 Story_ID: 615735 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Thomas Jefferson, and Gail Denise Dugas [Gail Dugas]. Ma'am could you please state your full and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Lauranita Taylor Dugas [HistoryMaker Lauranita Dugas]. Lauranita, L-A-U-R-A-N-I-T-A, Taylor T-A-Y-L-O-R, Dugas, D-U-G-A-S. Speaker 1: All right. Is there a story behind your first name? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think they thought I was gonna be a baby boy, Robert Taylor III (laughter). And in those days, you couldn't investigate ahead of time (laughter). So, when I was born they were confounded, and they finally settled on my mother's grandmother's [sic.] first name, which was Laura [Laura Smith Jennings], and my father's aunt whose name was Anita. That seem to fit together. His mother's name of Beatrice [Beatrice Rochon Taylor] and that didn't fit, Laura Beatrice. So, his mother's sister who was Anita Rochon [Anita Rochon Brooks], they called me Lauranita. And which was the combination of Laura and Anita. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 2, 1926, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Old St. Luke's Hospital [Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: And, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a former teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Retired teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. And the school administrator too? Was that true? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is May 28, 2010. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at my home at 5000 South Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 615736 Speaker 1: So, before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter) The first one is, do you have a favorite food and what is it? Speaker 2: Favorite food. I could almost say if it's not moving, I'll eat (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Not moving (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Now, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes. Blue. Speaker 1: All right. Now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Whatever time of year that it is. That's my favorite at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Do you have favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Key West, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Story_ID: 615737 Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history, and I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. But we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yes. Dorothy Vaughn Jennings Taylor [Dorothy Jennings Taylor]. Dorothy, D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, Vaughn, V-A-U-G-H-N, Jennings, J-E-N-N-I-N-G-S, Taylor T-A-Y-L-O-R. Speaker 1: All right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born Oakland, California, April 23, 1905. Speaker 1: In Oakland okay. Now, what can you tell us about her side of the family? How far back can you trace your mother's side? Speaker 2: To her great-grandmother [sic. maternal grandmother]. Her name was Ella Vaughn Smith, and she was born in Louisville, Kentucky. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any stories about her? And--oh, I'm sorry before--what year was she born? Speaker 2: It's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This has to go back to-- Speaker 2: It's on that piece of paper. Speaker 1: Yeah. We're going back to 19th century now. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, 1870--eighteen--she was born during slavery. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that's in the, at least in the 1860s-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right? Because-- Speaker 2: It's, it's on, in that folder. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, that's all right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But the tradition is that she was born during slavery. Speaker 2: She was born during slavery. Speaker 1: And any stories about who they were slaves for? Or what--or was she a slave of? Speaker 2: Her father was white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We have not pursued the family stories to legitimatize it so I hesitate to repeat that until it is legitimate. Needless to say--and in terms of giving his name, I won't do that until we can establish that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He and his wife who was mulatto, lived together and I think that world assumed that she was his slave. She was free, however. And for them to live together, to the outside world, it was--she was his slave. But in the home, they were married (laughter). They were lived as husband and wife. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They had three children; my great-grandmother and two boys. Soon as they were old enough, they were sent to the Ursuline convent in Ohio [Toledo, Ohio], and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell Ursuline? Is that U--? Speaker 2: R-S-L-I-N [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And that has to be established, legally. Speaker 1: Okay. So that-- Speaker 2: This is the family story? Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The--Mr. Vaughn became ill, and knew he was dying. So, he sent his--Ella to the bank to get all her papers and get what she need to establish. And when he died, his family came to take these slaves, this woman and her three children, back to wherever they lived. But she was able to establish that they were free, that she was free, and the children were free. The children left the convent can came back to Louisville. The boys decided to be white, because that's what they looked like. Their mother, their mother was mulatto, and their father was white, and they look white. So, they decided to be white. My grandmother [Laura Smith Jennings], well, in those days, the society of free Negroes (laughter) was, was intact in Louisville. And they had a lot of freedom and a lot of social life and most of the men were employed. So my great-grandmother decided it was better to be somebody black than to be nobody white (laughter). And she found a husband [John Smith] who came from the same kind of background that she did. They were also, looked like white. And they had two daughters. She knew how to do absolutely nothing except to speak four languages from having been in the convent, to embroidery. To do that kind of lady like kind of chores. Story_ID: 615738 Speaker 1: My [maternal] grandmother [Laura Smith Jennings] went to school, went to high school, and married another man from the same kind of a background, and he was a whiskey gauger, or I forgotten the name of the whiskey. But that's what made in Louisville [Kentucky]. And because he was gauger, that's why they moved around the country. Mother [Dorothy Jennings Taylor] was born in Oakland [California], my aunt [Alone Jennings Feaman] was born in Albuquerque [New Mexico], and my uncle was born in Louisville [Kentucky]. And he slipped in the rain, fell off the streetcar and had a head injury and died. So, that left my grandmother with her mother [Ella Vaughn Smith], by this time my great-grandfather [John Smith] died, with her mother and three children. So, she said, there was no way she was gonna earn a living in Louisville to take care of that much of a family. So, she came here [Chicago, Illinois] and worked for the board of education [Chicago Board of Education], and she took in sewing at night. She made baby clothes for the ladies on the North Shore [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So, she raised the kids and worked, and my great-grandmother was a stay at home mother (laughter). And my grandmother was the head of the family. She brought two pieces of property and she retired from the board of education. And went to live with my aunt, who at this time had married and (unclear)--to a dentist and that's how she spent out the rest of her life. Story_ID: 615739 Speaker 1: And my mother [Dorothy Jennings Taylor] went to Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], and while visiting a friend at University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign], she met my father [Robert Rochon Taylor] in Champaign [Illinois]. And he finished at Champaign in banking and finance, and came to Chicago [Illinois] to work at the Binga Bank [Binga State Bank, Chicago, Illinois], which failed in the '29 [1929] crash. Mother taught school until--well, the board of education [Chicago Board of Education] wouldn't let you teach if you were pregnant or had babies (laughter). So, she then retired after Barbara [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] was born. She taught briefly between the two births but then after Barbara was born she retired. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a curious rule we've encountered before that if you got, in some school systems, if you got married, you couldn't teach. Speaker 1: And they looked at, they watched you until you got pregnant and that was it, and children were not supposed to know that babies came from woman's bodies (laughter). I guess, I don't know. But it was about--maybe they thought it was improper for women to work when they had children. Probably a combination of both. But she taught home ec [home economics] and sewing. Then of course, when my father became manager of the Roosevelt--going back to that. After the Binga Bank failed, he worked for Supreme Liberty [Liberty Life Insurance Company; Supreme Life Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 615740 Speaker 1: Now, let me go to your father's side of the family. And then we'll put together, get 'em together again, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well about--that's about all I know about as far, as far as my mother's [Dorothy Jennings Taylor] side of the family. Speaker 1: All right. So, so, give me your father's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Robert, R-O-B-E-R-T, Rochon, R-O-C-H-O-N, Taylor T-A-Y-L-O-R [Robert Rochon Taylor]. Speaker 1: All right. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 21, 1999 [sic.]. He was born in Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Is that 1899? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, in Cleveland. Okay. Now, tell us what you know about your father's side of the family. Speaker 2: Well, Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] just gave us a history of the Taylor family going back to Scotland in 17th century. Speaker 1: Yeah. The 1670s or something (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, beginning with Henry Taylor who was the slave of--that was given a lot of freedom. He was a carpenter. And-- Speaker 1: What part of the country? Speaker 2: North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Wilmington, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some of that is on that history sheet that I gave you. Most of it is on that history sheet that I gave you. Henry was never freed. He was only freed through emancipation. His father [Angus Taylor] kept him in bondage, although he permitted him to work outside of the--and earn money. He built schools and houses and done a number of things in Wilmington. Speaker 1: So, he had skill--he had been taught (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had skills. Speaker 1: --taught the building trade and skills? Speaker 2: And his wife, we're not sure whether she was a mulatto or not. And we don't know too much about where she came from. He had siblings. He was mulatto. He had siblings some of which we know about and of which we do not know about. His father was--he had had number of relationships with a number of slaves. They, my father--grandfather [Robert Robinson Taylor] was probably at the end of the line; the youngest of his siblings. And he had--was a guess--it was obvious that he had a lot of talent and was very bright. He graduated from the Williton School--Williston School in Wilmington. And he went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how he got to MIT (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's very muddy whether his father sent him or his grandfather sent him. Speaker 1: Now see-- Speaker 2: There's no record, no written record how it had go paid for. Speaker 1: Thinking about those days and probably the kind of influence it might have taken, or probably took to get in a school like MIT, MIT I don't know how old it was then, but it couldn't've been very old, I would image. But you would think that, you know, you probably had to have a little clout. So, maybe his grand- you know, I don't know, we'll just assume that maybe his grandfather did have something to do with it. Speaker 2: His grandpa probably made the connection for him, because he, he was so supportive of his own son. Although he didn't free him. But he gave him every opportunity to act like a free man. If that makes any sense. Speaker 1: So, did, so-- Speaker 2: So, he possibly made it possible. Speaker 1: Yeah. Is there a sense in the family that Henry Taylor's father remained involved with him after emancipation? Speaker 2: There's, there's no sense of that, at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: He was just a cloudy figure. There was--my grandfather had a brother named John Taylor. And John Taylor's family has always felt a little bit chagrined that Robert had this opportunity and none of them did. Although, they somehow managed to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and they all have all, all become very professional people. But there's a sense of strength that he had this marvelous opportunity to go to, to MIT, and, and he was sponsored. It must have been that he was sponsored to do that and it maybe not have been just his father that made that possible. Speaker 1: We had assumed he went to MIT with them knowing that he was-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. They knew. Speaker 1: --black. Yeah, you know, so-- Speaker 2: They know, yeah. That side of the family has had family reunions. But the Robert Rochon table--the Robert Robinson family has not. And they've invited us to come and sometimes people have gone to that, and we know some of them. Story_ID: 615741 Speaker 1: After MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], my [paternal] grandfather [Robert Robinson Taylor] went back to Cleveland [Ohio] and somehow or another met my grandmother and they got married. And all of that is unclear. Speaker 2: Okay. But he-- Speaker 1: My impression is that while he was MIT, he must've met Booker T. Washington. Either Booker T. Washington came there and he went to a lecture, and had an opportunity to talk to him and meet him. There's another story was that he worked summers at Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] doing construction work and labor work. And that he met Booker T. Washington out there. So, we don't know. He continued--and Booker T. Washington had him to come to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] to do a specific project. And I have that written down somewhere, I just can't recall it right this moment. Speaker 2: You remember the date, or the year that they that they--? Speaker 1: It's all in-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The papers that he has. Speaker 2: Is it in the, still in the eight--19th century or had the century turned when he--? Speaker 1: Oh, it had to be after (unclear) because my, well, in the latter part of the last century. Speaker 2: Nineteenth century. Okay 1890s or something, I guess? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Just in the late 1800s, okay. Speaker 1: My father [Robert Rochon Taylor] was the only one born in Cleveland. So, I think Helen [Helen Taylor Dibble] was born in Tuskegee [Alabama]; she was the next child down. Then, they went back to Cleveland and then they went back to Tuskegee because by this time Booker T. Washington had competed--had convinced him to become a part of the faculty. He was no longer just doing projects. So the rest of the children were born in Tuskegee. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: His wife came from St. Martinville, Louisiana. And she had attended college in New Orleans [Louisiana], and she was a teacher. Speaker 2: What was her name, your grandmother? Speaker 1: Beatrice Rochon [Beatrice Rochon Taylor]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And her father was after the Civil War was, a state representative from St. Martin Parish in Louisiana. And he was Victor Rochon. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I have his certificate if you wanna look at that (laughter). And his speech (laughter) that he gave. She died shortly after the last child, Beatrice [Beatrice Taylor Robinson], was born. And her sister came to Tuskegee, Althea Rochon, to help with the children. And she stayed there until my grandfather remarried. Everybody thought he was gonna marry her, but he didn't. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He went back to Wilmington [North Carolina] and married Nellie Chesnutt [Nellie Chesnutt Taylor] who came from the very famous Chesnutt family, C-H-E-T-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Chest, N-U-T-T. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a part of the Charles Chesnutt family? Speaker 1: She was a part of the Charles Chesnutt family. Speaker 2: Charles W. Chesnutt, right? Okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And let's see, I guess, Althea must have gone back to New Orleans at--because her other sisters were there. Or maybe she went, went to New York [New York] because one of her sisters had become a pharmacist, Etnah Rochon Boutte, and they were in--and she and her husband were pharmacist. And they had a pharmacy in New York City. She didn't marry until late in life, Althea didn't, and she married an engineer in--from New York. I mean, he, he worked on the New York subway. He was, he was a civil engineer and so, I mean, everybody's educated. She was a school teacher, too. Story_ID: 615742 Speaker 1: The children all stayed at Tuskegee [Alabama] until they were ready to go to college, except Henry [Henry Taylor]. He went to boarding school at Williston Academy in--up in Massachusetts [Williston Northampton School, Easthampton, Massachusetts]. Ed [Edward Taylor] went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Helen [Helen Taylor Dibble] went to Fisk. Speaker 2: These are your uncles and aunts? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My father's brothers and sisters. My father [Robert Rochon Taylor] went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. He didn't--it didn't work out too well and he came home and worked. My grandfather [Robert Robinson Taylor] by this time had acquired a lumber, I don't think you call it farm, but-- Speaker 2: A sawmill or something or a lumber mill (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he had a sawmill. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he started building houses with Rocho- schoolhouses or--with Julius Rosenwald. And for two years my father was back at Tuskegee with--helping to build these houses all around the State of Alabama. Speaker 2: Now, were these schoolhouses they were building, were they like--were they built in the various colored schools in Alabama? Is that what (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, they were the colored schools. Speaker 2: Okay. And how many? Just to go--before we leave this, this period. How many of the buildings at Tuskegee was your grandfather responsible for building? Do you know, or--? Speaker 1: When they--we have pictures of about four or five. But all of the literature says all of the new buildings. The chapel was the one he was most proud of, and it burned down in the '50s [1950s] before my father died. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was there in '97 [1997], there was a new chapel, I remember. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was--and it was built on the old site. Speaker 2: But he built The Oaks [Tuskegee, Alabama], didn't he? The, the-- Speaker 1: Yes. The Oaks. Speaker 2: That was the presidential home (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Home for Booker T. Washington. Speaker 2: --on the campus of Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington, was a large stately home. Speaker 1: Yeah. Big front porch. Speaker 2: The students would work as the servants in the home and-- Speaker 1: And the student worked as, as construction and they could help--and my grandfather showed them--taught them how to make bricks, and how to cut lumber, and how, how to do all that kind of--you know, anything that went into construction. They went out in the fields and, and, and dug up the clay and make the bricks and fired the bricks. They did everything. And they built as they had money to do the work, and with the students as laborers. But that's how my father learned about lumber and the construction business. Speaker 2: Now, this in a sense, your grandfather was Booker T. Washington's message made manifest? Speaker 1: Yes. Precisely. Speaker 2: Because his message was the Negro should build and learn how to, learn these trades and skills. Speaker 1: And learn how to get a skill. Speaker 2: And your grandfather was the man who could make that happen. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And when I was growing up (laughter), it wasn't so much construction around here from Tuskegee, but Tuskegee air--Tuskegee shoe repair shops (laughter), they did. Of course, in those days people repaired their shoes. They put half soles on their shoes when they got holes in the bottom. And put new heels on them. You know, now people just give 'em away or throw 'em away. But there was signs all over the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], Tuskegee shoe repair (laughter). In every neighborhood, there was a Tuskegee shoe repair. Speaker 2: So, it was sort of a brand that people trusted-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --if it was Tuskegee. Speaker 1: Yes. They knew those boys had gone to Tuskegee and learned how to do shoes (laughter). But that's how my father learned the lumber business and business. Story_ID: 615743 Speaker 1: His sister said, "You learned this now," of course, Helen [Helen Taylor Dibble], by this time, she was the oldest of the biolo- the first set of children, and she mothered the rest of 'em. And she, by this time, she's at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. And she said, "Robbie [Robert Rochon Taylor], you got to," you know, "you don't need to do this any longer. You've learned this, now you need to go back to school." So, he entered the University of Illinois in Champaign [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. And he graduated 1927--1925 in banking and finance. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Then he came to Chicago [Illinois]. As I said, he worked for the Binga Bank [Binga State Bank, Chicago, Illinois], and then it failure and he worked for Supreme Liberty Life [Liberty Life Insurance Company; Supreme Life Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois] and the insurance company. And coincidentally about the same time--have you heard anything about Geor- George Arthur, and the YWCA--YMCA [Wabash Avenue YMCA] at 35th [sic. 38th Street] and Wabash [Wabash Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: A little bit, but tell us about, tell us about that. Speaker 1: A little bit--Julius Rosenwald made the, and part of his phila- philanthro- philanthropic endeavors told the YM that he would match any YM fundraising in order to make a new building. Mr. George Arthur took him up on the challenge and he raised so much money (background noise) that Mr. Rosenwald became very impressed with him. Story_ID: 615744 Speaker 1: I just wanted to go back a minute to your [paternal] grandfather's [Robert Robinson Taylor] matriculation through MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Was he the first black person to go to MIT, first African American? Speaker 2: First African American to graduate from the school of architecture. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I--it may have been that's where he met the relative of--they may have been some other blacks at MIT or at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because the community was so small. Speaker 1: Yeah. I think there probably was some more at Harvard in that area probably in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yes. Speaker 1: There weren't many, though. Speaker 2: And it gets kind of sketchy because the schools were so close together and the tightness was so--everybody was so-- Speaker 1: Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] came out of Harvard, William Ferris [William Henry Ferris] out of Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]. There's another, Woodson [Carter G. Woodson] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --came out in the 19th century, too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: These are, you know-- Speaker 2: So, that-- Speaker 1: There weren't many, but-- Speaker 2: And those schools are so close together and it gets kind of blurred. The only thing that we know for sure. And they honored him in 1960, '70 [1970], '69 [1969], '72 [1972], 1972 at MIT. They acknowledged-- Speaker 1: As the first black-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --architectural graduate. Speaker 2: Yes. And it was the year she [Dugas' daughter, Gail Dugas] graduated from Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts]. So, that was part of our being there for her graduation. Story_ID: 615745 Speaker 1: So, you said that your father had, he was working with--you had mentioned that Ju- Julius Rosenwald. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Julius Rosenwald asked Mr.--well, he had started to build the Michigan Boulevard Garden Apartments [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], and his interest in public housing, not public housing, but in housing for Negroes (laughter). And that middle income that Negroes could deserve decent housing also, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me ask you this before we go further with Julius Rosenwald. Do you have any idea, for the record, who Julius Rosenwald was and why was he interested in building colored schools and you know, middle income housing and for black people, and you know? Speaker 2: What his initial interest in African Americans or Negroes, I'm not quite sure about. I've read his grandson's book, Peter Ascoli [Peter M. Ascoli], and he, he was not definitive that I could remember. What caught his imagination or caught his interest--I don't think it was an aha moment. I think that as he became less involved with making money and in Sears Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] as he began to get more involved in philanthropy and people who had not had opportunities that they had--they both came on to his horizon. And once he caught the fever, (laughter) he was, he was caught (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He, he was impressed with Mr. Arthur and the way that he'd been able to raise money and he just really worked. So the Wabash Avenue Y [Wabash Avenue YMCA, Chicago, Illinois] was just tops. It had the first swimming pool that was available to black people on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. It was the center for activities. Speaker 1: So, what's Mr. Arthur's full name again? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Pardon me. Speaker 1: What's Mr. Arthur's full name again? You gave it to me a minute ago and I'm (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) I know. It escapes me. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, don't worry about it 'cause it's on the previous roll, but. Speaker 2: Yes. George Arthur. Speaker 1: George Arthur, okay; of the Wabash Avenue. Speaker 2: George Cleveland Arthur (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: In talking--well, in--he felt uncomfortable about the progress of, of the building. He said that he has a sixth sense that he just felt like it wasn't, it wasn't going properly, and did Mr. Arthur know anything--anybody that was an expert in construction. And he said, "Bob Taylor [Robert Rochon Taylor] knows all about lumber and construction, because he came from Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]." Well, that was all he needed. So, he hired my father to do, to do a survey and issue a conclusion about the quality of work and the quality of equipment that went in. And he was so impressed with his report--well the first week they tore out all the floors, (laughter) because they were inferior wood. And he asked him to come and manage the building. So, that's how he came to manage the building. Speaker 1: So, he was basically a construction manager at first and then managed the building afterwards (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. And--with the skills that he had from his education and from his experiences with the bank [Binga State Bank, Chicago, Illinois] and with Supreme Liberty [Liberty Life Insurance Company; Supreme Life Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois] (unclear) so he had become a businessman. Story_ID: 615746 Speaker 1: Then that evolved into Illinois Federal [Illinois Federal Savings and Loan Association; Illinois Service Federal Savings and Loan Association], 'cause that was his banking skills came in there. And he and another friend, Johnny Edelin [ph.], had a real estate development company. I've forgotten the name of it. Maybe Barbara [Dugas' sister, HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] would remember that. Speaker 2: Now, what was his role with Illinois Federal, before we get away from that? Speaker 1: Well, he ended up being secretary/treasurer. But he was one of the founding members. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And at that time, they were located in the Rosenwald building on 47th Street in one of the storefronts [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. And then he had an insurance, you said in-- Speaker 1: And then he, he did not take a salary after they got on their feet. None of the men took a salary. They put money back in and put money, they put what they could've take as salary. As board members, they sent the staff to school. So, Velma Smith [ph.] and all those people, Clark, [HistoryMaker] Walter Clark, he started there. All of them went--they were sent to insurance schools and to savings and loan schools to learn the business. Speaker 2: What was the name of the insurance company, again? Speaker 1: That they had--well, was Robert R. Taylor Insurance [Robert R. Taylor Insurance Agency, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That he--that was homeowners insurance. But he was the only one that knew anything about insurance and rather than let it out, to some--to another person, they let him do the insurance for the homeowners. And then they merged with Service Federal. So, they became Illinois Service Federal. By this time, they're so big, they move over here on, well, by this time it's King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] at 49th [Street] and King Drive. No, 48th [Street], maybe, and King Drive. Speaker 2: Yeah, then it would be South, was it Grand Boulevard or South Park (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) It was South Park (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: It was South Park (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. All right. So, he was in--so-- Speaker 1: Well, he was just, he was a (unclear), I guess he fig- he, it was clear he wasn't gonna have long with us, so he had his feet in every pie he could get in. Story_ID: 615747 Speaker 1: Mr. Rosenwald [Julius Rosenwald] sent him [Dugas' father, Robert Rochon Taylor] to Europe to, to look at housing projects there in Holland [the Netherlands], England and France. That's some of the ideas he got about garden apartments because their housing facilities always had that. Speaker 2: So, they were trying to design--what was the idea, to design, you know, more housing for the black community? Or-- Speaker 1: Well, he, he encouraged Mr. Rosenwald to, to create this atrium effect in, in the building. Speaker 2: In the Rosenwald--? Speaker 1: In the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. He carried that interest into when he became a board member of the Chicago Housing Authority and evolved into the chairmanship. Speaker 2: Now, where was the Rosenwald building? Speaker 1: Between 46th [Street] and 47th [Street]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And Michigan [Avenue] and Wabash [Avenue]. It took up a square block. Speaker 2: Okay. So many people that we have interviewed got started-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Started in the Rosenwald building. Speaker 2: --grew up in the Rosenwald, yeah, yeah. And the green space in the middle, right? Open space in the middle-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And apartments surround on the outside? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, there was a rock garden and a little pool, and annual flowers and perennial flowers, and the grass. Kids still talk about; couldn't walk on the grass, couldn't walk on Mr. Daley's [ph.] grass. There was a gardener called, his name was Frank [ph.], and they--I mean, everybody knew everybody. There were guards. I think--I went--I never, I really never thought about it being necessary for security. But they must've thought so. So, there was round, round the clock security, uniformed guard. I don't remember them ever be- having an incident but there must've been. But I was a child, you know, what do little kids know. I mean, there was--in those days, there was a big demarcation between grownups and children. And certain things children just were not privy to, you just felt safe. Story_ID: 615748 Speaker 1: Well, just give me a sense of--and I don't know if I should save this for later or not, but a sense of what the, what housing was like for black people prior to, you know, the efforts of Julius Rosenwald and your father [Robert Rochon Taylor], and the city in creating and a government coming in? What was housing like on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]? What was it like on the Black Belt? Speaker 2: There was complete dilapidated housing, uninhabitable housing. There were some apartments that were in decent shape. It was congested and bound in from the south and the east and the west, so that during the war [World War II, WWII] it became severely overcrowded because so many people started coming to work in the war factories. And that's when they had kitchenette apartments started. It, it was, Mr. Hansberry [Carl Augustus Hansberry] that developed--Lorraine Hansberry's father--he was the one that developed these kitchenette things where there was a common kitchen and all families would use the bathroom and the kitchen. And then they, he made kind of Pullman kitchens in each apartment. But there was a common bath. In which, which is no place for people to live and everybody was just trying to do what they could. Then, Mr. Hansberry and Earl Dickerson [Earl B. Dickerson] sued restricted covenants and one that, and opened up the Washington Park Subdivision which was from 55th Street South [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Explain what a restricted covenant is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Restricted covenant meant that there was one on, there was one on this building also. That it restricted, restrict to white Christians, to either rent or to purchase. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this was in the housing contract. If I own the house, I couldn't sell it to a black person-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or, a Jewish person-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or, a Muslim, or Buddhist or--? Speaker 2: No. You could only sell it to white Caucasian. Speaker 1: A Christian one at that. Speaker 2: Yeah. And it's on our deed. Of course, it's struck out by law but it's--most of the people around here have it on their deeds, and in most of the communities around, it's there. Speaker 1: But it was legal then and-- Speaker 2: It was legal (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, and this is what kept the black community bottled into-- Speaker 2: Yes, was kept us tied in, yes. Story_ID: 615749 Speaker 1: There was one black high school which was Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And as the pressure built and built and built, people started trying to go to Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and Calumet [Calumet High School, Chicago, Illinois](laughter), and all those others. So, they built DuSable [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois], keep us enclosed, keep us together. And that upset my father [Robert Rochon Taylor] particularly since they built it without first blade of grass around it. There was nothing there but concrete and bricks. And he raved and ranted about that, "They built a jail for the black kids to go to school there." But you know, the kids inside the school--there were dedicated teachers. There were good, good students and you didn't have the problem of--children went to school to learn in those days (laughter). And the teachers were willing to teach and the kids learned and they did well. And then a lot of kids did come out of Phillips and a lot of kids came out of DuSable. They were first class students and went to first class universities and did--have become professional people. And some people went to Phillips and DuSable and did not turn into stars but became responsible citizens and took care of their families, and, and didn't have the problem of, of deportment in school. Speaker 2: What, do you think it's because of the--? Speaker 1: I think it's the times. I don't think it's any, anything that's native to black people. I think the times. My mother [Dorothy Jennings Taylor] used to say, "The '60s [1960s] gave everybody permission to do anything they thought they wanted to do." And we learned quickly from white people (laughter). If they could do it, we could do it too. And the culture; television, everything, gives everybody permission to do good feel. And when my mother was teaching school, the mothers came to school and said, "If my child misbehaves, let me know. You spank 'em first, and I'll spank 'em again. They're here to learn." Now, mothers come to school and rave and rant and attack the teachers. So, you can't do that to me. And some of that was from the black power but some of it is because the culture permits it. When I attended, my husband [Lester J. Dugas, Jr.] and I attended University of Wisconsin in Madison [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], there was seventeen thousand students on campus. One security guard. One campus police. Now they have a whole police force. It's just different. When I went to college, it never occurred to me that I would be in danger from fellow students, in particularly the men. I was used to men taking care of me. I mean, boys taking care of me. When my daughters [Gail Dugas and Lauren Dugas Glover] went to college, they came home, well, when she went to first, she said, "Mother, it's not what you told us it would be like," (laughter). She said, "I had to take care of myself." Story_ID: 615750 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, let me go back to, and see if we can summarize your father's [Robert Rochon Taylor] career and then we'll go back and have you born, I guess (laughter), and go from there. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. So, well, in fact, we may just go on. Well, tell me, how would you summarize your father's career? He has one of the most famous names in Chicago [Illinois] and very few people know anything about him. You know they-- Speaker 2: Well, I think he has a famous name because they built that project and named it for him [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. And not too many people originally knew that he was even black, because there was not much effort to make that known. He was only fifty-seven years old. The people that knew him were the people from the churches that he led on Sunday morning over at the Illinois Federal [Illinois Federal Savings and Loan Association; Illinois Service Federal Savings and Loan Association] to make their deposit so they, they could buy a house (laughter). He would go around to the churches and they would parade with the ministers, back over there on Illinois Federal on Sunday morning to make a deposit, the church and individuals. Those people knew who he was. The people in the community knew who he was. But that, you know, in 1957 when they built the project, the king is dead, the new king is--long may he live. The housing authority [Chicago Housing Authority] changed its composition, changed his trust. He stressed, was stressed because the alderman are the ones in charge of where the public housing is situated. If, if it was only on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] that the alderman agreed, alderpersons agreed, to have public housing in their wards. The few, like Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes] on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], they only let white people in at Cabrini-Green and they said, "That's enough." The first big project that my father was involved in was on Cicero [LeClaire Courts, Chicago, Illinois], that project over there. It was built for veterans who did not have a place to stay. And, and he was able to get that permission, and they just didn't think that any black people could apply, any black veterans would apply. They did, and they had to let 'em in, and then they had the biggest race riot we've had in Chicago up to that point since the early '20s [1920s]. And there's more people had to move out. Speaker 1: This is about, what, 1940 what? Speaker 2: I don't know. I know, it's after, after the war [World War II, WWII]. Speaker 1: Fifty [1950], in the '50s [1950s]? Is that--in the '40s [1940s] or the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Forty-eight [1948], '49 [1949]. Speaker 1: Forty-eight [1948], '49 [1949], okay. Speaker 2: That was his first big defeat. He felt happy that he'd gotten this public housing and black people could get there and it wasn't gonna be on the south side, and it, it didn't work. Speaker 1: So, you have a city still trying to keep itself segregated-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and yet with, but the new public housing laws are, you know, allow black people--so, even the racial tension here in this building. Speaker 2: Yeah, racial tension. And it just, he just went from one argument to another and one--I know he finally resigned. And then that's when he started having heart attacks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And at fifty-seven he was gone. Speaker 1: So, you think the stress had something to do with it? Speaker 2: I'm real sure of that. Story_ID: 615751 Speaker 1: Now, Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois] for those watching this who are not from Chicago [Illinois], and not--didn't live during the time that we lived, Robert Taylor Homes is part of a wall of projects, sixteen story projects along State Street that stretched from, what, about 26th Street all the way to--? Speaker 2: 55th [Street]. Speaker 1: 55th, okay. This is-- Speaker 2: Stateway Gardens [Chicago, Illinois] was (unclear), is at the north end of it. Speaker 1: Yeah, Stateway Gardens. Speaker 2: And then they built the Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway] (laughter), and that really built a corridor. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, just unbroken-- Speaker 2: Unbroken. Speaker 1: --series of high rise project that in the beginning, I've been told they had like nice recreation facilities and enough maintenance and people to keep the grounds and everything. Speaker 2: Yeah, to keep--and they had grass and everything and all that. And when they asked mother [Dorothy Jennings Taylor], you know, and they showed her the plans and they show her what was hap- and she said, "Well, okay. He wouldn't like it being high rise, and he wouldn't like it being--taking up that much acreage, but these are the things he did believe in." Well, the composition of the board of Chicago, had changed. The chairmanship changed. Speaker 1: The CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] is Chicago-- Speaker 2: CHA changed. Speaker 1: --Housing Authority. Speaker 2: Housing Authority changed. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And pretty soon, society changed. Drugs became a part of our culture and they didn't interview people before they got--coming in and then this whole welfare system where you can't have man in the household, and, you know, everything just conversion on making it a mess. Speaker 1: And so, this is not--though named for Robert Taylor [Dugas' father, Robert Rochon Taylor], this is not what he envisioned-- Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: --at all for those projects. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And as we sit here, they're all knocked down now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The project began about five years ago-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to take them down like a lot of the high rise projects all over the country have been now imploded and brought down. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You said, there's one building left of the Robert Taylor Homes? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yep. And you know, it, it would've broken his heart to have his name attached to it. It would've broken his heart to see it, 'cause it was everything that he hated. 'Cause all they did was build new buildings to re- and replace the, the social structure of the, of the slums. Story_ID: 615752 Speaker 1: Now, let's kind of go back to--your parents [Dorothy Jennings Taylor and Robert Rochon Taylor] met at University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], you said, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She, she was there visiting (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Did they have a story about how they fell in love? Was it passed down or--? Speaker 2: (Laughter) She was extremely popular and he had to chase hard (laughter). They knocked a lot of different people, and he (laughter), they, they laughed and talked about it. And their friends who were also involved in that (laughter) would laugh and tease 'em about, about that. But she was very, very popular. And it, it was a good marriage I think, which was brief. She was a widow longer than she was married. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, he passed away in 1957? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957], and and she did in 1988. Speaker 1: Well, can you describe-- Speaker 2: Ninety ninety-three [1993], I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Can you describe your parents' personalities and talents, their dispositions, and, and who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My mother. She grew up without a man in the household. It was her mother [Laura Smith Jennings] who was the strength and the head of the household. He grew up without a real mother in the household. So, they had to learn how to make a family without too much mentoring, or too much examples. They loved their aunt dearly. They were not overly fond of their stepmother [Nellie Chesnutt Taylor], and she wasn't of them. After she had her child [Henry Taylor], that was the only child she--they recognized. So, his sister, Helen [Helen Taylor Dibble], became a mother to those other three. And so, they did not have, either one of them, a clear intact family structure to, to emulate for their own. So, they had to figure it out for their own self. Mother was fun loving, and she loved to dance, and she loved to have a lot of fun, and she enjoyed people, and she enjoyed being a mother. She enjoyed being a volunteer. She worked for United Charities [United Charities of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. She worked with the board of the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois]. And she did work at the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] with--well, she made marionettes, and you know, she did those kinds of things. And she worked with PTAs [Parent Teacher Association] with us in school. My father was more sober but he was also a lot of fun. He had a wonderful sense of humor, but he was strict. There was only a certain way to behave. There was--the world was black and white for him. Story_ID: 615753 Speaker 1: And he [Dugas' father, Robert Rochon Taylor] was a penny pincher. All of the Taylors are (laughter). But mother [Dorothy Jennings Taylor] was in a different way because she had, she grew up with--without a lot. And my [maternal] grandmother [Laura Smith Jennings] knew how to make a lot out of a little. So, it was a different kind of economy from her side of the family than from his side of the family. And we had almost everything needed--we thought we needed or wanted growing up. We knew that we were privileged, because he had a job, and not everybody did. And we were taught very, very early to accept people as they are and that we were no better than anybody else. And we just happened to fall into a better situation, and that everybody needed an opportunity. And you never knew who would take advantage of an opportunity and surpass us if they had a chance. So, we had opportunities because of his connections to be diverse, to have diverse relationships and cross cultural relationships. Because of the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] and the persistence of Mrs. Pacheco [ph.] who was a Girl Scout leader in the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. She made sure that we were not just isolated. That we, the Girls--that Girls Scout troop went places and did things that the other Girl Scouts did. They couldn't keep us out. We didn't know that, we just went (laughter). So, I did grow up feeling that we were just only one, one kind of people. We would go back to Wilmington [North Carolina] in the summer to see my [paternal] grandparents [Robert Robinson Taylor and Dugas' step-grandmother, Nellie Chesnutt Taylor], and all the rest of the kids came too; my father's siblings. We had lots of fun and visit the cousins and the uncles, 'cause most of the uncles were bachelors. So, we had a good time. In the summers we went back to Wilmington. I had what was double mastoids as an eight year old. Because--this was before antibiotics and before shots. The only shots that we had were diphtheria and small pox. We caught everything else. One winter, my father lived with my grandmother because we had the big red sign, quarantine on the door. First one, then the other. And so, he was very close to his mother-in-law, and he lived with her prob- because he couldn't, he couldn't come in and go out. Everybody--if you were quarantined, you were quarantined. He had to run the building so he lived over with my grandma. I had double mastoids, which was repeated ear infections and the mastoid bone which is behind your ear, both of them became infected. If they'd gone to my brain I would've died. They--and there was no antibiotics. That came with the Second World War [World War II, WWII]. And there was doctor at Children's Memorial [Children's Memorial Hospital; Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] had perfected an operations to take both these bones out. Our family doctor was a pediatrician. He was one of the few black pediatricians in the city. He could not take me into Children's Memorial Hospital. He called his classmate who was this surgeon, and they operated on me and took those two mastoid bones out. The following winter, I began to catch cold again, and Dr. Beasley [ph.] said, "You know, you got to get her out of this climate. Well, at least for this winter." So, we went to California, mother, Barbara [Dugas' sister, HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] and I. We spent six months in California. And by this time, by the time I came home I was robust (laughter). And I never was too thin again (laughter). Story_ID: 615754 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up? But wait a minute, before I ask that, let me go back even further and ask you like to name your brothers and sisters. I haven't had you do that yet. Speaker 2: My brothers and sister? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I only had the one sister, Barbara [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman]. Speaker 1: Just one. Just Barbara, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Barbara. Speaker 1: And she's younger than you, right? Speaker 2: She is a teacher and administrator at Erikson Institute [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And Erikson Institute is a graduate program at Loyola University [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] for early childhood development. And she was one of the co-founders of that institute even before it became a part of Loyola. When it became a part of Loyola it became a Ph.D. program. But they went back in history. When Head Start first started, when it became a federal program, there were only people with degrees in nursery school kind of training, a few people in early childhood who were teaching in colleges and universities. But there was not a career path for people, and they were just grabbing anybody with a B.A. or a B.S. who thought they could--would like to teach in Head Start and gave them in house training. And that was the early Head Start. And of course, now it's bloomed to a professional field. One of the things that co- Barbara with her two other co-founders wanted to get people who had their college degree and get master's degree in early childhood so that they could build a professional organization of professional track. And it caught on and as I said it moved to Loyola to this graduate program. You get graduate degrees and Ph.D.'s now at Erikson Institute, and is world renowned now, renown now. It's know all over the world for the quality of kind of students they produce and the research that they've been able to conduct, especially in the brain and very infant. Story_ID: 615755 Speaker 1: Now I'm going back to childhood again. And well, I asked about your sister [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] but, so, it's the two of you. What were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The sights were 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois], which was a bustling commercial area. The smells were barbeque (laughter), barbeque. You could smell barbeque all up and down 47th Street. I remember coming home from college [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] and there wasn't enough gas to pick me up at the train station, and I had to come home on the "L" [elevated train]. And when I got off on 47th (laughter), it just smelled like home 'cause you could smell the barbeque again. And-- Speaker 1: Do you think that's the number one dish on the (laughter) on 47th Street? Speaker 2: (Laughter) 47th Street was smelling like barbeque (laughter). And the people were always friendly. People spoke to you as you walked down the street. You just, you just felt a sense of community, a sense of closeness that was home. It was home, and you felt accepted. The advantage of being closed in was that you were surrounded by people that were like you and cared about you, and cared about themselves. The disbursement brought on more hostility. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting. I've heard a lot of people say that. That in the days when the black community was overcrowded and everybody had to stay together, it was a lot more civil then. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. It was a friendly, friendly place. And people, the culture nurtured that because everybody dressed up for everything. Black people loved to dress up. And people dressed up to go to church. Men wore suit coats even if they were not professional people. They wore jackets. They wore ties. They wore shirts. Women wore gloves and hats. It didn't matter what station of life you came from, that's what you did. So, that it was a feeling of uniformity that everybody was striving for the same goal. Story_ID: 615756 Speaker 1: If you shopped on 47th Street, you didn't need to go downtown. You weren't welcome downtown anyway. Carson's [Carson Pirie Scott and Co.; Carson's] was the first to hire a black sales clerk. Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company] was the last. There was a black woman who was an architect and engineer, lived in Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] and she helped to design the first air conditioning units at Carson's. You went to the movies or downtown to get cool, because there wasn't air conditioning anywhere else. Speaker 2: Now, were the movies segregated downtown? Speaker 1: Yeah, movies--you could go to the movies. That was not segregated. And they was, it was--they were cool. They were the first places to become cool. People slept in the park and the parks didn't close at ten o'clock or eleven o'clock or anything like that. It was hot and you'll go to the park and sleep outdoors. The beaches were opened. Now, truthfully, not all of the beaches were integrated. Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] where you slept out--57th Street Beach, there was a tree that on the north side of the tree was where the black people (laughter), and on the south side of the tree was the white people, and black people did not go into the clubhouse. Yeah, you rinsed your feet off in the water. You didn't-- Speaker 2: What would happen if you tried to do it? Speaker 1: Mostly it would be stares or (unclear) or pushing, maybe some, somebody thought they would say, you know, "You don't belong over here." Speaker 2: Did the police try to enforce that kind of thing? Speaker 1: Yeah. Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: Did they? Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. But you know, it was before the Civil Rights Movement and you didn't question it. It was just the way of life. And we just turned our backs on, and did our thing and enjoyed ourselves. It was pretty much the same way in the South before the veterans came home. And they said, "We're not gonna do this anymore." And their kids began to say, "We don't want this." So, it, it changed. But my peers that went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] had to get off the train in Indiana and change for the Jim Crow car. Well, they turned in that, that into a festival going back to school, or a festival coming back home after school. They had their box lunches, they had--and they went dressed to the kill. The girls wore stockings, and hats, and gloves. The boys wore suit jackets. They were dressed up and they had to move the Jim Crow car. But they turned it into a party, into a festival kind of thing. Their kids would not tolerate that, you know (laughter). But that's how we made out. That's how the generation made out. You accepted what you couldn't change and made it as pleasant as possible. Story_ID: 615757 Speaker 1: You started school, how old were you in nursery school? Four, three or four? Speaker 2: Three. Speaker 1: Okay. You really--you started school about 1929, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. That's the year, is that the year the Binga Bank [Binga State Bank, Chicago, Illinois] failed? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The stock market crashed in '29 [1929]. Speaker 2: It did, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, it was a pretty bad time I guess. And then, so-- Speaker 2: It may have been 1930 when I started nursery school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because we, we did not move into the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] until 1928. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right, so, nursery school, so, what was your first--now, did they, in nursery school in those days, did they teach you how to read, in nursery school? Speaker 2: (Background noise) No. No. Speaker 1: Not like now, in some of those schools. Speaker 2: (Laughter) They taught you how to be (laughter)--to get along with your peers and you know, the colors and things like that. But socialization was, and--was, was the main thing. Story_ID: 615758 Speaker 1: I went to kindergarten at Lewis Champlin School [Chicago, Illinois] which was at (background noise) geez, I'm sorry (laughter). Speaker 2: So, kindergarten at Lewis Champion. Speaker 1: Lewis Champlin, C-H-A-M-P-L-I-N. Speaker 2: Oh, Champlin. Okay. Speaker 1: It's been torn down now too. Speaker 2: Lewis Champlin. Speaker 1: On the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: And I graduated from there in 1940, and went to Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Ok--oh, so, elementary school was at Lewis Champlin, too? Speaker 1: Yes. From kindergarten to-- Speaker 2: Well, how did you like school? Speaker 1: I loved school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I loved school. Speaker 2: Did you have a favorite subject at school? Speaker 1: Did--pardon me? Speaker 2: Favorite subject matter at school? Speaker 1: English. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: English, 'cause I like to read. And I had fun with it, and geography. I didn't like math. I had a hard time with math. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Which, which really annoyed my father [Robert Rochon Taylor] (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. So, did you--what about the teachers there? Speaker 1: They--I did not detect, looking back, I did not feel discriminated against. Speaker 2: Were the teachers all white? Speaker 1: All white. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All white. It was outside of the Black Belt. I was there on permit. Speaker 2: Now, now, where was Lewis Champlin? Speaker 1: 62nd [Street] and Stewart [Avenue]. Speaker 2: Okay. So this is in-- Speaker 1: It was an all-white community. Speaker 2: Okay. So, this is Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], I guess we call it now. Speaker 1: And there were three of us from the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] that went out there. So, they, they knew that we were all black kids, but there was just so few of us it didn't matter, you know (laughter). And we didn't make any problems for 'em, social problems. Speaker 2: In retrospect, do you know how they set that up, where you three could go out there? Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sure that they'd met my father and Mrs. Cottle [ph.] 'cause one of--her son was there too, went to the powers that be and made it sure--made it possible for us to go there. Speaker 2: Okay, so-- Speaker 1: And get a permit to go there. Permits were permitted and you just had to have political clout to get a permit. Speaker 2: Okay. So, if you didn't have any clout, your kids weren't going to-- Speaker 1: Yeah. You just went to the neighborhood school. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Speaker 1: And truthfully looking back, some of those neighborhood schools were excellent schools. They had excellent teachers. They had black teachers and white teachers that were complete- completely devoted to the kids being--getting a good educations. I think my parents felt that it, that they, we, they wanted us to experience the integration that the exposure to another culture that hopefully that the world would change so that there would be more opportunities. So, that's why we went to Lewis Champlin and on to Parker. Speaker 2: So, most of your classmates were white, all of 'em were, except for, you know. Speaker 1: Well, there were maybe a couple, couple of, then a couple of families, black families living in Englewood. And they--we knew their kids at school. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And know some of 'em still today. Speaker 2: All right. So, you never had any problems at all-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --in terms of--? Speaker 1: Not in terms of race. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Nor, in high school. Some of those kids from high school I'm still in contact with. Those are, that are still living. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you, you were involved in the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], you said, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Out of the Rosenwald building. Speaker 1: Yes. I did not go on to have any more contact with other Girl Scouts. But the girl, the girls and boys that I went to high school with, we maintained contact for a while after college. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I'll get you to high school in a minute (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I'm trying to get to--finish grade school. Speaker 1: Okay. Get through grade school. Speaker 2: But yeah, yeah. So-- Speaker 1: The only people I know from grade school that continued the relationship, were black. Speaker 2: Okay. Any notable people from grade school that you remember-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --that we'd know by now? Speaker 1: There was one that Barbara [Dugas' sister, HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] maintained contacted with through high school. But I'm--they, they've--or into high school. Story_ID: 615759 Speaker 1: Now, this is, you're going to school during the, what they call the Great Depression? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, so-- Speaker 2: The fif- the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: How depressed was it? Speaker 2: How depressed? Financially? Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess and other. Speaker 2: I remember my mother [Dorothy Jennings Taylor] had a dollar a day as her budget for food. And bread was ten cents a loaf. That's my most vivid memory, but I had nothing to compare it to. It was, it was, it was just what it was. We knew people that did not have food. There were white children that I went to Lewis Champlin [Lewis Champlin School, Chicago, Illinois] with that were hungry, and I knew they were hungry. I knew that didn't get--I knew there was one boy that was not getting dental care, and his teeth were black. There was free--nickel lunch. And not every black kid had a nickel for lunch. We were well aware of that. My mother gave us--give me the nickel first and tied it to the handkerchief in the corner. That was my nickel for lunch. And then she gave me two nickels. One on each corner. One for me and one for Barbara [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] (laughter). Then my cousin who was also--went to school, who was older. He said, "Let's save this." Not eat lunch and save it for a couple of days so we could go to--they have the sliders. Speaker 1: White Castle. Speaker 2: White Castle. There was a White Castle a block away (laughter). We had--we--he would lead us off campus and we had to have not had lunch for two or three days (laughter), and we would go to White Castle and get five hamburgers for a quarter, and share them. We never told anybody (laughter). Barbara kept saying, "I don't wanna do this." I said, "Well, you have to," (laughter). We--those were the kind of mischievous kinds of things we would get into. And she always felt (unclear), listen to her now (laughter). She was the little sister. Yep, Bill [ph.] and I was always making her do things she didn't wanna do (laughter). Speaker 1: So, I take it most people were pretty slim in those days? Speaker 2: Everybody was slim. But you know, we didn't know what slim meant until later. The streetcar was two cents; two cents for children, two pennies. I didn't have anything to compare that to. Everybody was the same. You knew some people were more comfortable than others. But it--those children at school who did not have money for lunch, the teachers would sometimes give it to 'em. And we just thought, that was nice of those teachers to do that. And children's brains don't function the same way as an adult brain does. I learned that in child development (laughter), and they can't make judgments based on the environment other than what they know, and their experience give 'em. And our experiences did give us anything to make judgments about how people were living. I mean, you hear people always saying, "We didn't know we were poor." Speaker 1: Okay. So, and your family was fairly well off compared to others (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Compared to other people. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, other people. So, it was a tough time. Story_ID: 615760 Speaker 1: So, did you, okay, so you went to high school at Parker High School [Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And Parker High School is where? Speaker 2: At 67th [Street] and Stewart [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was on the campus with Parker Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], Parker High School, Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], and Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College; Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now, yeah, the old campus (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a big campus. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's near where the old campus Kennedy-King-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, was situated, right. So, well, how was high school? It's still mostly white students, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there were a few family that lived in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] that were there because they would--they were in the neighborhood. There were a few families on permit, and there was some on false address. That was the third way, you could get into (laughter). Speaker 1: False address? Speaker 2: False address (laughter). And nowadays they ask you go bring in a telephone bill or light bill to prove where you live, but in those days you just gave, "I live at blah, blah, blah, blah, blah," and it would be a black family that lives legitimately in the neighborhood. And sometimes that home would have ten or fifteen kids coming. Then they, and people would go to Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], I mean, to Hyde Park [Hyde Park High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] like that. And it was a family over here in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], two families in Hyde Park that gave, help to give false addresses to a number of different families. Then, they started following people home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just, just to see that they-- Speaker 1: How were your grades in school? Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. By the time you got to high school, did you have a specific goal, career goal in mind, or? Speaker 2: Well, you know, in our family, high school was just the second step, college was the third step. And we didn't--it wasn't anything that we had to think about or, it was just like, you went from elementary school, to high school, to college. That was, that was the pattern. At first, I thought I wanted to be a social worker, and then I thought about early childhood, and I said--well in preschool I was educat- it was in educat- in was in the home ec [home economics] department in Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], and you had to take chemistry (laughter). So, I said, "Well, I won't do that." (Laughter) I've had chemistry once, I don't think I can take it on the college level. I did well in high school. But I can see the other people that I knew that were really struggling with that chem- college chemistry. So, I went to sociology and then when I got out of the electoral courses here at Chicago State in education. Speaker 1: Well, we don't wanna get you too far out of high school, yet (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. I'm still in high school. Speaker 1: And I was just thinking--okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, I'm still in high school. Speaker 1: So, so, you were thinking in high school that you might wanna-- Speaker 2: I was preparing for college. I took the college courses. Speaker 1: Courses, all right. Speaker 2: I took three years of Eng- four years of English, four years of foreign language, two years of Latin and then two years of Spanish. I took physics and chemistry. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you have any favorite teachers in high school? Speaker 2: Yes. It was an English teacher, Ms. Dix [ph.]. And she taught English and civics. I really liked her. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 615761 Speaker 1: How was high school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] socially? Now, here, you're there, you're one of the few--? Speaker 2: Oh, it was completely separate. It was completely separate. The young people that I stayed in contact with and did things with, it was always like going to museums or things like that. Going to lunch during the school year and eating together in the lunchroom, but my social life was black social life. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it was mostly over in the Rosenwald [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], in that area that you lived in? Speaker 2: And by this time, people are living in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. A big contingent of black kids are doing to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois]. It had, it'd begun to--it still was some white kids at Englewood, but it began to change. And they were all mostly in middle class, middle income, people who lived in the Englewood area. Not, in Englewood, in the Woodlawn area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not, east of Cottage, west of Cottage. Speaker 1: Okay. So, east of Cottage was still mostly white then? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, Cottage Grove [Cottage Grove Avenue] was the dividing? Speaker 2: Cottage Grove was the dividing line. And it was, it was strictly enforced. Speaker 1: Okay. You told the story before we started I think of, of trying to--your, was it your cousin trying to walk to the beach down 57th Street [57th Street Beach, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No. 47th Street. Speaker 1: 47th, okay. Speaker 2: He didn't, he didn't really get up to 47th Street (laughter). He didn't get any further than Woodlawn-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Before he was stopped. Speaker 1: Stopped by the? Speaker 2: By police, Chicago police. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: "You may not even walk in this neighborhood." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Anyone. They were not in blue jeans and look like they just off from work. There were kids that were--wear knickers. The boys wore knickers in those days until they went to high school; knickers and a shirt. Speaker 1: Okay, so they just, just pulled us over and said, "Hey, you don't belong here." And did they drive--? Speaker 2: "You don't belong here. You don't even walk over here." Speaker 1: They just send 'em back, send 'em back? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Cottage Grove was a strict dividing line. Story_ID: 615762 Speaker 1: Were you involved in school activities at Parker [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Did you--in clubs and all that sort of thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, like the glee club and you know, the regular kinds of things. Just, honor society, and you know, those kinds of things. Speaker 1: Honor society? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, your grades went up, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: You had pretty good grades (laughter). Speaker 2: Enough to get into college (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, honor society is better than just, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was, it was easy. They wanted me to go to, wanted us to go to Parker, because they thought it was a training ground for the teachers college [Chicago Teachers College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], and that we would get an excellent education there. Parents were not as involved in the day to day education of kids like they are today. They just assumed the grades were okay and that we were learning what we supposed to learn. And the year I graduated, fortunately, I had already been accepted to Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]. North Central Association [North Central Association of Colleges and Schools] discredited Chicago Public Schools. Speaker 1: Did they, they-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that they were not up to par. And particularly--nor was Parker. I had never taken a final exam. I'd never taken an impromptu quiz. I'd never written an essay. I'd never written an impromptu essay. I had not had basic college skills. That's why you say, you know, "How did you do in high school?" I thought I was doing okay 'til I got to Wisconsin. Story_ID: 615763 Speaker 1: I was asking you about the prom at Parker [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Did you, did you have a prom there? Speaker 2: We had a prom and we went to the prom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As, as--and it was over here at the Shoreland hotel [Chicago, Illinois], and, it was a beautiful prom. There was one other girl in my class that went to the prom also, and we were friends outside of school, too. And she went with one of the other boys that was in our group, and I did too. And of course, we only danced with one another. But we talked to the other kids. And after the prom everybody was, I say, "Well we're gonna, well now we're going to blah, blah." It was a nightclub. And so, they, the boys, the black guys and the white guys, they talked and they said, you know, just where we're gonna meet and all that, where we gonna park and everything. And we got there and it was upstairs. I can't remember the name of the club, I really don't. And the first two kids were white, and then my date was there, and they and they let me in and the other couple were brown skinned. And they told them they couldn't come in. We all left. So, that--the black, the white kids were just mortified. They had, they didn't know whether to come out or not. But while they--it was the first time any of us had encountered anything like that. So, we came home. The boys were embarrassed. And at school Monday, the other kids were apologetic. They didn't know, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And--but, it was almost time for graduation and that was, that was my first encounter. Speaker 1: So, this is 1940 what? Speaker 2: Nineteen forty [1940]. Speaker 1: Nineteen forty [1940]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay. Speaker 2: Forty-four [1944]. Speaker 1: Four [1944], '44 [1944]. Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-four [1944]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Right. Right, 1944, okay. Story_ID: 615764 Speaker 1: So, now, how did you--tell us about the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]. How was that arranged, and, you know, and how did you come to choose University of Wisconsin? Speaker 2: My father's half-brother had gone there, and he was just so enthusiastic about. He'd enjoyed it so much. And he by this time is living in Chicago [Illinois], and opened a haberdashery store on 47th [Street] and King Drive [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], Henry C. Taylor [Henry Taylor] (laughter). And he just talked to me and talked to me and talked to me about going to Wisconsin. So, that's how I went. No other reason than that. My father [Robert Rochon Taylor] told me the only place I could not go was the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], because it was such a prejudiced place. Speaker 1: So, he really experienced a lot of-- Speaker 2: He experienced a lot of it. All the black kids that went to the University of Illinois did. They could not live on campus. Even when I went to Wisconsin, black women could not live in the dormitory, or black men could not live in the dormitories either. It was still a segregated institution. Speaker 1: So, if you went to, would you say that it pretty much is true with all the major institutions, white institutions, I mean, state institu- supported institutions and bigger schools that you couldn't, you wouldn't be able to--? Speaker 2: If you could think about Champaign [Illinois], it's in the South. It's like some parts of southern Ohio. It's in the South (laughter). That's where--the river [Ohio River] was where people tried to escape (laughter) on the river. And most of the northern and state universities did not discriminate. Now, I don't know about Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]. I didn't-- Speaker 1: Yeah. They did. Speaker 2: I don't think I ever knew anybody that went to Ohio State. Speaker 1: Ohio State did. Speaker 2: They discriminated? Speaker 1: They discriminated, too. Speaker 2: Yeah. But Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] didn't, Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] didn't, Wisconsin didn't. The eastern schools did not. Speaker 1: But well, Wisconsin did discriminate in terms of where you would live, right? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No. You could stay in the dorm? Speaker 2: I stayed in the dorm. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. I thought you said, you couldn't stay-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. I went to Wisconsin and could stay in the dorms. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. All right. Speaker 2: In Minnesota you could stay in the dorms. In Michigan you could stay in the dorms, but Illinois was considered a southern state. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Southern Illinois is like being in the South. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm sorry, I misunderstood you. Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm sorry. I was not clear. Speaker 1: I thought you said you couldn't, you couldn't stay in the dorms. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you stayed in the dorm at the University of Wisconsin? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And--all right, with the other-- Story_ID: 615765 Speaker 1: Did you have a black roommate or white one there [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was funny. I had a black roommate. During the Second World War [World War II, WWII], my father [Robert Rochon Taylor] also was on the Federal Housing Authority [Federal Housing Administration], and he worked for Bob Weaver [Robert C. Weaver], with Bob Weaver. And he in Norfolk, Virginia, he was in charge of constructing the black public housing for war workers (laughter), when they were building ships in Norfolk, and the [U.S.] Navy was there in Norfolk. So, we would go to Washington [D.C.] in the summer, to Highland Beach [Maryland], which was like the Union Pier [Michigan] is here or Idlewild [Michigan]. It was a black community, resort community. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, we would, in order to be with him, we would go to Washington, go to Washington and Highland Beach in the summertime. We made fast friends with people there, with girls there. And one of them was Mary Burke [Mary Burke Washington], whose parents had come from Tuskegee [Alabama] to migrate to Washington and pass through Chicago [Illinois] and they stayed with us for a day or two. And we reintegrated with the Burke family when we would go there in the summertime, along with two or three other families, and they got interested in going to Wisconsin also. They'd gone to Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School], which was the elite high school in Washington, D.C. And the teachers that were there were just aghast that they were considering going to a midwestern university instead of one of the Seven Sisters (laughter). And--but they came to Wisconsin. So, Mary and I became roommates, and we lived together for one year and then after that, we went into single rooms. And it was shocking to me how much those kids from Dunbar High School knew that I did not know. They placed out in English, in foreign language, and math. They placed out. And I was struggling with English, and after that first placement exam and my first encounter and the first essay that I wrote, they called me in and asked me where had I gone to school in Chicago. And I told them. And they said, "A public school or the private school?" Well, the private school wasn't taking black students those days (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Francis Parker [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois] had-- Speaker 2: And they said, "Oh, well, we just don't expect Chicago students to last very long. They've been so poorly prepared." Well, I went into hysterics, you didn't call on that call home. Immediately, my father said, "Drop everything you can drop, and just concentrate on English. Take as many English courses as you can take, and writing courses as you could take because you'll need that for any other course you take." So, that what I did. But I was so humiliated with all these kids coming from a segregated black school doing so well. And I'd come from this--they could've taken us to Washington and put us in Dunbar for the time that he was in Washington. Speaker 1: That's quite a story. That's--so, the Chicago Public Schools were in pretty bad shape. Speaker 2: That's when Barbara [Dugas' sister, HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] went to boarding school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She spent two years in high school here [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], and then her last two years were in boarding school. We both left home at the same time. She went to Northville [sic. Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts] and I went to Wisconsin. Speaker 1: So that--so well, college was pretty difficult then when you first started. Speaker 2: It was very difficult. It was very difficult. And it was not only difficult, it was embarrassing (laughter). But I stuck it out, and it got better as it went along. But I had missed a lot. I missed a lot. And then I thought I'd taken Latin and, Spanish and I thought I was a hot shot (laughter). Anyway, I got over it (laughter) and stuck it out. Story_ID: 615766 Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the, the teachers at University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], the professors that--or were there any that really were mentors to, to you or helped you? Speaker 2: My French teacher, Mr. Harris [ph.]. He was most encouraging, and well, he kept me on track in French, even though I switched languages (laughter). It didn't make much difference (laughter), 'cause Spanish I didn't know enough to--I probably would not have known enough. But I switched languages to French and he was, he was very helpful and I did well in French. The English teachers, they just kept at me with sentence structure and all that sort of stuff. And I got turned so I could write adequately. And the best thing that happened was all those Second World War [World War II, WWII] soldiers came back, and they did not have enough faculty to read all those blue books. So they changed from essay questions to true and false. There were very few blue book kinds of things until you (laughter). Speaker 1: So, they were trying to accommodate the level of the returning soldiers? Speaker 2: Well the--no, the quality--the quantity. They just did not have--who was gonna read all those blue books. The school went from sixteen thousand to seventeen thousand and mostly women to being completely inundated to up to twenty-five thousand. So, we were meeting in churches around (laughter), around around campus. And it was, it was a big drain on all the universities. Speaker 1: So, you were an education major at this point? Speaker 2: No. I'm still in sociology. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So-- Speaker 2: Cultural anthro- cultural anthropology. I was doing those kinds of things. Speaker 1: Now, was college an enriching experience from the point of view of speakers coming to campus or activities--? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was alive. It was alive. And it was fully integrated. There wasn't anything that you thought you might wanna do that you didn't, couldn't do. The dormitory was free. We became officers in the dormitory. Mary [Mary Burke Washington] became president at one point. And I worked with the Badger. That was the yearbook staff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and you did--anything you thought you might like to do as extra--extracurricular it was available and people encouraged you to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you went from struggling with English to working on the Badger staff. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Yeah. Speaker 1: So, did you like to write once you got, you know? Speaker 2: It's still a struggle for me because I think it's getting--I feel the monkey on my back. It, it doesn't come easily. I--it calls for concentration, but I enjoy it now. I think that those people who are the best writers are those who have had impromptu writing experiences in class. And I learned a lot from my roommate, Mary, and her--the other friends from, from Washington [D.C.]. And they taught--in our biology class, our professor would--had taught them biology at Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School] in Washington. He had come to Madison [Wisconsin] for extensive work. They had the same workbook in high school that we had lab book in our lab. That was the difference. Speaker 1: Yeah. I've heard the level there was not quite-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the level, the level of education that they received was just extraordinary. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 615767 Speaker 1: So, at what period of time did you decide to switch to education, or did you? Speaker 2: Got married two weeks after graduation. And we moved to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Because he was from Milwaukee and he thought he had a job. In 1949 there was a big recession and they did not hired the engineers from Madison [Wisconsin] that they said that they were going to hire at AC Spark Plug [AC Spark Plug Division]. Speaker 1: Now, how did you meet Mr. Dugas [Lester J. Dugas, Jr.]? Speaker 2: I met him here on his last leave before he went overseas. We had a mutual friend. She said that--and he, that he would come to Chicago [Illinois] for his social life, because there was none in Milwaukee. And her mother had opened her house to all of the kids. They just--the house was always teaming with kids. And he was very shy, and she was very attentive to him. And so, on his last leave he said he wanted to take Arlette [ph.] out to the movies as a kind of thank you to the blah, blah, blah. So, she said, "I wanna go by my friend Lauranita's [HistoryMaker Lauranita Dugas] house, because I borrowed a book. I wanna return it." And when I told him that I was going to the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] he said, "Well, when I come back I'm gonna go to--'cause I only had one semester before I got drafted, and I'm going to come back to Madison." And that's how we met. But I forget him immediately (laughter). It was three years later almost before he come to Madison. And he tried for a week calling me, and I was never in. So, he said he got, he was, he was persistent because he could not believe that he could not get in touch with me. So, after we got in touch and started talking, we never stopped. And that was how, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And he was in engineering? Speaker 2: He was in electrical engineering. And they were just, one other black guy in electrical engineering and I don't think there was anybody else in the engineering department at all. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you all got married in 1949, was that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen forty-nine [1949]. Speaker 1: And moved west to Milwaukee? Speaker 2: And moved to Milwaukee. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 615768 Speaker 1: We [Dugas and her husband, Lester J. Dugas, Jr.] had to room because he--the job fell through and all the money we saved it was dwindling, dwindling, dwindling. As liberal as the perception that Wisconsin was, in terms of work it was not. You could live anywhere you wanna to and go to any school you wanted to. But in time, in times of work there was two schools teachers, one dentist, one physician, one lawyer, and some entrepreneurs, you know, people that had stores and things like that. It was a black man that was a black minister who was chairman of Chic- of the Milwaukee housing authority [Housing Authority of the City of Milwaukee], and somebody at the Urban League [Milwaukee Urban League, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. That was it in 1949. And every place he went, he was turned away. He had too much education, or you don't have enough education. Oh, you too black. They never said you were black. So, he contact FEPC, which is the Fair Employment Practices Commission, there was just one person for the whole State of Illinois. Her name was Virginia Heebner [ph.]. He--she got him a draftsman's job (laughter), to be a draftsman, you know. And she said, "Lester, I am just so sorry. But with your education, but this is a job and it pays enough money for you to support your--for you to live on." And he was only one in the department that had a college degree. But whoever was his supervisor recognized that he was not placed properly, and he tried to make things better as much as he could. And he even sent him to Dale Carnegie to get--yeah. They paid for him to do that. Speaker 2: So, that was polish up his so- his social skills and his, his--? Speaker 1: Yeah. And my father [Robert Rochon Taylor] kept saying to us, "Are you sure this is where you want to spend the rest of your life?" And he finally decided he'd come down here and interview at Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company], and they hired him as an engineer. And that's how we came back to Chicago [Illinois]. I came back to Chicago. He came to Chicago to live. Speaker 2: So, about what time is, what date? Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-three [1953]. Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953], okay. All right. Speaker 1: So, we had two children, we had her [Gail Dugas] and Jeff [Jeffrey Dugas]. Jeff was six weeks old when we moved here. Speaker 2: Now, had you started teaching at this point? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No. Okay. Speaker 1: A housewife until-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and mother. Story_ID: 615769 Speaker 1: We moved in--back into the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], and we stayed there until after my father [Robert Rochon Taylor] died, died in 1957. The children went to nursery school there, and they went to Howalton Day School [Chicago, Illinois] which was founded by two black women. Speaker 2: How do you spell Howalton? Speaker 1: H-O-W-E-L [sic.]. By Mary Howe [sic. June Howe Currin], and Darden [HistoryMaker Ethel Darden]. What's her first name? She's 102 years old, lives over in Montgomery Place [Montgomery Place Retirement Community, Chicago, Illinois]. She and her sister and Mary Howe. Any--they were there until Jeffery [Dugas' son, Jeffrey Dugas] finished first grade and then we moved over here. And by this time, my father's died and mother [Dorothy Jennings Taylor] is living in the old apartment, but we're close by. And we had begun, even before he died, to look for someplace where the kids could go to public school and we could stay together as a family. 'Cause my father, by this time, had had enough heart attacks to know that he was going to be leaving mother with us. Barbara [Dugas' sister, HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] had married a year after I did and had gone to live in Iran. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, she was out of the country. In fact, mother was there with her with daddy got--had his most severe attack. And he had his first one the year that--the summer that Jeffrey was born. So, he just got a succession of 'em. In those days, all they knew how to do was to keep your blood thin, and they were just discovering cholesterol and how his was affecting and blah, blah, blah, blah. So changing the diet and all that--and keeping the blood think was about the only thing that. So, the reason we, we started looking for someplace before he died. Then after he died, we continued to look in the various neighborhoods. But we concentrated on this neighborhood. Now, do you want me to talk about that time now, or do you want me to finishing about--? Speaker 2: Well sure, yeah, yeah. I guess we should, we should I guess if that's what we're doing at this point. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 615770 Speaker 1: We can come back to some other part of it, our, our life in the Rosenwald building [Rosenwald Apartments; Michigan Boulevard Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] which was very, very, which was fun. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, let's talk about that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). The Rosenwald building then was filled with professional people, but also returning veterans. And they were all continued to either go to school or to get advanced degrees. And everybody was busy having babies, and taking advantage of the playground and the atrium situations and the benches. So, it was filled with people like [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett and his wife [Frenetta Jarrett] and his chil- and Bobby Jarrett [William Jarrett]. Tommy [Thomas Jarrett] was not here yet. Just oodles and noodles of families. And we enjoyed--the men went, went off to work or went off the school and they came home and have dinner and either went back to graduate school (laughter), and we sat on the benches and visited with one another. We called--Barbara [Dugas' sister, HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] used to call that bench therapy (laughter). And white women did it. They did it. They sat on the benches on the North Side and commiserated and talked to one another. And we did it in the Rosenwald building because caring for small children for all--and men not coming home (laughter). It, it was kind of isolating, you know, so, women got together and helped one another, and helped raise one another's children. The children are all still in contact with one another. They still know one another intimately and well, even those that have moved out of the city, talk about the Rosenwald building. Rosenwald building had reunions, two big reunions, where people came from as far as Canada and Alaska to their reunions. And as I said, people still make contact. It was the time before they had baby monitors and what we would (laughter), if you didn't get a sitter, you opened the phone to whoever was entertaining in your house and every once and a while you bend over to listen to see if you hear the baby crying (laughter). And (laughter), I don't think that anybody ever had to go home because a kid woke up. But that was our baby monitor system if you wouldn't get a sitter. And gradually people saved enough money to begin to, to move out. People moved to Chatham [Chicago, Illinois] and those bungalows out there. Charlie Lomax [Charles E. Lomax] was one of the first to leave. And they began to move over in here, and--for the schools. Well, by the time we got here, the schools were overcrowded. Speaker 2: Now, can you maybe kind of walk us through maybe how things, how things manage to change? I know we, all of us all over the country, you know, have seen the play 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry]. And you know, the people trying to move out of the overcrowded, you know, black community and out to, you know, where there's more housing. How did the housing thing change here, the housing situation change in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 1: Similarly to the 'Raisin in the Sun.' The Hancocks experienced that. I mean, they were bombed and carried on when they tried--and, they had a white person buy, their place and they tried to move in, and it was, it was bad. We went from restricted covenant to redlining. And you know what redlining is? The real estate agents then would pound--the first black family that got in and then they would start getting the white families to move out by selling them, "The black plague is coming. You better go while you can get some good money." And they did that all over town. They were doing it here when we moved in. We looked at houses, I tried to look at houses in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois]. And the real--the white real estate agent told me, "No, black people will never get into South Shore." That didn't take 'em a long to (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Change, right. Speaker 1: But they were opened about it, clearly open about it. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, who, do you remember some of the people that were like actually at the forefront of fighting the, the unfair housing laws, and--? Speaker 1: Only suburban people. Not in the city. The people that I knew in our generation, the only rioting that I'm, that I'm aware of are only really difficulty is that out on Cicero [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, I wasn't necessarily referring to riots. I just wondered, you know, who were the, maybe some of the-- Speaker 1: Who would be the first person (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] involved? Speaker 1: They would be the first person in the block and within a year the block would be black. Speaker 2: Okay. So, if you get a black person on a block then-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --it would change? Speaker 1: It would change. Within eighteen months, it was all over. Story_ID: 615771 Speaker 1: Now, who were some of the people--well, first of all, how did you, what was your thinking in terms of choosing Hyde Park [Hyde Park - Kenwood, Chicago, Illinois] as a place you wanted to live? And then, who were some of the people that were fighting for change over here? Speaker 2: We looked at the people and the neighborhood as being diverse and we wanted that for ourselves and for our children [Gail Dugas, Jeffrey Dugas and Lauren Dugas Glover]. We looked at the people who felt, who were committed in making this a--continue to be a stable community of diverse people and cultures. And some of those people were people like Bill Berry [Edwin C. Berry] from the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois], who lived here also on 48th Street. There was Al Raby [Albert Raby]. There was Tim Black [HistoryMaker Timuel Black]. These were people who were African American. There were white people who were also committed. Ab Rosen [A. Abbot Rosen] from the Commission on Human Relations. There was the Catholic Interracial Council [Catholic Interracial Council of Chicago], and they lived in the neighborhood also. Bud Lifton [Robert "Bud" Lifton] who was not affiliated with an organization, but felt committed to the change. Not so much of the changes but continued to stabilize the community. And he has continued although his wife has died and his children are grown up and he's moved out of the neighborhood. He's been working with the schools. He's chairman of Working with the Schools [sic. Working in the Schools], WITS program. So, he has, it wasn't just during the time of his youth and return from the war [World War II, WWII] that he felt this commitment to the neighborhood. He has continued with his interest in the schools as an older gentleman (laughter). Oh, there was so many people. The KAM temple [KAM Isaiah Israel, Chicago, Illinois], which is anchored in the neighborhood. Elijah Muhammad came and here we have Jews and Mus- (laughter), and them living next door to each other and communicating with one another. And so it was, it felt like an exciting place to be. That it was a place where we could contribute and that other people are willing contributing. Speaker 1: When was it when you decided to move? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty [1960], okay. Speaker 2: May, 1960. Speaker 1: May, 1960. All right. So, John F. Kennedy is the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Richard M.--J. Daley [Richard J. Daley] is the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --mayor of the city. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Who's the alderman over here then? Was it Leon Despres, then? Speaker 2: No, no, no. He was not in this ward. He was further south. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember. Before Preckwinkle [HistoryMaker Toni Preckwinkle], (laughter) I can't remember (laughter), so many years. But they all, all of the alderman had been active and persistent in, in zoning and licensing, and protection, and security, and accommodation for children. What is now Kenwood Park [Chicago, Illinois] used to be Farmer's Field. It was just a field with sand as a sand down there (laughter) that was it. And the neighbors at Halloween time would come down and make a big barn fire and the children would be in costumes and the neighbors just conducted it. The man that owned it gave it to Chicago Public Schools and that's when they built Shoesmith School [Beulah Shoesmith Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and built a field house there and park district [Chicago Park District] and Chicago Public School share that, that area now. But there were just so many things. Kenwood High School [Kenwood Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] was built to relieve Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. The music program there headed by Ms. McLin had produced outstanding musicians. Speaker 1: This is Lena McLin [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Lena McLin], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Lena McLin? The, she's the daughter of the father of gospel music? Speaker 2: Yes [sic.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, Thomas Dorsey [Thomas A. Dorsey], right? Speaker 2: Precisely. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And she had Kenwood High School on the map in terms of their performances of the children that have gone on and entered music. Jeffrey [Dugas' son, Jeffrey Dugas] sang with her choir too. And they're just so, we just that--the neighborhood seethed with opportunity for kids to learn and to develop and with men- mentors and with people demonstrating how to get things done. Story_ID: 615772 Speaker 1: This was a vibrant community-- Speaker 2: A vibrant community. Speaker 1: --and still is. But nowadays, now we're sitting here just blocks from the home of [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the real estate is skyrocketing. Speaker 2: Skyrocketing. Speaker 1: Now, was it an exclusive economic community in those days? Were the days that you moved in did it cost you like--did you have to be a millionaire to live here? Speaker 2: Well, the original houses were built by the Swifts, the Armours, the Rosenwalds, that era, then they moved to the North Shore [Chicago, Illinois]. Intervening people were still upper class, upper income people and after the war, Second World War [World War II, WWII], they began to leave. Their kids are grown. They didn't need these big houses anymore. There were two private schools anchoring the neighborhood [Hyde Park - Kenwood, Chicago, Illinois]. Harvard Street--the Harvard School for Boys and the Faulkner School for Girls [Chicago, Illinois]. So, there were really upper class people still involved in the community or, and as they departed the influx of returning veterans and the peoples that I, people that I just mentioned began to take interest in the community. And they're replaced with, with middle-class people not necessarily middle income people, people who were just starting their careers at the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] or in business or in these institutions. And they were people who just believed in, that did not represent anything other than their belief in the community. And so, they were, everybody's associating with one another; with the leaders and with the workers, and walkers, and the supporters, and the believers. With the Kenwood Open House Committee was composed of people like Eleanor Petersen and Norma Lifton, and these people went to the real estate agents. That was the first committee that they asked me to join. I was hardly unpacked before I was asked. We went to the real estate agents and the companies and demanded they stop redlining. And demanded that they looked for people who could afford the houses regardless of color. And we would help them by having this annual open house walk and tour. And we would open our houses so that the people could, from anywhere else, could come and see how nice it was. And there were block clubs that were highly functioning. Everybody watched to see that nobody was converting or doing anything illegal (laughter). And the block clubs met regularly. And so, everybody knew one another intimately. If people had babies, they brought babies to the meetings. And so the community became the same kind of a community that we experienced other places. So, it was, it felt comfortable. It felt really comfortable. And when Elijah Muhammad built his house there on the corner and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About what year was this? Was this after you moved in? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Long time after we moved in. And then he built the four houses for his children across the street. Speaker 1: This like the mid-'60s [1960s], late '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: After '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Early '70s [1970s], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was living around Jewish people, and they were very happy because of all the guards that he had (laughter). They protected them, too. Everybody made friends with everybody. Everybody-- Speaker 1: So, nobody tried to keep out the Nation of Islam? Speaker 2: No. Nobody isolated them. He didn't isolate anybody. Speaker 1: Okay. And soon, well, Muhammad Ali moved here, too (unclear). Speaker 2: And Ali moved across the street. And the tour buses started coming (laughter). They still stop to show this was Ali's house (laughter). And the political people that showed it all up with Mikva [Abner J. Mikva], and with Leon Despres, and with Newhouse [Richard H. Newhouse, Jr.], and Al Raby [Albert Raby], and Harold Washington, and all of those political figures helped to keep us all together and cemented, and moving in the same directions. Sidney Williams, he was another big leader. The Canter School down the street was named for a woman who was just an ordinary citizen who worked with the schools, who worked with the children. She was not a teacher. She just worked as a volunteer. She devoted so much time to the children who were going to the neighborhood schools that they named the middle school for her; Miriam Canter School [Miriam G. Canter Middle School, Chicago, Illinois]. And she was not a teacher. She was not a leader of no--any organization. She was just a woman who was devoted to this neighborhood. And she was typical. She was typical. Everybody wasn't just somebody that was, had big notoriety or big name. Everybody pushed. Everybody participated. Story_ID: 615773 Speaker 1: Do you think it's because of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] that, I mean, or does it, what role do you think that the university plays in the attitude (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were not interested in Kenwood [Chicago, Illinois] at all. The urban renewal was for Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and urban renewal and--their interest was in the Hyde Park. They were not interested in Kenwood at all. They felt the houses were too big and that, how could live in them or who could take care of them. And they were more interested in south of Hyde Park Boulevard [East Hyde Park Boulevard]. When it was demonstrated that it could work down here. They became more interested. They encouraged their faculty to live in the community, and many of their faculty lived in--bought houses here in Kenwood. Those two houses across the street there were built and law professors have always lived in those, those two houses. The--I understand that they made it possible financially sometimes for them to make the down payments for people to move into apartments in Madison Park [Madison Park Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] and into the other houses. So, they became interested, but it was not the original relationship. As the university has grown, their faculty is not as involved, because they're not living in the community. But their faculty was very much involved, not only in Hyde Park, but in Kenwood. But many of their faculty now, and the hospital and at the university live in the suburbs or away--or downtown, on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois]. But this was university community for years. Speaker 1: Okay. You think it's the, is it the influence of the university you think that-- Speaker 2: Still draws people here? Speaker 1: Yeah, that, that kind of created that, you know, that dynamism in the beginning (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that period is over. I think people say, "Well, if the university is there and that'll, that'll be an anchor." But I don't think that they think that that is their safeguard anymore. Story_ID: 615774 Speaker 1: The second generation of people that have come in [to Hyde Park - Kenwood, Chicago, Illinois], the women are--come in working whereas, when we moved here the women were like I, they were home with the kids for the most part. There were not too many working women with small children. And as the children grew people went back to work or went into the workforce. Now, people come in with both par- both partners working with income is a lot more than it was. They're paying more for their houses. And they don't even consider using the schools. They don't even, that is not even on the agenda. They come in using the private schools. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they put up fences. We never had fences. And so, they are more closed in. The block clubs are no longer functioning. Kenwood Open House society [Kenwood Open House Committee] is still functioning but it's not, it's not--doesn't have the job that he had then. It's mostly concerned with security issues. And it's nothing better than a project to bring a community, or bring any organization together. And the blocks now go from black to white to integrated. More black, more white. Nobody even looks at who's--what color or what race or what religion. The houses just pass from people to people. Whereas, we were all, in those early years, we were always looking. I understand they had a meeting about us in this block (laughter). And it wasn't just snobbery. It was, it was, and we didn't take it that way. That it was (unclear) or snobbery. It was way of trying to be sure that the community, this group stayed, this community stayed stable. And-- Speaker 2: Okay. So-- Speaker 1: Now, it shifts back and forth without people thinking any one thing at all about it. And the young, the young people are coming in and buying the houses for nine times more than everybody else, than the earlier generations paid, and put that much more back in. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the children don't know one another. When my children were growing up, you could hear the children out playing in the afternoon in the summertime. When the street lights came on, that's when the kids came in. You didn't lock your doors. Kids played with children from this block and there were lots of children to play with in this block. But Jeffrey [Dugas' son, Jeffrey Dugas] had friends over on Kimbark [Avenue], and he would go over there or they would come over here. He had kids down--he found out a way to get all the way down to 49th [Street] and Greenwood [Avenue] without going in the street (laughter). Speaker 2: Just through people's--? Speaker 1: Just going through people's backyards (laughter). And you know, everybody knew one another. If something happened between school and here, I could get a call. He picked up some keys in front of a house on 50th Street that he knew the people were out of town and he saw the house keys on their front step. So, he picked it up and brought it home, and he was telling me about it. Said, "I found these keys at the Gottliebs' [ph.] front door and I know they had people living in there, but I was afraid to leave the keys there." The phone rang and somebody had seen him. And I said, you know, "This is why Jeffrey brought the keys home." And they said, "Well, that's a good thing because these people don't know where the keys are," (laughter). So, he took 'em back. But all the neighbors, they knew every--they knew my children and they felt that they could, could discipline them if they needed to be discipline or they could call me, and it was the same for everybody else. Everybody walked to school, we had a crossing guard here at Woodlawn [Avenue], patrol boys, there's not fashion term, but bigger boys had patrol belts and they helped little kids cross the street. Jeffrey was a patrol boy. In kindergarten, Lauren [Lauren Dugas Glover] walked to school by herself. Now, the kids get driven to school a couple block away. Everybody knew the crossing guard. The crossing guard knew everybody. You know, it's regrettable that things change, but you have to live with what--the way things are. The neighborhood people are not using Shoesmith [Beulah Shoesmith Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], so Shoesmith's population comes from outside the neighborhood. The kids gets driven to school. Speaker 2: That's the local public school, right? Speaker 1: Yes. That's the local--and they built that school for kindergarten through fifth, and then the old was to become the middle school. And in theory, you know, on paper it looked right. But it is, as time has moved on, it's just not been that way. And you know, clearly across the board, CPS [Chicago Public Schools] has had trouble. It's not just that this particular neighborhood or these particular schools have some problems, it's across all of CPS. And it's across the whole country. Story_ID: 615775 Speaker 1: Speaking of CPS [Chicago Public Schools], now, how did you get started as a teacher? Now, you, you were--? Speaker 2: How did I get started? I started-- Speaker 1: You were a housewife and then with a sociology degree, right? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, what happened, and did you start before you moved here? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't work before I came here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lauren [Dugas' daughter, Lauren Dugas Glover] was in eighth--eight years old, third grade, and it was clear I needed something more to do. And first I started doing some testing at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. And the testing, I was testing children in the Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] schools. And I was just appalled, 'cause I had been doing PTA [Parent Teacher Association] work here and I knew what schools could be like, and it was just chaotic. The principal told me to switch a light off and on if they got too loud and to be sure to lock the door. (Laughter) So, I did that for about six months. And I said, I'd like to go to work but I don't think I wanna do this. Then talking to Barbara [Dugas' sister, HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman], she said, "You know, Head Start is gonna get a good start. It's going to become a national thing and it's gonna be--why don't you look into that?" So, I did look into that. And I--they told me I need to get some education courses. So, I went to Chicago--it was normal school then and--Chicago Teachers College [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and I took the education courses. And they had in training also at Head Start. Gwendolyn DuBose was one of my curriculum advisors, Gwendolyn Rogers [HistoryMaker Gwendolyn DuBose Rogers] she is now. I don't know if you've interviewed Jack Rogers [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Sr.], John Rogers' father. Speaker 1: John, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. His wife. She was the curriculum person then. And my first assignment was a school down at State--near Stateway Gardens [Chicago, Illinois]. And the children all were eager to learn. Their parents were eager for them to learn, but I was frustrated because it was two sessions. And just as--by the time you got through--they required all this feeding stuff. By the time you got through feeding them twice, there was very little time left for anything else. They had--then they left and the session came in. Speaker 1: So, what you're describing is a school that's so crowded they had to divide the time in two session? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Head Start was for morning in those days. Speaker 1: Oh, Head Start was--okay. So, there's two--? Speaker 2: And it was very new, very--they were learning as they were going along. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And it was real involvement with the parents. There was a parent session once a week. Parents had to come in. And in this--it, on paper it was beautiful. But some of the implementation was too difficult. And with the board of education [Chicago Board of Education], it was even worse, because to teach at the public, in the Chicago Public Schools, you had to be certified, kindergarten through third grade. And they told me, "Head Start is not gonna last, so you just ready to be, get ready to get certified." Then, they kept pulling me out of Head Start to teach first grade. So, I said, "Barbara, I don't think I'm gonna like this. I like, you know, what Head Start is doing. But I don't--is there someplace else I can go?" (Laughter) So--that you know about. So, that's when I found the Institute for Juvenile Research [Chicago, Illinois] which was doing the teacher training program in, in--and that wasn't Henry Horner [Henry Horner Homes]. That was on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now, about what year is this? Speaker 2: It's all written down in those notes that I have over there. Speaker 1: Okay. Was it late '60s [1960s] or mid-'60s [1960s], or? Speaker 2: About mid-'60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mid-'60s by now. Story_ID: 615776 Speaker 1: Institute for Juvenile Research [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Institute for Juvenile state--run by the State of Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a research project and the pilot project was housed in--I don't wanna rattle the papers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'll come back and tell you. Speaker 1: If need to look, if you need to look real quick go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Might keep you on track. Speaker 2: Henry Horner. Speaker 1: Oh, Henry Horner projects. Okay. Speaker 2: It was Martin Luther King's family center in, housed in Henry Horner Homes [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they--it was a lot of research and a lot of teacher training, and I learned a lot, a lot more. It was more practical. Got more involved with parents. It was not a separate unit that got involved with the parents. The teachers were involved with the parents. We would go into the homes and we would recruit children from in the home--we walked all through the Horn- Henry Horner Homes, without any problem with it all. But then, then of course it was Fred Hampton and the Black Pan- (laughter), and that whole incident with him. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's 1969. 'Cause I was thinking when you said, the Martin Luther King center. That had to be after he was killed that they-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, it was there before. Speaker 1: Was it before he got killed? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Because that's--there was more than one center named for Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. This was the arm of the Institute for Juvenile Research. This was the pilot program that I was involved in, okay. And they were doing good in the community, Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] were and Fred Hampton. And we were doing our thing in the project with the parents and with the children. We're getting the parents involved in, in the education of their children, the child development things. And I, through that project, I learned how to integrate direct instruction with everyday activities. And what we struggled with, with assistant teachers were they wanted to teach children like they were teaching in elementary school, but little children before four don't learn that way. You don't sit them down and then have a lecture, or had, or have, they had, you know, flashcards and things like that. This is what they wanted to do because this is what their memory of education was all about. But before six or seven, that's not the way children learn. So, we learned how to help parents and assistant teachers learn how to help children learn their colors by matching socks as they did the laundry, by matching buttons, and playing games that way. And say to children, "What else do you know? What else can you do?" Instead of saying, "This is what you have to do." So, it was a, it was a learning experience for the parents and for the assistant teachers that we had in that center. And the parents were just thrilled. "We would have never thought about that," you know, matching the socks as they did the laundry in the laundry room (laughter). Those kinds of things that were just, could have come naturally to them. That they did not associate with education and to help bring children into doing those things with them instead of just letting the children watch--not help with household task when they could. Measuring, we're using measuring spoons, measuring cups to measure quantities. Just (laughter), helping children learning how to cook with their parents instead of always having it done. All these kinds of things. That were the kinds of things we were doing. I stayed there until the project ended and the parents was so enthusiastic about the problem--the project that they wanted to continue it. And they raised money and got donations and they continue to have that center continue on. I also at that time began to supervise Erikson [Erikson Institute, Chicago, Illinois] students in their tutorials as they came into the center to observe the children and to learn. Story_ID: 615777 Speaker 1: Then '69 [1969] came (laughter), and it was chaos. It was chaos, and the riots and everything. We had to get evacuated out. Speaker 2: Was this after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], near '68 [1968], yeah. Speaker 1: And the school [Institute for Juvenile Research, Chicago, Illinois] closed down for a while and that's when I came over here to Chicago Child Care Center--Society [Chicago Child Care Society, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I was really enthusiastic about Chicago Child Care because it was going to combine social work and teaching. Child development and social work. The social workers were advocates of the parents. And the teachers were the advocates of the child. And sometimes the two didn't meet. Social workers was telling us, "She's not--the mother's not ready for that," (laughter). And we would say, "But the child is sinking in the, in the deep mud." And so, we had, we had the opportunity to, under the leadership of Marion Obenhaus [Marion Pendleton Obenhaus], who was the director of Chicago Child Care, to bring these two professions together in the interest of the family. And it worked out to be such an exciting adventure. I really enjoyed every minute of it. And we staffed children together; we staffed families together. We worked with families together. Social workers began to come into the classroom and could see what we were talking about and how, how--what was going on at home was affecting the children away from the home. And so, it, it was beautiful experience, exciting experience. I began to supervise two assistant teachers; more Erikson [Erikson Institute, Chicago, Illinois] students--they were there for a quarter--nursing students from Michael Reese [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois]. Because early childhood develop was foreign to almost every profession. Nobody looked at it as a profession. You sat with kids. You watch kids. (Laughter) You didn't get involved in their development in an educational kind of way. Story_ID: 615778 Speaker 1: Could you just tell us where the Chicago child care center [Chicago Child Care Society, Chicago, Illinois] is located? Speaker 2: Yes, 5467 South University Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how long were you there? Speaker 2: I was there twenty-five years. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you retire from there? Speaker 2: I retired from there. Speaker 1: Okay. So. Speaker 2: And it was back in the neighborhood. I could walk there. Gail [Gail Dugas] was by this time in college and Jeffrey [Jeffrey Dugas] was off in boarding school. But Lauren [Lauren Dugas Glover] was still in the neighborhood and so, and mother [Dorothy Jennings Taylor] was still here. So, it was--and she was getting older, mother was getting older. So, geographically, it made--I was more comfortable here. Speaker 1: So, this was about 1970 to '95 [1995] (unclear)? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Was that about right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Around--and I think it was '89 [1989] I gradu- I, I retired. Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], okay. Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Either way, I was there a long time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I have it written down on some of that information I gave you; the years. Gail grad- '69 [1969], maybe '69 [1969], around '69 [1969] is when I left the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], anyway. Speaker 1: About twenty years, I guess then. Speaker 2: Um-hm, twenty years. Speaker 1: Yeah, about twenty years. Speaker 2: More closer to twenty years. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Supervised other teachers, supervised Erikson Institute [Chicago, Illinois] students, and nursing students. We began to supervisor one another. There was another experiment that we--that was conducted there. And it was, there was never a dull moment at Chicago Child Care. We rate--we're free to, to make assessments and judgments on, on children. We were--we learned how to look at a physical trait to explain social behavior. Speaker 1: For instances. What--? Speaker 2: In child care. Speaker 1: Okay. For instance, what--give us an example? Speaker 2: Oh, for instance, okay. I had a little boy who played on the floor like this all of the time, and he had a lot of problems following directions. And I finally took his face and held it and I said, "Can you hear what I'm saying?" And he looks (shakes head). And I turned him, I said, to the ear that he usually had up, I said, "Can you hear what I say, now?" And he said, "Yeah." So, we were able to--and his mother was at her wits end with his behavior. And so, with the social worker we made, made arrangements for him to get a hearing aid. We had another child that was absolutely bizarre in her behavior. She could read at four or five at almost a high school level. She could read anything you gave her to read. She talked in a monotone. She didn't make eye contact. She was very different from the other children in the family. They were at wits end. Social workers didn't know what was wrong with her. She did not bond with anybody but me. And I thought, there's something we don't know about this child. We need to get her evaluated psychologically. She was the first autistic child that I ever had, first encounter with an autistic child. We found placement for her in a residential situation. I've seen her parents recently, and they said that she is now able to work. And she, and she grew up and she got help early enough to be independent today. Had another little boy who--at Child Care all of the windows on, in the first floor went from ceiling to floor. And the parking lot ran across that--those windows. And he would jump up and screech and run around in circles. It was just unbelievable, anytime somebody went by that window. And with the social workers we got him, gotta get his eyes evaluated. First he got a physical. Evidently, found nothing wrong with him. Then, I said, maybe it's his eyes because it's only when he sees something. So, they got his eyes examined and he saw the whole world upside down. He--it was like somebody was attacking him when, when he would see something through the glass. So, we got him glasses. So, those are the kinds of things that train--taught me early on that child's social behavior is not necessarily the cause, that's not the problem. Let's look for some physical stuff that is influencing the social behavior. And we were free to do that. We were free to explore that, director said, you know, "Well, let's look into it." What do you think? There were no rules to bar us from experimenting and pursuing. That's why I liked it. And that's why I stayed in the classroom where I didn't wanna leave. Story_ID: 615779 Speaker 1: Do you have a philosophy of early childhood education? Speaker 2: Well, I came to embrace Erikson [Erikson Institute, Chicago, Illinois]. I, I began to read independently, and you know, go to, to classes and stuff like that. And Erikson was--of course, I was surrounded by Erikson. I was surrounded by Erikson's students. I was surrounded by my sister [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman], and the people that I met through professional organizations. Everybody was into Erickson. Speaker 1: Now, how would you sum that up for us? What is that philosophy, basically? Speaker 2: It's development of the child. That is a scientific approach that it--that is a progression and one thing layers onto the next, and that prematurely you cannot jump from one developmental stage to the next developmental stage. Everybody goes through the process, even unto death. Story_ID: 615780 Speaker 1: Since you've been retired, have you volunteered, you know, services too? Speaker 2: Oh, I--after I retired from Child, Child Care [Chicago Child Care Society, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I started working at Harold Washington College [Chicago, Illinois] in a teacher--in, in a program to teach Head Start teachers who did not have a degree in early childhood, or any education in early childhood. It was a federal funded program through the health and human services [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services], and Harold Washington. They could take sixteen hours of college education, and that was not very much but it's, it still is a start. And Harold Washington required that they take a placement exam before they could take any of their courses. So, they had to be proficient in English, in math, before they could even get started on their professional education. The teachers, we teachers, advisors, counselors, observed them in, in their classroom routines and met with them for an hour after each meeting and counseled them and advised them on their, on their practice. They had to write then ten essay questions and be examined by a federal examiner, orally and with a written test. And I stayed there until three years ago doing that. Speaker 1: Okay, 'til 2007. Speaker 2: Of course, I had to go from school to school to school to make these observations, and it was a bad winter and I slipped and I said, "Well, at eighty, you got business, I'm not gonna do this." So, I stopped doing that. Then the program folded, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a federally funded program. And now there--it's a requirement that all these people have A.A.'s. The assistant teachers have A.A.'s and most of the people that we trained doing that, doing the, that program have gone on to get A.A.'s. I've had two to go on to get B.S.'s, and one is in a master's [degree] program. But it was a lot for these women. Most of them were working full time. They had families. They not only had families, they had families with problems. And it was very difficult for them to take college courses and have me come there once a week and critique their work and help them make connection between what they were learning in the college classes and their practice. If was like it was departmentalized. What they did in school was one thing, what they did in the classroom was something else. And help them to bring those two things together. Story_ID: 615781 Speaker 1: How would you summarize what you've accomplished, I guess, in early childhood education in your career? Speaker 2: Helping both children and adults learn how, how the child develops. Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back on everything you've done to this point, I mean, until you retired is there anything that you've done differently if you could've? Speaker 2: Maybe I would've taken more formal education, but it just seemed like it was just too much with three children [Gail Dugas, Jeffrey Dugas and Lauren Dugas Glover]. I know a lot of people do it without a, without a problem. But my husband [Lester J. Dugas, Jr.] was also comit- not only did I have my two chil- my three children, but my husband was a public figure also. And there were obligations that I felt as his wife that I needed to participate in also. I continued to participate in the neighborhood [Hyde Park - Kenwood, Chicago, Illinois] and doing neighborhood work as a volunteer. And I guess, you know, some people are strong enough to carry all of that baggage, but I thought, I just made, made the decisions that seemed right for me at the time. I could've made other choices. And that, I don't say that I regret but I know that there were other choices that I could've made. I could've come out of teaching and gone into more into administration. But I really loved the teaching part of it. I could've gone back sch- I did go back to school a couple of summers. But it felt like I was taking time away from the kids. So, I said, "Well, I'll stick with the kids," (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 615782 Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Oh, that's a big question. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: It's one we have to ask (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One, one you have to ask. Speaker 1: Yeah, I have to ask. Speaker 2: I think essentially the things that I've been saying. That we will somehow get enough children educated and educated properly so that they have--can make a contribution to society so they can take care of themselves and their families. And that they can move through life with integrity and honesty. Not everybody can be the star basketball player, but you can enjoy basketball for what it gives you and what it's taught you, same with baseball and football. And in the same, and that there are a lot of people that just do it for the pleasure and for the things that they can, can learn from it for themselves and to know about themselves. And raise beautiful families and make contributions at work and make contributions to society in general. And I think those people are the stars. It's not necessarily the ones that make to the very top with the notoriety. It's the people that, that--the good old souls. Story_ID: 615783 Speaker 1: Now, you've been--one of your major volunteer activities has been Black Creativity. You were, I think-- Speaker 2: I have Black Creativity. Speaker 1: Yeah, you were, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. I started with Black Creativity, Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] started with first Black History Week, and then Black History Month to herald black scientists. That was the first thing. My husband [Lester J. Dugas, Jr.] was part of that advisory board to the university, I mean, to the Museum of Science and Industry to help design the exhibit ['Black Creativity Juried Art Exhibition']. And it--expanded it into what they call a college bowl, which he brought in volunteers from the business community and scientists to talk to school children. And they developed a liaison with Chicago Public Schools that throughout the month of February during Black History Month, Chicago Public Schools and Museum of Science and Industry hold this event. They have not only the exhibit that they do annual but the college bowl which brings in the children and professional in the field. After the first couple of years, I don't remember exactly was--who it was from the museum that asked a community of black women, could we hold a gala to--through the public relations heralding the Black History Month. Speaker 1: So, this is a--? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Runner was one of the leaders in that group. She was the leader. And she got us together and we found the money. They wouldn't--the museum was not gonna pay for it. We had to pay for it or find money to pay for this gala, and we did that. We did that for four or five years until we started making money (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is 1988 when the inaugural, when the first one--? Speaker 2: Well, now this was '84 [1984] when it started. Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984] when you first started? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Isobel Neal was the first person to earn money. And we started putting that--we thought we were putting that money aside. And our goal was to get a permit exempt- exam- exhibit at the museum. But as time when on and the bowl became more expensive and the exhibit became more expensive, the money started going to, to support the program. And last month, yes, they museum took some of the monies that they had, we had earned (laughter) or put aside, and they augmented it by putting a plaque up in the museum in dedication to the Black Creativity committees that had started this. So, that's as close as we got to permanent exhibit (laughter). But it's a nice acknowledgement of all the work that has been going on since then. You know, they get the thrust, as I said, was for the gala committee that we wanted to try to get a permanent exhibit. Then, we moved to, "Why hasn't the museum have all of their exhibits, every exhibit that they have entail some acknowledgement or the blacks who have contributed to it?" Because there's not a--there's absolutely not an exhibit over there that blacks have not made a contribution. And that they should acknowledge that rather than to try to have a, just an exhibit that says that these are black, this is the black exhibit. And I think that they're still trying to do, move in that direction. I gave that up at the end of last year. I was chairman of the steering committee, which was all of the past presidents. And they have now really combined the gala committee with the advisory committee, and it'll, it's time for--I'm eighty-three years old, it's time for the younger people to, to move this thing forward. So, I said, you know, "If old people keep on taking up all the space, when are the young people gonna learn how to do it? When are they gonna get independent? When are they gonna do the things that we did?" Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 615784 Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about your--okay all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But then I--I was on WITS board too, which was in education, and that was Working in the Schools. As I mentioned, Bud Lifton [Robert "Bud" Lifton] is still working with that. Speaker 1: What was it called again? Speaker 2: Working in the Schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: WITS, W-I-T-S. Speaker 1: WITS board. Speaker 2: They--we were the one that instituted Principal for a Day to get communi- people in the business community to come intervene. There were volunteer to go into the classroom. At the principal's request and it would be the teacher who decided how best this volunteer could serve her. Rather it be cutting out decals or running mimeograph machine or help talking to a child, or listen to a child read. It would be the classroom teacher who decided how--what she can best, well, how best this volunteer could serve her. And that has continued and it's been a very good program. They brought in, at first it was just retired people who were doing it. And whether they were in teaching or not; didn't matter, just that it was a retired person. Now, they have a--really it was my suggestion, that they go into the business community and ask for volunteers from within the business community, and this has caught on. And an hour or two they come volunteers from all of the co- all of the companies around the Chicago [Illinois] area; Boeing [The Boeing Company], Commonwealth Edison gas company [Commonwealth Edison Company], all of them, sign up to go to a school to be a volunteer. As I said, I began to cut back on my volunteer work. I was twelve years at Montgomery Place [Montgomery Place Retirement Community, Chicago, Illinois], which is a retirement community. I don't know how they thought that I would make a contribution except I'm Episcopalian and it's Epsico- (laughter) that was an Episcopal institution. But many people from this community--Montgomery Place started with people who here in this community, Hyde Park and Kenwood [Hyde Park - Kenwood, Chicago, Illinois], were ready to retire but not ready to die. They were not sick. And the Episcopal church had a church home that was--had taken in retired church workers but they were down to three people (laughter). And so, they, they donated their capital and more capital was raised and they built this new institution over at 57th [sic. 56th Street] and the lake [Lake Michigan]. It's a retirement community. There's a--there are apartments for independent living. There's an area where people who need some kinds of supervision with health, with their medication or with bathing and things like that. But they don't need nursing care, that middle stage. And then there's nursing care. They also have rehab where if you need, if you have surgery and if--like you, if you had surgery, you need rehab you can go over there for two weeks and get back on your feet. They have swimming pool and they have all of the rehab equipment and all of that sort of stuff. They were almost broke when I went on the, on the committee and they're now out of the red and into the black. Story_ID: 615785 Speaker 1: Now, I didn't ask you about church, but are you, are you, are you an Episcopal? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And what's your church? Speaker 2: St. Paul and the Redeemer [St. Paul and the Redeemer Episcopal Church, Chicago, Illinois], right down the street. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, all right. Okay. Speaker 2: Right across the street from the park [Kenwood Park, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as an aside, and you probably learned that Lester [Dugas' husband, Lester J. Dugas, Jr.] was very much involved with everything in this community (laughter) and everything in the city. And the community and his friends have installed down, down there at the corner, the park across the street from the church, a monument in his honor, and a garden. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was very active at the church. He was a warden in the church. He was on Hyde Park Bank board, South East Chicago Commission, Hyde Park Kenwood Community Conference, and on and on and on in the community, and Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County] chair. Like, he did a lot outside of the immediate community but in the, in the total community. So, we were committed to the city and this community and as I said, I had the children but I also had him. And the things that he was interested in doing and I had functions with him too, when, when I could. Like he was on the advisory board and I was on the gala board (laughter). Speaker 1: So, yeah, they kind of partner up-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they partnered in a number of activities. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And when he retired, oh, gosh what was the name of that organization? It's all retirees and they advise people who're in business. Speaker 1: Take a look (laughter). I think I, I know what you're talking about. Speaker 2: What is that called? Speaker 1: I can't think of it. Speaker 2: A number of people. Well, we'll come back to it. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Story_ID: 615786 Speaker 1: The other thing at Mont- at Montgomery Place [Montgomery Place Retirement Community, Chicago, Illinois], people here moved there, and they were like in their seventies. And so, they were active. Some of 'em were still going to the university. Some are still going downtown to their businesses some of 'em. But they wanted to get out of the houses and the responsibility of the houses, and they had nice apartments over there. Now they're getting older and the new people coming in are coming in less active, not as vital. They're staying at home until they have to go over there. And so the complexion of it has changed some. But they're a very active community and they do, do a lot. Joan Smith was the first person, my first professor I took an education course from, was over there. And one of the social workers from Chicago Child Care [Chicago Child Care Society, Chicago, Illinois] was over there. They both have passed now. But I can see them and I could be with them, and remember with them. There are a lot of people who were, a number of people who were in this early fight in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s], have now retired and now over there. So, it felt like I was com- although, we were losing older people, they were not young people but it was holding all of us together still. And it was, I was making a contribution to keeping it together so that it didn't fail. And it was on the brink of failure, it really was. But it was struggle but I retired off that board (laughter). What, there's something else I'm doing now too. Oh, and then Lester [Dugas' husband, Lester J. Dugas, Jr.] began to recruit engineers from the University of Wisconsin into Commonwealth Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company]. And he was so successful at that that it came to the attention of, of the alumni association which is Wisconsin Foundation [University of Wisconsin Foundation, Madison, Wisconsin]. And they asked us to help them recruit students into the university by hosting a reception for accepted students. They had been accepted but they had not said that they were gonna matriculate. So, we would have them come here once a year with their parents and be brought in other alumni from the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin], particularly those in the neighborhood, and to talk to the parents and to talk to the young people. And we did that until we outgrew space. And after that, it really wasn't necessary anymore, really. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: People were going and accepting and they were getting enough students. Then, the chancellor established, what they call the Chancellor Scholarship fund for minority students [Chancellor's Scholarship Program]. And there's a black woman that was to be the chancellor for that project, and we began friends with her, well, my daughter [Lauren Dugas Glover], the younger daughter was at the University of Wisconsin. And their scholarship is called the Powers Knapp Scholarship [Powers Knapp Scholarship Program]. And they not only provide the tuition and room and board, and everything else, they provide mentorship and guidance, and counseling. And they meet with these young people on a regular basis and be sure that they have all, they all graduate and they all stay up with their grades and everything like that. So, then we started a Lauranita and Lester Dugas book fund for minority students at the University of Wisconsin. So, with the Powers Knapp Scholarship and the book fund there's a lot of kids that are being able to not have to worry too much about money. Story_ID: 615787 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family. Your children, I know you spoke about Lester Dugas [Lester J. Dugas, Jr.], your ex- your former husband who passed. Tell us about your children, too. Speaker 2: Well, Gail [Gail Dugas] started out in early childhood, And she couldn't earn a living. It was just too low pay. And so, she took one of those placement--after she graduated from Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts], she was a director of a daycare center in Hampton, Virginia--which she was living hand to mouth. And she took one of those exams and they, they suggested that, that insurance is another teaching profession, and that you might be do good--do, do well in that. So, she went into insurance and in financial planning and stuff like that. So, that's what she does. Jeffrey [Jeffrey Dugas] got caught up in the '60s [1960s] and the walkouts and the blah, blahs that were going on around the city [Chicago, Illinois]. And we took him out of public school and he went to boarding school [Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts]. Went to the same boarding school my sister Barbara [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] went to. And then he went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and then he went to Morehouse medical school [Morehouse School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia] for two years, 'cause it was only a two year school then. And then transferred to Rush [Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] here, and he's been at Rush ever since (laughter), had two wives. Speaker 1: So, he's a physician? Speaker 2: Hum? Speaker 1: So, he's a physician? Speaker 2: He's a physician. He's had two wives. His first wife [Lynn Hudson] was a young lady that lived at the other end of the block (laughter). They were in elementary school together, first two years of high school together. She's an attorney, and her uncle was Oscar Brown. Her father was a physician at Rush, head of ambulatory care. And it just didn't work. They had two children [Andrea Dugas Douglas and Jeffrey Dugas, Jr.], just unfortunately didn't work. And he remarried twelve years ago, and they have another child, a boy [Taylor Dugas]. He married Tina Carroll [Tina Carroll Dugas] from--well, she was originally from New York [New York]. And Lauren [Dugas' daughter, Lauren Dugas Glover] the youn- the baby. He says his baby (laughter), 'cause there's about five years' difference in their ages. So, she--he always considered Lauren his baby. This is my baby. She went to the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, Wisconsin]. She went to public school, the only one that, the only one that ever finished public school. Gail went two years to public school and then went to Latin [Latin School of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. They were recruiting black student at bla- at Latin. And that she was one of the first blacks to graduate from La- Latin. As I say, Jeffrey went to boarding school, and then he went--then Lauren went Shoesmith [Beulah Shoesmith Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] which was a brand new school when she started kindergarten to Kenwood High School [Kenwood Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] to University of Wisconsin. She says, she's all public school (laughter). She was in broadcast journalism which she has evolved into not doing that. But she, she was clearly a good writer. She had--all three of them are good writers. They all had excellent English teachers. Lauren got her M.B.A. Gail got a master's [degree] also. But Jef- Lauren got an M.B.A., and so, she was not working in broadcast journalism since she got that. Right now, she's doing placement of public art, placing of art in public places for the State of, of Maryland. And she's vice chairman of the DNC [Democratic National Committee] of the State of Maryland. And she has two boys and a busy husband. Story_ID: 615788 Speaker 1: Her husband met--they met during the Harold Washington's campaign, his second campaign here [Chicago, Illinois]. And she was in television at that time. And he left there to go to--he left Harold Washington's office, I mean, his tenure when Harold Washington died. He, he was his assistant at that time, and when he died, he went into banking. Speaker 2: What's his name? I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Kenneth Glover. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And he's been in a number of different places on Wall Street. Twelve years ago, he was originally from Maryland a friend of his was account executive and he need a financial advisor. And he persuaded him to leave New York [New York] Wall Street and come to Maryland and be the financial consultant for the State of Maryland for the--Prince George's County. So, he did that until the term was up and then he went back to banking (laughter). He's been with, he's been with Mesirow [Mesirow Financial, Chicago, Illinois] and he's been with PNC Bank [PNC Bank National Association] in Washington [D.C.], and he's been doing a number of different things. But he's been a consultant to three black city mayors in New York and New Orleans [Louisiana], and Los Angeles [California]. I guess there aren't any more of them, I mean, they're no longer mayors (laughter). So, he said, he's through with politics (laughter). But you know, their boys are sixteen and twenty next week. And the older boy's second year in college, doing very well in college. And he's a very interesting young man. He joined Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], and a year after he--or the semester after he joined Alpha, they had the lowest grade point average of any of the (laughter) fraternities on campus. And he became the educational whatever, and he had every one of his brothers go to his advisor, and they made a contract with the, with the office to raise their GPA [grade point average] the next, following semester. They raise this--all those young men raised their GPA until it was the highest in May of any of the fraternities on campus. So, he got recognized by the school as a major contributor to the welfare of the institution. And he made, he got recognized as a sophomore, male sophomore for achievement. And I went to that ceremony and it was a, it was a thrill to have his professors come up to us and say, what a pleasure it was to have him there. And that he, he had done so well. And, you know, he's been busy. He just came back from spring break. They went to Cos- the Dominican Republic and he'd build houses with the habitat [Habitat for Humanity]. He went to New Orleans when he was in high school to help tear up the town, tear up, tear down houses and--at spring break that was another contribution that he made. So, he's, he's been a busy young man giving back, giving back. Story_ID: 615789 Speaker 1: How does it--so many of the people even that I interview for this project don't know much about their ancestors. They can't trace 'em back very far, and that's not necessarily the worst thing in the world. But what does it mean to have a legacy of achievement from so many generations? Speaker 2: Well, it gives you focus. It, it helps to define who you are and what your responsibilities are, not only for yourself but for your family and for the future. And not only these people have accomplished may be things monetarily, but they have given back. They've made contributions to--that are worthwhile in society. And that helps define how you plan out your life and how you hope your children will plan out theirs. And I find my kids have all done the same thing. They're all giving back. They all found ways to make contributions, to volunteer. And Jeffrey [Jeffrey Dugas] has raised his children even though he did not have the same input for his two older children [Andrea Dugas Douglas and Jeffrey Dugas, Jr.] as he does with this one [Taylor Dugas], to--for them to be contributing people, and responsible people, and understand their heritage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And where they've come from and where they need to go. Gail [Gail Dugas] doesn't have any children and--but she does--she volunteers everywhere. People call on her because she likes to organize, and she likes to get things done. And she, she has chaired a number of organizations and done that kind of thing. Worked with Sinfonietta [Chicago Sinfonietta], Black Creativity, there were, there were things like that. They're all devoted to education. Both of Jeffrey's children have advanced degrees; no, the girl does, boy doesn't. They both have college degrees and she has a M.B.A. from Kellogg [Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois]. And he's three years out of college and he's already a store manager for Target [Target Corporation]. So, he's, you know, he's got his eye on the prize. Story_ID: 615790 Speaker 1: Is there--oh, as we sit here this is like 2010, your neighbor, your--well, your niece [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett's in the administration of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] who is one of your neighbors here-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. Well, how does that make you feel (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, in some ways awesome. But in other ways since we knew him before he was somebody, it just feels like one of the kids has done good (laughter), that kind of thing. We have known him and Valerie knew him before. But we have known him since Malia [Malia Obama] was in, was in arms. So, he was just a kid. Another friend of Valerie's, you know. The kid they brought, brought around for Sunday dinner. 'Cause that's another thing we always do in this family, we're close, very close. You interviewed my cousin Gene Dibble [HistoryMaker Eugene H. Dibble, III]. They lived in Madison Park [Madison Park Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]. He had five kids. Barbara [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman] lived around the corner with one child. Gene's sister, Ann Cook Jordan [HistoryMaker Ann Dibble Jordan], had four children, two doors down. We were all together. This cousin Bill [ph.] that I talked to you about, he lived at 48th Street with his two children. So, we not only had the community as a, as a perimeter for us, we had all of our family. And all of these children are still on and out of our house all of the time. And most Sundays it was somebody had everybody as--'cause kids got bigger and they got boyfriends and girlfriends and (unclear). Barbara's house was the only house was big enough to hold everybody. So, mostly the big dinners and stuff were at Barbara's house, but they started out here. 'Cause mama [Dugas' mother, Dorothy Jennings Taylor] was here and she was the head of the family. But all of these cousins are like sisters and brothers to me. Their children call me aunt, and it's hard for people to understand that how could you have so many cousins (laughter), and so many generations of cousins. Gail [Dugas' daughter, Gail Dugas] was in Albuquerque [New Mexico] last month. A friend that she had gone to high school turned out to be a vet manager, and has expanded into Native American. He manages the powwows. And the big animal powwow is in Albuquerque in April. It's such a big thing that the president sent two people to the powwow, and they both happened to be on Valerie's staff. So, Gail goes to the powwow every year. She first--she went as a guest. Now because of organizational, business and talents whatnot, they have her in the office organizing everything. And so, the people came to her right before they went on stage to do their--what they had to do. And during the conversation this young man says that he worked for Valerie Jarret and she says, "Oh, that's my cousin." And he said, "I cannot believe I have you here in Albuquerque and met another one of her cousins. Everywhere we go there's another one of her cousins, and they're seemingly first cousins," (laughter). So, that's the, you know, that's how we are spread out and that's how we, we still stay connected. Frequently, you'll find families past the first generation or the second generation, the cousins don't stay connected. The cousins all still stay connected. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lauren [Dugas' daughter, Lauren Dugas Glover] is in Washington [D.C.] with four cousins. Story_ID: 615791 Speaker 1: Well, is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my-- Speaker 2: I know you're bored silly (laughter). Speaker 1: --the last question. I got one more question I'm supposed to ask. But is there anything I haven't ask you that you wanna address before I ask it. Speaker 2: I can't think of anything. Not--I'll try to be quiet about this. We talked about the politicians in this neighborhood at the beginning and how they, they helped but we still have Barbara Flynn Currie. And we still have Preckwinkle [HistoryMaker Toni Preckwinkle] and they are on the same path. There're still the same parameters, the same structure. Even though times have changed, a lot have changed, the same basic concepts are still here. The same--we depend upon them the same way we always did, the politicians. They're not as many. The new ones, Raoul, you know, and-- Speaker 1: Kwame Raoul. Speaker 2: Yeah. They and--young lady in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] that--it's right there on the tip of my tongue. They were in nursery school, too (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Unclear) was my nursery school. Leslie Hairston [Leslie A. Hairston]. They're the new breed, but they have same basic kind of, of ideas, the same values. They're walking in the same direction to help keep stable communities where families can thrive. Story_ID: 615792 Speaker 1: Well, my last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. How, ma'am how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) A good mother. I set an example (pause) to treat all people equally, to respect all people, to help people when you can. And so, far I think my kids [Gail Dugas, Jeffrey Dugas and Lauren Dugas Glover] are doing that. And the- each in their own way. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 615793 Speaker 1: I think that's my grandfather--grandmother's--great-grandmother's brother from Louisville, Kentucky, the-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. That's all you know. Next. Speaker 1: Do you know about this one? Speaker 2: That's my father's mother. Her name was Beatrice Rochon [Beatrice Rochon Taylor]. When that--she must have been about ten or twelve at the time, and she was born-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) she was born about 1870 something. So, she must be--that must be in the '80s [1880s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's Beatrice Rochon as an adult and she was married to my grandfather. I would assume that was either at the turn of the century or just before, because my father [Robert Rochon Taylor] was born in 1899. Speaker 1: Victorian outfit. Speaker 2: Now those are my grandmother and grandfather's children. Going from left to right is Robert Rochon Taylor, Victor Rochon [sic.]--Edward Victor Taylor [Edward Taylor], Beatrice Anita Taylor [Beatrice Taylor Robinson], and Helen Taylor [Helen Taylor Dibble]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: That's my Grandfather Robert Rochon--Robert Robinson Taylor. That must have been at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] so it must've been middle '30s [1930s]. Speaker 1: Now, that is my husband Lester Dugas' family. His parents, from left to right at the top, that's Lester Dugas, Jr. [Lester J. Dugas, Jr.]; next to him is [HistoryMaker] Lauranita Dugas--Lauranita Taylor Dugas; Lester Dugas, Sr.; and Lilla Garfield Dugas [Lilla Dugas]. Left, Gail Denise Dugas [Gail Dugas] holding her dog Tiny; Grandmother, Grandmother Dugas, Lester Dugas' mother that's, her name was Rita Fauria Dugas; and then Lauren Dugas [Lauren Dugas Glover]. And sitting on the floor is Jeffrey Dugas, Sr. now (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: This is a picture of my husband's sister and mother and father. From left to right is Dolores Dugas Scurlock; Lester Dugas, Jr.; Carolyn Dugas Viera. Left at the bottom is Lester Dugas, Sr.; and Lilla Garfield Dugas. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Many years later, (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That was 1953. Speaker 1: This is twenty years (unclear)--in the early '70s [1970s]. At the top left to right is Dolores Dugas Scurlock; Lester Dugas, Jr.; Carolyn Dugas Viera. Seated are Lilla Garfield Dugas; and Jeffrey--and Lester Dugas, Sr. (laughter). Speaker 2: Generation family, on the left at the top is Lauranita Dugas, Lauranita Taylor Dugas; Jeffrey Alan Dugas; his daughter, Andrea Lynn Dugas [Andrea Dugas Douglas], and my mother Dorothy Jennings Taylor. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture at Tuskegee at my grandfather's house. It must have been like 1927 or early '28 [1928]. Left to right at the top is Eugene Dibble [Eugene H. Dibble, Jr.]. Next to him is Edward Victor Taylor. Next to him is Robert Rochon Taylor. Next to him is Dorothy Jennings Taylor. Next to her is Robert Robinson Taylor, and his wife, Nellie Chesnutt Taylor. Standing in front is Helen Taylor Dibble holding her daughter, Helen Anita Dibble [Helen Dibble Cannady]. Next to her is her half-brother, Henry Chesnutt Taylor [Henry Taylor]. Next to him is Beatrice Taylor Robinson holding Lauranita Taylor Dibble. No, Lauranita Taylor Dugas (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 2: I got caught up in the Dibbles (laughter). Speaker 1: Those Dibbles catch you up. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of--where I had--Gordon (Unclear) Parks [HistoryMaker Gordon Parks] in the early '40s [1940s]. At the top there's Dorothy Jennings Taylor. Seated at the left is Lauranita Taylor, and to the right is Barbara Taylor. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Dorothy Taylor--Jennings Taylor, and her two daughters, Barbara Taylor Bowman [HistoryMaker Barbara Bowman], and Lauranita Taylor Dugas. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Robert Rochon Taylor, and his wife, Dorothy Jennings Taylor. This was in the early '40s [1940s], 1940s. Speaker 1: This is a picture of The Oaks, Tuskegee that my grandfather designed and built. Speaker 2: What The Oaks was? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Say what The Oaks was. Speaker 1: This is a picture of-- Speaker 2: Just say what The Oaks was. Speaker 1: Oh, that was the home of president of the university, Booker T. Washington. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. You have a Xerox here, what is that? Speaker 1: The one on the bottom, I guess, first. Speaker 2: Oh, that's, that is Robert Robinson Taylor and his father Henry Taylor. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. You don't written on the photographs, do you? Speaker 2: No. I don't know. Does it identify that building? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, there's a headline on it. Speaker 2: I think that-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) the chapel, I think. Speaker 2: No, that's not the chapel. Speaker 1: It's not? It's not the one he built? Speaker 2: I have a picture of the chapel, but you didn't wanna (unclear) the picture of the chapel at all, you-- Speaker 1: It says science building. Speaker 2: There's the chapel down there on the left. Speaker 1: It's a science building, Thrasher Hall [Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, the chapel's at the bottom. Speaker 2: The chapel's at the bottom. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Robert Robinson Taylor as a young man. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next one. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. At the top is Jeffrey Alan Dugas. Next to him is Lauranita Taylor Dugas, and the center seated is Taylor Jeffrey Dugas. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is Barbara Taylor, Barbara Frances Taylor. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next one. Middle. Speaker 1: Oh, the middle. This is Dorothy Vaughn Jennings. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And who's on the top? Who's in the top photo? Or the right one? Speaker 1: At the top? That's Lauranita Taylor. We're all eleven years old. I don't think you're supposed to smile in those pictures. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This, the United States of Ameri- United States of America, State of Louisiana office of the secretary of state to signify that Victor Rochon was deferred--declared doing-- Speaker 2: Declared--elected. Speaker 1: Elected representative by-- Speaker 2: The Parish of St. Martin [St. Martin Parish, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: By the Parish of St. Martin. Speaker 2: About what--and the year is? And the year is what? Oh, here-- Speaker 1: Must be 1860, or-- Speaker 2: This is January of the year of our Lord 1872? Yeah, '72 [1872]-- Speaker 1: What is the date on--? Speaker 2: No, '74 [1874], 1874. Speaker 1: What is the date on his speech? Can you see that? That might-- Speaker 2: Oh, this one? Let me see. No, I don't see a date on it. Speaker 1: It doesn't say? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, this says 1874. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah, that's the important thing. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Reconstruction. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: During Reconstruction? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. That's it...