 Story_ID: 643824 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am can you please state your full name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: Angela Pearl Dodson, A-N-G-E-L-A, P-E-A-R-L, D-O-D-S-O-N [HistoryMaker Angela Dodson]. Speaker 1: And ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 24th, 1951, Beckley, West Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay that's B-E-C-K-L-E-Y? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. And, is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: Yes I am named--my middle name is for my grandmother who died about three months before I was born. And my father [William Dodson, Sr.] asked my mother [Kira Walthall Dodson] to name me after her and she said, "What's your mother's name?" She only knew her as Mrs. Dodson and he said, "Lucy Pearl Evelyn [Lucy Basham Dodson]," something or other and my mother said, "I really have to think about this." So she said she tried to hide it behind the prettiest name she could find (laughter) and so she named me Pearl. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and ma'am what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I am a freelance journalist, writer, editor, consultant and I've just recently founded my own firm called Editorsoncall, LLC. Speaker 1: Okay. Editorsoncall, that's, the acronym is, what did you say (unclear)? Speaker 2: I call it the EOC. Speaker 1: EOC, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And what is the--today's date? Speaker 2: Today is March 7th, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time and, you don't have to give your address, but. Speaker 2: At my home in Trenton, New Jersey. Story_ID: 643825 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: First one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Probably fried calamari. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Bethany Beach, Delaware. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not really no. Like, well yes, but, part of Rudyard Kipling's poem 'If,' "If you can keep your head when all about you / Are losing theirs, and blaming it on you." Story_ID: 643826 Speaker 1: Well I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, then your father's [William Dodson, Sr.] side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --and then we will put them together. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Kira, K-I-R-A, Evelyn, normal spelling E-V-E-L-Y-N, Walthall, W-A-L-T-H-A-L-L [Kira Walthall Dodson]. Speaker 1: Walthall, that's an interesting name I don't think I've heard that before. Now is there a story behind her name? Speaker 2: I'm not sure, I just--her last name or her name in its entirety? Speaker 1: Yeah, any of them, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm not sure who she was named after or anything like that. But the Walthall name I really didn't know too much about until very recently. My grandfather died early in a coal mining accident about ten years before I was born so I never knew much about his family. I had met one sister who was in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] but his name was Robert Thomas Jefferson Walthall [Robert Walthall] and I recently found on ancestry.com who his parents were. I keep--I'm forgetting the name right this minute but I believe it's Milton [ph.], something like that, and he was from Pittsylvania County, Virginia-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and later worked in West Virginia, so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And, so, well how far back--oh I'm sorry, what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth was June 12th, 1922. Speaker 1: And where? Speaker 2: She was born in Altavista, Virginia in Pittsylvania County, which is on the southern border of Virginia. Speaker 1: Altavista, Virginia. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family and what stories are on that side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side of her mother's [Lilly Waller Walthall] family has been traced back to my great-grandparents [sic. great-great-grandparents] who were born around 1830 and 1840 each; Milton [Milton Waller] and Mary Waller. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they were also from--my entire family, all eight gra- all of my grandparents, all of my great-grandparents, all the people that we found before them are from south central Virginia. A couple of counties down there, Pitts- in addition to Pittsylvania, Henry County [Virginia] and another one that escapes me at the moment but about three counties in a row. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And all of them migrated to West Virginia. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: All of my grandparents did. Speaker 1: So they migrated towards the end of the 19th century or, or do you know? Speaker 2: They came to West Virginia at varying times. My mother's people came after she was born around 1927. Speaker 1: Okay, so that late, that they? Speaker 2: And my father's people moved to the, to the same area. But my, my great-grandfather [Obediah Dodson] on that side had come to West Virginia I believe earlier probably around 1900. Story_ID: 643827 Speaker 1: What are the stories on that side of the family? Speaker 2: Stories, most of the stor- stories (laughter) on that side of the family evolve around my, my [maternal] grandmother was a character who, one, would get in fights with people at church or wherever. And, I mean physical fights, up until she was like in her fifties or sixties and regale us with things about--our family would regale us with things about arguments that she had gotten into, that kind of thing. One of the most interesting stories I've heard of late was that one of my grandmother's sisters had an opportunity to be the first Aunt Jemima. Last year I was doing some oral history within my family for a big reunion that we had with the descendants of Mary [Mary Waller] and Milton Waller and a cousin told me that, that was my Aunt Lucille who was a Waller, Lucille Waller and she was married four times so she had several other last names. The last one was Cle- the last two were Clegget and Michael--Lucille Clegget Michael [Lucille Waller Michael (ph.)]. She had worked for apparently the family of the company that started the Aunt Jemima trademark in, I believe the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area and they asked her--and actually gave her a contract to look at. She asked her brother who was a minister in Wayne, West Virginia what he thought of it. And he thought she ought to take it but she found it demeaning and did not take it, so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right, so, any stories from your great-grandparents [sic. great-great-grandparents] that were born before slavery? Did they talk about-- Speaker 2: No. I couldn't find anybody who had remembered them. I really only became aware of them in the last twenty years or so--what their names were, focused on them and all. They had seven children of whom my great-grandfather was one, Alexander [Alexander Waller]. And we had been having reunions with descendants of all of those seven children that we can find, and miraculously we still can find a lot of them and we're a family that still gets together and stays together, and if there is a funeral there might be people from two or three of those branches there. So that's very good and that side of the family has also produced many, many ministers. Three of my grandmother's brothers were prominent ministers, two of them in Philadelphia, John Bernard Waller [John Waller (ph.)] and William Waller was in Wayne, West Virginia, Alfred Morgan Waller [Alfred Waller (ph.)] was in Cleveland [Ohio] in his final years. Speaker 1: You're pronouncing this Waller? Speaker 2: My mother's [Kira Walthall Dodson] maiden name was Walthall; my mother--my grandmother's maiden name is Waller (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right. Speaker 2: W-A-L-L-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, go ahead, I-- Speaker 2: That's probably your confusion. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. So a Waller married a Walthall [Robert Walthall]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: --was what happened? Okay. Speaker 2: Grandma's name--original name was Lilly Oda Waller [Lilly Waller Walthall]. Speaker 1: Okay, O-D-A? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, Waller, all right. Story_ID: 643828 Speaker 1: Now what did your--now your mother [Kira Walthall Dodson] grew--did she grow in Altavista [Virginia]? Speaker 2: No she didn't, they moved to West Virginia when she was about five years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She lived in various coal mining towns in West Virginia. Mostly one called Helen, West Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. What did she say about growing up? What kind of stories did she tell? Speaker 2: They, they talked a lot about people in the community. A lot of her stories I don't remember but she wa- she was a storyteller. We have a memory when we were--we meaning my brother [William Dodson, Jr.] and I--when we were little she took us to Helen, maybe only once that I recall. We would visit other towns in West Virginia because we spent our earlier years in Pennsylvania but in the summer we would go to West Virginia. And one year we were driving back through her hometown at Helen and there was a lady who was ironing on the porch and the way the roads are built, you know, the road comes almost up to your porch rail. So we never got out of the car we just sat there and talked to her while she was ironing on the porch. And my brother and I thought the whole idea of ironing on the porch outside was very funny. So from then on whenever she would tell a story about this town she would start out, "Well you remember the lady who was ironing on the porch," it was her mother, it was her brother-in-law, it was her sister, it was her sister's cousin, somebody or other. Those kinds of things but I think--you know I really can't remember many of them specifically. But, you know, a lot of my parents' lore deals with growing up poor. They grew up during the Depression [Great Depression] and they went to segregated schools. They had to, you know, walk a ways to school and my mother said, you know, she dropped out in eleventh grade because she was the last one standing waiting for the bus in her whole town in the dark, on a, you know, winding road in West Virginia, so. Other stories deal with, my grandmother [Lilly Waller Walthall] generally ran a boarding house for miners who were in the area and had not brought their families yet or hadn't started a family or were widowed or something, lived in my grandmother's house. My mother and her sisters had to help cook for them and prepare for them. Her sisters dropped out of school a lot earlier than she did, because of that mainly. And, you know, they were seamstresses and quilters and just did beautiful, beautiful work, so. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, now, now did your mother--did she go to school in Helen? Speaker 2: She must have started elementary school in Helen, probably a one room schoolhouse. She went to high school at a segregated school that was called Byrd Prillerman [Byrd Prillerman High School, Amigo, West Virginia]. Speaker 1: I'm sorry what was the name again? Speaker 2: Byrd like Robert Byrd (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Byrd-- Speaker 2: B-Y-R-D, I believe-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Prillerman, P-R-I-L-L-E-R-M-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: As did my father [William Dodson, Sr.], my father went to the same school. Speaker 1: Okay. Byrd Prillerman High School? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your mother talk about what she wanted to do when she graduated or what her aspirations were when she was in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, as I said that sh- my mother was a extre- especially, a very, very fine seamstress and she went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to study designing, eventually, while she worked as a maid. She worked for wealthy people in private homes during World War II [WWII] mostly. And she had studied designing some place. I don't know whether it was a correspondence course or a trade school or whatever. I, you know, would see items that she used for designing, they had special rulers and things like that, things to make a curve with or whatever and some of her books. La- you know, much later when I was growing up she still had them. So I think that's, you know, basically what she wanted to do. Story_ID: 643829 Speaker 1: Now let me go to your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name is William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Alfred, A-L-F-R-E-D, Dodson, D-O-D-S-O-N, Sr. [William Dodson, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Was there a story behind his name? Speaker 2: Not that I know of, I don't know who he's named after or anything--no one else in the family that I know. Well the William may come from one of his mother's brothers, I believe was a William. But I'm not sure where the Alfred comes from. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth was February--I mean I'm sorry January--no, le- July 2nd, 1922. Speaker 1: Okay and is he from (unclear)? Speaker 2: He was born in Rocky Mount, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Rocky Mount, Virginia and, well, tell us what you know about your father's ancestors. How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: My father's ancestors have been traced at least to my great-grandfather's mother, was a Kizziah Dodson and that's on the, just on the Dodson side. I have cousins who--his mother was a Basham and my Basham cousins have traced parts of the family's history as far back as 1700s. I haven't memorized it all because I've just been learning it in the last year or so. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Is that--that's spelled B-A-S? , B-A-S-H-A-M and they were based in Rocky Mount. My grandfather's people I believe were in Danville [Virginia] as near as I can tell, were, one of the places that keep coming up of the ancestry a place called Horse Pasture, Virginia. And, on the, on the Dodson side, Obe- my great-grandfather's Obediah Dodson. He had two siblings that we know of. One was John Lewis Dodson [John Dodson] and Sally Hairston [sic.] and all of them are, of the--the Dodsons are descendants of and heavily married into the Hairston family. The, there was a book that came out a couple of years ago--about a decade ago 'The Hairstons: An American Family in Black and White' [Henry Wiencek] that traces the Hairstons all the way back to Scotland and Ireland. But they came to this country and established a number of plantations. They had an original land grant in Virginia for this tobacco land that turned out to be some of the best in the country. The Hairstons eventually had hundreds, a hun- at least a hundred plantations throughout the South. Mostly in Virginia, my family is from the original spot around Martinsville [Virginia]. And a lot--throughout our history the Dodsons have married the Hairstons. In my grandparents' generation three or four of the Dodsons have a Hairston spouse and vice versa. We have reunions with all of, descendants of all of these people too. The Dodsons have had a tradition of having reunions back to the 1930s. So we know that side a lot better than some of the other, other sides. And the, as it turns out a lot of--all of my family branches probably were intermarried with each other. There are Hairstons who turn up in the Waller line in Pittsylvania County [Virginia]. There seems to be a--Pittsylvania County was probably also a Hairston plantation according to Henry Wiencek's book about them. And I surmise that my parents may have been somewhat related to each other and the more I study the Basham tree all, a lot of these people are also intermarried. It's hard to single them out. One of my uncles who is my father's brother, a Dodson and Basham descendant had told me about a town in Virginia called Fieldale that he said the family came from and I looked it up when I go- you know, got home--I had done an oral history of him just while I was at a funeral and taped some of what he said. So I looked up what, a few of the facts just to see if he really was on target, and as it turns out when I looked up Fieldale there were--not only were there Dodsons there, there were Hairstons there, there were Wallers there; all, all these names were, you know embedded in the history (background noise) of this place. Story_ID: 643830 Speaker 1: So you were talking about the Dodsons, Wallers and, in Fieldale. Speaker 2: Fieldale, Virginia, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah, okay. Speaker 2: There was a history of Fieldale (background noise) that was on the web and all of our family names are included in it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I need quiet (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So your father's--now were his parents, were they farmers or miners, which ones? Speaker 2: Both. I think they had been farmers in Virginia most likely and all of them, you know, as I said, moved to West Virginia. My grandfather whose name was John Wannamaker Dodson [John Dodson], he was a miner in several different towns I have found in the census. One was Slab Fork, West Virginia where Bill Withers' people were from and eventually they settled in a town called Tams [West Virginia], T-A-M-S, and lived there mo- I guess most of his life. My father [William Dodson, Sr.] is one of twelve children, his mother [Lucy Basham Dodson] is one of twelve children, his father is one of I used to think ten children and I just found out recently it was fourteen children. So we have a huge family (laughter) as it were. Speaker 1: Okay (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I forgot to say that my grandmother [Lilly Waller Walthall] on my mother's side was also one of fifteen children. Speaker 1: Okay. That makes a lot of relatives (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. That's probably not atypical of those days so I guess-- Speaker 2: No it wasn't, it was fairly common. But they, you know, they, it just means you tend to have much larger families than most other people just by extension, the number of cousins and whatever. It is quite astounding. Speaker 1: Okay so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Last year the Basham cousins who had been working on the family tree just basically found my brother [William Dodson, Jr.] and I a couple of years ago and started sharing some of that history with us. My brother and I joked, just what we needed was a few thousand more cousins (laughter) so. Story_ID: 643831 Speaker 1: Now what stories did your father [William Dodson, Sr.] tell about growing up? I mean what was his, what was he doing and how did he, you know, what kind of occupation did he want to pursue? Speaker 2: My father had a very interesting history. He often told stories about working in the mines and going to high school [Byrd Prillerman High School, Amigo, West Virginia] at the same time. He would go to school a couple of days and to the mines the other days and of course, you know, being from such a large family they were poor. He said he never owned a schoolbook, they--he had to borrow schoolbooks and he was a very, very good student. My mother [Kira Walthall Dodson] always said that she was too embarrassed to borrow schoolbooks so she wasn't as good a student. But he--my father apparently had been a pretty good athlete also in high school in a number of sports and he was a boxer, amateur boxer. I, we met somebody just in the last few years that said oh she knew my family, she asked her mother about the family and she said, "Oh yeah one of them was a boxer," and I said, "That would be my father." And then he went to the [U.S.] Navy and or first he went to the shipyards in Newport News, Virginia and then into the Navy and studied electronics at some point while he was there. I believe on the campus of Hampton University [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. He talks about--or used to talk about that. And, he studied electronics in the Navy but when he--when the war [World War II, WWII] was over he came home and worked in the mines again and met, or actually re-met my mother who was home supposedly temporarily from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to see her brother graduate or something. And he continued to work in the mines maybe for about two or three more years but at that point the mines became unstable work. It was the coal seam or something that they were working on that was not as productive and they were laying off men, you know, left and right. So my fam- a lot of family started looking for other places to move to and my family ended up moving to western Pennsylvania to a town called New Castle mainly because some of the Bashams had settled in that area. Story_ID: 643832 Speaker 1: One of the interesting things about my family is not only did they live in the same places in Virginia and know each other and interconnect there, they lived in the same places in West Virginia and all of them were interconnected. And sometimes we didn't know why, you know, how somebody was related to us, or years later I'd find out that somebody was related to us that I didn't realize was related to us. So when we moved to New Castle [Pennsylvania] it was the same way. My mother [Kira Walthall Dodson] and father [William Dodson, Sr.] both had family there. My maternal grandmother [Lilly Waller Walthall] moved there, my--two of my mother's siblings lived there, about half of my father's dozen siblings lived there and I had great aunts on both sides of my family in western Pennsylvania. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, so they're moving into a situation that's all--where a lot of the--I guess the social corners had been, you know, rounded off-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --by the family. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So is, so your parents met actually in West Virginia, and (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, they would have met in high school [Byrd Prillerman High School, Amigo, West Virginia] to begin with. Speaker 2: Is there a story about how they fell in love, or? Speaker 1: Not that I know of. My mother said--I don't know how they bumped into each other again, except they weren't very far apart geographically. So I don't know how they, how they got together initially but she does, did tell a story about the way my father proposed to her. That they were sitting basically at a bar one day and she, he said, "You know I'm going to marry you Christmas," (laughter) and so, you know, it proceeded from there and they did. They were married Christmas day 1948. Speaker 2: I see he's pretty--was that typical of your father's personality? Speaker 1: Yeah, probably, probably, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Kind of blunt and to the point. Speaker 1: Yeah. And then she--when they were married, when the pastor got to the point of asking for the ring my father said, "Oh skip that part," and then later on they were out somewhere and he handed her the ring. I guess he probably--I don't know whether he had misplaced it or he didn't know, think the ring was, you know, grand enough or, or whatever. Story_ID: 643833 Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, their hobbies, their habits, their-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --how they look, how they walk and talk, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I take after both of them. If, I always say, if you looked at my father's picture and covered up the hair you would see my face pop out immediately. But other times I think I look a lot like my mother [Kira Walthall Dodson]. And, you know, I think my personality is probably more towards my dad [William Dodson, Sr.]. My dad had a great sense of humor. He told jokes all the time and he, as I say my, father could study electronic diagrams for his job which he had to do all the time and watch TV, joke with us and never miss a beat for the entire evening. That's basically how he operated. My mother was more of a quiet natured person but she also had a good sense of humor and she had a habit of singing all day, or whistling. My mother could whistle whole hymns like at the opening of 'The Andy Griffith Show.' Sometimes I joke--there are hymns that I don't know the words to because mother only whistled that one. But there was always music in the house, but by the same token my mother never sang in public. She was never in the choir, she never soloed. I think I did see her--she sang one time, she just said that she had a particular hymn on her mind in church and got up and sang it and that was the first and only last time I've ever seen her sing in front of people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, the, and, you know, my mother was a very gifted seamstress, as I said, and very smart too. The two of them together probably also are the source of my love of language. My father liked to quiz--teach us long, complicated words and quiz us on them. He would make up stuff like he made up a long insult made up of big words and the only parts that I remembered were something about your infamous ancestry. And, you know, the thing had--it had about twelve, fifteen words in it. My brother [William Dodson, Jr.] recently sent it to me but I can't recite it now. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: But, my mother was also a kind of person who could memorize long poems even up until--really up until her death. The day she died she was supposed to do a recitation someplace. But she could memorize long poems and recite them in public and people would ask her, you know, to do it for a dinner or a special occasion something like that. So, you know, when we were growing up if we had a school assignment, they would teach us poetry and really stress delivery and diction and stuff like that, so that, you know, I really developed a level of words from that, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. I think both of them finished high school, right? Speaker 2: No, mother did not. Speaker 1: Oh, she didn't? Okay. Speaker 2: I said, you now, she dropped out when she was in eleventh grade. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now, this is remarkable, they went to the same high school [Byrd Prillerman High School, Amigo, West Virginia] basically. And, did either one wish they had gone to college? Speaker 2: My fa- yeah, I never heard mother talk about wanting to go to college so much. I think what they said then was it was so expensive. My father used to say, "Well it was only a hundred dollars," but a hundred dollars then was just something they didn't have. But, he, none of his siblings got to go to college at that point. My father later went to college after I finished; four years after I graduated my dad graduated from college [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]. Story_ID: 643834 Speaker 1: You said he fi- he finally graduated from West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, right. Speaker 1: But at the--you know, he had, when he came out of the [U.S.] Navy, you know, he had the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], did he-- Speaker 2: Well I think he--what I was going to say was when he got out of high school [Byrd Prillerman High School, Amigo, West Virginia], the war [World War II, WWII] was coming on and I th- he probably went to the shipyards because there was money to be made, much more money than at home. My father [William Dodson, Sr.] is the second eldest of twelve children so if he had a hundred dollars he would have probably had to use it to help support his brothers and sisters. And as I said he worked as a coal miner half of the time he was in high school anyway. But then he went to the Navy. The Navy trained them but they also never put the black men into combat. He said that he had just gotten to the West Coast, probably shipped out to the Pacific, when the war ended and they did give him electronic training and he took that, I believe on the Hampton campus [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] somehow. But after the war he came home to work in the mines again, I guess he didn't use his G.I. Bill immediately and then he married my mother [Kira Walthall Dodson] and they quickly had, you know, two of us. And he d- what I think he did with his G.I. Bill later was to--he studied electronics at night school for years when I was in grade school. I know he had to commute to someplace in Ohio to do it. So I'm pretty sure that's how he used the money from the G.I. Bill. And he took--that training allowed him to--in Pennsylvania he had worked in the steel mills and he took that training and was able to eventually get a job with the Federal Aviation Agency [Federal Aviation Administration], it was called then. And that was just in like 1960 so he worked for the FAA for the rest of his career. When we were--at some point when we were in college, my brother [William Dodson, Jr.] and I, he started taking classes at night at initially I think Morris Harvey College [University of Charleston, Charleston, West Virginia], and maybe a couple of other colleges near Charleston, West Virginia which is where he eventually was stationed with the FAA. And he continued going to night school most of the time I was in college [Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia] and for a while after, but FAA training also allowed--gave him some college credits, he was able to use some of his training there to translate into credits for college. So he ended up at West Virginia State and his degree I believe was in business administration. Speaker 1: Okay. This is in the early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: He would have gradu- late '70s [1970s], by the time b- I got out of school in '73 [1973] and I believe he got out in '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I attended his graduation. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have my half-sister [Emilie Cook Wright] is ten years older than I am, my mother's child, and my brother is a year older than I am. Story_ID: 643835 Speaker 1: When you think about growing up, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Our house was always the place where other kids came to play. And we also had--we lived in a big Victorian like this most of the time in western Pennsylvania, which would have been, you know, af- when I started remembering things. My parents rented out a lot of the upstairs rooms to people who were coming up--at that point people were still migrating from West Virginia. You know the father would come and stay awhile before he sent for the children, that kind of thing. Or, we had whole families that we--one of the rooms upstairs--we had a fairly large apartment on the second floor and a couple of single rooms on the second and third floor for renters. So it was also a place where family came and went. At one point my grandmother [Lilly Waller Walthall] lived in the house, at another point my mother's brother's family was there. At another point one of our Basham cousins lived in the house and a lot of people that we were not related to were renters too over the years. So it was a place where people came and went. It was just a lot of socializing, whatever. My mother [Kira Walthall Dodson] was an extremely good cook and we celebrated holidays in a really really big way. Christmas is a particularly a good memory of ours, that--my mother would start baking cookies like weeks before Christmas. Any time after Thanksgiving my mother would start baking batches of cookies; various kinds, huge batches of them to give away as gifts and that sort of thing, lots of cake baking. Both of my parents could bake. Among other things the [U.S.] Navy taught my father [William Dodson, Sr.] to bake because they, you know, used a lot of the black men in the kitchen in the officers' club or something. We had, you know, big family meals at Christmastime, at Thanksgiving time. Our, our family reunions were also a bi- very big part of our growing up years. The feasts that we would have then, you know, everybody brought a covered dish and that kind of thing, and the Dodson reunion was held all over the country in different cities. My parents took us to visit relatives a lot. As I said every summer we went to West Virginia. My mother's oldest sister lived in North Carolina and sometimes we would go down there. She was a quilter and they also had like large church dinners outside and a lot of her relatives down there in North Carolina and in West Virginia had outhouses, and they lived in fairly small, modest homes, no bathrooms. So that, you know, it was a different scene for us. I'm trying to think of what else. I don't know, it was just always a lot of relatives around. It was hard to realize at the time, but we used to say just about every other house had a relative in it. I was recently at a--one of my father's sisters [Betty Dodson Hill] passed a year or two ago and she still lived in New Castle, Pennsylvania where we lived and a bunch of us were sitting around talking and somebody said and it might have been me that at one point--even when I close my eyes I could kind of remember every family that lived on this particular street between, from my front door on up this long hill where it must have been like maybe forty, fifty houses. So a bunch of us got to playing a game to see who could remember who actually was in every single house on this particular strip and we did, we put it together. You know, just, and most of us hadn't lived there for about twenty, thirty, forty years. I hadn't lived there in fifty years. But it's just, and it was such a rich community to be around. And, you know, the other big part of our life was church. We grew up in the Baptist church. Story_ID: 643836 Speaker 1: What was the name of your church? Speaker 2: Second Baptist Church of, in New Castle [Pennsylvania]. And, you know, most of the people in church must have been relatives at the time too. And we participated in everything there: the choir, the Baptist Training Union, Sunday school, Vacation Bible School, all those kinds of things, so. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Did you have any, I guess, responsibilities as a youth in the church growing up? Speaker 2: Not really, I don't remember holding office or anything like that. My biggest role in church was I usually got to play a good part in the plays that we had at Easter and Christmas because I could memorize long parts. One of the parts I played was Bartimaeus, the blind man, because he had to sit there and talk to everybody that went by and say something and people said things to him. Speaker 1: Hm, okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: That's in, that's in the, that would be in the Christmas play? Speaker 2: We had Christmas plays and Easter plays (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Easter, okay. Speaker 2: I don't remember which one Bartimaeus was or what-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --because it didn't seem to fit a Christmas theme but it might, might have been Christmas. Speaker 1: I can't remember, he, well he's, okay, all right, Bartimaeus, I'm not sure what he was in, but anyway (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't, I don't remember the plot, but it was. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 643837 Speaker 1: Now what about school, now what school did you attend? Speaker 2: I went to West Side Elementary School [New Castle, Pennsylvania] from first grade to fifth grade. Speaker 1: Now was the, the neighborhood that you lived in called West Side? Speaker 2: Yes it was the West Side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. And, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: My favorite subject I guess always English. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And, you know, I did very well in school. For most of my growing up years I was just about always first in my class in grades. I met somebody recently at a reunion there and somebody wa- somebody walked up to me and said, "You were the smartest kid in our class." And I said, "Yes I was." The other guy that didn't know me from Adam said, you know, looked me like, "Well that sounded arrogant." And I said, "I just come from a conference where they said claim your gifts," (laughter), "so I'm claiming my gift." Speaker 1: Probably everybody in the town knows who the smartest girl (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm so. Speaker 1: --in class is, or the smartest person so that's fair enough. Speaker 2: So I, you know, fifty years later I still had a reputation, but. Speaker 1: Now who were--were there any special teachers or mentors in grade school? Speaker 2: Not that I recall. I had--all my teachers were good in grade school but nobody that I was particularly close to--maybe my fourth grade teacher, Mrs. Kennedy [ph.] was one of my favorites-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and probably second grade, Mrs. Reynolds [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now could you, well, you said you memorized, you know, poems for church, do you remember any passages you memorized for, I guess for, that came out of grade school? Did they have you memorize poems? Speaker 2: They did. Speaker 1: Because that's something that's not done hardly. Speaker 2: They don't do it anymore. Let me see if I can do one. Speaker 1: You did a Kipling poem earlier. Speaker 2: Yeah but I don't think I can do the whole thing. I can do--I probably could do the Kipling poem, but the one I'd probably have the best chance of doing is Robert Frost: "Whose woods these are I think I know / His house is in the village though; / He would not mine me stopping here / To watch his woods fill up with snow. / My little horse must think it's strange--," something, I can't think of the rest of it. Speaker 1: I think it's queer, I think, yeah. Speaker 2: Huh, "My little horse must I think it queer--." Speaker 1: "To stop without a farmhouse near," I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "To stop without a farmhouse near" ['Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening,' Robert Frost], yes, so. Speaker 1: I don't know why I remember that. If you'd have asked I would have said I don't know-- Speaker 2: But I have miles to go, "And miles to go before I sleep--," something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, I didn't think I knew any-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --of it and you just brought some of it back (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: But that's, that's what, people had to do that in those days (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah but at, you know, one point, you know, I could do that, and do the whole 'If' poem [Rudyard Kipling] and stuff like that. Story_ID: 643838 Speaker 1: Did you do any Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] in school, did they do that? Speaker 2: No, my, I went to all-white schools [West Side Elementary School, New Castle, Pennsylvania] and we never--I was introduced to Dunbar by my parents [Kira Walthall Dodson and William Dodson, Sr.] but never in school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, well this is significant, I thought that you were going to segregated schools and, but you were the only, your family was black family around there? Speaker 2: That's, that's another town. I'll get there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's another town? Okay. Speaker 2: In New Castle [Pennsylvania] was extremely integrated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Even so I was shocked when I looked at some of my school pictures and it was probably about half and half, and then most of the whites were ethnic, you know, Hungarian or Italian whatever, so it was a great mix of people, really great mix of people. Later on we lived--when we left New Castle we moved to a town called Meyersdale, Pennsylvania. The FAA [Federal Aviation Agency; Federal Aviation Administration] required my father to live there because it was halfway between two things that he serviced on the top of mountains for the FAA. One of the spots was in Pennsylvania and the other one was Maryland, Fro- maybe Frostburg [Maryland] or someplace like that but I think Indian Head, Pennsylvania and maybe Frostburg. But that was the halfway point, because he would be called out in the middle of the night to go fix something, some tower's electronic equipment that was used to guide planes. And, anyway Meyersdale had like three thousand people, about twenty-eight of them were black and that included the four of us. There were no other black children in town. There was a black teenager in town. The families that were there had been, I think with the railroad or coalmining or something and they were mostly related to each other, the Banks [ph.] family. A couple of them adopted us, but, you know, we would go on outings with them and things like that. The nearest black people were probably in the town of Somerset [Pennsylvania] itself. We knew some kids over there and we got invited to like large picnics or something there. But Meyersdale was, as I said, very white and the first year we were there my brother [William Dodson, Jr.] and I were not in the same school because I was in the sixth grade in grade school and he was in seventh grade in the high school. And then we were together the second year. We were only there two years. But it also was a very interesting experience. It's in the middle of Amish country and Mennonite country so we had some Amish people in school not so many because they basically only go to the eighth grade. But you know horses and buggies would come by the house. Meyersdale is the seat of a large maple festival in Pennsylvania, the--and we had really good friends, some very, very close friends there. And I had mentors there; I recently reconnected with some of my friends from there on Facebook, so. Speaker 1: Now what's the name of the school is it Meyersdale? Speaker 2: The, I forget, the elementary--Meyersdale Elementary School--I guess it was called Meyersdale Area High School [Meyersdale, Pennsylvania], it was called at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. So you still have friends that you are in touch with from that experience? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. But you, there were very few (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At least one family, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So were you still a top student? Speaker 2: Pretty high, yeah yeah, usually. I made nearly straight A's the years that I was there. There were some other students that were fairly bright, I had competition there but (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in sixth grade I had an excellent teacher who let us learn out of seventh, eighth, ninth grade books. Particularly English books, basically decided, he advanced us on his own but as I recall maybe there were like two or three students in that group. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so did you study higher math and, or other sciences or that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, in high school, later on in high school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In that group or was that group just for--? Speaker 2: We did higher math with other students. I can't remember how far advanced-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --we went in math but I especially remember him for English because he would have us diagram these long sentences all across the board that people don't even know how to do anymore. And like daily spelling bees, et cetera. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you get involved in--did you run for student body office, or? Speaker 2: No. The only thing I remember participating in much in Meyersdale was the school chorus and I belonged to some sort of girls group that, that was affiliated with the church. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And there was no Baptist church there, we attended a Brethren church [Meyersdale Church of the Brethren, Meyersdale, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Oh, Church of the Brethren? All right, so this, when you are in I guess the sixth grade it was about 19--? Speaker 2: We were there when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] died (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-three [1963], '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: That was the second year, I was in seventh grade. Speaker 1: Okay, that's 1963. Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963], yeah. Story_ID: 643839 Speaker 1: Did your family keep up with the news, and were there a lot of newspa- papers and magazines coming into the, into the house? Speaker 2: Yes, my father [William Dodson, Sr.] insisted that every household with children should have newspapers--I don't, it's whatever (laughter)--and was very critical of people who didn't read the newspaper. So--we got it--New Castle [Pennsylvania] had a daily paper, I think, the New Castle News, and my father got the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and the Pitts- we could get the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette in Meyersdale [Pennsylvania] as well. On Sundays I would go with my dad to buy the Sunday papers from the, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] and the Youngstown Vindicator. Speaker 1: Now the Courier and The Vindicator are black papers, right? Speaker 2: The Vindicator was not, I don't think. Speaker 1: It wasn't? Speaker 2: I don't think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Maybe it was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but I don't remember it that way. Speaker 1: Well I don't know if it was or not, it sounded like one, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I don't think so. Speaker 1: --the title sounds like a black paper, Vindicator, you know. Speaker 2: It does, it does (laughter) right. Speaker 1: I know the Courier (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'd have to look it up; I think that was the regular daily paper in Youngstown [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Youngstown Vindicator-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now that's interesting. But Courier-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --certainly was a-- Speaker 2: Yeah we always had reading material. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Because I'm surprised sometimes people just don't get, you know. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Parents don't read, don't bring stuff in. Speaker 2: Magazines too, we always got Life, we always got Look and Reader's Digest and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you like reading through periodicals, or? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a library card growing up? Speaker 2: I--that's probably one of the greatest things that ever happened to me. Somebody took me to the library the year between first and second grade and in first grade [at West Side Elementary School, New Castle, Pennsylvania] I really had trouble learning to read and didn't really master it 'til well into the school year. In, by the time the summer was over I had read so many books and basically taught myself that in second grade our teacher divided us into groups and she had some of us reading up to fourth and fifth grade books. And I would go through the books from the library--I would bring home four or five books a week from the library and read them all in addition to my school work. Up through--when we were in Meyersdale, I talked my way into being an assistant to the librarian and went to the library every day after I got off the bus and worked with her and helped her put books up. Helped, you know, stack cards, sort books, label books, put books in book jackets. So I had the run of the place and I could read everything in the children's section, everything in the teen section. I was working my way through the adult section; it was a one room library probably smaller than this living and dining room together. And I would keep track of how many books I read a year. I read like well over a hundred most years, and I would just keep a list. He needs to get through there. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay. You're talking about reading in-- Speaker 1: Yeah. At l- I know I read at that pace at least through Meyersdale because there wasn't a whole lot else to do but through seventh grade [at Meyersdale Area High School, Meyersdale, Pennsylvania], I probably stopped keeping records after that but I still remember reading a lot later too. And we bought books too, so. Speaker 2: Okay so did you get the stations from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or from--I mean on television or radio? Speaker 1: We got--I grew up on Pittsburgh stations in New Castle and in Meyersdale because Mey- New Castle is about fifty miles one way and Meyersdale about fifty miles the other way, WKDKA [sic. KDKA Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] was prominent then and I don't remember what the other stations were (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first radio station in the USA, KDKA. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, but we got their television station [KDKA-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] too and there must have been another station or two but I don't remember what they were--what they were called. I can remember W--KDKA, so. Speaker 2: Okay. Now was, did you watch a lot of television, or? Speaker 1: We did, we were like the first family on our block, probably in our section of town, to have television because my father in addition to working in the steel mill then would fix TVs on the side and was very interested in technology. We always had, anything technological we had first. Transistor radios, later, cass- stereo record player, most families with similar means probably didn't have them. But I remember we got TV in '56 [1956] and everybody in the neighborhood would come over to watch. We would even--the way the living room was set up we could even sneak people like in the front door and they would be like hidden behind the chair while my dad was sitting over here and didn't even know we had somebody in the room. So we watched TV before school, we watched TV after school, 'Captain Kangaroo,' 'Popeye' ['Popeye the Sailor'] you know, things like that, cartoons on Saturday, yeah. Story_ID: 643840 Speaker 1: An event like the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination you had like enou- a lot of information coming in about it-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: That was--'cause that was some,, oh, was some weekend, I remember we were told about the Kennedy shooting, we were attending a play at school [Meyersdale Area High School, Meyersdale, Pennsylvania]. The upper grades were--must have been like a senior class play. They did it for the seventh graders or something. And at the conclusion of the program which must have been like an hour after everybody else knew they announced from the stage that Kennedy had been shot. And th- I will never forget it because like right behind me somebody jumped up and said, "I'm glad he's dead, the damn nigger lover." And (laughter) I swear to God. Speaker 1: Did they forget that you were in the class, or did they even care? Speaker 2: They didn't care, it was an auditorium, he didn't care. He probably said it because it was in earshot of me, but. And that's the only racial incident that I ever remembered there. But my best friend there, the white family that I'm still in contact with, was an Italian girl named Diane DiPasquale and her sister we were told, knocked--practically knocked somebody out on the bus for saying something similar (laughter). So, at any rate, we were told about it at school, we came home and when I got home my mother [Kira Walthall Dodson] was not in the house and my mother was always in the house and we're looking around and suddenly we hear all this boohooing and sobbing from the neighbor's house next door. My mother is sitting over in the neighbor's kitchen, with the white lady next door and both of them are boohooing (laughter) so much so that we could hear it in our house. But from then on it's like for the entire weekend we were glued to that TV. On Sunday we came home from church [Meyersdale Church of the Brethren, Meyersdale, Pennsylvania] we had just turned on the TV when Ruby [Jack Ruby] shot Oswald [Lee Harvey Oswald]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And I, I always remember that's the one, the first time I ever remember people playing the same thing over and over again on TV. Speaker 1: Right, it was like instant replay, it was--you're exactly right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That shooting--and I had never seen that for a news event ever. Speaker 1: That was, it wasn't even used in sports in those days. Speaker 2: Right, no, no. Speaker 1: But here over and over again it was played. Speaker 2: Over, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: It's truly remarkable, it's almost surreal-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --kind of a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I just remember how--the whole town felt like weird. It was just such a state of mourning that, you know, I couldn't really really describe and I have never seen anything like it, until the Marshall crash [Southern Airways Flight 932] which you and I talked about before. Just, you know, that palpable sense that everybody in town was just miserable, so. Speaker 1: Um-hm. What do you think it was about the Kennedys that, you know, made people react like that? Speaker 2: Because people related to them, they were--for me it was like the first time I was really old enough to know what was going on in the presidential race. And we had seen Kennedy--Kennedy came to New Castle [Pennsylvania] before we left there. We had gone to his speech and then saw the motorcade coming back, like really toward our house so he was somebody--for me personally he was real. But you know, for, I think that at that time in Meyersdale [Pennsylvania] you know it was a very much working class town and probably a lot of Catholics. So people, you know, and young people really felt that he was our president, so. Speaker 1: And he was young, he was Catholic and he said things about civil rights that people-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, the whole civil rights connection--of--I wasn't around black people that weekend but, you know, I'm sure black (laughter) black people felt it, you know, very very heavily, so. Story_ID: 643841 Speaker 1: Same year--in fact, the same year that Kennedy, that John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] delivered the speech at the March on Washington. Did-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --did your family take note of that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I remem- remember watching it because we tuned into it late. My mother [Kira Walthall Dodson] was mad that my father [William Dodson, Sr.] was watching something else or whatever at the time or didn't remind her or something. But we watched it there, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember being very, very impressed by that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, now you're like about eleven when this happens, eleven years old? Speaker 2: Yes, I must--well, no, yeah probably (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-three [1963]? Speaker 2: --elev- I would have been twelve. Speaker 1: Twelve. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963] okay, you were born in '51 [1951]. Speaker 2: Fifty-one [1951], right. Speaker 1: Yeah. It seemed like you would have been younger but I was born in '49 [1949] I think I was thirteen I guess. Speaker 2: Thirteen, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, maybe eleven, I think-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but I think probably eleven. But, at any rate. Story_ID: 643842 Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: We, we left Meyersdale [Pennsylvania] and moved back to West Virginia, the FAA [Federal Aviation Agency; Federal Aviation Administration] placed my father [William Dodson, Sr.] in Charleston, West Virginia, at the airport, so I attended three or four different junior highs. I started junior high in Meyersdale in seventh grade [at Meyersdale Area High School], eighth grade I went to Marmet Junior High [Marmet Junior High School] in--no I'm sorry I went, I started at Woodrow Wilson Junior High [Woodrow Wilson Junior High School] in Charleston in eighth grade (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Ninth grade it was Marmet Junior High in Marmet, West Virginia. Speaker 1: How do you spell Marmet? Speaker 2: M-A-R-M-E-T. When we first moved to Charleston we lived in the city and then my family eventually bought a house in a town called Chesapeake, West Virginia which is up river [Kanawha River] from Charleston, or down river whichever (background noise). And I went to East Bank High School [East Bank Middle School, East Bank, West Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is it--was, were you still basically a minority at Woodrow Wilson and Marmet? Speaker 2: Pretty much. West Virginia is only like 3 percent black. Woodrow Wilson, I think, had a sizeable black population. Marmet had some but I don't remember whether that was twenty some or thirty some or whatever, there weren't many of us but. Speaker 1: Okay. So did you, did you start writing in junior high school? Speaker 2: I told my parents [Kira Walthall Dodson and William Dodson, Sr.] that I would be a journalist when I was eleven. I don't know where I got this notion but I started writing when I was in sixth- as soon as I could read I decided I could write. So I started writing when I was in second grade [at West Side Elementary School, New Castle, Pennsylvania]; poetry, little essays, things like that and in Ju- at Marmet I had my first piece published (background noise). A teacher had questioned whether I could have written a possible assignment earlier in the school year and accused me of plagiarism and then she had us do an in class essay and she--I think as a way of making it up to me and admitting that my writing was my writing she had it put in the school paper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In high school I was the editor of the newspaper [The Pioneer Post]. We actually had journalism classes in high school and I was on the newspaper staff in my junior year and senior year the editor of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was your first published work about? Speaker 2: Empty barrels make the most noise (laughter). Speaker 1: Empty barrels (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I haven't thought about that in years. Speaker 1: Yeah that's a critique of certain individuals in society, I guess, right. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. As they say empty tray rattles--there are different versions. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so it was published in high school--in junior high school. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you're editor of the school paper-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --at East Bank High School, now-- Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 643843 Speaker 1: Were there more black students at East Bank [East Bank High School; East Bank Middle School, East Bank, West Virginia] than had been at these other--? Speaker 2: Not really, there were some, I can't remember--our class was three hundred and some people so there must have been about twelve hundred kids in East Bank and of those twelve hundred probably maybe a hundred and fifty were black. And we were all, East Bank was kind of odd because we were all from different towns. The high school--East Bank [West Virginia] the town sits on the river [Kanawha River] but the schools that feed it and the towns that feed it are like up and down these long West Virginia hollows, what we call hollows down home and some of them like twenty, thirty miles back into the mountains. We lived on the main drag right on the river too, but in our direction, we lived like six miles from the high school in one direction. There were kids who lived maybe fifteen miles in the other direction. They used to say our school drew from like a fifty square mile radius. So it wasn't like we knew these kids well, we only saw them at school, so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So I don't remember exactly--our town didn't have any black people and we ended up--we lived on the white end of town. My parents had waged a very public fight for--to find a decent house because nobody would show us a decent house in Charleston [West Virginia]. So my mother [Kira Walthall Dodson] called the newspaper and the story got on the TV. Eventually realtors would start showing us houses and this particular family sent us a picture of their house at Chesapeake [West Virginia] and asked us to come see it and we did and that was the house that we liked so we moved there. But consequently, we lived like two miles from the other black people in our town and my brother [William Dodson, Jr.] was old enough he could walk down there and, you know, hang out or whatever, I couldn't really go hang out much so I had one best friend there and she is still one of my best friends, Regina Davis [ph.]. But our high school was just not conducive to having a whole social life around it, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. That's for everybody pretty much. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So you--once again a good student I would think and-- Speaker 2: I was a National Achievement scholar [National Achievement Scholarship Program] at school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I probably--as I recall I had the highest SAT score in the school for that year, at least, for that year. My brother had also been a National Achievement scholar the previous year but I had a higher score than he did on the same test. The same year he took it I also had to take it for the first time and my score was higher than his. He made National Achievement scholar and then the next year my score was even higher and I made National Achievement scholar. But his year there was also a National Merit scholar [National Merit Scholarship Corporation] winner and my year there wasn't--there was nobody who qualified ahead of me on that. Story_ID: 643844 Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers or people around in high school [East Bank High School; East Bank Middle School, East Bank, West Virginia] that inspired you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had excellent teachers at (laughter) East Bank, becau- --as--I characterize it as--it was after the VISTA [Volunteers in Service to America; AmeriCorps VISTA] workers had come to save us so we had all of these highly educated people from big cities with just all kinds of qualifications. Speaker 1: So this is VISTA, okay, this is the beginning of VISTA. Speaker 2: Yeah, but, '64 [1964], '65 [1965], yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is--VISTA was the domestic Peace Corps. Speaker 2: Right, so I entered high school in '66 [1966] and people had, you know, had stayed and decided to teach there and stuff. But my favorite teacher was the journalism teacher, Mr. Robert Vasheries [ph.] who was also our sociology teacher. And my brother [William Dodson, Jr.] majored in sociology as a result of it and I majored in journalism part--you know, partly under his influence. And a few others, I wish I could think of my French teacher's name, I can't think of it and my math teacher. Math was not my favorite subject but I had an excellent math teacher, Mr. Shawver [George Shawver]. I took all the advanced math and everything from him. We were just talking about him on Facebook the other day so--I'm trying to remember who the--that's probably--oh, my two black teachers, Mrs. Andrews--Anderson [Louise Anderson], and Virginia Lawson. Virginia Lawson was my English teacher a couple of years. She taught me speed reading and sent me to a special program to advance in speed reading, she was my driver's ed teacher and she was the aunt of the woman who became my college roommate later. She just passed not too long ago. Mrs. Anderson taught me typing--tutored me in typing because I was not going to pass the business typing class and my counselor pulled me out of it to keep my average from going down. So Mrs. Anderson tutored me personally in typing--she was the business teacher--after school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So did you go to prom and all that sort of thing, in high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I went to prom, I don't remember who with. I used to have boyfriends from like Charleston [West Virginia] so they couldn't go to our prom and I know I, I know went to my junior prom. I think I asked a sophomore and his name escapes me and senior year my boyfriend asked a friend of his that went to my school to take me, I think. Speaker 1: Okay. What was happening with him where he couldn't do it? Speaker 2: People who weren't from your high school couldn't go to your prom (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, they couldn't take you, oh, so he asked--okay I get it. Speaker 2: So he couldn't--neither year could he attend, or, whatever. Speaker 1: Well okay so when you were on the verge of graduation what was your counseling like in terms of college? Speaker 2: I had very good counselors. I worked in the counselor's office one period a day or something or at least a couple of days a week. I wish they had pushed me more to go to a Ivy League school or something. My husband [Michael I. Days] always teases me about why I didn't with the grades and scores I had. But I wanted to go to Marshall [Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia] because they had journalism, because my journalism teacher had gone there, my brother was going there, my older cousins who were in college were starting to go there. As opposed to, you know, blacks before then had all gone to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]. Now, generations of my family have gone to Marshall. And there were, you know, I had five or six cousins there at the time I was there and two ahead of me who--one of them finished, I guess after I got there but two of my Hairston cousins went there first and then my brother and I went there. And some of my Dodson cousins came later. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But, you know, at the time I think I only applied to maybe one or two other schools and I don't think I applied to anything out of state. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And partly because, you know, my parents [Kira Walthall Dodson and William Dodson, Sr.] could only afford so much and my parents were paying for it. I didn't--I got like one year of scholarship from National Merit [National Merit Scholarship Corporation] but my father paid my tuition out of his own pocket, so we went where he could afford to send us, so. Story_ID: 643845 Speaker 1: Marshall University [Huntington, West Virginia] in 1970, right, that you start? Speaker 2: I entered in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969] okay. In 1969. And, well, what was it like and you went there specifically to, specifically to major in jour- journalism, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Marshall was a really, really good environment. Eve- you know, there weren't that many black students there and black women were just starting to go there really in large numbers. Black men started going there, you know, immediately after integration. West Virginia has the distinction of not having resisted Brown v. the Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] and there are people all over the state who have stories about signing up ball players the next day. I don't know how many of them are true but (laughter). My white counselor from high school [East Bank High School; East Bank Middle School, East Bank, West Virginia] got recruited by the black school [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], but black people had been at Marshall since at least since '54 [1954]. You could go to the grad school before that, I think, and, in, by the late '60s [1960s] it was still mostly men. In our class it was something like fifteen black freshman women to maybe a hundred black boys, so. Black students were very, very close knit and the learning atmosphere was very good. The journalism department is excellent, I had excellent teachers there. I remain in contact with my mentors there to this day. And, you know, I was at Marshall at the time of the plane crash that killed seventy-five people [Southern Airways Flight 932]. Speaker 1: Now that was--now were you like working on the school paper or something at that point? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the journalism department. Marshall has a daily newspaper [The Parthenon] and you, the--some of the journalism classes feed into the paper. If you are taking reporting you were reporting for the daily paper. If you are taking copy editing you are copy editing for the daily paper. So at that point, I believe I was taking my first reporting class probably, because that would have been the beginning of sophomore year. Speaker 1: Okay, so that would be 1972 or seventy? Speaker 2: Seventy--'70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Seventy [1970]? Speaker 2: The crash was in Nov- November '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Se- seventy [1970], okay, 1970, okay. Speaker 2: November 14, 1970. Story_ID: 643846 Speaker 1: Tell us what happened, and what the, what you did as a reporter. What--well, you know, this is like a big story, a na- national story. Speaker 2: The story is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)And a sad story. Speaker 2: I must have spent most of the week feeding other people's stories, interviewing some of the parents. The documentary on the plane crash [of Southern Airways Flight 932] has me--has a scene of me at a press conference. I don't think it was that period, I think that was later in the aftermath of the crash. I did, the black students chartered a bus to attend some of the funerals. Ten of the thirty-five team members were black, and we took a bus fr-- Speaker 1: Let's just tell people--people listening to this, be they your family or whoever won't know what happened. But what, what happened, first of all? Speaker 2: They, oh they--it was a football game, Marshall [Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia] played Eastern Carolina [sic. East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina] on a Saturday and the team was returning on a chartered plane Saturday night, November 14, 1970 and the plane crashed into a mountain just as it got near the airport, West Virginia being mostly mountainous. The pilots had never flown in there before, I don't know if they had ever chartered a plane to go anywhere and the whole team was killed plus a lot of boosters from town. People were given the opportunity to travel with the team and it was doctors and lawyers and city councilmen and important people, bankers, rich people, couples were wiped out. Two of the cheerleaders lost both their parents--other people lost both their parents. And, you know, they were--we had football players from all over the country. And it was, you know, an intimate enough campus [Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia] almost everybody knew somebody and if you take seventy-five people out of a town as small as Huntington [West Virginia] which then might have had seventy-five thousand people, everybody knew somebody. It was, you know, it was really really devastating for a lot of people. And, and to this day, a friend of ours just wrote a book about it--the crash called 'November Ever After' ['November Ever After: A Memoir of Tragedy and Triumph in the Wake of the 1970 Marshall Football Plane Crash'], and, his name is Craig Greenlee, he was a journalism student with me and he writes for the first time about some of the experiences that the black students had, particularly this bus trip up, that we chartered and I covered that trip for the school paper at the time. But we, the black students, we raised our own money, I think. The local minister in town helped us put this together and we went to one of the funerals in Bluefield, West Virginia was our first stop; a guy named Dennis Blevins who died. And then we went from there, I think to Atlanta, Georgia where a player, we called the player Governor [Larry "The Governor" Brown], his name is escaping me at the moment was buried. And then to Tuscaloosa, Alabama where four of the players [Joe Hood, Larry Sanders, Robert Van Horn and Freddy Wilson] were from, and there was a funeral at the high school [Druid High School, Tuscaloosa, Alabama] with all four coffins at the same time. I've never seen anything like it, I hope I never it see again. Then we went to Green- was it Greensboro, South Carolina? Speaker 1: North Carolina, North Carolina. Speaker 2: No, but what's the one in South Carolina, Green (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, South Carolina, there's a Orangeburg, South Carolina, and a-- Speaker 2: Green something-- Speaker 1: It may--Greenville, Greenville [South Carolina], yeah. Speaker 2: Greenville, I think--for one of the players there and came back from there. Other people from campus went--the university sent people to every funeral, but some of the other friends went to funerals in Texas, Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and New Jersey, there was a player from New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So this is, the black students--did they do it as a black student union or what? Speaker 2: I think initially--I think we did it under those auspices. We met together where we--black student union normally meets--Black United Students was our organization. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the pastor of the First Baptist Church [Huntington, West Virginia] there at the time, Charles Smith, helped us organize it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you get a chance to meet any of the national media, you know during this period of time? Speaker 2: I did not, I don't recall meeting any. Maybe they came to the J school [journalism school] but I don't, I just don't remember that, so. Speaker 1: Okay. I wondered who--you know, just, all the networks were there, and all that in those days. Story_ID: 643847 Speaker 1: We were kind of sheltered and I, you know, I would have been busy with the school paper [The Parthenon] and probably grieving and everything else. You know, I am fortunate that I didn't have like, you know, a really, really close friend or relative or whatever but so many people did. And my experience was kind of odd because I had gone home the night before, I wasn't on campus [Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia], and I almost never go home at that point in the school year and my roommate had gone home. Just on a whim we decided, and we took the bus to Charleston [West Virginia]. She lived in Charleston, I lived outside of Charleston. And then Saturday night I just felt like I needed to go back for some reason and asked a fried to drive me back. And I heard about the crash [of Southern Airways Flight 932] on my way back to campus and when I got to campus it was just a bizarre scene where--I lived in the new dorms, the Twin Towers, and people were throwing mattress out of the elevator or something, I couldn't figure out what it was for, and what it was for was basically for temporary clinic over at the field house. They were taking students that were grieving and passing out and what have you. But when I got to my floor, and I was a resident advisor at the time and I lived on a floor with six other black women, or six black women total out of the thirty-two on the floor. And when I got to my, to my floor the one woman who came up to me is the daughter of the assistant athletic director who was black and she said, "Daddy wasn't on it, daddy wasn't on it." Then my, I knew that the boyfriend of the woman who lived next door to me, her fiancee, was probably on the plane. And, you know, they told me that yes, he had passed and I think one of the other women I think was, if not dating, was very close to another player, they were friends at least. And, you know, so we spent most of the evening comforting this woman whose, whose fiance had died. But my friend, Gina Gunn whose father was not on the plane--I mean she is Gina Gunn now, she was Gina Starling [Gina Starling Gunn]. Her father, Ed Starling was the assistant athletic director, he ended up really being the one who put this whole team back together, kind of, or the department back together, and he has never gotten any credit for it, he never got credit for it in the movie ['We Are Marshall'], he never got, you know, he's not even a character in the movie although he is buried where some of the unidentified players were buried in a cemetery in Huntington [West Virginia]. But, you know, we spent a lot of time comforting the woman who lived next door to me, Macy Lugo [ph.] and her boyfriend and, I can't think of his last name either, Larry--Sanders, Larry Sanders was killed. And, you know, some of these people have really never been the same since that happened, whatever. And we eventually had to take her to the make up clinic over in the field house. I remember going to church the next morning, a lot of us were in the habit of going to the Baptist church [First Baptist Church, Huntington, West Virginia], and the Baptist church picked us up in a bus. So almost everybody went to church the next morning and they did an altar call where people were just weeping and wailing and crying and it was really something, so. I, you know, I don't think I will ever forget that. And then my other memory was we were--some of us volunteered to take families of the players around campus when they arrived like later in the week to get their things and do stuff. And I escorted the family of the guy from Greenville [South Carolina], I think we called him Willie Blue [Willie Bluford], I think it was his last name. I'm not sure if that's the first name, I think we called him a nickname. We helped them clean out his room and that kind of thing. And, you know, my other memories of it were just trying to help do the stories about it around campus and what have you. But, you know, after the funerals then we were dispersed and we went home for Thanksgiving, so. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So that was a, now that's quite a blow in school that--you were like a? Speaker 1: Sophomore. Speaker 2: So- sophomore. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so two more years. Story_ID: 643848 Speaker 1: Did anything--did you pick up anything from that experience that, like, influences what you do as a journalist any? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it--well I don't know if it still influences me but it gave me a great interest in covering disasters. I used--you know, as, covering them as an editor, per se, I never like covering one as a reporter, I think. But it could be a coal mine explosion, the MOVE disaster, train derailment, whatever. When those stories happen it's like I'm right on point. I could do it all day. The list of the wounded, list of the victims, the layout of the mine, trying to get all these details settled. You know, with, I think I was at work when the plane [Boeing 737-222 N62AF] hit the 14th Street Bridge in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], I was at work when one of those nightclubs fires broke out. I was at work during the night of the MOVE disaster and I covered a lot of the aftermath of the Challenger disaster on the national desk at the time. Things like that--those kind of stories are just, it really, really sharpens my mind instead, it doesn't upset me; it really focuses me to work on those, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just don't do it anymore because it doesn't apply to the kind of work I do now but I still--you know I like to watch stuff like that. When things like that happen on TV, I'm riveted to it, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about the rest of college? Now what was, I guess when you look back at it, this big, I guess this disaster kind of consumes a lot of your college life? Speaker 2: It did for a while but it, you know, things got back to a semi-normal, and, you know, my memories of Marshall [Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia] after that was a very pleasant experience. I think that was a big bonding experience; it brought us a lot closer than some of the other stu- the entire campus. The guy who wrote a book about it tells the story of--there was a near race riot the day before, the night I wasn't on campus, and there was, it broke out over an intramural football game. People were fighting and following each other to the dorm and the black students were afraid to go out or whatever. It had something to do with one of the more--less enlightened fraternities there had incited something on the intramural field. And the, I didn't really know a whole lot about it until weeks later. People forgot about it, and then eventually people started telling us about this thing and then Craig Greenlee wrote about it in his book ['November Ever After: A Memoir of Tragedy and Triumph in the Wake of the 1970 Marshall Football Plane Crash'], which was more detailed than I had ever seen. And as it turned out the football players--a couple of the football players had helped to calm the whole thing down just before they left campus, you know, by breaking up the students and basically, I think daring somebody to hit somebody, so it, you know--the whole, the crash [of Southern Airways Flight 932] kind of changed the tone of things. If that had not happened the race riot would have been a bigger part of our experience, probably. But as it happened it barely made the news, it did, there was a report of somebody being injured or something, somebody did go to the hospital at some point, but the racial climate at Marshall was extremely good I think compared--for the times. And it, you know, you never felt that you were, hardly ever felt--I had one or two experiences with professors, that you were being, you know, mistreated in class, or not given your due. Story_ID: 643849 Speaker 1: I was talking about a friend--mine--I grew up with, that was at Marshall [Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and I thought was on the football team, and I was glad to find out that he was not one of the ones-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --killed. Speaker 2: There were a number of people who for some--I don't remember whether Dave Smith [ph.] was on the team at the time but there are a number of people who didn't make the trip either because of injuries, somebody had just quit the team or something, the--my classmate Craig Greenlee had been on the team the year before and he said that when he went home his friends knew he had gone to Marshall to play football, and they thought he was dead. Somebody looked at him like they had seen a ghost. And a lot of those people, you know, they felt really guilty about not being on there. One of my brother's best friends who is depicted in the movie, Nate Ruffin, the, in the 'We Are Marshall' movie there's a character based on him, he, I think he must have been injured but he didn't make the trip and he's one of the people who really made a success out of his life in spite of that crash [of Southern Airways Flight 932]. He, you know, he worked for one of the corporations there, he went into some ministry but he worked for the Gannett corporation [Gannett Company, Inc.] for years in human resources. He just died a few years ago but he and my brother [William Dodson, Jr.] became very, very close after that--after the crash and they worked together after college, so. Speaker 1: Okay, did, I know the implication of the title of the movie is, 'We Are Marshall,' is-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --is a galvanizing event-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --even though it was a disaster is that pretty much how-- Speaker 2: Yes that's how I felt about, in fact, I've written about that. It just, you know, it kind of solidified the whole community that this was something we pulled together for. And there were, you know, no differences, you know, everybody was equally grieving. So in that sense--in a weird sense, I think it was good for Marshall. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: But there were also a lot of people who never really got their lives together after that. And I happen to work with an art director from time to time now who, he did know that I had gone to Marshall and I did a story for the magazine about, I guess it was about the book that came out ['November Ever After: A Memoir of Tragedy and Triumph in the Wake of the 1970 Marshall Football Plane Crash,' Craig Greenlee] and I had done one for somebody else after the movie but it turns out this art director's father was killed on the plane. He never met his father. So there, you know, there are all kinds of stories like that. So a lot of us say, the movie basically made up a story line. It didn't have to because there were so many interesting story lines. If you had just gone in there like this and done an oral history and somebody still should do it. There were so many stories to tell, you know, that it's just amazing. Speaker 1: It's one of the mysteries of Ho- Hollywood. Why-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --a writer would have to make up a story, or incidents where there were so many-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --good stories and better stories. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 643850 Speaker 1: Did you ever become the editor of the college paper [The Parthenon]? Speaker 2: No I was not the editor, I was--I worked on it. I was an editor--a news editor or something by my senior year, so. Speaker 1: Okay. And you graduated in 1972 [from Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --right? Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973]. I actually, I went to work full time in '72 [1972] but I just happened to get a reporting job at the beginning of my senior year. Speaker 1: Okay, now how did that come about, tell us what happened? Speaker 2: Well I'd done--first I did an internship at The Charleston Gazette [The Charleston Gazette-Mail] and that was on the copy desk. Then I--when I came back in the fall I kept hearing that the Huntington paper [The Huntington Advertiser] wanted a quote unquote black reporter and I probably wanted no part to that. You know I wasn't looking for a job and I was, you know, just starting my semester, et cetera, but the whole idea of being the black reporter was a little offputting. Then finally my advisor who had gotten me the summer job, Ralph Turner said, "You really ought to go down there, the, you know, this guy is really interested in you." I went and interviewed at the paper, the editor's name was Don Hatfield, and he told me about the job and whatever, and we joke about it today--I showed up in a floor length dashiki with my Afro, partly because that's just how I had dressed that day and I lived like forty miles away at the time. And he thought that I had done it deliberately but anyway I gave him a hard time in the, in the interview asking him would I just have to, you know, write about black things, "No, we have a black repor- we have a black reporter, we have a white guy who covers the black community very well and his name is Charlie Bowen." Then I asked, you know, said, you know, "Well I don't want to just be the black reporter," but he gave me a writing test on the spot and he hired me the same day. I just--last fall I had lunch with him and his wife [Sandra Hatfield], he was telling me a little bit more about the story. What I didn't know at the time was that he had asked about me specifically. He said he had been reading me in the school paper, which never occurred to me, because I had a column and he called and said, "This seems like a very thoughtful young woman and I would like to meet her. We want to hire somebody," you know, the paper had never had a black reporter and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] president had called me and asked me to go see him too. I didn't know him at the time but we later became friends. So he offered me a job to work part time while I finished that semester and around my class load and in the second semester I went to work full time. I stayed there for a couple of years. Speaker 1: Okay. So, is there anything--well what were your assignments like, what did you learn, at the Huntington Advertiser, right? Speaker 2: I learned how to turn out stories very quickly. We were an afternoon paper and sometimes you did four or five little things every morning and I would have to go pick up the stock report before noon. I did a little bit of everything. My main beat was to cover education but I also got to cover things like the arts and feature stories about individuals. I wrote a lot of stories about the black community. Eventually I did a story about, a series of stories about being black in Huntington [West Virginia] and that won a statewide award before I left, and I interviewed a fascinating family that had lived in one of these hollows outside of town for a generations and on, you know, the great-great-grandmother somewhere back had worked at Mount Vernon [Mount Vernon, Virginia], and, you know, (background noise) stories like that. I was trying to think, I interviewed a woman who was 104 years old. Story_ID: 643851 Speaker 1: Yeah you were talk- talking about a woman in the community whose ancestor worked at Mount Vernon [Mount Vernon, Virginia]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I guess for [President] George Washington. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, it's interesting that there's a conne- I know there's a part of West Virginia that his whole family moved to called Charles Town [West Virginia] near Harpers Ferry [West Virginia]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --his whole, his brother and his sisters they all lived there-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: At one point. So Washington (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right, I've been there. This was a--I don't remember how they got to where they were but she was very, very in- the whole family was very interesting. Speaker 1: Okay. So the black community there--was there anything you remember specifically about the black community there that kind of sets it apart from? Speaker 2: The black community there is very interesting. It, one of the ways I got to do this story [for The Huntington Advertiser] and Don Hatfield just reminded me recently was somebody had taken offense that I used the word ghetto in the story to refer to where the black people lived in town. They were argumentative about it and whatever and I got so incensed that, you know, I was almost in tears that they didn't understand the meaning of the word ghetto and Huntington [West Virginia] definitely had a ghetto because nobody lived anyplace else even the upper class, middle class people lived in the middle of the ghetto. They built their new houses in the middle of the ghetto. One of my best friends from that town who's white said that he grew up walking past there thinking that that's where the black people wanted to live and that's why they lived there (laughter) with each other there; when in fact, you know, it had a long history of segregating people by housing. So, they said, well maybe you should do some more stories and explain this to us. So I did something like a three or four report series, they let me have weeks to do it. On the economics, on the education, housing, et cetera. But, you know, it was a close knit community, it had, you know, Huntington has a very rich history, Carter G. Woodson was the principal of the black high school there [Douglass Junior and Senior High School, Huntington, West Virginia]. And it had educated people; it had a lot of strong churches, just a real sense of community, fraternities, graduate chapters and that kind of thing, with its own viable social life then. I don't know that that's true anymore but it had black dentists and doctors, lawyers, and they all lived in the ghetto for the most part I think a couple of them probably moved to the suburbs later, but. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is a, so this actually won a--your series of articles won an award, you said, from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From the Associated Press for West Virginia. Speaker 1: AP, um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 643852 Speaker 1: Now this is great so what, what, what skills do you think that you cultivated that, you know, a journalist--a young person who wanted to be a journalist now would have to have? Speaker 2: Just I don't know, I guess it helped me to refine my writing but it also helped me to find stories, figure out what was a good story. The Advertiser [The Huntington Advertiser] had a staff of really, really excellent writers. Somebody--years later somebody--we were sitting around talking about the staff, I lived in another town where a couple of other people from Huntington [West Virginia] had moved to work for the paper too, and we were talking about this person, that person, you know, and she--talking about all the excellent columns this one woman had done and then somebody said, "And she was considered the weakest writer on the paper," (laughter). 'Cause, you know, everybody there could--for a newspaper so small, everybody could write really well. So you are around people in good writing and appreciation for good writing I think, but also for just finding the unusual, because we were a smaller paper and we were an afternoon paper. We couldn't necessarily just cover what everybody else covered. So you had to have initiative and be fairly innovative, so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. It's interesting, like people don't think of West Virginia necessarily as being a place where good writers are, but a lot of people, you said Woodson [Carter G. Woodson] came out of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that area, Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] is a West Virginian. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --other, I think there-- Speaker 2: Leon Sullivan-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --there are so many famous people from West Virginia. I think it's in the water, it's just--it's a good place, it's family oriented and people don't have some of the negative influences that you have in big cities. I've always been glad that my pa- you know, my parents [Kira Walthall Dodson and William Dodson, Sr.] could have--or my grandparents or somebody could have migrated to Chicago [Illinois] or to New York [New York] or whatever but as I said we had like a fifty year stay over in West Virginia which I think kept us (laughter) from being as scattered and as diluted as a lot of families and especially in my family where everybody seemed to move in groups. My family moved like a tribe; they moved from one state to another together so that was a very important influence. But, you know, that's also the story of some of these other, you know, Woodson's family is very similar. They, they went from Virginia to West Virginia and he worked in the coal mines instead of going to high school. He didn't go to high school 'til he was like twenty-one, twenty-two and then he went to high school and he went to Berea College [Berea, Kentucky], he went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] et cetera, so. You know, and there's something about you know Huntington really inspires people to achieve, parti- there were, yeah with a lot, a lot of my friends from there are doctors and lawyers, and Ph.D.'s and you know all kinds of things, so. Story_ID: 643853 Speaker 1: Now, 1974 you were hired by Gannett News Service [Gannett Company, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What happened, how did that happen (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the--well at the time the Huntington paper [The Huntington Advertiser] was owned by Gannett. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I wanted to go to Washington [D.C.] to, you know, find work, explore, whatever and one of my bosses there help me get the job. He actually sat down and wrote my resume for me, his name, it was John McMillan our executive editor. And I got, so, I got an interview at the bureau and I think they weren't sure I could do it. At that point I would have been the youngest person there. I would have been first black person there, and the third woman. And the other, the second one had just come like a month before I did but they gave me a try out, sent me up to the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] to cover--or took me up to the Hill to cover something, I think they dared me to find my way back and write a story and get it on the wire and I did, you know. And it was, I remember it to this day; it was about economic stockpiling, I can barely say it (laughter), so, you know. And it was some sort of congressional subcommittee hearing and I produced the story, handed it in and it was fine; they put it on the wire it was fine. So I think that was in August and was a, just a couple of days before Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] resigned because when I got back home, I help cover the resignation story and then I was to report to Washington that September. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Yeah, so, a lot big news going on then. Okay. Now did you meet--let's see, now, I see a note in here about Robert Maynard [Robert C. Maynard], did you ever meet him during this period of time? Speaker 2: I did meet him in Washington a couple of times. I got to know his wife better later but I'll get to that. The first time I remember meeting Maynard I think at a party he had for journalists in town and, or maybe not. He did some work for Gannett in trying to help Gannett diversify in the '70s [1970s] so he was like a consultant and I made have met him at sessions with them too. And one day when I entered graduate school from--while I was at the bureau, and one day while I was in grad school [American University, Washington, D.C.], he invited me over for lunch. When I got there he was at a stand up desk and there was a big dining room longer than mine but, you know, one of those Batman like tables, and he had a housekeeper who served us lunch. And, we just, you know, had a long ranging conversation about journalism and what I was interested in and things like that. I remember at some point we were talking about black religion or something and I said that I had just gotten a book on black religion and radicalism or something like that--I can't remember the author's name and he asked to borrow it. And I don't know if I ever got it back (laughter) but at any rate I got to know his wife, Nancy [Nancy Hicks Maynard], later because I did work with their institute, Maynard Institute for Journalism Education [Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education]. I worked as an instructor for, in the editing program for many summers. But I first met Nancy when we met to choose a class one year, out in Tucson, Arizona, and got to know her a little bit over the year. And now we are fairly close to his daughter [HistoryMaker Dori Maynard], my husband [Michael I. Days] was in a fellowship program with her, they were in the same class, and I was also doing some consulting for Maynard Institute later when they moved the editing program from Tucson, Arizona to Berkeley [California] about ten, fifteen years ago, something. I went out frequently to Oakland [California] to work at the institute, so, while we were getting that set up. Story_ID: 643854 Speaker 1: This begins back in the '70s [1970s]. Now the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] starts up in 1975-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in, in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, so, tell us about that, were you in on the beginning of that? Speaker 2: I was not on the beginning, I don't know why. I lived in D.C. at the time but I never heard about the first meeting. I've always kind of kicked myself that I could have been one of the founders if I had only known. But very few, you know, I worked for out of town press and a lot of people did not know we were there. They, my best girlfriend, Betty Anne Williams worked for the AP [Associated Press] and we I think had another friend who was working for UPI [United Press International]. None of us heard about it at the time. I can remember almost to this day when I did hear about it was I got a letter on my desk at the Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.] bureau like two years later, announcing the convention two years later not the '76 [1976] one, in '77 [1977], and I was so excited I just could not believe that there was this organization that was for black journalists. I only knew, at that point in my life I had never even worked with another black journalist in the same office. So I went to the convention in Baltimore [Maryland], I'm one of the earliest members because a lot of people didn't know about it until the '77 [1977] convention. There was a small convention, I believe in '76 [1976] somewhere out in Texas [Houston, Texas], I want to say. But Baltimore was the year that a lot of people really showed up for it; a lot really means probably a hundred. It was so packed that we could--some of us sat on the floor to sit in these workshops and listen to people. But I think, you know, the closing luncheon or banquet or whatever probably didn't have sixty people in the room. You know, now we attract three thousand people. But, you know, I was active in all those--I never missed a convention for years until probably the '90s [1990s]. But the year that it really took off was when it came to Louisville [Kentucky]. We went from something like a couple of hundred people from the previous convention to seven hundred in Louisville and I was living in Louisville that year. And we, you know, we had planned it and helped host and then from then on it continued to grow. Speaker 1: So when was it in Louisville? Speaker 2: It was--what year was that? Must have been '81 [1981] I want to say. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It really took off then, okay. Speaker 2: And I think part of it was because Louisville was centrally located. People from the South could drive up there, people from the Midwest could drive down there; people from, you know, St. Louis [Missouri] could dri- could drive in. That's one thing that made it fairly, fairly popular rather than being on the coast. Story_ID: 643855 Speaker 1: In '77 [1977] you were promoted to assistant news feature editor at Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you served there from '77 [1977] to '79 [1979]. I mean what--tell us about that promotion and-- Speaker 2: I, well I asked for it--someone who had been the in office editing, getting things on the wire and all that announced that she was leaving for I think the Knight Ridder papers or something. And I, and I knew that they had hired a new woman to come to the bureau who had been an editor and I figured that they might have her in mind for that job. But I went to the bureau chief, John Curley, and asked him if he had thought about how he was going to fill the job. And he grumbled, "No I just found out about that (unclear)," but I convinced him that I needed to do this job 'cause I wanted to be an editor and at that time the technology was changing. We had just--in the bureau we had just gone to computers. Huntington [The Huntington Advertiser] had already switched to computers but a lot of places were not using computers yet. And I-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I was fascinated by the technology; I am my father's [William Dodson, Sr.] child. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) By, by computer you mean the? Speaker 2: Ter- you know, the terminals. Speaker 1: Copy graphic terminals they use to have-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to do typesetting and all that, and? Speaker 2: So, you know, to be able to, you know, learn about the new computers and how that was going to affect the copy, and you know, and to learn about the technology and to work with the wires and all that just fascinated me. Speaker 1: Now, let's go back a little bit. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Just, like before how was it, reporters just used typewriters, and? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Almanac and a typewriter (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were trained, you know, we were trained to use the typewriter, I learned--at Marshall [Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia] we had to learn to type if you are a journalism major so I, you know, I did. In the newsroom you would have your typewriter, you had paper what we called--most papers had what you called carbon sets. It was two or three stacks of paper with carbon paper between them so that you made copies. You had a copy for yourself, the desk had a copy and then one copy went up to the printer after it was edited. So at some point Gannett had used Huntington as an experiment, partly because it was a small paper, to bring in the computer terminals and see how it worked in a real life newsroom. But it wasn't long before I left, it might have been in the last six months I was there or something like that. When I got to the bureau, the bureau was still on paper and we would fax our stories up to Rochester [New York] and they would typeset them and put them on the wire or whatever they did with them. So because the bureau was fairly small it was also easy to com- to computerize it, long before some newspapers had switched over. And to be on the cutting edge of that and, you know, to learn how to do it and how to format the stories and that sort of thing, I think really interested me more, more than reporting did, so. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so-- Speaker 2: Although report- you know, reporting was fun there, so. Story_ID: 643856 Speaker 1: By 1979 it says here Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.] had a chain of seventy-nine newspapers. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was very controversial at the time. Speaker 1: That they had that many-- Speaker 2: The sudden growth of these newspaper chains Gannett and Knight Ridder and swallowing up all these, you know, small town papers was very controversial. We wrote papers about it in grad school [American University, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Right, was it, was it a fear that all the news would be dominated by one political or, or, or ideological (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well having all the ne- the news be dominated by one company--you know it was also fears over the quality of journalism. Would they, you know, would they dumb it down, you know, suck all the money out and cheapen the product whatever, so. Some of those things came to bear and some of them didn't. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, so as assistant news feature editor you would feed stories out to these, all these papers. Speaker 2: Yeah we would edit them--the way Gannett did it, a lot of stories came in from the papers themselves. If there was something of interest in West Virginia, if there was something of interest in Rockford, Illinois, if, you know, wherever, it might go to the wire along with the stuff from the Washington bureau [Washington, D.C.]. But we also had bureaus in like the Florida capital [Tallahassee, Florida] and some other places. Maybe Indiana, California, places like that where we had several newspapers. There would be a bureau of some sort and those bureaus would also feed stories to us, like New Jersey, we had a number of papers up here, and distribute those back out to other papers. But we also bought, you know, the, certain stories from The Washington Post news service or, but some other specialized services for like--part of my duties were some of the feature material. We'd buy, we'd buy features and columns and recipes and things like that from certain services, movie coverage and put those on the wire so that all the papers could use them. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And I worked nights and weekends to do that, so. Story_ID: 643857 Speaker 1: Now those are the days Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president of the United States, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ji- Jimmy Carter was president when I was in the, in the bureau, s- well he be- became president what, in seventy--in early '77 [1977]? Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976], yeah. Well, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy six [1976] election, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But he would have started, he would have been inaugurated in January '77 [1977]. Speaker 2: Well I, I got to go help cover the conventions for those, for that year, too. So yeah it was a pretty exciting time, you know. The Carter administration was like a breath of fresh air in Washington [D.C.], I think. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. And he, I think he brought in more black people, I think-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --than any other previous administration, I believe. Because he brought in [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --and there was quite a few other people that came in, right. Speaker 2: And I, you know, when I was reporting I covered the delegations from West Virginia, Pennsylvania, Michigan and New Jersey. So I covered a lot of regulatory stuff and a lot coal mining issues, the black lung bill, mine safety things like that, and for a while I did automobile coverage too for the Michigan papers that sort of thing. And we had--we started a group of under thirties journalists, I think it was call like the thirty club or something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you were twenty-six when you started this job [with the Gannett Company, Inc.], right? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twenty-six years old. Speaker 2: Right, but because of Watergate there were a lot of young people in town. They--a lot of the bureaus had decided to hire younger people than they ever had because in theory they would have a fresh eye, I think. Speaker 1: Because of Woodward [Bob Woodward] and Bernstein [Carl Bernstein] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bernstein, right. Speaker 1: --being young men? Speaker 2: And the other thing I discovered over time was that several of the bureaus had hired black people that month (laughter). That's what--, "When did you come to Washington?" "I came to Washington August 1974." "Me too." So, I mean, my best friend was a AP [Associated Press] reporter, sh- Betty Anne Williams, and she had just gotten there, but over time we met like maybe a dozen or so people who had been sent to Washington at that very moment in time. So I think, you know, it was a good time for us. Story_ID: 643858 Speaker 1: John Curley was your immediate supervisor, is that? Speaker 2: John hired me, he's the one that took me to the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] and left me in a hearing to find my way back (laughter), that's right, and he promoted me, so. Speaker 1: Okay and he went on to become the head of Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.]-- Speaker 2: Of Gannett, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: --the whole thing, at one point. So, okay, so, all right, we were, in '77 [1977] I didn't point this out because didn't realize it but you were, it says here that you were elected national secretary of NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]? Speaker 2: Not in '77 [1977], I don't think. I was elected in Louisville [Kentucky]. Speaker 1: Not '77 [1977]? Okay. Let me draw a line through that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But in Louisville in '81 [1981], you were-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, 1981, okay, all right. Speaker 2: I've been a member since '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay so you were there until '79 [1979] and then what happened next? Speaker 2: Well as I mentioned briefly I went to graduate school at American U [American University, Washington, D.C.] at the beginning of '78 [1978]. I still worked in the bureau part time, on the, particularly weekends and some evenings for that year. The American U program was a one year and out program and I took some courses over the summer but I had to get an internship and it had to be something that I wasn't already doing. So the company let me go to Rochester [New York] to work for the flagship paper. Speaker 1: Okay the Rochester Times-Union [Times-Union], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: You worked there as an assistant city editor, I have here. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Okay, all right, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I, I, you know, I worked on the city desk and then later as the wire editor and later on the copy desk. Story_ID: 643859 Speaker 1: So what was going on in Rochester [New York] in '79 [1979]? Speaker 2: That was their flagship paper, that's the, you know, that was the lead paper in Ro- in Rochester. And I had hoped that I would get--what I really needed was to work for a bigger city paper and when I got there I got moved around a lot and didn't really get all the experience I wanted in doing that, in the metropolitan news, but then again I've never had to work in metropolitan news since then. I thought I would, but I di- I think I got the most out of being the wire editor because I learned so much about national news and the Iran controversy broke out--I mean the Iran hostage situation broke out one night when I was on the wi- on the wire desk. And, you know, thereafter we had stories every day and I had to pull about the Iran controversy. Speaker 1: Now this is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a good experience for me. Speaker 1: Now this is a big, big story-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --that just dominates the rest of-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --of the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration. Speaker 2: Right, right. For the rest of that year there was nothing else. Speaker 1: This is the story that launched 'Nightline.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know. Speaker 2: I did not remember that but yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So it just, it focused, a lot of people were fo- were intensely focused on this. So, in terms of being city editor of Rochester Times-Union [Times-Union], what was going on in Rochester? Speaker 2: I didn't work as a city editor--assistant city editor very long-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and there were several other assistant city editors. The only thing--the biggest story I remember was one of those stranglers out in Cali- there was that team of, it was two cousins, I believe who were serial killers, stranglers in California. Turned out to be from Rochester. Speaker 1: Was that Ted Bundy? Was that--that wasn't him (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No it wasn't Ted Bundy, he was someplace else, I can't--the Hillside Stranglers [Kenneth Bianchi and Angelo Buono, Jr.] maybe? Speaker 1: Hillside--I thought he was it, but I don't know, I'm not, I, I don't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --watch enough A&E I guess. Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember a whole lot of what else was going on in the news there. It was a fairly routine city, it was not conducive to big news per se, so. That was, that was, that was the biggest issue I remember covering or having to deal with. Speaker 1: Now did, did Rochester have a black paper? Speaker 2: Not that I know of. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: It was interesting, at one time, did you--were you aware at the time that Rochester is the home of Frederick Douglass' North Star [The North Star] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. That's a big part of their history, you know, that whole Underground Railroad thing and him being there, and, you know, it's an in- it's a place with an interesting history. Story_ID: 643860 Speaker 1: Did you move on to the Washington Star in '80 [1980]? I got you here at the Washington Star, is that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I left, well let me see--I must have gotten to Rochester [New York] in '79 [1979] and I left like a year to the day later in '80 [1980], the summer of '80 [1980] I went to the Washington Star. Speaker 1: Okay so you, you're still in graduate school at American University [Washington, D.C.] at this point (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No when I finished the summer in Rochester, I got--that was the last degree requirement I had and my degree was granted in December of '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is, this would be a master of arts in? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In, in? Speaker 2: In journalism and public affairs. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So I went--I went back to Washington [D.C.] to go to the Star. I was recruited by Eileen Shanahan who had previously had worked with The New York Times. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I worked in the features department, what they call--I think it was the Washington Life section. Speaker 1: Now this is--now the Washington Star, didn't it go under shortly after (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It--less than a year. The--I left before that to go to Louisville [Kentucky], partly because my fiancee [Michael I. Days] who I had met in Rochester was in Louisville, but the Louisville papers had offered me jobs several times when I was still in Washington the first time. They wanted me to come in as a reporter, but--and it was after I had already started editing for Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.] and I didn't really want to go back to reporting. But, so they recruited me from the Star, like in April of '81 [1981], I guess, and the paper folded what would have been my one year anniversary, I think, in August. Speaker 1: Oh, the Cour- the Louisville paper [Courier-Journal] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, the Washington Star. Speaker 1: --the other, the Washington Star, okay, all right. Speaker 2: After I got to Louisville but we--if I had stayed at the Star it would have just been a year then, so. Speaker 1: So the Washington Star folded, and from what I understand the Washington (unclear)-- Speaker 2: The Washington Times took over, yeah. Speaker 1: Established the Times and took over the facility of the, where the Star used to be [sic.]? Speaker 2: Oh, was it in the buil--I don't know if I knew that was in the building (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or the, the resources of the Star-- Speaker 2: Star, probably, yeah. Speaker 1: --were absorbed by The Washington Post. Speaker 2: So then, you know, Star was a wonderful paper, a wonderful place to work. Story_ID: 643861 Speaker 1: Now Louisville [Kentucky], now here you're, you're closer to home, I guess, in Louisville, but. So that's the Courier-Journal-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --journal, in Louisville-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in 1981, now this is new--Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is the president of the United States. Speaker 2: Right, Reagan was inaugurated just before I left D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was going on in Louisville? Now you were a copy editor, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, as I said, Louisville, Louisville had wan- had tried to recruit me. I met them, met the editors at an NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] convention probably '78 [1978] or so and had been there to interview around that time. And, I--it was attractive because it's one--it was one of the best papers in the country, with a good reputation, and a good reputation for moving people on to different papers too. It was a livable city; it was three hours from my parents. My mother [Kira Walthall Dodson] was in Huntington [West Virginia] at that time, my father [William Dodson, Sr.] was in Char- near Charleston [West Virginia] at that time, and my brother [William Dodson, Jr.] lived like two hours north. S- and Louisville also paid me more than I was making in D.C. It was an editing job and I was going, I believe, initially to the national desk which I liked. And, as I said, my boyfriend or fiance was there, he says that I knew that he was going to propose as soon as I got there. I did not. I thought I would have to hang around and nag him for another year or two but he, I think I got there in April when he proposed to me on my birthday in May (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now where did you all meet? Speaker 2: In Rochester [New York]. Speaker 1: In Rochester, okay. Speaker 2: We sort of met--had met at NABJ probably in '77 [1977] he says. We probably worked in the same buil- we did work in the same building in Washington and never remember meeting each other. I don't remember necessarily meeting him in '77 [1977] 'cause I--for a long time I thought it was at--that I might have met him at a particular event where I had drinks with a bunch of people from Rochester. And he later told me that no, it was at a party there that a lot of people went to. A party that [HistoryMaker] Acel Moore from The Philadelphia Inquirer had and it was a small room but hundreds of people must have gone through there that night. And I just don't recall seeing him so. And when I went to Rochester we didn't work on the same paper, we worked on opposite papers. He was on the af- the morning paper and worked in the afternoons; I was on the evening paper [of the Times-Union] and worked in the morning mostly. But one day the black staff decided that they wanted to take me out to lunch before I went back to D.C. 'cause initially I was just there temporarily for the internship. And they wou- didn't want to leave until Michael Days [Michael I. Days] got there, "We can't go, Michael's not here." And it was like they were waiting for like a movie star or something (laughter). 'Cause everybody kept saying, "Well Michael's got to be here," (laughter). So, you know, I met him, you know, at that particular luncheon and one day--we passed in the hall and he said, "You know we should have dinner some time." I said, "Okay, how about Friday?" He said, he got to his desk and realized that's tomorrow (laughter). So we, you know, we went out and there were no sparks, we didn't, you know, did not particularly care for each other that much, didn't set a second date but we kept being invited or thrown in with frien- you know, we both ended up at a party together, we both ended up at somebody else's event together and we ended up going on a trip with--a couple of trips actually with this woman from the paper. Eventually, by about the second trip I thought, "This is a really nice guy," and I guess he was thinking the same thing and that's kind of how we got together, so. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. That's-- Speaker 2: But he, you know, he left Rochester to go to Louisville in May of, I want to say '80 [1980] and I was still in Rochester until--for the rest of that summer and then I got a job elsewhere. So I didn't know whether we would get back together or not. But when he was in Louisville somehow the editors found out that that's who I was dating although we never would confirm it, even up until--practically the minute we were married like a year later. But it they--it probably emboldened them to go ahead and make another offer, and this time, you know, it was for an editing job so, and our friend Merv Aubespin [Mervin Aubespin] I think helped manipulate some of that, so. Story_ID: 643862 Speaker 1: All right so in, in Lou- also, well in, also in 1991 there is the big story--biggest story in black journalism was the Janet Cooke story-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --at The Washington Post, the town you had just left and--or well, left a couple of towns ago but, she, she wa- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean in '81 [1981], right? Speaker 1: Yeah in '81 [1981]. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: She was a Pulitzer Prize winner but they found out that she had made up some of her story ['Jimmy's World'], right? Speaker 2: Oh that was a--that, now that was an interesting story because I--I was on my w- I was the road on my way to Louisville [Kentucky] when this happened. I think I was i- somehow I left, I must have left D.C. [Washington, D.C.], maybe the Pulitzer was announced before I left D.C. I visited my home paper [The Huntington Advertiser] in Huntington [West Virginia] while I was on my way and I think that was the day that they--that the whole thing fell apart that they found out she was not--by the time I got to Huntington that, you know, she had not written the story. And I, then I had to drive the rest of the way to Louisville, I said, "Just what I want to do is be a black woman showing for work the first day after Janet Cooke," (laughter) so it was not a good time for me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you suppose a lot of black journalists--black women felt that? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I'm sure. Speaker 1: And, you know-- Speaker 2: I just happened to be in the unique situation of going to a new job. Speaker 1: Now these jobs were new-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in your generation pretty much, though. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: All the black people being hired as journalists for the first time-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --even though there were some before (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah but almost-- Speaker 1: --not this many at once. Speaker 2: Right. Almost everybody in my generation was the first black at (gesture) wherever, you know, at the AP [Associated Press], at the UPI [United Press International], at the--or in that bureau and certainly in Washington, you know, we were the first blacks, you know, to come to Washington for white newspapers and white magazines in great numbers. So that was a, that was a big blow and I can remember discussing the story the day it came out. I happened to have had a brunch that day and we were sitting around talking about it and talking about, you know, whether we thought this really happened, or whatever, 'cause. There were a number of journalists there and there were a couple of lawyers there, et cetera. But it's never really crossed my mind that anybody, you know--back then we would never--who would make up a story and put it in the newspaper, 'cause you are going to get caught, you know. But, the paper probably, you know, I always felt that paper should have taken more of the heat for that. She wasn't supervised; copy editors had raised questions about the stories. We used that story in our editing program [at the Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education] and go through it line by line to pick out what some of the flags should have been. That, in the copy as it was published. Story_ID: 643863 Speaker 1: Now this is--let me just go back over this for a minute. That this is a story that she wrote about an eight year old black girl who was a heroin addict. Speaker 2: Boy, I think. Speaker 1: Boy. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Boy, in--okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: In Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And this is, so--did you know Janet Cooke? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think--it was kind of unique because most of us didn't. There was a lot, you know, as close knit as some black journalists were getting, or being--by that time people were starting to know each other. There was a point there when I first went to Washington you didn't know who was there, or didn't know anybody. I, you know, I bumped into Betty Anne [Betty Anne Williams] at a press conference that we both happened to be covering about burning books in West Virginia. And some of us, we had formed a Washington Association of Black Journalists. I was helping to get it restarted. It had started a couple of times but so far as I know none of my friends at the time said they knew her. And I didn't know many people at The Post at the time. There was sort of, sort of a division as I alluded to between this out of town press and the local press didn't necessarily know us. And that was starting to change but, you know, and she was younger than we were so I think if she was more like the next wave of journalist-- Speaker 1: Now is she the first African American woman to win a Pulitzer Prize for journalism? Speaker 2: Yes, I think so, that's my recollection anyway. Speaker 1: So did you--when, did you, so you must have heard about that when that happened, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So everybody was probably-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --excited. Speaker 2: Yeah. I can't, I can't remember what day it broke but I, you know, I must have left Washington like on a Monday morning or something. And it had been announced and we were all buoyed up by that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know that for-- Speaker 2: And I just happened to be on a--standing in a newsroom--somebody else's newsroom when it was announced that she, oh no, she didn't [sic.] write the story ['Jimmy's World,' Janet Cooke], okay, so. Speaker 1: Now did you feel at the time when you first heard it she's being framed to keep her from, you know, because she won the Pulitzer Prize (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I didn't, actually, no, I never thought that. Speaker 1: So you thought they really got her--I mean she really-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And, I don't know, why, but I just didn't--partly because of the fact that I didn't know her maybe if I had known her I might have thought otherwise but-- Speaker 1: And, and, so this good though--what are the flags, you say you use it as an exercise in class (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What--I was trying to remember what--I thought you might ask me that. One of them is--if you read like a copy editor you really should read stuff and that's what we do. We put it in front of every student and you raise points. One of them is that the, she says something about the stepfather gave him heroin to take to school; nobody gives away heroin. But, you know, and they, there's just little details, and I wish I had it in front of me but I've seen, you know, in the editing program [at the Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education] for we have like four working faculty members at all time. People from, you know, top editors from The Washington Post, The New York Times, the, you know, the Milwaukee Journal [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] or somebody are sitting on one side of the table presenting lessons, you know, we would take turns presenting lessons. And there's like, you know, a dozen people who are--usually seasoned reporters--who are, for whatever reason, want to make the switch to editing as I did. And so they're there to learn, you know, how to be an editor, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so-- Speaker 2: --what they are supposed to look for. And, you go through with the-- that's, you know, that's some pretty sharp minds to have in the room. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: You go through it line by line with them and they say, "Oh well that didn't sound right," or, you know, or maybe, maybe it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What you just said, a lot of people--I don't think a lot of people, unless they know anything about heroin-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --or would think about it, would even find that necessarily disturbing but if you do know something about heroin you know people don't give (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, and these are reporters who've, you know--a lot of them, you know, they grew up in the hood but if they didn't grow up in the hood they've covered the hood for ni- for nine, ten years or whatever. Speaker 1: It's, somebody (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some things just didn't, you know, ring true-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: --and then maybe he has a blue shirt over here and he has a white shirt on here or, you know, whatever. I can't remember what the details were because I've been taught this lesson or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. But even that point though--this is something that an editor not, unfamiliar with drug addiction wouldn't, wouldn't catch. Speaker 2: Right, or so, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, I mean, people scrape together money to get drugs. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean they don't, you don't (unclear). Speaker 2: And suddenly you're going to give it to a kid? I don't think so. But, you know, it's just--it was, it was riddled with stuff. Story_ID: 643864 Speaker 1: And the fact it was such a negative story about black people I think made a lot of people un- unsympathetic to her. So-- Speaker 2: That's--you know there is a saying I used to hear in the barbershop and you hear it now that when for instance Denzel [Denzel Washington] played a crooked cop-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and won the Academy Award [for 'Training Day']. Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: I mean, you know, I think Halle Berry's role kind of scraped the bottom of society and she won an Academy Award [for 'Monster's Ball'] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly, and she won a Pulitzer--yeah, right, it won an Academy Award. Speaker 2: And the, there are people--there are conspiracy theorists in our community-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --that say well if we do something like that we're going to get a reward. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: If we do something positive, nobody's going to-- Speaker 1: Right, it may not even make the paper-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --much less get put up for Pulitzer, so. Speaker 2: So you think that's part of it or do you think that there's really some truth to that kind of--? Speaker 1: Yeah, I think there is a lot of truth to it, yeah. People, you know, there is a lot of the media that wants to believe or feeds on the negative particularly about black people. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And it's been hard to get positive stories about black people in the newspapers. And a lot of times, you know, I've had to play that role of, this is an important story. This is of interest to black people and we think it's going to be of interest to a lot of other people too but we need to cover this story. Those can be a hard sell. You want to write a story about somebody who is not a heroin addict, who's, you know, doing good in school and all that kind of stuff, no (laughter), it's whatever, so. Speaker 2: Yeah. Or even an investigative report that, about something with--did Janet Cook's story ['Jimmy's World'] point to any constructive thing that could be done about the situation or any, you know, any redemptive situation that gave out of that? Speaker 1: I don't recall that it did, I don't think so. But I haven't read it now in many years, so. The lesson that the editing program [at the Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education], I think was taught by Bill Conley [ph.] from The Times [The New York Times], would usually lead that discussion. So I probably haven't seen that lesson given in more than fifteen years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I wish I, I probably do--actually if I thought about it beforehand if I'd known you were going to ask me I just came across a notebook of materials from that program, just the--yesterday when I was looking for photographs for you. Story_ID: 643865 Speaker 1: I don't know if you remember, but was there--you, could you generalize that there was more scrutiny of black reporters' work after that? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, definitely. I mean, I've had reporters tell me--by that time I was no longer a reporter but, you know, I've heard reporters say that they had, they had, or felt scrutiny, if not, whatever. And, you know, that, it might have cost them jobs or people, you know, just look at you differently and they scrutinize everything. Speaker 1: I've, I've interviewed quite a few people-- Speaker 2: You did. Speaker 1: --that had an experience that I actually had in school where--in grade school where, that you describe-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --where a teacher questions whether you wrote something or not. Speaker 2: Every journalist I know just about has that same story of a teacher questioning whether they wrote what they wrote. At least at one point in my life, I had met many, many people--I've heard this story out of many people's mouths. "She didn't think I wrote it," "She gave me a bad grade," "She gave me a D," "She said I, you know, I must have copied it," or whatever. In my case the teacher thought I had copied it directly from the newspaper. I may have used a word or two that the newspaper used because that's the only way I knew to describe the building. I wouldn't have known what else to call it. But--it, and it happened to be--it was a, you know, she asked us to write about a fire that had happened like right behind my house. Well as it happened we weren't at home that day and my only source was the newspaper. I had read the newspaper but I didn't copy from the newspaper which she could have told by comparing my writing with the newspaper. But I don't know how many journalists have told me that they have had similar experiences of people were doubting their--, "Did you really do this," "Did your mother write this," "Did you take this right out of the encyclopedia?" Well nowadays you check. You can look it up, Google it and you'll tell, you'll know that I didn't, but, that's very common. These people give us a hard time about being editors or whatever because they don't believe that we can read and write so definitely they don't believe that you are good enough to be checking their work, so. Speaker 1: These are some of the racial dynamics of-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the black journalists deal with. Speaker 2: Right. And not everybody is like that but you, you know, you meet these people (unclear), you have these moments in newsrooms, so. Story_ID: 643866 Speaker 1: Also--well they got a milestone here that Ed Bradley comes to '60 Minutes' in '81 [1981]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --which was a good thing. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And Pamela Johnson [Pam McAllister Johnson] became the first black woman publisher of a mainstream daily paper. Speaker 2: Oh that was so exciting. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I know her--I knew her and I met her that same year at NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], I think. Speaker 1: Okay. So she becomes the pu- editor, or the publisher (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First publisher of a newspaper. Speaker 1: Ithaca, New York, Journal [The Ithaca Journal]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: 'Cause that was a Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.] paper. Speaker 1: Right, okay. And a very smart town, Ithaca, New York. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Now in, you got married in 1982 [to Michael I. Days]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and in 1982 also a new venture is started up, USA Today, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's-- Speaker 2: That was pretty exciting--I--sometimes been kind of sad that I wasn't still at Gannett then because that would have been, you know, an interesting career too if I could have been on the ground level of starting that. But I had friends who were, you know a lot of my friends are--were at USA Today then. Speaker 1: Okay. So you weren't at, at, you weren't at Gannett at all when they started? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, but I was on my way to The Times. I remember being--when I was interviewed at The Times an editor asked me about what I thought of USA Today and I don't know, I don't remember whether USA had actually started then or not. Do you know the launch date, when it? Speaker 1: I don't have it here, I don't know it personally, but. Speaker 2: Right. Well what I said, he said, "What do you think of USA Today?" And I said, you know, "I think that they're going to teach a whole lot of us a whole lot about journalism," and of course being at The New York Times this man's like, "What do you mean, what do you mean?" (Laughter) And didn't they? I mean, you know, we do color, we do short stories, we don't do jumps, we have multicultural people on every page. You know, Gannett--I knew Gannett from the inside so, you know, Gannett does things very professionally and by the numbers, and by the, you know, studies and focus groups and whatever. And, you know, we--even as reporters we read that stuff. They say people read--look at this part of the page more often, or, than that page or readers like this and readers don't like that, and, whatever. It was bread and butter to us; we talked about that stuff all the time. Most newspapers didn't, they weren't even thinking about it in those terms. What the readers really want? You know, and places like The Times figure well, you know, "We're The Times. We don't have to worry about that sort of thing." They don't. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And it took, you know, how much longer did it take The Times to do color, maybe ten years? So. Speaker 1: They, they still kind of use a font that's hard to read, but, you. Speaker 2: Yeah, right (laughter). Story_ID: 643867 Speaker 1: This is The New York Times. And, now how did you--how did your hire by The New York Times take place, what happened? Speaker 2: I, I mentioned teaching in the editing program [at the Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education]? The first summer I taught, two people came from The Times, [HistoryMaker] Paul Delaney who was the deputy national editor came for a few days and Dwayne Draffen [ph.] from the national desk, copy desk taught with me for some weeks, I don't know whether it was the whole time or not. But at any rate both of them came back and recommended me and there were, there were lots of openings for copy editors that year. And I had also met, their recruiter was from--had been in Louisville [Kentucky] and I met her at a NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] convention, I think the previous year with Louisville's recruiter, who, they were friends. But her name was Carolyn Lee and she had not approached me or followed up with me at all until Delaney and Dwayne recommended me. And then she called and set up my interviews and, you know, asked me to come for a try out. Well The New York Times does a one week try out for, you know, a five day, I guess, try out for copy editors where you actually sit out in the open newsroom and try and edit these stories while people are yelling across you and, you know doing things in real time. And some of the stories you edit are real stories from that day's paper. The others are stories that have some fundamental flaw that they've already pre-tested them. They have used these stories over and over again in try outs. And as it happened they let me split my try out because my best friend as I mentioned Betty Anne Williams was become, was to become the president of the Washington Press Club which is the old Women's Press Club [Women's National Press Club] in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] that week and I had already planned to travel to see, to see her get inaugurated. So I think I came to The Times--like I did my try out like Monday and Tuesday and Thursday and Friday and Saturday or something like that. And I, they put you up while you are doing the try out and take you out to a few lunches and stuff like that. And I, you know, made it through the try out, it didn't seem that difficult to me, but it was interesting, you know, just sitting in the middle of a newsroom watching people running around doing news. And one of my best friends to this day was a woman on the national desk named Claiborne Ray [C. Claiborne Ray]. One night, my last night there probably, I hear all these people yelling back and forth, "What's the governor of New Jersey's first name?" Or former--I guess he was former governor by then but I'm not sure and one person would ask another person and then another person would ask and they kept yelling back and forth finally I said, "It's Bob." And it's kind of, I'm saying it like under my breath and Claiborne heard me and she said, "The try out says his name is Bob." (Laughter) I looked at her and said, you know, thanks. So, and, you know, so then they find out that really was his name. Story_ID: 643868 Speaker 1: Okay so did you initially start as a copy editor then? Speaker 2: Yes, I was copy editor on the national desk. Speaker 1: Okay. I know la- later on you became the, an editor of living section and the housing sections (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, right. The--I was first deputy editor of living section then editor of the living section. Then I was head of the style department. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, style department, okay, all right. Now, what was it like being at The New York Times? This is, this is--you would think this is the, what every journalist wants, you know. Speaker 2: What--what every journalist wants to do. The Times was a mixed experience for me. It was, it was extremely good for me in a lot of ways. I did well there and was promoted easily but I was not one of those people who aspired to go there and almost turned them down. My husband [Michael I. Days] convinced me--once they made me an offer. Dave Jones [David R. Jones], the national desk editor called me--they tell you when you take the try out that it could be weeks before you hear from us, it could be months, we do a lot of try outs, hardly anybody ever passes this thing, you know, we don't know when we will be hiring, et cetera. So about a week or two after my try out I get this call from Dave Jones the head of national desk and he says, "Angela [HistoryMaker Angela Dodson] come to work for us." I said, "Dave is that an offer?" (Laughter) And he said, "Yes." So the national desk was extremely good, I, you know, loved the people there, it was intense, it was interesting every day, it was--you know, I learned a lot. I got to, more responsibility, I got to be like the head copy editor for nights and weekends occasionally I would fill in and I started doing that for weekends. And they--I got a reputation for being kind of the story fixer. If you had these stories that just weren't ready for paper and they were going to take up an editor's time all day to try and figure it out, straighten it out, I usually got those. And, you know, I got to fill in or assist the chief of the copy desk is called the slot man, the person who checks everybody else's editing again and checks the headlines before you send them up to type. Sometimes he would ask me to assist him on a story or, you know, on deadlines, start editing some of--start slotting some of the other stories. And, you know, I got several citations in the little newsletter we had for having some of the best headlines for that week or month or whatever. And, you know, I said, it was just good people, the national desk was a terrific environment. I was asked to interview for the living job--I think I'd been asked to interview first for the home section and they picked somebody else, and, in fact, it was another black woman, Daryl Alexander [Daryl Royster Alexander], I think. Then the living section job came out maybe less than a month or two later or something and I got it and then the paper did a huge shuffle of editors one day. They changed something like twenty-six section heads, and assistant section heads, and assistant department heads all changed places. And, I--that's when I got the job as editor of living. And, you know, I did that for a couple of years then-- Story_ID: 643869 Speaker 1: Now the, the living section handled what, what? Speaker 2: Food, we-- Speaker 1: Food. Speaker 2: Primarily the living section specialized in food but also some feature stories mixed in there. That was just a really fun job. I think that, you know, that really was one of my favorite jobs in my entire career. Speaker 1: I think that around that time is the, the ladies who came up with spoon bread cookbook? Speaker 2: 'Spoonbread and Strawberry Wine' ['Spoonbread and Strawberry Wine: Recipes and Reminiscences of a Family,' Norma Jean Darden and Carol Darden-Lloyd]. Speaker 1: Yes, yeah. Speaker 2: I think that came out before I left D.C. [Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that before? Okay. Speaker 2: I, I, I covered it at Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But, you know it was the time when those kind of people were coming along, new foodies and certainly black people in food, and I was able to publish a lot of them. I really gave Jessica Harris [HistoryMaker Jessica B. Harris] her start in getting stories into The Times [The New York Times] and a number of other black foodies as well as, you know, tons of white ones. But it was a time when food was really important and cooking and whatever people were very, very interested. And I've always been a good cook, and I've always been very interested in cooking. I have hundreds of cookbooks and I entertain a lot and I like to cook, I cook for people. So it was a good fit for me. Then our department head by that time was Claudia Payne. And at some point, which a lot of people don't know, Claudia pulled me aside and said you know, "I may be asked to move up to such and such a job," you know, "not any time soon, maybe six months or whatever, would you be interested in succeeding me? Because I'll groom you and I'll get you ready." And I thought, "I don't know Claudia, this is, you know, I'm not sure I can do what you do and, you know, put in the hours you put in and whatever." "Some of that is me; I just do it that way. I don't think it's going to be that much different for you than, you know, your current job. And, you know, you've, you're the only one that's ready for it--that's already in the department." Well, eventually Claudia got moved suddenly and there was this big brouhaha for who was going to take the job or whatever. Only a couple of people knew that, you know, that I had been groomed or was being groomed or, you know, had been mentioned as the person or that I even expected to get the job, but everybody, most people in my chain of command, well, there became a campaign sort of to find somebody else, that's a nice way of putting it. There were certain people who thought that they should have it or that the paper should find somebody outside or somebody--you know, some new blood or whatever. And, frankly, I think there was a lot of backlash against diversity, period. And this was like the last straw; they are going to give the style department to a black woman. So the promotion was held up for weeks while the managing editor wanted to consider options and whatever. And I, you know, we heard rumors that the paper thought maybe this brilliant young editor over here or this brilliant young editor over there or one of the reporters kind of wanted it or whatever. And I think people did not realize--people who were fostering this sort of thing thought of me as some young person who didn't have all the experience I had. And I was an insi-, I knew that department, by then I, I, you know, I knew how to run that department, I knew it ba- backwards and forwards. But eventually they named me to the job. Story_ID: 643870 Speaker 1: So this is what year, is this? Speaker 2: Eight--this must be '90-ish [1990], nine--was I forty? I think it was ni- early '91 [1991]. Ja- like January '91 [1991]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I finally got the job. And, but the, you know, the backlash never really died down. There was a lot of resistance from certain people who, you know, basically were not cooperative with me or something or just, you know, would kind of talk behind my back. Finally somebody like leaked the story to a magazine about how, basically painting me as the villain of diversity. Some sort of symbol of, you know, everybody in the department was upset when she got this job and blah blah blah. Which was not true. I was extremely popular in my department before this happened, and, you know, a lot, and in the paper. A lot of people were pulling for me but I managed to eke out about two years. Then they took my deputy away and gave me somebody else who was not cooperative with me and, whatever, and it's kind of hard to run a department with a deputy who is not responding to you or not carrying out your wishes when they're stated. So, to make a long story short [HistoryMaker] Paul Delaney left his job which is as senior editor of administration and then he was in charge of recruiting and all that kind of stuff or he announced he was leaving to go the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] as chairman. And recruiting was something I really wanted to do, had always wanted to do. And up until then I had done what The Times [The New York Times] asked me to do. Every time they asked me to take a job I took the job, I never asked for any of these jobs and I don't know that that, that I ended up going in the direction that I might have gone if I had directed more of my career myself or been able to. You know, maybe I should have stayed on that national, or maybe I should have done this that or the other. So for me deciding to leave the style job and take Delaney's job was fairly easy because it was something that a lot of my friends were doing. People in different papers I know are on this recruiting circuit because of my years of working with the Maynard Institute, IJE [Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education]. I have friends all over the country who are involved in this kind of diversity recruiting work. So it's, was something that I had always had my eye on eventually. But I ended up--they offered me the job, I took the job and as it turned out the boss that I had that I thought was in my corner, and had always considered a mentor, did not want me there. And pro- as I understand it now, wanted her friend to have the job and basically made--my two years there were just miserable, so. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is--so the position you had was--was it senior editor, or, or? Speaker 2: Senior editor for administration. Speaker 1: For administration, okay. Speaker 2: Which mea- you know, I interviewed some, I interviewed a lot of people for their jobs. I, you know, tried to keep track of candidates, and set up people's interviews and went on recruiting trips and went to, you know, conventions to do job fairs and that sort of thing, so. Story_ID: 643871 Speaker 1: You were the--okay. So in, now you end up leaving [The New York Times] in '96 [1996] is that right? Speaker 2: I took a leave-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in '94 [1994] and then, for health related reasons, and then tried to come back in '95 [1995]. And in, when I got ready to come back in '95 [1995] there were, basically they offered me a job that they knew I couldn't do because I had carpal tunnel and I had had operations on both hands while I was out on leave so, and they had been fairly recent, I had just had the surgery maybe a couple of months before I would have come back. So they weren't even healed and they wanted me to come to what they call the news desk or the bull pit which is--they're editors who kind of, I don't know how to say this, they play traffic cop for the rest of the newsroom and determine what goes on page one and whatever, which would not have been a bad job if I had been able to do it. But what--what I really think happened was that they thought that I would decline it out of hand because it was night work, weekend work, stressful, whatever. And I didn't, I never said any of those things. I did ask, "How do you think I'm going to do this with the carpal tunnel? Or can, you know, can I have special equipment or what are you going to do to make sure I can do it?" But I think, you know, it was like the fix was in or something that's the best way I can describe it. That, and, I think it just threw them off that I didn't just say no or resign or whatever or put up, you know, put up a lot of reasons why I couldn't do it or whatever. It was illegal for them to not give me a job--and it was against company policy--to not give me a job that I could do with a physical handicap, so. Story_ID: 643872 Speaker 1: What ended up, well, what was the--I know it, the whole thing ended up in a lawsuit, at some point, but (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I ended up suing and eventually they settled but it, you know, was long and drawn out. They basically tried to hold off until, you know, I had spent all my money and all that kind of stuff. And, you know, we didn't reach a settlement until like '99 [1999] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's (unclear) three years. Speaker 2: And, over time, I'd testified I don't know how many different times at the state agency, at the, I did depositions at The Times [The New York Times], and they did another whole series of depositions at some other law office. And it was, you know, I think it was the right thing to do because I wouldn't--if I hadn't resisted or hadn't--hadn't stood up to them--I'm not going to just let this go down like this without a fight. I don't think I could live with myself so I don't regret having done it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So do you think, did the lawsuit--do you think it set a precedent or a sta- or made a statement that would--I mean is still--I don't know how to say it. Do you think it made a difference in what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do I think it made a difference in the business? Speaker 1: Yeah, in how they did business at The Times, or? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't think it made a difference, I'm sorry to say, at The Times. I think they have, you know--they hired some people after that and Gerald Boyd [Gerald M. Boyd] became managing editor after that but we never had the nu- what people don't know is that back in the '90s [1990s], the '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s], there were lots and lots of black people in that newsroom, fifty, sixty. Somewhere, not necessarily in the main newsroom but throughout the paper and I don't think they've ever had those kind of numbers since, that I know of, 'cause I don't, you know, and now most of the people we know, you know, aren't still in the business anyway. But there--through attrition, like you know all of my friends were quitting or had quit at the time. One of things that you know just kind of pushed me over the edge was a couple of people had like quit the week I stopped work, you know, in '94 [1994], and a lot of the talent that was there then is just not there. And the, and you can tell in the content, that--we were at a point of being able to achieve so much in terms of diversity and what got into the paper and what, expanding the kind of stories and whatever. And not just blacks but women, stories all that kind of stuff. I just see a lot of that momentum gone, at least from my perspective. Maybe I'm, you know, I'm not that close to it anymore, I don't hang out with people there; my last, you know, friend there retired, so it's hard to say whether it made a difference or not. 'Cause the way they tell a story is, "We promoted Angela [HistoryMaker Angela Dodson] all those times and she sued us," well yeah (laughter). Because, you know, if I was a person that was that excellent yesterday and, you know, I injure my hands and all of a sudden you can't find a job for me there is a problem. Did you think I wouldn't do anything? I don't, you know, I don't know. I think they just thought because they were The Times they would get away with it or they'd scare you off eventually or I would back down and, you know, drop the suit or run away or be scared or whatever, and none of those things ever happened. I also think that they--in retrospect what I think happened was they thought that I was some sort of stocking horse for some big class action or something or somebody put me up to it and no one did. I never--I refused to talk to the, you know, talk to anybody else about it. The lawyer tried to get me to meet with some other people who might be in- but I wouldn't do it. I'm not interested in their case; I'm interested in my case. This is my dime. I think they even thought that somebody else was paying for it and, you know I just, I just want to get this thing settled. And I really thought that at some point they would wake up and realize, you know, this is all one big mistake, I guess. That, you know, somebody would resolve it or so- or something. And, you know, even if in retrospect, but no one ever did so. Story_ID: 643873 Speaker 1: But you, you went on to become the senior editor at Essence, right? Speaker 2: I would fill in at Ess- --I was never there full time. I would go and work--if the managing editor was on maternity leave, I would fill in for her. If one of the senior editors was out, I would fill in for them. They, Essence had an interesting system where they had people with a whole lot of experience who would basically supervise stories and supervise the younger people but then there would be like a big gap where the writers and whatever were a lot of times beginners or whatever. But you had this pool of people who knew, you know, knew enough to help supervise them. So I would go fill in for one of those people, and I did it several times. I would be there for two or three months at a time. One summer I filled in for Linda Villarosa and a couple of times for Martha Southgate who is a novelist too, now, so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now-- Speaker 2: And I also, you know, I edited some books, helped edit books for them, their books division too. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you began working in 1999 with Black Issues Book Review magazine, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. While I was at Essence, I met Susan McHenry who had been asked to help start this magazine. She was one of the senior--regular senior editors there at Essence and Cox, Matthews [Cox, Matthews and Associates, Inc.] was starting this magazine. They, you know, they previously published what was then Black Issues in Higher Education, it's now Diverse: Issues in Higher Education. They were launching it in New York [New York] and they needed some people who had book knowledge and what have you, and Susan said, you know, "I want you to be a part of this, I want you to help write for us," or, you know, and I think I initially also edited some of the stories from home. And, so I wrote for them for about, must have been for years. I was in almost every issue ever, and I got a call out of the blue one day from the assistant publisher, Susan had left by then and there was another editor, and the assistant publisher said, "Would you be interested in being editor of the magazine?" And I said, "Why, what happened?" She said, "Well, the previous editor is three weeks late closing an edition and the boss has asked me to find a new editor before he gets back in town." So, you know, I wasn't looking for a job, and at the time I was teaching at the community college [Mercer County Community College, West Windsor, New Jersey] and I went to meet with her for lunch and she told me, you know, how much they were in dire straits because, you know, the editor had left, that morning, the assistant editor--while she was on--while the publisher was on her way to lunch with me, the assistant editor told her that she was quitting, I guess because she didn't get the job, I'm not sure. The art director was out of the country or something and somebody had stolen the software to put out the magazine with, taken it with them or something, whatever. Anyway. And there was--nobody had assigned any stories for the next issue, nobody had a list of stories that they were thinking about, nobody had a lists of the writers, so I said, "Well I'm going to take the job but we are going to get up right now and go to that office," (laughter). And the next issue had to be closed in a month, I think. So, you know, otherwise the boss was going to fold it, Bill Cox at Cox, Matthews was probably going to fold it, and she wasn't sure whether the back--whether he was going to keep it going even for six months but, would I take the job. So we went to the office in the Empire State Building [New York, New York]. We went to the office and tried to figure out what was going on, got some books, and called a few people to ask them to do some stories. By the next Tuesday or so I had all the stories assigned. We got--we got them all in, we made the deadline and we lasted another three or four years under that administration. Eventually Cox, Matthews sold, sold them and the new owner laid me off after about six months and then they only published maybe one or two more issues if that, so. Speaker 1: Okay this is about what year is this, when you? Speaker 2: I was there from 2003 to 2007. Speaker 1: Two thousand seven [2007], okay. Speaker 2: I went there in March of 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now did you work at all with, let's see, no I guess that's it, I don't know, I had so--oh, oh, with Emerge, did you work with Emerge at all? Speaker 2: No I never worked for Emerge. Speaker 1: Never worked for them, okay, all right. Speaker 2: I don't think I've even written for them. Story_ID: 643874 Speaker 1: So you were there until two- 2007 and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and since that time you've been--you started your own business now (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've been freelancing for most of this time. I started getting freelance jobs the very week that I was laid off, even though people didn't know I was out of work yet, I happened to get two; one assignment was that week 'cause somebody, my friend at Heart and Soul, [HistoryMaker] Yanick Rice-Lamb who had worked with me at The New York Times called and asked me to do a story because one of her people, her managing editors was off or whatever. So I did it and then the woman who had been our assistant publisher who hired me for Black Issues Book Review called me and asked me to basically fix a book that was a mess and I started editing for her and I started editing for--and writing for Diverse: Issues in Higher Education too, you know. I called Bill Cox asked if he had anything, within a couple of weeks he had stuff for me regularly. I write for them just about every month and I do some editing for them from home. I edit supplements and hire other reporters, et cetera. So, in the last few months I have incorporated my own business called Editorsoncall, LLC and it's at www.editorsoncall.com. The, I have started hiring people under that particular business model yet but the plan is to try to find more projects like this that we can do; journals for associations or businesses or newsletters, websites. A lot, a lot of the people, I edit a lot of authors, either self-published or people who have major contracts with publishing companies. So there is a lot of that work out there especially the self-publishing authors, I get calls all the time. People speculating whether, I don't always get every job but, you know, they want to write a book, they need help editing or they need ghostwriting or, or whatever. At the same time there are a lot of people who are laid off and out of work, and between jobs or semi-retired but they want to do a little bit of freelancing, and to try to aggregate those people and be able to not only to supply one editor, one copy editor, but to be able to also put teams together if they, if somebody needs writers and editors and picture editors and graphics people, to put a team together to put out whatever it is they need doing. If you are doing a start up you probably don't know how you are going to staff it yet. So, you know, we want to kind of fill that gap and because I have worked with so many different people over the years as an assigning editor and as somebody who has helped train copy editors and all that kind of stuff, I have a tremendous number of contacts of, you know, people in all of those different fields that, you know, I think it's worth a go to see if we can do it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you're filling a niche that really can benefit from somebody with your background and experience (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I hope so. It's different. There are a lot of these services where you can go online and hire an editor you have never seen before and whatever but that's not what we are talking about doing. In these cases, these are people we will know, we've vetted them, I can replicate somebody else, you know, a team of people who can run other projects the way I run them, and you, you know, you have the background and whatever to check the work. You know these are very, for the most part these are very, very senior people. I'm, you know, very experienced. You can look and see, did this editor do a good job, did this copy editor do a good job, are these pictures the best we can get? That kind of thing. There's nobody really kind of helping these people who need the services, so. Speaker 1: Okay. What have been some of the projects that you have worked on since? Speaker 2: Well I just finished doing, for Diverse, we did a supplement to Diverse: Issues in Higher Education and The Chronicle of Higher Education that is just coming out now. The, the date on the Diverse--it came out in February 28 and Diverse is coming out tomorrow in The Chronicle about diversity and inclusion--and it's, you know, about a fifty page supplement or so. And I--for that I hired like ten writers and the picture editor and worked with the art director at Diverse. But Diverse also had me edit a supplement for them on community colleges recently at the end of the year, and, you know, that involved a lot of people--six or seven reporters and whatever. The Chronicle was very impressed by the level of experienced people that I brought to the project for, for that supplement. So, those kinds of things and Diverse has been edi- has been editing and seeking out more s- like journals for clubs or associations or for specialty groups basically. And I expect to get more of that kind of work through them and basically con- convert--I'll run most of my work for them probably through this company eventually. Story_ID: 643875 Speaker 1: With EOE [Editorsoncall, LLC] I guess you're, you were coming along at a time when a lot of people have access to all the tools to write a book except the knowledge (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Except how to do it, right. Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) how to do it. You know, you get, you know, programs that'll typeset for you and layout-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: --and do everything but. Speaker 2: Yeah, and there's, you know, and there's an explosion in self-publishing. I'm editing two people right now that are planning to self-publish their books. And I think, you know, tho- and a lot of those people they need a lot of editing help on it, and sometimes they just need, you know, practical help or even just to know how to set up the manuscript itself to do it. And, you know, there are a lot of experts in self-publishing. I'm not necessarily an expert in all the business end of it but I know people who are. So, you know, I'm able to hook up people with other people that they need to. Speaker 1: Do you have a--what advice would you give someone that wanted to self-publish today? Speaker 2: Basically that they should go for it, make sure that's what they want to do, but to be forewarned it's hard work. And most of the work is actually promoting and selling that book after you have done it but also that, you know, they need to have good editors and good advice and good, you know, good book designers and whatever to help them work on it. A lot of people think that, you know, they can just do it no matter what their skills are but you do need to have skilled people advising you along the way, so. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean, have you ever thought about starting a newspaper, since you've? Speaker 2: No mostly because--you know, my husband [Michael I. Days] works in the newspaper industry. The, he's editor of the Philadelphia Daily News. This is not a good time to start a newspaper. The newspapers ha- that are in existence are having a hard time just to keep going and his paper has been sold a half a dozen times in the last you know, how ever many, half a dozen years or so and they are still trying to figure it out. So, you know, people know that they have to do more with the web, but you can't make money on the web yet, and nowhere near the kind of advertising dollars that you made in the newspapers. So I think you would be hard pressed to get a newspaper off the ground even a small one or a black newspaper or whatever and see it as viable. A website maybe but I'm not sure that that's what--it is not necessarily what I want to do. I don't want to necessarily put out a publication every day anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or every week or every month, so. Speaker 1: It seems, I don't know if it is just because of, I'm the age I am today or what but it seems to be a lot of people that I know that have, have some writing skills and editing skills that are available to do some of the work you do; people that were once working full time for these major papers (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Exactly, exactly. And they, you know, there is no downside for them, they--all they have is somebody else looking for work for them, you know, basically, and I think that's half the battle when you're a freelancer, just where am I going to find my next, you know, gig. But, you know, if we work together and people are on the lookout for, or maybe a writer has, you know, is working for somebody and that person needs a team of other people or needs an art director, or needs a whatever. That's how I get a lot of my work now; it's referrals. An art director that works with me some time will tell somebody, you know, that I'm available to edit, you know, a copy editor works for me that was my managing editor at BIBR. He works for some other publications. I've written for those publications. And a, you know, a lot of us have been hiring each other for a long time. I mentioned my friend [HistoryMaker] Yanick Rice-Lamb, that's about the third publication she had that I wrote for her for; she wrote for my publication. My friend Ingrid Sturgis just ran Savoy for a while and both of them, Yanick and Ingrid, were at BET [Black Entertainment Television] weekend. I wrote for them when they were at BET weekend, both of them have written for me. So there is a lot of that going on and I hope to see more of it, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Do--are, (background noise) are a lot of these contacts--were they made through NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] back in the day, I mean, of the people you met (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Most of them, either NABJ or, you know, Yanick and I know each other from The Times [The New York Times] but she and my husband knew each other when she was an intern in Rochester [New York] before I went there. Ingrid's husband worked at The Times and I got to know her through him but a lot of the others are either people that you know from NABJ or people that I happened to get contact with when I was at Black Issues Book Review or at the, at The Times, you know. We--I've hired lots and lots of freelancers over the years. Story_ID: 643876 Speaker 1: What advice would you give a young journalism student today, I guess? Speaker 2: The main thing for journalism students today is that they have to be much more versatile than, than we were. Most of them have to shoot their own pictures, shoot video, edit the video, you know, write the story, do the standup, it's a lot more complicated than it was. That's even for newspaper reporters, in addition to your newspaper report you have to do a blog and they want you to shoot some pictures sometime. So, you know, they have to be open to learning new things and having a lot of skillsets but also to figure out what they're, which one they are really good at or which ones they're really good at and try to specialize a little bit too, I think (simultaneous). Story_ID: 643877 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I, we didn't talk abou- about it much but, you know, I adopted four sons [Edward Days, Adrian Days, Andrew Days and Umi Days] twenty some years ago. And I'm very concerned about the fate of black boys and, you know, their statistics in this society is just really, really dismal in terms of education, in terms, you know, of people ending up in prison, in terms of just being there and becoming marriageable men. So I, you know, I think that's something we really have to pay attention to and particularly with the achievement gap, and that, you know, there's a theory that, or concern, that boys overall, even, you know, even white boys are falling behind in, academically, behind girls for a lot of reasons that have to do with changes in the economy and the, you know, schools kind of play to girls' strengths, and--you know, like sitting still and being quiet and being nice and whatever. You know, that's not necessarily something that comes easy for boys, and there, there are a lot of statistics that they're falling behind in general. Well our boys--the African American boys are really falling to the bottom in terms of finishing school an, you know, getting into colleges, getting, you know, getting even any decent job. If they get a record or whatever they can't even get a job for the most part. So I think that that's probably my biggest concern and the other is just education in general, the achievement gaps, the, you know, poor urban schools, that sort of thing. Story_ID: 643878 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point what do you consider to be, I guess, your major contributions in terms of journalism? Speaker 2: My major contribution I thi- I think now is ha- well, I, you know, a couple of things. There are some lasting legacies I think I left The Times, that I probably will never get credit for, but I pioneered ways to do, to like reintroduce tastings to the magazine. I basically suggested the idea that became the vows column. I was style editor at the time we decided to start running couples pictures and I believe maybe even gave pictures but that might have happened later. But, so I had to work out a lot of the details as to how that would look and how that--what that would be like, you know, to have couples in the society pages. I pioneered or created the model for a column that they did for a long time, I don't know if they still do it, dining with or lunching with whatever, some person. You know, what those stories should look like, or feel like, what kinds of things, you know, they should talk about, what kind of people they should look for. So, you know, some of those things, I think, are a lasting legacy and, you know, the number of people that I have brought into the business, helped to teach journalism to, to teach editing to, specifically. And people that I was able to basically launch their careers as a freelancer for The New York Times or as a writer for The New York Times; they even, I mean I hired people for the full time staff after that. And, you know, a lot of those people have gone on to do very well or have been able to parlay that into whole careers or whatever because, "I was published by The New York Times." So I think those things are important and more recently there this whole black book explosion would have never really gotten off the ground without something like Black Issues Book Review chronicling it all the time and, you know, to this day the archives of our stories are out there on the web, if, you know, in twenty/thirty years when somebody wants to know what this black literary renaissance was going to be about--a lot of those stories I will have written or I will have edited or created the idea for and caused them to be written and all that. And it'll give people a body of knowledge and research about what this was. And, you know, this was a time when black books have gone from like knowing we had three or four authors and we all read the same books and we could all discuss them at parties. Now it's hundreds of black authors out there that I don't even know, people, you know, starting out every day. And some of these people are mai- being published by mainstream people. The whole phenomenon of self-publishing, you know, a lot of that credit goes to black writers who had to do it for themselves (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that's true. Speaker 2: --and market the books, and w- you know, they created some of the models for this. People like Jerome Dickey [Eric Jerome Dickey] and Zane [Kristina Laferne Roberts] and all those people. So I think, you know, being able to give publicity to the whole book world and to leave a record of what they've done and even now I do, what I do for Diverse [Diverse: Issues in Higher Education] a lot of times is book coverage, I write about academic books. A lot of those books would never get written about; most people would never be interviewed by anybody else but us. So it, you know, it leaves a record, this book exists and maybe you should check it out, and whatever. Where I think otherwise they would just (audio disturbance) fall into a deep hole and nobody would be looking at them at all. Story_ID: 643879 Speaker 1: What would be, can you maybe name like three, I guess that you really were impressed with that came through, that you've reviewed? Speaker 2: Three books that I've reviewed? Speaker 1: Or, or, or that you saw come across it there during that period of time that-- Speaker 2: God. Speaker 1: --or a couple even, just, I just want an example of what we're talking about? Speaker 2: Most re- well this probably would not, would have done well no matter what but most recently I interviewed Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] on his--the reader that his publisher put out of a lot of his old stories and stuff. It's one, I've just done a story on a woman who--her name escapes me but a book about basically Koreans in America, Kore- it's meant to be a textbook for Korean studies. Nobody else would cover that book. And it, you know, there have been countless ones on the, on the achievement gap or, you know, I did one on something that was called what--I forget what the name of it--'What's Wrong with Boys' or 'Why are Boys Failing' or something like that. God there's so many--there have been so many. I reviewed the book about the Hairston family ['The Hairstons: An American Family in Black and White] for Black Issues Book Review years ago, and I was able to talk to the author [Henry Wiencek] and he was really kind of excited that I was from the Hairston clan myself. So the, that was one of my favorites and I did--oh the title escapes--oh I know it's a book about the secret codes in quilts. The book was called 'Hidden in Plain View' ['Hidden in Plain View: A Secret Story of Quilts and the Underground Railroad']. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And one of the author's name is Dobard [Raymond Dobard], his first name escapes me. He wrote it with another woman [Jacqueline Tobin]. That's something that people hadn't talked about much. It wasn't really known and it still was kind of controversial whether this really was true or was one of the valid systems or, or whatever. So I think, you know, stuff like that I find very, very interesting. I've interviewed Annette Gordon-Reed about her book about Jefferson ['Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy'] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that's really-- Speaker 2: --which is one of my favorite topics ever. I think I've read everything about Jefferson [President Thomas Jefferson] and everything about Jefferson and Sally Hemings that I could put my hands on so far. As it turns out one of my family lines I don't think my direct line has somebody in it that was at, at Monticello [Charlottesville, Virginia]. And, you know, his- I particularly like history; I've done a lot, lot, lot of history. I've done a lot of education policy those kind of things, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I've done other quilting books too, I think that, that's interesting. Story_ID: 643880 Speaker 1: If you could go back and change something or make something different in your life what would it, what would it be; or is there anything? Speaker 2: What would it be? I don't know. I, I've reached the point where I have a whole philosophy that, there are many junctures in my life where I've wished something had gone differently, or where I wished I had gotten that job, or maybe I shouldn't have gone there, but if any of those things had happened, I wouldn't have landed where I am now and by that I mean, you know, I probably wouldn't have had the same husband, I wouldn't have the children, I wouldn't be in this house, I wouldn't be doing something I really liked now. I wouldn't be able to, to have the freedom of working from home or whatever. There were times when I nearly got a job in television, nearly got a job at The Washington Post. I did, you know, I probably could have left The Times [The New York Times] to go do X or go teach or something, I didn't do those things at the time, that maybe if I'd gotten all the things I wanted at the time I would want them I would have really messed up my life, that's (laughter) that's how I feel about it now. You know, 'cause, basically I've, you know, I've had a really good life, a good career. I have, you know, a great husband [Michael I. Days], I have had challenging children. My, you know, my adoptees [Edward Days, Adrian Days, Andrew Days and Umi Days] have been a challenge but. Story_ID: 643881 Speaker 1: Tell us more about that--your adoptees. Speaker 2: I--well, twenty some years ago we, you know, realized we could not have children. And we started trying to--well we didn't do anything about it at first I think. And, at, then at a certain point we tried in vitro and hated it and it was not successful and we said we'd give ourselves a year, decide whether we wanted to do it again and we never wanted to do it again. So one day o- one holiday over Christmas we were talking about children and my husband said, you know, "Well maybe you should call, you know, the adoption agencies and let's start, you know, talking about it." So like the first working day after Christmas one year I t- called the agency here, it's called DVD, no not DVD, chil- whatever it is; the children's welfare agency here. And we started working with them and took the training, took, did all the applications, went through all the physicals, went to all the interviewing. You know, we actually had, had classes and we got through the whole process, got approved to be adoptive parents and we had said we wanted one toddler boy, you know, slightly over babyhood, not too old. After we got approved, got a letter saying that basically we are on the waiting list to get a child, we started getting invitations to some of those adoption match parties. And we went to one and my hu- I remember my husband saying it, "Now, you know, Angela [HistoryMaker Angela Dodson], basically, you know, you can't take home all the children." Yes, unh-uh. So we went to this, this party and for--it was Halloween and we were supposed to wear like a costume or something and as soon as we got into the door one of the couples that we had taken our classes with said, who knew that we wanted a boy, said, "Did you see that cute little family of four boys [Edward Days, Adrian Days, Andrew Days and Umi Days] over there?" We said, "No and I don't want to see them." (Laughter) So we looked around and went the other way and talked to some other people but we ended up back talking to them and their social workers and the social worker is really high on them, "This one is a straight A student and they were such a little team of people and, you know, they were taking care of one another," all that. So my husband couldn't snatch me out of there fast enough. So you know, we left and the same day we're driving around in the car, you know how newspapers have those cute little children in there, the waiting child or Thursday's child or whatever they call them, kids that are waiting for adoption. Those four boys were in our newspaper that morning and they don't even live here, they didn't live here. So we talked about it like over the weekend. Michael [Michael I. Days] would periodically say, "You're nuts, we can't do this," blah, blah, blah. So then he, by Sunday night he said, "Well I guess it wouldn't hurt if we called the people Monday and let's see if we can find out more about them," or whatever. It took us two months to basically get them to find the kids and meet with us--you know, let us meet with them and see what was going on. And a couple of social workers even came out to try and talk us out of it. Anyway, they finally let us visit them and they started letting them visit us and we visited a couple of times and their siblings are about a year apart except the older one. They were four, five, six and nine when they moved here. We spent maybe most of a spring visiting back and forth--the agency is called DYFS, Division of Youth and Family Services [New Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services; New Jersey Department of Children and Families Child Protection and Permanency], said that we could have them when the school year was out. So, you know we went from no children to four children, they came marching in here the day after school was out with two social workers and some paperwork; and then we, you know, we just, we got through it. Story_ID: 643882 Speaker 1: They, turns out, you know, two of them have special needs. My youngest [Umi Days] is autistic, one of the other ones [Andrew Days] as it turned out had really severe mental issues from the time he was seven and he's, he's really had to live at a institution for, and it was really heart breaking to have to, have to do that. But to be able to keep the other three intact, and, you know, basically they told us that we didn't have any options and he would probably end up spending the rest of his life in some kind of institution, we didn't believe it at the time, but it's true. We have him for weekends, we have him for holidays, you know, he is still our child and he was just home like last weekend or something. And, you know, he is just a beautiful, attractive child, and he, and it's really sad, you know, to see that. And, you know, the other two children are normal, fine. My eldest [Edward Days] has been married for ten years, has three children. Just had a new baby this spring, or, I mean, almost a year ago now, and the, the second eldest [Adrian Days] went to Marshall [Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia] for like a hot minute and ran away from college and then disappeared. He comes back in and out of our lives. He now lives here again and he is kind of trying to still find himself. But, you know, this was after we gave him the very expensive private school education and stuff. So I, you know, they've been a lot of trouble at times, but it's been a really joyful experience. Just, you know, the things that they've brought us; I got an award about a year ago for Mother's Day from one of these local clubs, made me one of their mothers of the year, and my eldest--my husband [Michael I. Days] had already given remarks and I'd given remarks and they, the club allows other people in your community to come up and say something about you or give you flowers or whatever. So he was in--my eldest son in line to give remarks--he gave like a five minute speech about how--you know, what we had saved him from basically. All the negative statistics about young black men, et cetera. and his theme was like, one man can change a statistic and he talked about now he is able to be a husband and a father, and, you know, a worker because of what we did for him. By the time that child finished, four hundred in this ballroom were boohooing. I looked up and my priest was crying. I said, what can you tell a priest that would make him cry (laughter)? He has seen everything, heard everything. People still stop me on the street and say, "Is that your son? He was just wonderful." He did it like a Baptist minister he took a theme, he explained the theme, he came back to it and he was just really good. I'm standing there behind him with my mouth like (demonstrates) whatever. As a child he was one of the most difficult, after he got here and realized that we really had this then he had his acting out period for about three or four years and we always say, well who'd have thought he would become the model child but he really has, in a lot of ways. And he is, you know, very admired in the community has a great wife [Tracy Days], wonderful children, so and he's started--he is preaching now, so. He went to a Pentecostal church, so, we're Catholic and we raised him Catholic but he is in a church three or four times a week, that's good, so. Speaker 2: Okay, it took a lot of courage to do that, I might say. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Seeing, you know, seeing, I just know, it would take a lot of courage for anybody to do that. Speaker 1: It is. And, the other thing my, my eldest did, one of my reporter friends interviewed my eldest for a story that went national, I think. It was on the AP [Associated Press] or Black Ameriweb [Black America Web] or something--interviewed him about adoption and he said--he was talking about how his parents had hung in there with him, he said, "Heck there were times when I would have thrown me out." (Laughter) So, you know, he said, "But my parents never did, they just, they stuck in there with me," so. Story_ID: 643883 Speaker 1: Do you have any advice for black people that--have considered adoption? Speaker 2: I think everybody who can, should consider it, should try it. We have personally caused about thirty adoptions, you know. Journalist friends of ours, people tell us, "After you all took four [Edward Days, Adrian Days, Andrew Days and Umi Days], I decided I guess I could take one." So, you know, and it was like a stream of adoptions over the next five or six years. I even have some friends who had, have, other friends who have multiple adoptions. So I think, you know, it's something that particularly we as a black community should consider more, because, you know, one of the things that we said to each other at the time was--well if not us who is going to do it. Because, you know, few other people would have the resources--we had, you know, we already had this huge house and if you can do it and you have the resources it's something you should consider because there are so many kids in foster care who are in really dire straits. And what we were told at the time is that boys are the ones that are least likely to be adopted which is one reason why, you know, we stuck to our guns that we wante- wanted boys, so our communities need to step up. Story_ID: 643884 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't know. Let me see. Something occurred to me when you said that and I can't think of what it was. I don't know. (Pause) I don't, you didn't ask me about my sib- much about my siblings. Speaker 1: Oh, what--what are they doing? Speaker 2: My brother is a, a minister who is in charge of community development work for his church in Columbus, Ohio and is really into his church work but he's, like, rebuilt huge sections of Columbus with affordable housing and low income housing. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: William A. Dodson, Jr. [William Dodson, Jr.] and he is really into basically evangelical circles. Andrae Crouch introduced him and his wife [Judythe Dodson] and Andrae was the godfather of my nephew [Daymon Dodson] who died at the age of twenty-nine a few years ago. My sister basically has been a homemaker; seamstress and has two daughters [Yvette Lane Harris and Renita Lane] and lots of grandchildren and great-grandchildren now. But she came to live with me while, when I was raising my children [Edward Days, Adrian Days, Andrew Days and Umi Days] and she basically helped me run the household and did, you know, did most of the cooking and laundry and everything. Stayed for about eight years and then she went back when her great-grandchildren were coming along, I think. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And her name is Geravia, it's actually Emilie Geravia Wright [Emilie Cook Wright], so. Story_ID: 643885 Speaker 1: All right. Anything else before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I, I've put on my glasses, I didn't have my glasses on before (laughter). No. Was it off when we were talking about the siblings? Speaker 1: No it was on. Speaker 2: Oh okay. No I think that's it; I don't think there is anything else. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well the last question is similar to a legacy question, I guess-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but a little different. Ma'am how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How I would like to be remembered? Oh, I would like to be remembered I guess as somebody who tried to make a difference in people's lives. Not just my children, not just my family, but other, the community at large, particularly other people in my field and people that I work with at church and through my radio program, 'Black Catholics YES!.' Just a s- there is a song that is sung at nearly every funeral in my family and it's 'If I Can Help Somebody,' and I think that's a good model for life. That we, we are here only for a while and we should be trying to spread whatever good we have with whatever we have to work with. And, you know, I th- I believe that, you know, God gives each of us certain gifts and whatever and I always say that He only gave me one. He gave me the ability to write, or communicate, or speak but they are all basically the same. He didn't make me a gifted singer or dancer or artist or any of those things. So, you know, although I can dabble in some of those but I think, you know, the measure of your life is how you've used your gifts. One of my clients is a evangelist, or actually his specialty is speaking about leadership, his name is Dr. Myles Munroe out of the Bahamas. He works for Bahamas faith ministry [Bahamas Faith Ministries International, Nassau, Bahamas] and he talks a lot about serving your gift, that whatever gift you are giving you have to keep serving it and giving it to the world. It comes from Jesus' saying that you have to be--if you want to be first you have to be a slave first and a slave to other people, to service. So, I tol- after I had worked with Dr. Munroe on one book and I said, you know, people keep asking me now to write things like for church, for my sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] or for this or that, sometimes for free, and I always say they better be glad they talked to me after I worked with Myles Munroe because I just say serve, serve your gift; they are asking for your gift, it's your--so. So I think, you know, that's one of the things that I'd like to be known for that, that I used my gifts, so. To the, to the best advantage and to help other people and to serve other people, so. Speaker 1: Okay. Well thank you very much. Story_ID: 643886 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead and tell us about this please. Speaker 2: Okay. That picture is my brother on the left, William A. Dodson, Jr. [William Dodson, Jr.], my sister Emilie Geravia Wright [Emilie Cook Wright], and me at a reunion in New Castle, Pennsylvania, basically a reunion for people who used to live there and it was taken probably around 2005, maybe. Go ahead? Speaker 1: That's me for my senior class picture at East Bank High School [East Bank Middle School, East Bank, West Virginia]. Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, you can do them as soon as I put them up. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a group of students and faculty for the editing program of the Maynard Institute for Journalism Education [Robert C. Maynard Institute for Journalism Education]. That's me in the white slacks and red in the center and there are a number of other people in there who are probably well known, famous editors now. Speaker 2: That's me receiving an award at Marshall University [Huntington, West Virginia] I believe from the black alumni in the 1980s. Attorney William Red [ph.] is on the left and his wife, Marie Red [ph.] is next to him; he was one of my best friends in college. Speaker 1: That's me at one of the first tapings I did for my radio show 'Black Catholics YES!' which is heard on WIMG [WIMG Radio, Trenton, New Jersey], we used to tape there, we no longer do. Speaker 2: That's me in my dorm room at Marshall University probably freshman year, maybe not. Speaker 1: That's me taken at a retreat that I go to with some women at Cape May, New Jersey every year, a bunch of journalists, and it was a group that was started by Brenda Box, who just passed. Speaker 2: That's me taken at Marshall in what was my Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority uniform and I think we did a power fist for the group picture that we took together. On the left is Linda Waller, now Linda Waller Shockley of the Dow Jones fund [Dow Jones News Fund], Vanessa Williams who was NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] president and editor at Washington Post [The Washington Post], [HistoryMaker] Wayne Dawkins who wrote the history of NABJ and me on the right. Speaker 1: That's me on the left and Betty Anne Williams formerly of the AP [Associated Press] formerly of USA Today and the Joint Center for Political Studies [Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.] we--it was taken about 1975-ish. Speaker 2: That's my photo taken the night of my high school graduation 1969, East Bank High with my National Honor Society pennant on. Speaker 1: That was a going away luncheon for me when I was leaving The Huntington Advertiser and going to Gannett News Service [Gannett Company, Inc.] with members of our staff and it was sponsored by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in August of 1974. My husband, Michael [Michael I. Days] on the left and my youngest son Umi Days in the middle and me on the right. Speaker 2: My father William A. Dodson, Sr. [William Dodson, Sr.] taken during World War II [WWII] while he was on post somewhere with the [U.S.] Navy. On the far left is my father throwing a punch at someone I do not know. He was in Golden Gloves boxing and I believe he might have done more boxing during the Navy and it was probably taken in the late '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: That's me with my four sons, I'm not sure what year that was that's not the one I think it is, maybe in, oh, around 1998 or so. Speaker 2: That's my great-grandfather, Obediah Dodson, taken in Charleston, West Virginia, I think he died in the '40s [1940s], late '40s [1940s], so I don't, before then. Speaker 1: That is my great-grandfather's brother John Lewis Dodson [John Dodson], I don't know when it was taken and I did not know him so, but I know his descendants. Speaker 2: This is my great-grandfather's sister [sic. daughter], Sally, Sally Hairston [Sally Dodson Hairston]. Speaker 1: That is I believe their mother, no, I believe that's the woman they called Masally [ph.], who is a mother to my great-grandfather and his siblings. Speaker 2: I'm not sure who that is. I'm not sure who that is, that's a Dodson but I don't know. Somebody told me and I don't remember the name, he's not one of my direct descendants, I mean not one of my direct ancestors that I recall, I believe. Speaker 1: That is a picture taken of my mother's family, the Walthalls. My grandmother Lilly Oda Walthall [Lilly Waller Walthall] is to the left, next to her is my mother, next to her is my mother's sister Anne [Anne Walthall], I don't know the lady in the middle, the next one the heavyset woman is my aunt, Ida Mae [Ida Mae Walthall Towns], mother's sister--eldest sister, her husband C.T. [Cleophilis Towns], my father on the far right, William A. Dodson, Sr. behind him is my mother's brother, who's called Robert Junior Walthall [Robert Walthall], his actual middle name is Junior, his wife at the time Peaches [ph.], I don't know the gentleman next to her but that's my Aunt Louise [Louise Walthall O'Kelly], mother's other sister in the middle, like. I'm not sure who any of the other people are, we believe it's a funeral for one of my grandmother's husbands--she was married four times--in the late '40s [1940s], before my birth but after my parents' wedding, so. Speaker 2: This is a picture that my mother had taken, it's five generations of women in that photo. My grandmother Lilly Oda Waller Walthall, in the center my sister on the left Emilie Geravia Wright, my mother Kira Evelyn Dodson [Kira Walthall Dodson] on the--did I say Emilie on the right, Emilie on the left, Kira Evelyn Dodson on the right, one of the babies, that's my niece Yvette [Yvette Lane Harris] on the right and my Aunt Anne, mother's sister, there, and I believe that is Yvette's child, maybe Anthony [ph.]. Speaker 1: And that, oh, that was taken at New Castle, Pennsylvania too. This one is my mother on the back left, my sister Emilie Geravia on the right, my brother Bill on the left in front and me in front. I believe there is a cousin kind of half seen off to the left. Speaker 2: This was taken in West Virginia in the middle--mid-'50s [1950s], it's Stotesbury, West Virginia. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me taken in Greenwood Park [Greenwood Cemetery] in New Castle, Pennsylvania, some man came around with the horse and took photos and then sold them to your parents. I'm probably about five. Speaker 2: This is my brother and me, taken at a Dodson family reunion I believe in Charleston in 1959, August 1959. Speaker 1: That's me taken one Easter weekend, probably Easter Sunday in Wayne, West Virginia at the home of my great uncle, W.H. Waller [William Waller], the Reverend W.H. Waller. And it--I'm about eight years old there. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken of me in, for my third grade class picture in New Castle, Pennsylvania. The ironic thing about this photo is I was hit by a car later that day, but I was not seriously hurt. Speaker 1: This is a group shot of my wedding on the far right, I can't tell who that is, I believe on the far right is Merv Aubespin [Mervin Aubespin] a friend of ours. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You mean over here? Speaker 1: On the far left, rather, I'm sorry, I believe it is Merv Aubespin and my sister-in-law Vera [Vera Days], the best man was Walter Middlebrook [ph.], I guess. My mother-in-law, Helen B. Days, my husband, me, my dad William A. Dodson, Sr., my nephew Daymon William Dodson and my mother Kira Evelyn Dodson and Betty Anne Williams on the far right. Speaker 2: That's me, my husband, I'm not sure I recall what the occasion was--I believe it's at a banquet of the Philadelphia Association of Black Journalists and I believe he was getting an award probably taken about four years ago. Story_ID: 643887 Speaker 1: That's me as an intern at The Charleston Gazette [The Charleston Gazette-Mail], I was asked to pose for an ad of subscription sales, and that was the summer of 1970--summer of 1972, taken at the newspaper. Speaker 2: That's a photo of me taken in college at Marshall [Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia] by a friend I believe and I don't know what the occasion was. I think he was just a photographer standing outside the door. Speaker 1: That's me, when I was a reporter I did a story about the use of bio feedback to control migraines, I actually went through the program and the sto- actually I didn't write the story. The story was written by I believe Strat Dalfett [ph.] of the AP [Associated Press], maybe I did write a story and that's a machine that--it's basically the same machine you use as a lie detector but it detects your pulse rates and stuff. Speaker 2: On the left is Eugene Gribbroek who was the news editor for Gannett News Service [Gannett Company, Inc.], me, and the right is John Curley who was then the Washington [D.C.] bureau chief and later head of Gannett, CEO of Gannett Newspapers, Inc. Speaker 1: My grandmother Lucy Pearl Basham Dodson [Lucy Basham Dodson], it would have been taken probably in the late '40s [1940s]. She, she died in '51 [1951]. I'm named for her. Speaker 2: This was the article in the paper about the children that I eventually adopted. That was taken about, that's like 1990 or something. Speaker 1: This is my father's family and on the far left is his brother Obediah Dodson, his sister Zettie [Zettie Dodson Gunn], his sister Maxine [Maxine Dodson Moore], my father's father John Wannamaker Dodson [John Dodson], my father's brother Tim Dodson [Timothy Dodson], my father on the far right William A. Sr. [William Dodson, Sr.], my father's sister Venesee [Johnnie Venesee Dodson Hill] also known as Tenny on the front seat left probably with one of her children, Anita Gayle [Anita Hill Jones] is the girl. Speaker 2: My grandmother Lucy Pearl Dodson, the boy is probably Venesee's child William Matthew Ross [William Ross], I think was his name; C.C. Dodson [Calvin Dodson], one of my father's younger brothers, oh, and my father's sister Betty Jane [Betty Dodson Hill] on the far right. Speaker 1: This was me take when I was ten years old, the occasion was the fiftieth anniversary of the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] and I was one of the Girl Scouts of the year for the county. There is a newspaper shot with me with two other girls. Speaker 2: My brother William A. Dodson, Jr. [William Dodson, Jr.] on the left, me in the center, my sister Emilie Geravia Wright [Emilie Cook Wright] on the far right and I think it was taken when I was about five it appears so it may- 1956 or so. Speaker 1: My parents, my mother Kira Evelyn Walthall Dodson [Kira Walthall Dodson], my father William A. Dodson probably taken the same time the other one, from 1955 or so, or '56 [1956]. Speaker 2: This is me in the Pass it Down cookbook ['America I AM Pass It Down Cookbook'] by SmileyBooks, came out last year. I have two recipes in the book and this is one of them for hoppin' john. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, could I see your mother again? Speaker 2: Um-hm. My mother, Kira Evelyn Dodson. Speaker 1: This is my husband and I, I believe it was taken at the Pulitzer party when his paper [Philadelphia Daily News] won a Pulitzer a couple of years ago for a series on police corruption. Speaker 2: This is my husband on a cruise aboard the Cunard Countess in 1989, it was a family reunion for his family, the Days, and Days-Bolls [ph.]. Speaker 1: A wedding photo for my oldest son Edward [Edward Days], in it are from left in the rear, my brother William, my sister-in-law Judy Dodson [Judythe Dodson], my nephew Daymon Dodson, a couple of people I cannot see, my son is toward the center there with the flower, his wife Tracy [Tracy Days] is next to him, my husband's to the right of my son, our friend Ed Lake [ph.] behind him, my son Umi Days, the blonde is our friend, Marge Lewis [ph.], my bro- my husband's best friend Alfredo Lewis [ph.] on the far right, I think my son Andrew [Andrew Days] might be behind Marge and on the front row is my sister, Emilie and behind her must be my sister-in-law Vera [Vera Days], my mother-in-law Helen B. Days is in the center and I'm on the left. Speaker 2: This is my family it's a portrait we had taken on the day that the children were legally adopted. On the left is my son Adrian [Adrian Days], in front of him is Umi, me on the left in the red, my mother-in-law in the blue in the center Andrew on the right and Edward to the far right of him, my sister-in-law Vera in the gold and my husband Michael [Michael I. Days] up to and we have a portrait painted from this picture. Speaker 1: Me on the left, my grandson Marcel [Marcel Days] in my lap, my husband Michael on the right and our granddaughter Makayla [Makayla Days] on the left and it must be about, oh, let me see, I'd say it was taken about four years ago so maybe what, 2009, 2008, somewhere in there. Speaker 2: This is our wedding, that's Michael on the left and me on the right. Some of our newspaper colleagues are behind us and the minister's name is Reverend Ockard [ph.], I can't remember his first name now, right this minute. Speaker 1: That picture taken of me when I was about thirty it was taken just before I got married, maybe I was just engaged so it would have been 1981-ish. Speaker 2: Here you are at a youthful sixty (laughter). Speaker 1: I think that's the same as that, that, one of those other pictures, I'm about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Oh, it's just blown up? Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm about eight there, a third grade picture, the same one. Speaker 2: That's a (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's one of me at sixty. Speaker 2: --that commemorates your sixtieth birthday. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. There is a picture of me at the sixtieth birthday party in there. Oh, you'd like, yeah, that's a great picture. Speaker 2: Going to try to hold-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which one do you want? Speaker 2: This one. Speaker 1: Oh, you want that one? I thought you were talk-- Speaker 2: Actually this one. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That was the same day as your (unclear). Speaker 1: That's the other, yeah Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): They're in the same place. Speaker 1: This was a holiday dinner, it looks like--is that a turkey? Looks like Thanksgiving. I believe the first year the boys came here. It looks like that, 1991 or 1992-ish maybe, somewhere in there. And it's my son Adrian on the left, my sister-in-law Vera, me in the center, that's Edward behind us at the buffet, my mother-in-law Helen B. Days, and Umi is in the blue on the right; and it's taken here at the house in the dining room. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, do you still want to do that one? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): We already got a picture of that same day. Speaker 1: We did. This was taken the same day as the group picture of the family. It's just, we took take outs with me and Michael and whatever. Speaker 2: Okay. That's it...