 Story_ID: 61128 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And you said these were approximately '67 [1967], '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: That's when I saw it for it-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --the first time I saw it. I, I'm, I'm very--because see all this con--see, there was a lot of controversy associated with all this mess. And so, so there was a big discussion as to whether they, they should even include that in there, you know, in that, because they said, (unclear) (the display?) of black astronauts is really what it is. And this is just a part of a larger display with Guion Bluford [HM] and Fred Gregory and, and the cat that got killed, McNair [Ronald E. McNair]. And, you know, and, and it was a tribute to the, to the black astronauts. So this--it's on the second floor of the Space Museum. And then they, surprisingly, some, somebody in NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], because it's a NASA display, so somebody, (laughter) some benevolent person decided, say (unclear) wait, I mean, you want to put Dwight (unclear), give him a tribute or something. So, so, so that's what they did. So. Speaker 1: Okay, Scott, you got it. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yep, next, please. Speaker 1: So I'm supposed to be describing these things. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): We, you know, you--we just grab a still from the videotape and, and we use what you tell us to create a text caption. So, who, what, when and where is fine. Speaker 2: Oh, I see. Speaker 1: We're doing this first because (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, this one's, you know, this is in a studio. That's a studio shot, and it's a studio. That's that piece I did of Miles Davis, shortly after he died. He--I did, I took about three months to do this piece. It takes about a year to do something like this, but I was very excited and did it in about three months. But that's me, and it looks like a studio shot to me. You know, I thought maybe it was in a gallery, but I don't see any other art there along with it. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And what--I don't remember what year he died. I know it wasn't that long ago. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Ninety two [1992] or so, '91 [1991] or '92 [1992]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next photo, please. Speaker 1: Oh, that was a--. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a posed shot for a poster for U.S. West Corporation, and they were going around doing stuff for their headquarters, you know, and they took a bunch of artists and they took musicians, artists, people who did things in, in the city here and made posters out of 'em. And that was, it's on the front wall in there (chuckle). It's the one they did, that's the poster they did of me working. They wanted a lot of junk around it (laughter). So that, I gave 'em a lot of junk. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): It's great. Year? Speaker 2: Oh, it's got to be seven [or eight?] years ago, so what, what--1995 maybe. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photo. Speaker 2: Now, where'd you get that picture and why is it there? Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Where'd you get that picture and why is it there? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): For the chronology, that's all. Speaker 2: No, but where'd you get it from? ( OFF-CAMERA VOICE 2): In the office of (unclear). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, it's, that's my wife, Barbara, and I don't know, haven't any idea when it was taken or anything about it. I don't even know how it got there (laughter), but it's okay. Speaker 2: That's a posed shot--. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: Yeah, that's just a posed shot that--somebody decided that I needed some PR [public relations] shots and, and that was taken in my studio back in, oh, my God, that's twenty years ago, man. I had hair (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I've seen you before. That's why I chose it. That's the only reason why I chose it because I've seen it before. Speaker 2: I see (laughter). Yeah, (unclear) there's years, as the years and the years, and you know, these little dinky brochures. Speaker 1: And this is Ed Dwight (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, here's--this is one of the PR shots that the Pentagon did when I was, I was out raising hell about, because, you know, the White House stuck me in this program, and, and, you know, and what they needed was--it was real bizarre, it turns out the U.S.I.A. [United States Information Agency] and they were still looking for, for space tracking stations. And they took this picture and a few more, and they took this picture to these villages in, in New Guinea and Africa and as a PR shot, that this astronaut guy was gonna be flying over their, over their (chuckle) islands, and so they took this shot. You know, so they gave me a bunch of them. This, this was left over from U.S.I.A. And so they just gave me--I was complaining because I was getting, you know, five or six hundred things a day for autographs. And so, and so they sent me about twenty cases of, of these, of these pictures here. So that was, that was in--that was in 1963. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is--the Congressional Black Caucus had commissioned me to do a sculpture for Nelson Mandela as a--in one of the other shots, there's a picture of the sculpture some place--. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DICUSSION): Speaker 2: --and, and this is at the Library of Congress, Kwasi (ph.) Mfume was the Master of Ceremonies there, and anyway, we were just taking a whole bunch PR shots cause this is, this was after the, the sculpture had been presented to him. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) What year? Speaker 2: Oh, about 1997, I would say, somewhere thereabouts. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: He needs to identify the people in this photo, and they're all famous people, need to be identified. Speaker 2: Cause I don't any of 'em. The only one that I know is--. Speaker 1: Kwasi (ph.). Speaker 2: --is (unclear)and Kwasi Mfume. Speaker 1: Nelson Mandela. Speaker 2: And there's [Congressman] Bobby Rush [HM], looking--there's Bobby Rush's head between me and Nelson Mandela. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, there's Bobby Rush. Speaker 2: Right. And the rest of those people, I don't know who they are. Speaker 1: Okay, I can tell you who they are. That's Nelson Mandela, Bobby Rush--. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Kwasi Mfume, right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That's fine. Go ahead. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the unveiling of a sculpture I did, and it was, it was--you know, when they got voting rights down in South Africa, and there's a bunch of hands with ballots. And it's kind of a crescendo of hands with ballots, going into a ballot box. So he was very, very pleased it. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photo, please. Speaker 1: That's the Mother of Africa sculpture. That's, it's in the National Shrine in Washington, D.C. And I can't remember whether we were installing it or--but anyway, this is, oh, in, maybe 1998, thereabouts. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next photo. Speaker 1: Carson, he was the one that, that kind of sponsored me and took my name to Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy]. And once--well, actually, what, what he had done, he taken my name to Kennedy before they ever did the--they ran that computer on to find, find, you know, a group of black astronauts. This is 1963 in Washington, D.C. in front of the Senate office building. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's my mom [Georgia Baker Dwight], and I--what year this is taken? I don't know. It's probably taken 1960s, I guess, thereabouts, cause they were taking a lot of photographs of them around the time I was involved in the space program. So I think that's probably why that came about. So I would say '64 [1964], '65 [1965], thereabouts. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great, next photo, please. Speaker 1: That's my mom [Georgia Baker Dwight] and dad [Ed Dwight], getting raided by the reporters (laughter). That's what that's all about. The staged, set up press conference in their house where they're--and they're posing like (chuckle). Speaker 2: They're literally being imposed upon. Speaker 1: Yeah, they're very imposed upon, you know (laughter). And, God, this is back in '63 [1963], again. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Story_ID: 61129 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: That's my dad [Ed Dwight], and this has got to be, this has got to be back in the '50's [1950s], man. This is before I left home because he took these shots for, for some kind of PR [public relations]. That's for the--that's about fifty--about '52 [1952], '53 [1953] thereabouts, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the Kinzie and Morris baseball team back in 1936, and this is my dad in the, in the lower, right-hand corner, sitting down. He played second base and center field for the Monarchs. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: I guess that's me probably in 1934 (laughter), me and my moms. How many months old are you when you can, when you can do this (laughter)? Speaker 1: Motor development. Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's motor development, so it's got to be, it's got to be '34 [1934]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my sister. Her name, her, her nun name was Sister Martin Mary. Her, her real name was Theresa. And we're on, we're on the traveling circuit together. We made speeches together, and we traveled all over the country making speeches and stuff. She's holding a picture of me and, and just another PR shot, staged PR shot. And this has got to be in sixty--see, cause I--it's, this is about 1964, probably. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is, this is while I was in training actually. This, so I went there in--this is 1963. This is while I was in training, and this PR stuff, posed PR stuff. He didn't like airplanes at all, but (laughter) (the hell?) he played like he did (laughter). (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Before I was rolling, you said it was your son. If you could just say that on tape. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's my son, that's my son, Eddie the third. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. I'm sorry, go ahead, start again, I hit the tape (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, this is, yeah, Bishop Ward High School in Kansas City, Kansas, and I played right halfback, and this is 1951, my senior year. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: See, this was on the cover of "Sepia Magazine". It was a whole bunch of, mostly European magazines that looked for the cover stories, but this was back in 1963 when this whole thing kind of blew up and it was announced and stuff. So there was just thousands of these pictures floating all around the universe, the cover of "JET" and other--. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: So this is April, I had, I got--this is April of 1963 (laughter), cover of "JET Magazine" after "Ebony" ratted me out--no, no, no, this is before "Ebony" ratted me out, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next, please. Speaker 2: This is me and my, and my then wife, Sue, and, and our two kids, Eddie, who is my son back there, and Tina, my daughter. And this is--this had to be in 1963 because somebody just goosed me or something, but that's okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Just a posed picture with a model of the Black Patriots Memorial and (unclear) this was done probably for--about 1998, I'd say. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead with the description. Yeah, yeah, this is at a veterans benefit, I mean a, a veterans hearing in the House chambers. And Clinton [President William Jefferson Clinton] came in and made a speech to the, to the, to the black veterans, Tuskegee (unclear) cause it was during Black History Month. And it's Ray Smith, the gent to, to the left of me there. And, and we, we were presenting one of the patriot sculptures to the president. And--. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): He looks so young. That's got to be like right after he got in office, like '93 [1993]. Speaker 2: No, no, not really. This is late, and this is in his second term. Yep, um-hum. See, cause, Wayne didn't take as president, see, of the memorial fund until, till, until the second. Clinton [President William Jefferson Clinton] promised a whole bunch of stuff that he didn't deliver, and that's what was interesting about it. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): It must just be the way the photo turned out. He just looks so young there. Okay, what else do you want to shoot on here, Larry? Speaker 2: I wanted to shoot this one. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is--we made a presentation to the, to the Senate. It was open to all senators in the senate office building. And--do me a favor, run back here and tell him to turn that compressor off and leave it off. It's 5:00 o'clock, and tell him to get out of here (laughter). Are you reading the audio okay? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, we got audio on. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, this is actually our first presentation to the Senate. And this is in the Senate office building, and, and the senators were free to come in and, and look at the model and all that kind of stuff cause they had to vote on it. They had to vote on, on the extension of our, of the, of the memorial so we could keep the land until we raised the money. And Newt was the first one to show up and the last one to leave. And, of course, Bob Dole in one of the other pictures gave us a big chunk of money. He's presenting us with a check down there. But, but Newt got up and made a wonderful speech. He spoke for almost a half hour, and he knew all, all the black soldiers by name and all that kind of stuff, you know. And, of course, the guy used to be a history professor (laughter). And so, so everybody expected him to, you know, with, with his reputation, but he was very helpful to us. Story_ID: 61130 Speaker 1: Well, I'm Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our vidographer is Scott Stearns. And, sir, I, I want you to state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yeah, Ed Dwight, and the last night is spelled D-W-I-G-H-T. Speaker 1: All right. And when were you born and where? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty three [1933] in Kansas City, Kansas. Speaker 1: What's your birth date? Speaker 2: September, September 9, 1933. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And what's today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? I think it's June 19 (laughter), but I don't--don't nail me on that one, buddy (laughter), 2002 (laughter). Speaker 1: That's right. And where are we? Speaker 2: Yeah, we're in, in my, in my studio in Denver, Colorado, 3824 Dallier Street in Denver, Colorado. Speaker 1: And what's your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a sculptor. Story_ID: 61131 Speaker 1: Alright, there are five "People Magazine"-ish type questions I ask in the beginning, and just bear with me a minute. The first one is, what's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food? Well, you know, I like any kind of fish, you know, like seafood. I mean I'm a seafood nut, shrimp and (unclear) all kinds--and all that kind of--any kind of seafood, you know, raw--sushi and all that kind of stuff. But I'm a seafood freak. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I wear black all the time. I don't know. I used to say blue and brown, but I wear black all the time, and everywhere I got, I wear, (laughter) wear black. So I guess black is my new, my new favorite color (laughter). Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Oh, man, you know, when it's--it just kind of just passed, springtime, you know, cause, you know, Denver, Colorado it's cold here all the time, you know, I mean in the winter. And so, having that emerg-emerging where you can, you know, wear t-shirts and stuff. And so I like spring, even more than summer. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yeah, Tahiti. I've been there twenty times, so every chance I get, I go to Tahiti (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not really--I don't, I, I guess I don't. I don't know. No. I never thought--no, I guess I don't. Story_ID: 61132 Speaker 1: Okay, it's all right. Okay, now, you were born in Kansas City, Kansas? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-three [1933]. Can you tell us about your mother? Can you give us her name and spell it for us and tell us something about her? Speaker 2: Yeah, her maiden name was Georgia Baker. She was originally from Iowa, and she grew up Catholic and, and she grew up in a family, they, they didn't know they were black (chuckle). They were all white-looking, and we've trace--we've traced it, and there were some, some Indian and African American in there, in the mix there, you know. But they grew up in a, in the Catholic schools and, and, you know, some of 'em married white folks and there were ten kids. And about half of them married white and half of 'em married black. And then mom was the first to marry a black, who was my dad [Ed Dwight]. And, and she college ed--pretty much college educated. She didn't graduate from, from the four years. I think she did like two and a half year (unclear) of college. But she wanted to be a writer. Speaker 1: And where did she go? Speaker 2: And she, there's a Catholic system up there, Cathedral system where they, they went through, almost "K" all the way through two years of college and stuff. And she graduated from Cathedral College there in Sioux City [Iowa]. And she was trained to be a writer. She wanted to, to write. And she wrote poetry, and wanted to be a, you know, newspaper, and that. But anyway, that's what she was gonna do until she met my father. Story_ID: 61133 Speaker 1: And, and she was--she was really pretty cool. She was, you know, she was very attendant. She didn't work outside the home for a really long time cause dad [Ed Dwight] was on the road playing baseball at the time. And so she was, she was at home all the time. But she started us out at--she had a total of eight kids, and three of them died. So five of us survived, and I was the only, I was the only male. So I had four sisters and, and it was quite a while--when, when my brother died, I--see, I was two when he died. And no, I guess I was, I was four. He was two when, when, when he died. And so she kind of lavished a whole bunch of love on, on, on me as the, as the surviving, and she didn't have any more kids for five or six years after I was born. And (unclear) all my sisters are quite a bit younger than I am, but, but she was really--she lavished a lot of love and attention on me and, and teaching me a whole bunch of stuff really early cause I, I learned how to draw really, really early. And I learned how to read really, really early. And I lived right near, next to the Fairfax Airport, and she would walk down there to the Fairfax Airport everyday, and, you know, and that's where I got my--my interest in flying was germinated because of her interest, you know, seeing me all interested in these airplanes and stuff and, and drawing and stuff. And so she put me in school really early, and I was--I've been going to school since I was two years (laughter). So she, you know, she, she had my life planned out, one step at a time, all the way through this whole deal, man. And every, every art course that you could take--cause Kansas City [Kansas] was segregated back in the '30's [1930s], you know, but black folks had their own little, little training things, you know. And they had the "Jack and Jill" and they had all these different little things, but, but mom [Georgia Baker Dwight] and dad weren't in the circle. I mean we were, you know, we lived out on a farm. And, and so, you know, I grew up, you know, with animals and stuff like that. And she--and we--it was kind of rustic living. You know, we didn't know--we didn't have any idea we were poor cause we had chickens and pigs. And we'd slaughter the pig every couple of months and, and we lived this, in a, in this encampment with my dad's [Ed Dwight] family. They were already there or either when mom [Georgia Baker Dwight] came down, and, and then we were born, we came into this, into this strange environment. And it was very, very strange for my mom because my mom came from this very structured Catholic environment that was very rigid, you know. And she was a virgin, (laughter) and all that kind of stuff when they met, and (laughter) all those kinds of things, you know. And, and as a matter of fact, I think he probably was too because he was kind of a backwards sort, my dad was. And he was not a worldly--so, he didn't drink or smoke. He didn't start smoking until he was fifty, my dad. So, you know, and he started drinking when he was about thirty. So, you know, it was very, very strange. My--and so my mother was thrown into this, into this--cause my dad's family was already in place. And everybody in my dad's family were near-do-wells, I mean there was a lot of dope and drinking and carousing and fighting and jail and police. And this is right across the street from my house, you know. And I lived in this little peaceful, little place that my mom made quiet and peaceful. But I loved being over there cause of all the action (laughter), you know. Speaker 2: It was like across the road? Speaker 1: Right across the road, man, and it was, it was something, man. And with my dad being gone all the time, you know, I mean it was, they were crazy. All of 'em were nuts, man. All of 'em, personally, were nutty as fruitcakes. And my mom was this nice, quiet, peaceful person. And she went to church every day (laughter). She went to mass every day, man (laughter). And so she, she, she had me going to mass every day. And, you know, pretty soon I'm five years old, I'm a alter--I'd been an alter boy for twelve years man (laughter). She had programmed me for the priesthood, and I was gonna a priest (laughter). And, God, oh, man. So she had all this stuff locked up for me, man. And, and, and I mean I kind of--I mean I guess I was a willing participant in all this stuff because, I mean I enjoyed all these things she had me doing, I mean all these activities. And so, but she, she was right on it, man. And very quiet. No hollering. I never heard my mom holler, ever in my life, did I ever hear her raise her voice about anything, you know. And so, versus the other noises I was hearing from other places and stuff. So, so I listened to what she had to say. And, but that's about, you know, she, she was very quiet and reassuring in telling me I was cool (laughter). You know, and she was constantly telling me I was coolest cat on earth (laughter). Speaker 2: Did you believe it? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, yeah (laughter), oh, yes, and believe me, I believed it. Story_ID: 61134 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was his name? Could you spell his name for me? Speaker 2: Yeah, his, his name was Ed-Edward Dwight, Sr. I mean, you know. He didn't call himself senior. He was just Edward Dwight, you know, and I'm a junior, of course. And he was the oldest in his family. And, and dad was different than all of the, all the brothers and stuff in the family because as the oldest, you know, and he, the, the whole group--well, they were from Dolton, Georgia. They were sharecroppers down there before they came to Kansas City. And hardly any of 'em went to school, you know. And they just came to Kansas City [Kansas], and very, very little education, no structural training and all that kind of stuff because of the sharecropping, cause they just worked, you know. And when dad came, came to Kansas City, he did go to school in Kansas City and dropped out in about--they say the tenth grade. I think it was earlier than that. They just--but he was offered a baseball contract when he was like fifteen, sixteen years old, and went off to try out for the Kansas City Monarchs. And he was, he started actually playing pro, pro ball when he was sixteen. But he didn't make the Monarchs on the first go round. So they, they traded him or whatever they do, and presented him to the Homestead Grays, which is another real famous team, that was one of his traveling teams. So--. Speaker 1: Pittsburgh, right? Speaker 2: Right. And so he played with the Homestead Grays for--oh, I'm--take it back. Gilkerson Union Giants, not the Homestead Grays. He played with the Gilkerson Union Giants, I'm sorry. Story_ID: 61135 Speaker 1: Where were they located? Speaker 2: You know, they were located in, I think in, somewhere in the Middle West area in, in the Iowa area there. And, of course, it kept him fairly close to home, but they still traveled. They traveled all over. And he played with them for about a year. And then, and then he went up with the Monarch [Kansas City Monarchs] and started playing with the Monarchs when he, when he was seventeen. And then he played with the Monarchs for quite a long time. And, and, of course, they traveled everywhere and went all through Canada and, and Mexico. And so he spent--he played the winter leagues in Cuba, Venezuela, and he spent the whole time in the Dominican Republic playing baseball in the winter leagues down there. So it was almost kind of a year-around thing. You know, he was gone most of the time. And that little window after the winter leagues are over in like January, and then, there's that little window. And then you go to spring training for--you know. So, he ended up playing almost year around. So. And, and I think that was the thing that changed, was the reason why he was different than any of his family. And met my mother [Georgia Baker Dwight] in, I guess in, nineteen--she was twenty-two, born in 1909, so, when they met or just twenty-one when they met. So nine and twenty-one is, is thirty, so about 1930, I guess. In '31 [1931], it was 1931 when they met. And they got married cause Therese--Rita was born right, you know, about a year after they got married. So, she was born in 1931, I was born in 1933, so-- Story_ID: 61136 Speaker 1: But she was--he was kind of acultural, I mean, you know, and had no--zero training of any kind, no societal training. To the, when I was in the space program, I remember he would, would not like to go to restaurants cause he figured he was gonna pick up the wrong fork and all that kind of stuff. It was, you know, this was when he's in his fifties, sixties at that time. But he was real short, very paranoid about that. He was bald when he was nineteen years old. And so there was a whole bunch of things railing against him being a real cool ladies man cause he was only about five, seven [5'7"], you know, this bulky, I mean huge muscles, (unclear) his muscles (unclear) all his, whole body. I mean this guy was really built. He weighed over two hundred pounds. And he was five, seven, but it was all muscle, and not a ounce of fat on him anywhere. Story_ID: 61137 Speaker 1: What position did he play? Speaker 2: He played second base. He was kind of a Jim Morgan kind of guy, you know, of that--you know, but he was built, I mean twice as heavy as Jim, I mean bulky. And he could run really, really fast. That was his asset, stealing bases and stuff. Matter of fact, they called him "Little Grease", he could run so fast. And after the '36 [1936] Olympics, Jesse Owens--to get people out to the race track, they--I mean out to the ballpark, at the seventh inning stretch, they would do circus things, like they'd have--if they could get a hold of Jesse, Jesse would come and, and, and Jesse would be in a squat, and then he'd be running. And he'd beat a race horse at full gallop on over a hundred yards and all that kind of stuff. And then they'd have the baseball players running against him, and the favorite, Josh Gibson was playing cause Josh was pretty fast. And, you know, Josh and my dad would beat Jesse all the time. I mean it was bizarre, you know, and Jesse was the '36 [1936] Olympics, (unclear) (mom?) I told my old man, see, you should have gone to the Olympics, dude. And so, but, but he, but his confidence in his ability, he was only at home in that environment, you know. (Unclear) Actually, if you took him outside that environment, he was a fish--like a fish out of water. Story_ID: 61138 Speaker 1: And a kind of, asocial, didn't like people who, who were connected. You know what I mean. It was so funny. I was, I was telling, I was telling my mom [Georgia Baker Dwight], you know, I says, I said, dad [Ed Dwight] would come home, and especially, after he got through playing baseball (laughter), he'd come home and, he'd say, "Son, don't ever trust a nigger, niggers ain't shit. Don't you ever trust a nigger as long you live, you understand?" I'm going, yeah, dad, you know. The next night, "Son, peckerwoods ain't shit". (laughter) "Don't you ever trust a peckerwood for as long as you live, you understand?" I'm going okay, peckerwoods (laughter). And he (laughter), and he's going down the list, you know, "Jews ain't (unclear)". And so before he, I said, well, God, ain't nobody else, and, and so, and so my first overseas assignment was to go to Japan. And so I says, I'm safe. The ole man never told me that, (laughter) that Japanese weren't worth a damn (laughter). So, but I found it, I found hilarious that, that he had--he was carrying all this stuff. He had all this baggage, you know, he just carried around all this baggage. But I mean, but he never did too much about it, I mean other than just harbor these feelings, you know. And when I went off to the service, he said, son, he says, "Now, the first thing I want you to do", he said, "you make sure that they're paying you the same amount of money they paying them white boys, you understand?" And he said, I want you to check they checks out, and all that kind of stuff because, you know, that's what they do to us. See, see, they don't pay us the same amount of money. And, and so the first question--I, I was coming home from on leave, (laughter), you know, and flight jets and stuff, and he, and the first question out of my ole man's mouth, "Are they paying you the same thing that they paying them white boys?" (Laughter) I said, yeah, I think so, dad. I said, there's a little schedule--I showed it to him, you know. All of us lieutenants get this amount of money (laughter) (unclear). He said, "Ah, but the got a special one for niggers though, I bet they do". (Laughter) So, and he was, he was hilarious. He was a funny guy; didn't laugh a lot, didn't laugh a lot. And mom laughed all the time, and to see them, how they could stay together all this time, but what was--they had gotten this interdependence because she, she knew what to do. Story_ID: 61139 Speaker 1: And she was the one to save the money, and he was the one to spend it. And she's the one that got the rent paid. We had a family restaurant. And, you know, and, but she was the one that made sure things happened. And, and, but the, the--what was interesting about my dad, the really, with all the stuff cause he worked at the WPA [Works Progress Administration], and, you know, all that kind of stuff, you know. When he got through playing baseball, the owner of the team got him a job working in a, in a chemistry lab as a bottle washer, washing these flasks after they get through with the chemical tests and stuff. And at the end of twenty years, he was the chief chemist of the state grain department. So here this guy was, who never got out of high school, and he's running--and he made more discoveries on, on finding the protein in wheat than any other person in the United States of America. And so you had all the--like K-State University [Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas] that was locked into, to his laboratory. You had the (unclear) the school of mines, you had all the agricultural departments of all these schools. And they were sending their PhD candidates to, to understudy him during the summer. You know, they're writing their PhD's on the bett--on the better ways of, of, of--what his job was, he, he would get, you know, Kansas is a bit wheat state, and, and Canada, he had the Canadian wheat. He'd done all the, all the wheat in the, that whole region there. And what they'd do, they'd bring him samples of wheat. And he would make a determination of whether the wheat should be done, should cattle feed or whether they should make bread out of it or whether it was high, high wheat--high protein wheat. And so you had these guys--cause I worked for him for a while. But you had these guys giving him champagne and booze all the time, they were trying to increase the value of the protein in their batches of wheat cause they could sell it for money, and you see what I'm saying. And so he got to be real popular with all the big wheat barons there in Kansas and was always getting gifts and all that kind of stuff. And even when it was right, he--they still gave him gifts when the, when the protein was high and all that kind of stuff. He rounded up all of these--and they'd bring all these gifts and things, mostly booze and cigarettes and all that kind of junk. And, but the fact that he could go from, from this illiterate, almost, might have been able to read and barely write, to understanding the complexities and the bonding of chemicals. He could sit down there on the blackboard like these guys and do all this chemical bonding of, of, of, you know, carbons and all that old kind of stuff, you know. Well, what in the world (laughter), where'd this come from, dude? And, and I, and I worked for the guy, and it was amazing, absolutely amazing. And these PhD guys are down there understudying him, you know, what in the world is this? So, anyway, he retired at the end of thirty years, you know, from Kansas State Grain Department. So, who--you know, go figure (laughter). Speaker 2: And, and, you know, that's unusual. Speaker 1: Incredibly unusual (laughter), especially, since all of his brothers were derelicts and thugs (laughter). Story_ID: 61140 Speaker 1: So describe to me some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up. Speaker 2: Ah, man, I, you know, probably in the, part of the--the second chapter of my book, one of the things is, I have a book on discovery, you know, and, and the rich environment that I, that I, you know, that I was presented with, you know. And, God, it was just--it was like I, it was like I created a world for myself cause I, I was the first little kid in this encampment of grown up people, you know. And, and it was very, it was interesting. There was animals everywhere. We had about--my uncles hunted, you know, and not only sport--mainly for food source more than sport. But we had about ten or fifteen dogs, hunting dogs. And we had everything that flew, I mean we had guinea hens, turkeys, geese, chickens, of course. And there was a big egg thing going on, you know, access to--you know, cause we--this whole thing, it was kind of self feeding, you know. There were, there was about ten acres, and, and they grew everything that grows. I mean onions and natural, and I--maybe that's why my grandfather picked this place. There were persimmon trees and apple trees and pear trees, peach trees, and they were just, I mean it was, the whole thing was just lush with all this stuff, like some kind of Garden of Eden kind of thing. You couldn't--I couldn't go out and invent all this crap, you know what I mean. And, and I talk about all the other things because of all the growth, I mean there was raccoons and possums and snakes and frogs, like you won't believe, you know. And, and I used to go crawdaddying , and I was a big--everybody used to kid me cause they called me--and they used to laugh at me cause I was, I was set all these crawdad traps. And I had a stream, it was a stream that ran right through the middle of his property, and it ran all down to the Missouri River which is nearby. And I would lay all these crawdad traps, and I'd go crawdaddying, and, and then I, and I'd grow these things, man. And, and my hands were just mangled because the way to get big crawdad is, is you, the big crawdad is make the, the--the little baby crawdads get in cans. I'd set these cans, and that's when they start growing. But they move out of that, and they start digging these, these huge holes, so, but the only way to get a big crawdad is you got to stick your hands in there, you know, and you got to have 'em bite your hand. And they won't let go, and so I'd come up, you know, blood was everywhere, but I'd pull that bad boy out of there. But I, they'd grow like almost big as a lobster man, and I'd--and so pretty soon, I'd take these things home. And they, hey, Joe, would you go down and do some more, and bring some crawdads (laughter), cause we started eating these bad boys, you know. And, and then I raised pigeons and stuff, and, but I was always into something, man. And when the mom was always telling us all kind of stories about things, you know, and then, and I was into flowers, and, and I started drawing all these things, you know, when I was a little bitty tyke. And so I, the environment was really exotic. Story_ID: 61141 Speaker 1: And then my, my granddad--and, and that's how I guess my brain and hand coordination got really slick because my grandfather was a junkman. And he had a mule and a mare. And he used to work for Armour's Packing House when he first came to Kansas City, but he, he turned into the town junkman; had this old wagon. And I was his legs. I mean we'd drive all over town, you know, I was four or five years old. And I'm the one that jumped off the wagon when he spotted something, you know. It could be hubcaps, it could be some plumbing. It could be somebody throw--you know, American throws--is a throw-away society. He built his house off throw-away stuff. He built the whole house off of things that other people were throwing away; interesting man. But he would take all this stuff and old cars and stuff, and he'd, and he'd take a torch--he'd cut all these things up and then build new stuff (laughter), I mean, you know. And I was his legs and arms, and you know, move this, do that, do this. So he was always building things, man. And pretty soon, I was, I had this handle on this big sack of motor sense about being able to build things. I, cause I'd watch him do all this stuff. It was amazing. This--and here's a man, never been in school in his life, right? And, and he's building all these things, houses and, and plows and, and he built all the plows and shaped them and hammered them into shape, like a blacksmith heating 'em up on a forge and hammering 'em in shape and getting 'em welded together and all the fuses together and all that stuff. You know, I don't know--he didn't have an art welder. And I sat and watched all this stuff. You know, it was really amazing to me. Story_ID: 61142 Speaker 1: And so I learned a lot about making things. You know, and so I was always making something, man. I was, I was constantly making something, and I--making little, I was making little cars to airplanes to, to gizmos and I made dams, you know, I was a, the construction engineer (laughter), you know. I was, I was always doing--and, and I inherited, and I got into bugs, cause we had lightening bugs all over. And so I, I inherited the name June Bug, and they called me June Bug till I left home. And I would, I would get these gigantic beetles, they're about that big, you know, and big green beetles, and I'd tied thread on the end of, the little, back of the legs. And I'd walk down the street, you know, and I'd walk all over the neighborhood. And they'd be flying, and I'd be walking all over the neighborhood, about twenty of these bad boys, they're just flying, you know, (laughter), and I got my bugs, (laughter), you know. And so I got--I, I inherited the name June Bug from, from all my bug things. I was, I guess I was a miniature entomologist or something, you know (laughter). So I was always doing something, raising hell and doing something. And, but so the, but it was the environment that I was in. It was really rich. Story_ID: 61143 Speaker 1: And the thing that intrigues me more--most were my, was my, was the fighting that, that my fam--that my dad's [Ed Dwight] family did. They fought everyday. They'd start drinking early in the morning, man, get up in the morning at 8:00 o'clock (laughter), and they're, they're pouring it down. Well, by 10:00 everybody's fighting, you know. Well, you know, that's why I'm an ambulance chaser today (laughter). Every time I see a fire truck, I want to stop and see what the hell is going on (laughter). (Unclear) See a car wreck, man, forget it (laughter). And I was watching them beat the hell out of each other every day (laughter). And I'm going, this is intriguing as hell. And I could not figure out why these damn fools are beating the hell out of each other. And I'd go across the street, and my mom [Georgia Baker Dwight] was so cool about things, you know, there was no, there was no fighting in our place, you know, no voices raised, and everything. But I was fascinated with having them holler at each other and throw things at each other and beat the hell out of each other and cut each other up with knives, and shoot each other in the leg all (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: Did your father ever try to explain it and did your--? Speaker 1: No, as a matter of fact, he was embarrassed, but I mean, most of the time this was going on, my old man wasn't even there. You know, we'd tell him. He'd say we were lying (laughter). You know, he'd come home, "you're lying" (laughter), you know. And I would say, oh, yeah, dad, Uncle Boots cut, he, he cut, go look at it, he cut his face all the way across. I mean, and he did, he cut the guy's face--(unclear) the man had a scar that came across his eye, almost cut his nose halfway in two, all the way across his face. And the man lived like that the rest of his life, with that (laughter) big scar cut--and, you know, his brother did it to him, you know (laughter). What's up with this? (Laughter) And so, I said, yeah, they, you know. He'd say, ah, somebody else did it, you know, Boots didn't do that to him. I'm going, I'm going (laughter), yes, they did, (laughter) you know. So my father was in a great deal of disbelief, (laughter) as I watched all this, this madness, you know. So I had to make some choices though. I was intrigued by the, the real--it was exciting, you know, it was like they led this exciting life, man, cause they would go places, and my uncles used to bring home--they'd bring home a different chick every day. Some of 'em was some good-looking chicks, man, you know (laughter). And, and, and they'd bring home, and they'd fight 'em and they'd beat 'em up, and they'd all drink, and they'd do dope and all that kind of stuff. And then they'd disappear. And Lupe, a little Mexican girl, she was about big as, as, as Lisa here, tiny little woman. And, and she was the toughest little broad I ever seen in my life. And she sliced--(laughter) she sliced my uncle up so bad one day that, you know, in the cartoon, you know, when you--they slice you all up, and then you move and then you fall apart (laughter). I was standing (unclear), (unclear) and she was, she was slicing and he didn't know he was sliced up till he moved (laughter). Blood started gu-gushing every place, you know, and I'm going, God, I'm, I, I watched this (laughter), you know. What in the world is going on here? So, you know, and so I had to make some decisions, you know, about whether the lifestyle was worth it or not and whether them good-looking chicks were worth getting sliced up about (laughter). Speaker 2: It sounds like you had like a real-life models of what not to do. Speaker 1: Exactly, yeah, really. And, and I, and I think that's probably why--of course, you end up making decisions about these things, you know, but the strange part of it is that every one of my cousins, when they started come-coming along, man, all adopted that lifestyle, to a person; in jail, stealing cars, every one of 'em. And they all died before they were thirty, forty, you know. And, and the oldest one, the oldest one of my--oldest cousin, the one that nearest to me, he just died of--but he died at fifty of cancer. And, and here's a kid that, you know, that--but he was the only one that lived to, for that long. All the rest of 'em dead. It's bizarre. Story_ID: 61144 Speaker 1: Now, what do you--did they ever express how they viewed your family? Speaker 2: Yeah, we were--my, my mother [Georgia Baker Dwight] was a white witch, and she practiced witchcraft, and she had us doing us all these weird things, you know, cause we went to church all the time, every day. And they were a bit, you know, they were--they practiced, they practiced real--but it was African, African witchcraft out of, that's Caribbean out of, you know, they would do--like my grandmother, she, she made me wear an Asfidity bag. I don't know if you ever heard of that or not. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, and you'd wear it, wear it around your neck, and it keeps the evil spirits away, and, and you don't sick and all that old kind of stuff. And, and the crazy practices like when my, when my cousins were growing up, we had all these dogs on there. And if, if a kid was teething, you know, they would go get a dog, just any random and take a pair of pliers, and they'd match the tooth up with the kid--if the tooth is coming in here, they'd find a dog with, with that tooth, and take a pair of pliers and pull it out, yeah. And, you know, and I'm sitting there watching all these toothless dogs (laughter) walking around here. And the kids were still crying from teeth, but the damn dog ain't got no teeth now (laughter). What's up with that? (Laughter) And so I'm going, I'm watching this stuff. You know, and, and they would do all kind of things, you know. Like if you ever got cut, they'd put charcoal in the cut, you know. And charcoal does stop bleeding, you know, but, but they would take and burn some really, really quick, and they'd rub it right into the cut, and my poor sister, the one that's a nun, has this huge, half moon thing up her leg, where she was running down with a razorblade in her hand, and she slashed her leg wide open with that razorblade cause she was running with it, and it just has this huge half moon. And my grandmother shoves this charcoal (unclear), she has that big black scar, permanent black scar on her leg for the rest of her life (laughter) from this charcoal stuff, man. I mean, you know, and, and I would go over there. She'd rub my legs with, with either bacon grease or--if she had any Vaseline around, I mean she'd--I mean every day, she'd rub my leg, you know. (Laughter) And so, why are you doing this? She said, it makes you run faster (laughter), you know, in case you're stealing something, you know, you need--want to get away, you know (laughter). I'm walking around with these shiny legs, and my mother say, what in the hell, what you put on your legs, boy? Are you crazy, what they--take that crap off your legs. What's wrong with you? (laughter) Speaker 1: Well, did you mother ever try to explain any of this to you or--? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah, (laughter), with a simple explanation. They're crazy, yeah (laughter), stay away from away. Every day, stay away from over. I couldn't, I couldn't stay away. It was, it was irresistible (laughter). Speaker 1: It's unbelievable. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Totally irresistible. Man, (unclear) (laughter), you know. I had to go over there every--it was like a magnet, like a moth and the, the candle thing, you know. Story_ID: 61145 Speaker 1: It was a colorful environment, no-[simultaneous] Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was, it was rich, man, totally rich. And, and, and then, but the other part that really gave me the, you know, that food of the gods, and all that kind of stuff, had to do with, with the airport because that excited my imagination and because I saw those air--I'd go down every day. Every day I'd be at the airport, and from the time I was like two years, my, my mother [Georgia Baker Dwight] used to take me down there, but after that, I mean, and it was in walking distance. And, and these guys, and then they would take--and I didn't know where they were going. See, these airplanes would take off, you know, and I, and I would imagine in my brain where they were going, you know. And, and so, and I would paint all these pictures of these places, these exotic places, I didn't know anything about. And it wasn't until I--my mother introduced me to the library when I was four years old. She took me to the library, and they wouldn't give me a library card. And my mother in those days, I mean she looked, she looked like she was white and everything, and she went in the library, and she had little brown me with her in the public library. And, and they wouldn't give her a card, and she said, cause, you know, who's it for, says, it's for him. And they says, no, you know, it's--you know, we don't let niggers get library cards here; said, what are you doing with him anyway? You know, (chuckle) you taking care of him or something? You know, "that's my son". She said, "Well, they let niggers draw books out over there--there's a school over at Northeast Junior High School". So we trooped over there, didn't have a car, trooped over there. And they didn't want to give me a card because they thought I'd tear the books up. And so she just, she was--I remember she was fighting with them people, almost, almost coming to blows, said, you're gonna, he's gonna, he's not leaving here without a library card. And so I came--became one of their best customers. From that point on, I was--and I, and I was--it was really interesting because I was really a little bitty guy, and, and I'd carry all these books home. And we lived--actually, we lived about four or five miles from the library. And then I--my whole life changed because I was seeing where those airplanes were going now, you know, cause there was all these exotic places. Story_ID: 61146 Speaker 1: And I got really interested in all that really early. So I was studying all these, Rubens, all these master painters and El Greco and all those kind of guys. So I, I really went to this art section, and I was looking at all of these, all these paintings these guys were doing. And, and nobody had stimulated my interest in art at all. It was all self motivated, and by the time I was--I remember I did my first oil painting when I was eight years old. And I cop--I was copying these, the masters, and everybody was talking about how precocious I was, and I mean I was painting these painting. And I was having my mom [Georgia Baker Dwight], you know, get me to the art bookstore to get, to get oils and all that kind of stuff. And why did I know about oils, and I was reading all about oil paintings and all that kind of stuff. So, so I started oil painting just on my own, just right a--right away. And, and I became the school artist, you know, from the time I was in kindergarten all the way through high school. I was, I was the official school artist all the way through. But it was from her, and, and, you know, and the environment that I would, that I was living in and all that kind of stuff and her allowing me to--and encouraging me to go out to that library and, you know, and, and then I lived in that thing from that point on. Story_ID: 61147 Speaker 1: I was just always getting new, finding--and I, I got to be fan of [Adolf] Hitler of all, of all people because Hitler had a, had the only air force in the world. And I was reading about airplanes. And it had all this stuff about Luftwaffe. And they were over there killing people and all that kind of stuff, but they had been--they were writing books. And you couldn't--there weren't any books about American aviation because we didn't, you know, didn't have an air force and Hitler did, so I became a student of Hitler, and I, and I--to this day, you look at all my videos over there, I got, I got more videos on Hitler than anybody else. I was curious as to how this guy--and I was really young. I'm talking real--I'm five, six, seven years old, and I'm readying about Hitler, and about how this guy was able to control all these people. I was fascinated with that. He was a corporal in the army, and ends up as the chancellor of Germany and (unclear) and all these dumb people are following him and gonna conquer the world (laughter). And so, I didn't know that I wanted to be a mini-Hitler, but (laughter) what the hell, you know. I was fascinated with this cat, man (laughter). (Laughter) Not for him killing masses of people because I, you know, that part of it, you know, that was really the, you know, the aftermath of the Holocaust, and all that kind of stuff. And that was really late, after the war, when all this stuff was, was really discovered and stuff. But part of that time, it looked like he was over there--he had seduced a lot of world leaders by then (laughter), you know. So. Story_ID: 61148 Speaker 1: How about school? Where did you go to school and did you like school, and (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, man, I just ate it up. Yeah, I just ate it up. Yeah, I started school when I was two, went to pre-school, and, you know, I was the, I was the, the one they had to put in, in the straight jacket the whole (laughter), the whole time cause I was always raising hell, you know. And, and so, so because by the time I got to--there was, there was not a Catholic pre-school so I had to go to, you know, just a regular pre-school, and then kindergarten was public school. But that was the last time I saw the inside of a public school until, for a long time. And then I went to Catholic school all the way, elemen--through elementary school. In 1947, I integrated this white school, this lily-white Catholic school, man, me and my sister went out there. It was kind of like the Little Rock Nine, without TV cameras, man. And it was hell to pave--but the good news, it was that, there were only two of us, you know. That was the good news. The bad news was that, you know, they could prey, they could prey on you, you know, easier, because since there, there was no big cadre, there was no-- like in a couple of instances of the Little Rock Nine when that big tall girl whacked the guy and threw a hot bowl of chili in his face, and all that kind of stuff. And, and then they had that kind of confrontation. We never had that kind of physical confrontation, you know. And my dad [Ed Dwight] had told me some stuff and, that he learned in his travels. And I didn't want to go out there cause the public high school was one block from my house. And, and I had been practicing track cause I ran track, and I played football in high school. And I had been practicing even before I went out there, I had been practicing with, with a black team, it was one block from my house. And I'd been running track with a black team, you know, before I even went out there, and so I wanted to go to Sumner. And my mom and dad said, you're gonna go to the white school. So anyway, my, my old man was giving me some advice and counsel about it. And he said, son, he says, white people love to laugh. He said, if you make white folks laugh, you got it locked, okay. Man, I went out there, I was the biggest god damn comedian on the, on the campus (laughter). And they was calling me nigger, and I'd say, where? Show me one, where is he, you know (laughter). And it was just (unclear) and pretty soon--and, and they, and they liked sports stuff, you know. So right away, I was running touchdowns and running on the track team and stuff. So, you know, I just bypassed. My sister was catching hell all this time though. She was coming home crying every day. And I was going, what the hell is wrong with you, you know. And, because I, I was out there, and I had, I--we lived in totally different lives in this--and if you were to ask her today, she would tell her [you], that's the most horrible thing she's ever experienced in her life. And it was the greatest thing I ever done, I mean, you know, because I was, I was a big celebrity guy, you know. There was a rule, I couldn't date any white girls. I couldn't talk to one unless she talked to me first, okay. And so, if she nodded at me, I could nod at her back. I was not to start a conversation with a white girl. Forget dating. I mean I was not to ask that white girl for a date, but, you know, I really didn't, didn't much care about that because I was a nominated school artist. I did all the bulletin boards, everything all over the school. So I was a real popular dude. And then being the sports thing--between the sports stuff and, you know, I was a pretty smart guy too. And so I was National Honor Society and all that kind of stuff. So I was having a hell of a good time. And, you know, there, there were times when I guess I, I could have been upset--. Speaker 1: Finish your sentence. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, but, you know, and, but I opted not to do that, you know. There were a whole bunch of incidents that went on that I could have been really pissed, but I, you know, I just blew it off. Story_ID: 61149 Speaker 1: It's really, you know, I sit here and look at all this stuff. And I look at it in retrospect, and I'm going what in the hell. You know, and I, and I was a little--I was, I was so small, man, that, you know, I had to walk, I had to go, go past the public school to go to, to get, to get to Catholic school, man. And I'd get my but beat every day, you know. And I was, when I was, when I was in eighth grade, I weighed sixty-five pounds, and I was about, you know, maybe four foot, two, four foot three. And I mean I was really small. And that summer I, I mean just jumped up to eighty something, and, you know, and then by the time I was in the tenth grade, I was about a hundred and four cause I was--I made the football team when I was a hundred and four pounds. So I, I got upset about these guys beating me up all the time, so I decided that I was gonna box in the ring. So I became a Golden Gloves champion there in Kansas City, and I started fighting in the ring when I--actually, I started when I, I was in the sixty-five pound class when I actually started fighting. And I fought for five years, and, you know, I was just getting ready to turn pro--this was in addition to all these other things, and, but what my objective was, was that, you know, when you're boxing, you win, when you win something, you know, you get to wear a jacket. And it's got these gloves up here on the thing up here, and it's got your name on here. And on the back, it's got Golden Gloves, yadda, yadda, and all this (unclear) (great big?) stuff. So I'd wear, I'd wear my jacket. I'd wear my jacket around town, and, they, hey, man, that's Eddie Dwight. Don't mess with him, man, the cat's the champ, man (laughter), don't mess with him (laughter). Yeah, man, I had twenty-three fights and lost one. Story_ID: 61150 Speaker 1: And, and it was bizarre because--and I, I got in trouble in high school, with the athletic commission people thing, you know. And they said, you got to, you got to do one of two things. You either stop boxing or stop--you can't play no high school sports, you know, it was, you know. Speaker 2: Conflict of--? Speaker 1: Yeah, well, no, it was true with public school or anybody. If you were a high school athlete, you could not do any other thing that preoccupied your time, you know, for instance, you could play summer baseball because the school was out, but anything that conflicted with school or your sports activities during the school year, you could not participate in anything outside. And, you know, so, so I had to, had to make an appeal to them. And they said, oh, well, okay, he's okay. And so I was able to fight and still play high school sports. And so when--I was really good. I was, I was a soft paw and Sugar Ray Robinson was my idol because of the way, you know, I had his style, I had that old, that old Sugar Ray style. I mean it was, you know, which Muham--which ended up being Muhammad Ali's, you know, that old dancing stuff, you know. And I was, I was--so I thought I was the coolest cat in the world up there. And (laughter) so, and so (unclear) Bubba Clyce (ph.), who was a boxing (unclear) in Kansas City, Missouri, wanted me to join Gateway, and, cause we had a boxing club in Kansas City, Kansas, and I fought out of the club in Kansas City, Kansas. So he wanted me to come over and fight with him because it was leading into Chicago [Illinois] cause he was, took his boxers to Chicago that--cause that was the next step from Kansas City to Chicago for Golden Gloves. If you won in Kansas City, the champs from there went to Chicago. So he, when I won, when I won in Kansas City, Kansas, then we had a, a joint thing. So I, I won, and so I--the next step was Chicago. And so my old man [Ed Dwight] says, you're not going to Chicago, you know. So you--so you're not fighting anymore, you know. And I'm in high school now, you know. I'm a hundred eighteen pound champion from (laughter) from Kansas City, and, and my old man say, you ain't gonna fight no more. And, and I says, you know, I said, I think I'm gonna be a fighter, cause I mean I like this 'Glory' stuff, man. This is really cool. He says, you're not gonna fight any more. And, and I'm, you know, and he was telling me all of the guys with the brain scramble and (laughter) all that stuff, you know, the guys with half eyes, (laughter) (unclear) and flat noses (laughter), and, you know. And so I was pretty good looking, and I said, well, you know (laughter), maybe, do I--I mean do I want to mess up this kid, this profile (laughter). And so, and so, so I stopped fighting. I just quit. And Clyce was really upset with me. But it was really funny, man, I woke up about six months after I quit fighting, I woke up one day and the buzzing had stopped in my ears. I woke up one day, I could hear birds and stuff. I did not know, man (laughter). I was--I heard this buzzing in my ear for, I mean for five years it was hum (making buzzing sound), like (laughter) that inside my head. And I woke up one day, and it was gone. And I said, (unclear) (laughter), I mean I could hear birds and things and people (laughter) talking and all kind--hear cars running up and down the street (laughter). I'm going, so I see what my old man meant. It, I was absolutely crazy. So (laughter). Story_ID: 61151 Speaker 1: Okay, so, so high school, well, high school is pretty exciting then, I guess, with activities and--. Speaker 2: Oh, you know, it was, yeah, it was really cool because, well, you know, I had a, I had a little miniature fan club, you know. And, and on the top of that, see, I had a, I had a sign shop. We had a family restaurant--when I was in high school, we had a family restaurant that I worked in cause I had to work the real late shift. And, and we, we delivered food after a certain hour, about after 8:00 o'clock. And I had to deliver food all over the town, so I had a--I, I started building car--I built my first car when I was fourteen. And I start to build hot rods and stuff, and I was doing that on the side, and you know, chrome--taking them all apart, and chrome heads, and--. Speaker 1: You're talking not like, not models, but real [simultaneous]-- Speaker 2: Nah, these are real cars, man. These are road--street roadsters and stuff, you know. And, and so I was, you know, but I was using 'em to deliver the food for my family restaurant, you know. That was my excuse for having this car, a fourteen-year old had to go get a special (unclear), cause you couldn't get a license until you're sixteen. So I'm fourteen years old, and I'm driving these cars around town, and all that kind of stuff. So, and so (unclear) I was building the cars, and, and so I, I was, I was sleeping about two or three hours a night. And, and I didn't realize--I got it, I probably got it from my mother [Georgia Baker Dwight] cause my mother to this day, sleeps about three hours a night, to--I mean that woman's ninety-three years old. And she goes to bed a little bit earlier, she goes to bed about midnight now, but she's up at 3:30, drinking black coffee and walking around, you know. And I was wondering where I got there from, you know, this idea of not sleeping, you know. Later on, the space program had some impact on, you know, they had this theory that people don't need sleep and stuff. But when I was a kid, I mean I was just, this motor was just going all the time, you know. And, and I worked in the restaurant. I had a sign shop, and I opened the sign shop in the back of my house. And I had Kansas City, Kansas locked up, painting signs for all the restaurants and the stuff all you see--furniture stores, where they have these big sales, you know, with that soap stuff, soap-based stuff. And I, I mean I had Kansas City pretty well locked up, and I always had money. I mean I always--my mother kept me, had a meeting with me when I was nine, and she said, kid, you'd better sit down long enough to get a job (laughter), hello. (Laughter) So she got me two paper routes (laughter), and came, came and said, here, and here's your route, and here's the people. Here's the list, I mean, here you got to (unclear), and I hated her guts, man. I mean when I was--you know, but that, end of the week, I had all that money in my pocket, you know. And I was the only kid in the block [that] had money, you know. And it was bizarre, and I had more friends in, in the world because I had, you know, I would lend a nickel out here and there, and penny candy stuff, you know, and I was the big sponsor of all this stuff, you know. But I always had money, and I can't remember a time in my whole life where I didn't have money, spending money, you know. And so doing all the, all the things I needed to do, buying new boxing shoes and trunks and, you know, and all the stuff, you know. And you're going out with these fancy trunks, with my name on the side of it, you know. I was the first one to do all that stuff in Kansas City (laughter) cause I, I knew a person at the sports show, they, they'd engrave, so I mean extra stuff in my shorts for me, you know, cause I thought I was a cool little cat, man, running around (laughter). So it was, it was really fun, and I, and I just couldn't wait to leave home though. When I was eighteen, I--so I joined the [United States] Air Force, you know, just to get out of, just to get out of dodge. Story_ID: 61152 Speaker 1: Okay, did you graduate from high school with honors or things? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was in the National Honor Society, and all that nonsense, yeah. I did all that stuff. Speaker 1: Did you have any sense that you were gonna go to college at that point? Speaker 2: Well, I, I'll tell you, what really happened was, I had won an--and like I said, I was the class, school painter at, at this high school. And I had, you know, I had thought about art, and I thought about sign painting. And I used to go watch these guys paint these big billboards, you know. And in the beginning, when I was about maybe fifteen or sixteen, I said, that's what I want to do. So I--and I'd go watch 'em, you know. And they painted, actually painted. They didn't do it like they do today with the photographs. They actually painted the billboards in those days. And I, and so--and, and my old man [Ed Dwight] had talked to me, we had this conversation when I was about sixteen years old. And he said, what are you gonna do? I said, I think I'm a be an artist or a sign painter or something. He said, no, you're not. He says--I said, what do you mean? I says, that's what I want do. He says no you're not gonna do that. I said, I'm willing to bet you, he says, you, you cannot get a job in this town sign painting for nobody. And so I, I said--and so we had this little wager and everything like that. So I went over to--which would be equivalent to Norton Signs, it's probably one our biggest in the country and (unclear). And I went over there, and, and sure enough, they said, you know, we don't, we don't let niggers paint. So get out of here, you know. So that was my first, you know, like hum. So I went to the second sign shop. So I had--I came with a different deal. And I said, I can pay you ten dollars a week to let me work for you (laughter). That was my deal. I'll carry the buckets. I'll carry the paint, I'll do all that kind of--be here on time and everything, but, you know--nigger, get out of here (laughter). And so, then I decided that, that--and, and I was, I went back to the old man, and I said, you know, dad, he said, you know--I said, you might have a point about this art stuff. And he says, he says, nobody can make any money making art. He said, you tell me one black person in the United States of America that make--he said, nigger--making money making art, any kind of art. And I couldn't. There was no place I'd go, there was no books in the library. And there was no role models in Kansas City [Kansas], and if I was--Har-Harlem Renaissance had already happened, if I was in New York [New York City, New York] or Chicago [Illinois] probably. And maybe there, maybe there might have been a black artist in town that, you know, that, that was making or something, or at least had some notoriety or something, you know, somebody I could pattern or, you know, put a template over me and all that kind of stuff. Nothing. And so, and I said, maybe the dude is right. You know, and the more I explored it, the more--the questions I asked, the more I got just, kind of just turned away, you know. And it just looked like it was a white man's sport, you know, painting and artistry and all that kind of stuff was white folks stuff. So I said, well, he said--I said, what do you think I ought to do? And he said, I think you ought to a, an engineer. So I don't know what the, I don't know what they do, dad. I mean, I don't know, what the hell do engineers do? He said, they make money, first of all, you know, you like that flying stuff, go fly. I said, wait a minute now. They ain't gonna let me paint and be an artist, but they gonna let me fly (laughter). Get a grip on this dude, I don't think so. And so, and he say, hey, you know. And so I said, well, I said, well, maybe--I said, I know they're not gonna let me fly. So I know they'll do--I'll be an airplane mechanic, see. Story_ID: 61153 Speaker 1: So TWA [Trans World Airlines] and airplane mechanic school, costs four hundred and forty-four dollars and seventy eight cents. And I had the--you know, I had some bread in the bank. My old lady [Georgia Baker Dwight] got me this bank account and everything. I was cool. So I went over there and, and you could pay by the week, by the way. You know, you know, so I had the bread. That wasn't no question. So I walked in there, and I said I want to be a mechanic. And he said, you know, it's nice, son, he says this cost a lot of money. I said, nah, I got--don't worry about the money. I got the money. He said, you know, but, you know, we don't let niggers do this, you know. And, he said, I think they're taking niggers down in the diesel school, down on Main Street. Go down there, and I think they're letting niggers in down there. So I have no idea why I did this, man. I should have told the guy to go to hell. I got in my car and drove down there to (laughter) Main Street to the diesel school headquarters. And I walked in there, and the woman--she was a very nice lady. She didn't call me a nigger first of all. She says--. Speaker 2: Well, now, I hate to interrupt the flow, but this is something that people watching us in the future may not understand that people actually would call you--? Speaker 1: Oh, God, yeah, I mean that's what, that's what Kansas City [Kansas] was all about. I mean you were nigger, I mean you weren't--there was no colored. There weren't Negroes, you were a nigger. Speaker 2: And you're not exaggerating. Speaker 1: No, God, you got to be kidding, not even close, you know, because, you know, if you're a bus boy there, you know, nigger, you stepped on my toe. And I used to set pins in bowling alleys, you know, something that. And they'd call you nigger down there for--if you set one of the pins wrong, you know; work you for eight hours and throw a nickel down the alley. You know, work for eight hours straight, setting pins, and they throw you nickel, here, nigger (laughter). And I'm going, whoa, okay. Story_ID: 61154 Speaker 1: So, anyway, I get down there to the, to the diesel thing, and he says, we're taking one colored a year in St. Paul, Minnesota. And said, if you get your application in, now you can make this next class. You know, and, you know, and I had--and I graduated from high school and yadda, yadda, yadda and all this stuff. And I, I said, I've got all this--I'm, I'm incredible (laughter), you know. She said, you're the kind of person we're looking for. So you want to make an application, you know. And I--she gave me the application to go fill. You know, I walked out of there, said, I don't want to be, I didn't want to be a diesel mechanic. Why am I doing this? This is nuts. It's totally craz--insane. And so I went and told, I said, dad, I says, you know--and, and I don't why my old man [Ed Dwight] had a (unclear), cause my old man and I never talked about anything, I mean nothing (laughter). We didn't have a conversation about nothing, and I don't why I'm having this dialogue with my father about these things, cause he had already told me, he said, if you go to college, you got to pay for it cause I don't have any money to send you to college. So, you know, you're on your own. And so I said to myself why am I listening to you if you, you know what I mean (laughter), why are you giving me this advice, said, why am I listening to this advice. So finally, the nuns got involved. And I had won, unknowingly, Sister Dismaus at the high school had submitted three of my paintings to the Kansas City Arts scholastic thing for the whole state of Kansas, you know. And I had won the first three places; was three oil paintings that, that she had submitted. I had no idea she did this. And it had never been done before. And I--and I mean nobody had ever won all three, three ribbons. So she finds me, and she says I got you a scholarship at Kansas City Art Institute [Kansas City, Missouri], you know. What? You know, yeah. And they want to see you and they want to interview you and all that kind of stuff. So I go over there to Kansas City Art Institute and interview with these guys, and they tell me all this stuff. And they give me the tour of the school. And, and they say, well, they gonna give me a scholarship for one year. Well, I was insulted, you know (laughter). I mean what was that one-year stuff (laughter), not four years? And so by now, I, I decided, I said, you know, the heck with all this stuff. And this flying stuff had just really, just kind of gotten my, had really gotten my attention by now. Story_ID: 61155 Speaker 1: And, and so and this engineering stuff that my dad [Ed Dwight] talked about and this whole flying bug. I said, maybe my old man, you know, and it would change the whole thing, man. I was still throwing newspapers (laughter) getting up 4:30 in the morning still throwing my newspapers, you understand? I was in high school, right. I was still throwing--and I, and I went to get my "Kansas City Call" newspaper, it was a black newspaper. And, and I--on the cover of the "Call" paper, you know, and, you know, how they fold it in half, you know, was the upper part of this black guy with a pilot uniform on. I opened it up, and it was some kid in Missouri, and his name was Dayton Ragland. He was standing on the wing of an F-86 saber jet. And he got his butt shot down in Korea. And he was a POW [Prisoner of War], and from Kansas City. And I'm going--and he was five foot, four. And a little bitty dude, man. I said, dangit, this is it. I mean, role model stuff (laughter), yeah, let me go. And, man, as soon as I saw that, that changed my life. I don't think I even threw the papers that day. I mean I probably didn't. I just went nuts. I said, that is it. I'm a fly jets. And I didn't even tell my old man nothing about none of this stuff, you know. So, I went and got my old stuff out, got my old--and I had been, I had been going to, to the library, and, and they had this--they, they had a military aviation section. And they had taken that whole thing about--it wasn't FAA [Federal Aviation Administration], it was CAA [Civil Aviation Authority] then, Civil laboratory--Civil Aviation. And, and they had all these books out, and they all this--on flying and, they had all these tests on, on every flying thing that you could do. And they had all these tests at the end of the thing. Well, I started writing--I mean, I, I went to all these recruiting places. And the, and the, and the recruiting people--I stuttered really, really bad. I mean I could not--seriously, I could not talk. So I was, I didn't say a lot, a whole bunch of stuff cause I stuttered really, really bad. Nuns got concerned about this all through school. They were trying to get me in drama classes and all that kind of stuff to stop this stuttering. But it didn't, it didn't work. And I'd go to these recruiting places and get an application for pilot training, and then I would (imitating stuttering) stutter pretty bad. You know, and they'd say, you know, first of all you'll never make a pilot cause you stutter, and you're too short. You know, and one guy told me I was too ugly too. And so I wrote a letter to the Pentagon. And I told the Pentagon--I did. I told--I wrote Washington, D.C., and I told the Pentagon, I said, I want to be a pilot, and, you know, and these recruiting guys won't help out. They won't give me nothing. And they, and they says, no problem. And he says, are you in school? I said, yeah, I had enrolled in Kansas City Kansas Junior College, and to get in, to get in the engineering school. And I had written all the engineering schools, and I had never, in the whole high school, man, I had never taken a science course or a math course in high school. (Laughter) I was, I was a artist, you understand (laughter). And I had never taken physics, chemistry, biology, botany, anything hard, like that. I didn't take none of that. And I had taken English lit, I mean taken all the English courses and all that kind of stuff, but--and I, I took college, I took high school Algebra cause it was, freshman Algebra, I took that. Speaker 2: It's something that just came to mind--I don't want to (unclear) take it back, too far back from what you're talking about, but none of your counselors in high school suggested that you go to school or try to help you get in school? Speaker 1: No, oh, no, no, no. They didn't have counselors in high school. Speaker 2: I mean none of the teachers or administrators? Speaker 1: No, no, no. Un-un, no. Speaker 2: How did you make the National Honor [simultaneous] Speaker 1: I'm in a private, I'm in a private school. You'd think--but even in the public schools, I mean, you know, they didn't have counselors. Speaker 2: But you were in the National Honor Society, and it would seem like they would--somebody there would-- Speaker 1: Well, you'd think, you know. And, you know, Sister Desmus (ph.) was the only one that--and she got concerned because, you know, cause I was doing--I was, all this activities, I was doing all this activity stuff. And it was all soft, humanities activity, stuff like that, you know. But I hadn't taken, and I stayed away from the chemical lab and the physics lab, and I just stayed away. I didn't know what those nuts in there were doing. I mean they were a bunch of nerds to me, you know, and I didn't know what these cats were doing in there. And I didn't really care, you know. Story_ID: 61156 Speaker 1: But it wasn't until, when I really got interested in flying and stuff that that--and I started reading the requirements to be a pilot and to be a jet pilot and all that kind of stuff, and it had physics and (laughter) it had chemistry and it had math, and it had biology (laughter) and it had all these hard things. I said, oh, God. And so I, I tried to enroll in engineering school. And they, of course, tossed me out the door, said, liberal arts, liberal arts, you know. I said, no, no, I got to take chemistry and I got to qualitative analysis, and I got to take calculus. I got to take all these courses. And so, I made a bet at--I can't think of this guy's name, I made him a bet. I said, look, I bet you--I said, I'm gonna go--I'm gonna go to an alternative school for one semester, and I, and I'm a take like eighteen hours. And I took, I took, I took college Algebra, I took chemistry, I took qualitative analysis, I took--I mean it all hard stuff. And, and I, and I said, if I get anything less than a "B", you can forget me, okay. I went to Donnelly College [Kansas City, Kansas] for the, for the first semester. And I took eighteen hours (phone ringing). And, you know, you know, low and behold, I came back, got a "A" in one or two and B's in the rest. So anyway, I'm in engineering school, you know, for whatever it's worth. And so I write this letter to the Pentagon, and I'm--I'm got this emersion in make-up stuff in math and physics and chemistry and all that kind of stuff. So by the time these guys got there, I was in my second year of junior college, by the time they sent this team. And they did send, send a recruiting team directly to the university. And he said, you can--can you line other people who are interested in the pilot training as well. I was the first one in line and the first one in there. They gave you an eye check for color bind test, and they gave you an ear test for your hearing and thank God, they didn't ask me to recite the Declaration of Independence cause I would have flunked, cause I couldn't talk. And, and so they fine, they're going to Denver [Colorado]. And they just sent thirty-three of us out here in 1951. I was the only one to pass. Story_ID: 61157 Speaker 1: And what had happened was, all them tests that I had been getting at the library, it was the same things they had out here at Lowry [Air Force Base], same book, same everything. And I'd been taking these tests, you know--and I made me an airplane in my backyard, by the way (laughter), had a (unclear). I'd charge guys a nickel to get in my bird, I'm serious. I built a full airplane in my backyard at my house. And, you know, and it would take off--and, you know, in my brain it would take off, and I had seats in it (laughter), had a stick, you know. And I had rigged it up so the stick in the back would move just like the stick in the front. And I, you know, anybody [who] want to get in it with me, it cost me [you] to get in my airplane, but I'd get in my airplane, and I'd fly about an hour a (laughter) day (laughter). It's crazy, it was totally insane. But, but (laughter), you know, I was, I wanted to be this pilot guy. And so low and behold, by the time I got out to Lowry here I had done, I had done all this stuff, and I had passed like--I went through them tests like--I got--was the first one to get up and get out of there. And, and so, and so they, they thought it was rigged, and all the other cats thought it was rigged because, because I was the only black that came out here in that group, and I was the only one that passed. So they thought it was some kind of rigging deal that was going on, but it really wasn't. I mean the fact of the matter is, I had, I had--over, over time, and this didn't happen, you know, cause I had been looking at that flying thing for really a long time. And, but it just a side thing, you know, it was an imaginary thing. It was not something that, it was in my present consciousness right up here. But it was just something that I had in my back pocket that I was very fascinated with. And so by the time I got out here, it just, it was just like magic, man. Story_ID: 61158 Speaker 1: And then, and I got out here, and the brother that weighed me out here--I mean measured me, he said, man, you too short to fly. I said, you got to be crazy. You know, I just--. Speaker 2: They had a height requirement for flying? Speaker 1: Oh, man, yeah, you had to be five four [5'4"]. I was five three and three quarters. Yeah, man, I mean it's totally nuts, and I--and the guy said, man, don't ever get (unclear) you know, and it was a, it was a black guy out here, a Sergeant. And he said, man, don't--I'm a pass you, but I just thought--he was just rattling my cage, you know. But (unclear) should be bigger, and I went in the cadet training, got a class, went down there, and the upper classmen were just like, I mean just glommed on that right away. He said, man, you're too short. So we, for--we practiced crawling up the wall, and then all these things, you know. And, you know, you're taller in the--when you're--in the morning when you stand up, you're taller cause your bones ain't settled yet, so you can get about a quarter of an inch. But they got to carry you over there on a stretcher and stand you straight up (laughter). So every night for--cause they didn't, well, they didn't measure you--after I got in, every night, they had a roster on the wall that 9:00 o'clock lights out, and they tied my top, to the top of my cot, and two of base guys (unclear) pull, pull my feet for one hour every night for a month (laughter). I didn't grow shit (laughter). Nothing, nothing happened. And so, so our, our plan A, our plan A was either was to--I had to declare athletes feet, man. So what they did, they tape--they taped a quarter of an inch of--these are upper classmen did this, now I didn't do this, cause I wasn't smart enough to do this cause I was scared. So they taped a quarter of an inch of cardboard to my feet and put some socks on. And they, but they used this athletic tape. And the athletic tape, it don't come off, you know, you know, it's like, you know, it's a tape, you know, for, for swollen ankles, you know, track tape and stuff. So that was a mistake, but they taped my, taped the stuff to the bottom of my feet, and I put these white socks on. And so I'm a quarter of a inch higher, see. Story_ID: 61159 Speaker 1: And I'm in this room, all but-ass naked in this room, and I'm the only black guy in this room, and I was back in the crowd, and that--so that guy looked at me and he said, hey, you (laughter), you the little one, with the white socks on (laughter), get up here (laughter). He said, what the hell's this? And I says, I got ath-athlete's feet (laughter). And I said, I don't give a damn what kind of feet you got, get them socks off (laughter). My problem was, I had to--I couldn't get the tape and the socks off at the same time. I mean I'm going, and the tape ain't coming off, man. Well, the problem is I got an honor code violation, see, cause this is deception (laughter), you understand. I'm in trouble now. And so, I'm trying to get this tape off. And I'm just trying to get it--he said, what's wrong with you? So I said, these (unclear) things won't only come off, cause I'm trying to get the tape and the, everything to come off at the same time (laughter), and it ain't working. And so he saw (unclear), so our cover was busted. And so it was a class project. So everybody booed you know, and he said, he (unclear) said, disqualified. He says, get out of here. And so the problem was, he was a Sergeant, and you had to be a Flight Sergeant, you had to have wings to disqualify somebody. So they sent a Second Lieutenant in there, and it was an administrative guy, no wings, sent a Captain in there with a set of wings on. And he was a Flight Sergeant and he could, you know, he says, you know what, I don't want any part of this cause he knew the [United States] Air Force was looking for black pilots. So he disqualified himself and said, I don't want to be part of this. So they was--you know, about ten or fifteen more minutes, and this guy had to be six, five [6'5"], I mean the biggest the white boy I ever seen in my life. And he walked in there and, and he had these big wings on and everything, (laughter) and he, and he says to me, and he looks over to me, and I--my tears are going out like this, (laughter), they ain't doing like this, man, I wanted, our cover was busted, man (laughter). And I was, all this work, and I just said, I was just crying. And I just--that guy looked down at me, he looks at me and said, what's wrong with you? And he says, he says, how tall are you? I says, he, he--I says, I don't know. And he says, well, as far as I'm concerned, you're six feet tall. And he erased the disqualified. And he said, do me a favor, little man. Don't ever get measured again. And, and, man, I finally says, oh, thank you, and the whole class clapped. I mean we had, we had busted the system, man (laughter). And so I did grow a half inch though. That's the good news (laughter). So I'm five, four and a quarter now. But it--after I was twenty-five. It's crazy isn't it, totally nuts. Speaker 2: That is, that is. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 61160 Speaker 1: So, so you're in, beginning flight school now. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, well, you know, flight school was a dream. I mean, you know, I mean I just--it was like I was born to, to--it was like I was born to do that, man. I mean it was like, it was like I had been doing this all my life, as a matter of fact. I zoomed right now, you know, primary training. But that's where I stopped stuttering because--it was really fascinating. We were flying those little piper airplanes, and, and you know, you holler, you know, you're talk, you know, talking to, you know, the guy, he's hollering the instructions to you in the little piper cause it's making noise. It's like a kit. (Laughter) It's made out of cloth, you know. You know, and, you know, and, and it--but when you get to the T-6, you have to wear earphones and you got to talk. And you can't do anything without talking. So I got really scared. Man, I was petrified man because I was stuttering like crazy. So what I did, you'd, you--and they had a thing you could go to where you put these earphones on and you practice Morse Code, you know, dot, ditta, dot, you know, and then you--cause you got to pass a Morse Code test. And so, but I, what I did, I, I went down there, and I used it, cause I--you could talk into it. You could practice your, what you say to the tower. And I had a clipboard. And I wrote down everything you could ever say to the tower about anything. And I, and I sat home, and I wrote it out, you know. And then I could, I had to find a, a word in whatever it was that I could say. But if it started with a "k" cause I couldn't (stutter imitation) say K's. But I would go down that line and find a word and start with that, a word that I could get out, and start with that, and, and, and I would like pretend, and my key wasn't down. And then I--once I got started, I was actually kind of pretty good at, at following it through, but I memorized everything you could ever say to the tower, you know. And, and I started saying it to myself slow, and I went down there every night, and I, and I just put those earphones on and put that mic on, and I practiced every, everything they could say to me, everything I could say to them. And so by the time I got to the T-6, you know, I was, I was talking slower, and I was talking more coherent, but I had my crutch, which was right here, about anything they could say to me, and I, man I was--I studied the--I had this thing so memorized, man, that whatever sentence was, whatever the need to use, man, I would, I would nail it, man. And, and it was interesting because it, it carried over, and it slowed my, my talk down, and it, it made me more aware of what I was saying because I didn't realize that I--your brain gets way out there, man, and your mouth ain't catching up with it, and all that kind of stuff, you know what I mean? So it slowed me down, and, and I--I was better. And I stopped stuttering. I had more control over what I was saying in other words. Speaker 1: You think you were just sort of hyper? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah. I've always been that way (laughter), you can't tell (laughter). Story_ID: 61161 Speaker 1: Okay, now, so you take a leadership roll, but you have a, sort of a setback (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, all the, even the preflight training, when I went, you know, went through, you know, all, you know, what I did, I ended up joining up early because I didn't want to wait on my pilot class, cause I didn't have a military background. I mean I didn't know what military guys did. I know they marched a lot (laughter), and stuff, and it was a whole bunch of other things they had to do. And they, they camped out (laughter), and so, so, you know, I didn't trust myself to--and I thought that was gonna be the hardest thing, psychologically, I wasn't worried about the academics and stuff like that, but the physical stuff cause I was a little bitty guy, man, and so I didn't know whether they were gonna make you carry hundred pound knap sacks up, up vertical hills or what they gonna do. So I decided to--and I was in good shape because I was an athlete, but, but I had joined early as a, as an enlisted man. So I went enlisted training and, you know, and I came to the table with a lot of--and I'd already been accepted to pilot training when I came to the table as an enlisted man. And everybody in the hierarchy knew that I was gonna be a pilot. So I had a, a, a--you know, my arms around leadership, so they were just zoom me to the top, you know, anyway, cause I had already qualified, and these kids are--dropping out, high school drop outs and stuff, so rating them against me was, you know. And, and so, and so what they did, though, what was interesting about what they did, is call me in, and they said, you know, really, you know, you should be the flight leader, you know, you know, cause the rest of these, you know, don't have your background. And, he said, but you're not tall enough. You know, if you were taller, it ain't got nothing to do with your race, now, okay, Sergeant Davis is telling me this. And he says, if you were taller, you'd--said, I don't want you to be insulted, okay. So, we're gonna put yuckedty yuck as the flight commander and you're gonna be his assistant, okay. Okay, I said, this is story, this is gonna be the story of my life for the rest of my Air Force career, you know. So, anyway, I, I went through that. But, and then I got in preflight training, but I'd already been through all this stuff, and I'd been through flight safety. And I had been investigating aircraft accident, man, which is what I did as, what they call pre-cadet. And I mean I'm seeing airplane crashes, man, and people are dead and finding people's arms and legs laying around, and all that kind of stuff. Man, I'm going whoa, I don't know about this stuff. And so when I finally got in the preflight training, I mean I, I shot to the, I mean I was a class officer all the way through. And as soon as I got out of the little freshman plead thing, I was the number two guy in the flight again, you know, in, in rank. And it was, cause it was that way all the way through. Story_ID: 61162 Speaker 1: So I was a class leader guy throughout the whole process, but I, I got--I was feeling my oats one day, and I was flying, and I was flying a T-6, and I had the radio turned off, man, and I was on a cross country. And that's the advance course where you get, you get to fly all around, get to go to Kentucky, and you get to go around all these places, you know. And you get to use the radio and the VFR [Visual Flight Rules], the VOR [VHF Omni-directional Range], and all that old kind of stuff so you can find out where you are. And you a get radio, to follow a radio beam. I had turned the radio to a, to a, a music station. And I don't know who was hot in those days, but I was bopping (laughter). And a storm came in, and they--all students land. And I'm up here, bebopping (laughter) around over Kentucky, you know. And so finally, I was heading back home, and, and they were, gotten calls, I mean they were getting ready to launch the Highway Patrol after my butt, you know, (laughter). So I come back, and it was a ninety degree cross wind, I mean it was a thunderstorm right over the base, man. And the wind was, oh, it was really--it turned to black almost. And I came, and they were trying to talk me in. Well, I was, I was hearing, but I wasn't hearing. I was scared to death. I was petrified because the, the wind wasn't down the runway. It was a ninety degrees to the runway, and if they didn't have a runway, they were going to the wind. And that wind sock was just standing straight out, which means that it's well over thirty, thirty knots. And it was about forty-five knots, ninety degree to the, you know. And the whole idea is that I had not been at, you know, in our final stages to get the fine tuning, letting the flap, flaps all the way down, and I put four flaps in a ninety degree crosswind, and I got--I, I was landing, and I hadn't, didn't have my power up and the airplane spun out. And the only thing that saved me from being dead was I was close enough to the ground so when the airplane spun out, it just ran out of air--I mean it ran out of forward motion, and the airplane went into a spin. And when it spun, when it spun out, I was close enough to the ground for, that the wing tip hit the ground before I could turn over. If I was high in the air, I would have turned over, and it would have been over. I mean I would have just been a dead, another dead dude. Story_ID: 61163 Speaker 1: And, but by hitting that wing, it, it careened the airplane sideways, and I was at the end of the runway, and it dug into the ground, and swung the airplane around this way. And, and our fire chief weighed four hundred pounds, sitting in a jeep in front of mobile control. And I'm sitting there, and that fat guy couldn't get out of that thing. And I says, oh, my God, I'm gonna have hamburger for dinner because this prop is just, I mean it's, I mean the airplane just spun around and it was heading straight for the mobile control. And I saw people running. I saw, guys were--they jumped out of the mobile control. They were booking, man, and this fat dude is still (laughter) sitting in this jeep, and I said, oh, my God, I'm a kill somebody. I'm dead, I know I'm dead. And, and everything, from that point blacked out. I remember nothing after that. All I know is that the--I was sitting in the airplane, and when I woke up, I said, damn, I'm dead. I said this is cool. I mean, heaven's really--I thought I'm in--presume I was going to heaven, see (laughter). It was so cool, I was--it was quiet. It was just serene. And I, you know, I said this is cool stuff, man. You know, at least I didn't go to hell (laughter), you know. I did some good things, you know (laughter). And, and, and I--and they got me back conscious by bamming on the canopy. They were beating on the canopy, open it up, cause it, you know, I could open up from the inside, but they--and they didn't, cause I was sitting there. I was just in shock, you know. And so finally, I mean I looked up, and said, oh, my God, I ain't dead, you know. And, and I opened up the canopy, you know. And they, you okay? Yeah, yeah, went through all this stuff. And it turns out that what had happened was, I was I had, I had jammed on this brake so hard, trying to miss the control, I had just jammed, I had jammed that all the way in. And it turns out that the wheels had--the airplane was swerving, and the, and the wheels went like this. And enough for the--the wing missed that guy by eighteen inches. I mean, and they measured the, the tract for the wheel, where the wheels were, and they measured it back to where that fat dude was sitting, and I missed that cat by eighteen inches, man. (Laughter) And (unclear) he, he, I think he quit the next day (laughter). And, right away, they, they were gonna ground me. The only way I didn't get washed out because I was a class officer. That's the only reason I didn't get washed out because they called me, man, they read my but up one side and down the other, said, what the blankety, blank, blank. Hadn't (unclear) he hadn't told me, I said, he--I said, I had never heard anything about doing half flaps in a crosswind, nobody had told me nothing like that, you know. Where would I find that out, you know. And we went up the next day, and we shot over a hundred landings with four different instructions. And they took the airplane, and they stalled it out from fifty feet, and said, you got it, you know. And from that point on, I learned more about landing because of that accident, cause I had to do, shoot a hundred landings before I could get reinstated, you know. And I knew more about landing from every angle, and I became--matter of fact, I did all the landing stuff for the, you know, for the space shuttle cause I got to be this landing expert because of an accident (laughter). So it was another one of these taking, taking lemons and making lemonade out of it, you know. So it was, it was pretty cool. Story_ID: 61164 Speaker 1: Well, what happened--how did you become an astronaut? Speaker 2: Oh, man, well, what--this over aggressive thing that I had going for me, you know. I was, when I finally got out of the pilot training, they sent me to instructor school down in Selma. So I was in Selma, right terrorizing Selma, Alabama, you know, and back in 1955, before any of the marches and stuff, you know. And I'd got--nearly got lynched down in Selma because of my cocky Northern attitude, but that's a whole nother story. But what I had been doing, man, I had been, I had been flying my missions. I had everybody--everybody that didn't want to fly a mission, cause as an instructor, you, you have to fly a mis--two missions a day. Every week, you got to fly at least one night mission, and every month, you got to go on cross country, whether you want to or not. And so, and a lot of these guys, you know, just lazy and stuff like that. So I would fly my missions, but I'd fly their night mission cause they wanted, they wanted to be home eating. So I said, hell, I'll take it. So pretty soon, by the time I was in the service--well, it was not very long, but I had a lot of flying--I had twice as much flying time as anybody else for my rank and grade and stuff, you know. And I was a brown-nosing sucker, man. I mean I just--I went in there and found out what, what people needed, you know. And as an officer, and I did--once I found out what they needed, I did twice as much work for what they required, you know. And, and somebody told me something once, you know, find out something that your boss doesn't like doing and do it for him, and you'll get promoted fast, you know. And I kind of used that as a practice, kind of most of my life. And I found out, I was (unclear) looking around. I'd, I'd, you know, I'd--I was really trying to get in my bosses' heads, all through the whole thing. And I tried to get in their heads to try to figure out where they were going and how they got to be Colonels and whatever, you know. And, and I would, and I'd figure what they needed and what was slowing them down, and I'd have it for them. You know, if we had big meeting, (unclear) we had big briefings at the end of the day, you know. And he had to do all this preparation. Well, I'd go do it for him, and I'd just to present it to him. Man, I've already done that, you know. And I've already, I've already got all the aircraft loads, I've got all this stuff, and boom, there it is. You know, oh, yeah, this is great, you know. So pretty soon, I'm--they put me on fast track, see, so I was getting promoted early. So I got promoted to Captain early, and they had put me on fast track for Major, and--which meant that if I had stayed where I was when this astronaut thing came along, I would have been a Major within, you know, a year or two. You know, you normally got to wait five or six years for that. And I, I had a lock, man, on where, on where I was going. Story_ID: 61165 Speaker 1: And my shortness kept getting in the way because it had to do with the kind air, kind of equipment they had cause when I went to Japan, we were flying B-57's. And before my getting over there, seven crews had been lost in the B-57, both pilot and navigator, and in every instance, the pilot was under five, seven [5'7"] cause they had, they, they--you couldn't do the rudder pedals, right, because they had the engines placed in the wings, and you couldn't control these things under a certain speed. So the airplane would just flip over and turn into a flat spin, and (finger snap) these guys were dead, you know. And so, I, I mean they wouldn't give me a crew because of this, you know. So I worked for the head guy over there, for the, for the, for the base commander. I was a big brown-nosing sucker, and, you know, we'd party and everything, you know. I was on the base track team. I was on the base boxing team over there (laughter) in Japan. And I talked to him, I said, look, man, I'm incredible, man, you got to let me--you got to give me a crew. And so, he gave me a crew. And, and it was the black crew in, in the Far East, me and Tom Blanchett, big tall, six foot, four [6'4"] brother, beautiful cat, man. Tom was, was the cool, German Shepard, Doberman to my Chihuahua, you know, you know. And he was so cool. And he was always cooling me down, you know. And, and he, before we got in the airplane, he said, for the last time, said, Dwight, don't you kill me tonight (laughter). You know, it was his last words, (unclear) (laugher). So anyway, part, you know, part of cascading all this stuff into one, big ball, you know, your, your records are speaking for you, you know what I mean. This stuff's going back to the Pentagon, and I'm, I'm getting all these outstanding ratings and all that kind of stuff. And I'm flying like crazy, and I got all this flying time, and I, and I started working my Master's in engineering. In the meantime, I got my Bachelors in aeronautical engineering from Arizona State, in the meantime, while I was in the service. And I did that at night when I was flying. So I started working on my Master's at Cal-Berkley [University of California-Berkeley, Berkeley, California] cause I was stationed there in San Francisco area. So, you know, I'm smoking. But I don't know where I'm smoking to, you know. All I know is I was gonna stay in the service, try to be there thirty years, kept, kept--. Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: You ready? Speaker 1: --Now, you're moving about a hundred miles an hour towards you don't know where. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, you know, and I, you know, and the, the--you know, the end product for me at the time was, well, to be a colonel or a general. So just let, let's leave it flat. Just don't go into nothing exciting, you know what I mean. Just leave the whole thing flat. And, and but, but, the objective was, and if I could make bird Colonel before I left or--and then I wanted to get my Master's in engineering, you know. I wanted to Air War College, I went--there was a whole, I mean I had benchmarks about things, and I had gone through Squadron Officer School. I had done that on my own, and, and the Air Force was sending me to every school. Man, I must have been to a hundred--not a hundred, I bet I went to thirty or forty schools. And, and then I got a really--I mean really, the neatest boss anybody could have. He was a little, short Jewish guy, German Jew, by the name of Berkowitz. And he was really paranoid. He was a navigator. And I was a pilot. And he was a lieutenant colonel, and my boss, and this guy says, you know, I like little short guys. Said, you know, I'm a take you to the moon. And so he sent me to every--I, I went to B-52 school, knowing that I was too little to fly a B-52, but he sent me to B-fifty--I became an aircraft commander in a B-52. Then after I, I got aircraft commander qualifications, then he sent me to F1--I mean the, the C-135 school, and I became an aircraft commander in a KC-135 tanker, you know. And I was, and then he said--I was on the air traffic control board in San Francisco [California], and he got me that. Then he sent me to air traffic--I'm a qualified air--a licensed air traffic controller, man. I went to air traffic controller school in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma]. And he sent me down there to go to school so I'd know everything about air traffic control, you know, which means talking and all that kind of stuff again. So I got all this stuff, and all this stuff is piling up in my record, in my, in my record bank here. Story_ID: 61166 Speaker 1: And so November the fourth, 1961, I get a letter. And it's signed, not by the president, but it's at the direction of the president. "I'm inviting you to become America's first Negro astronaut", you know. And, and he says, "This is very exciting because if it's, if this project succeeds, you will probably end up being the greatest Negro that ever lived." And that was in the letter, man. And I said, whaaaa (laughter), you know, said, I'll take that. And so I got this letter, and I thought it was a joke. And so I waited three days, and the reason why I thought it was a joke, we used to do things in headquarters that--we, we'd get Department of Air Force stationary, and we'd send people to Alaska. And we'd put it, you know, I mean we'd write all these orders, and we'd send this guy--you know, somebody we'd been--you know, somebody we, you know, and we'd give to him. "God damn, I'm going to Alaska, they gonna send me to Alaska." And about a couple of days later, we'd say, ah, got ya. (Laughter). He gonna tell--he told his old lady, he told everybody. And so I thought it was one of them letters. So I waited three days, waiting for the other shoe to drop. And nobody called me on it. So I took the letter to my, to my immediate boss, Berkowitz. And he said, "Forget it." He says, "No, no, no, no. Ed, that's another world. Your career is secure. You're gonna, you're gonna leave Travis [Air Force Base] with a minimum of a bird on your shoulder, maybe a star, okay. Why would you bother with this crap? Those guys are crazy down there." And so I said, you know, I said, well, okay. I didn't say it--so I went to Doug McDonald, his boss. And I talked to Colonel McDonald, and Colonel McDonald looked at me, looked at that thing, and he said, "This is nuts." He said, "Why would you want to do something like this?" And I said something really stupid. I said, 'cause I want to be on the cover of "Ebony Magazine" (laughter). And he looked at me, and he said, what the hell is "Ebony Magazine"? He had never heard of "Ebony Magazine". I said, man, I get to save my people (laughter). He said, what people do you want to save, Ed? He said, what are you talking about. You know, he says, these people are crazy. He said, man, they're gonna make hamburger out of you. He said, you have no idea what you're getting into, but, you know, he said, leave it alone. Your career is in cement. You're on the fast track. Everything's fine. Leave it alone. And I couldn't leave it alone, man. I went home, and I thought about this stuff, you know, and I read, I read that letter about that "greatest Negro alive", kept reading that part over and over again (laughter). So I--. Speaker 2: Were you married at this time? Speaker 1: Well, no, I mean that's what, that was the killer. See, that was the killer. I had--. Speaker 2: There was nobody else to talk about it with. Speaker 1: No, my old lady had split and left my butt with two kids, man. See, and I'm gonna, I'm gonna have to bring these two kids up. And the Air Force didn't even know that. See, I hadn't told the Air Force that my old lady had left. And she had left years ago. And I was bringing these kids up by myself. And, you know, one guy on the base knew about it, but nobody else did 'cause it was against the Air Force regulations to have kids on the base without a mom. So I didn't say nothing to nobody about this, man. So that was my little secret. And, you know, and so, and this was gonna blow this up, you see what I'm saying? And so, now, I just--I can't leave it alone, man. So I snuck, and I got all my transcripts and all my records, and I sent 'em--and they had most of 'em up there anyway, but I send all the new stuff up there. And, man, it wasn't even there a day, those people didn't even have time to read that thing. To show, I mean to show you how this was cooked up, man, this whole thing was cooked up. You know, all they wanted was a response that I, to give 'em, to say, yeah. That's all they wanted from me. And they didn't care what my records were because the very day they received it, I got orders sending me to Edwards Air Force Base for flight testing and interview. Story_ID: 61167 Speaker 1: Come on, man, something wrong with this picture, here. Air Force doesn't operate like that. It takes months. You want to do anything in the Air Force, it takes months, I mean you got to go this--that, that same day they got it, I was heading for Edwards [Air Force Base]. I get down there, and Chuck Edgar is the head of the test pilot school, and I get down there. And we fly, and they interview with me and all that kind of stuff. And the last question they asked me on the interview, man, they said, we assume that you're happily married cause that's a pre-requisite. And I says, no, I might as well tell you right now, I'm not. And they said, well, what do you mean you're not. What, what's going on here? And I said, well, I--I'm divorced. He said, where is she? I says (laughter) hell I don't know. He said, go find her and bring her back. And, and find out what she wants, how much money she wants. Speaker 2: Now, this is not exaggeration? Speaker 1: Hey, man, hey, man, I mean, hey, man. I go back--wait, wait a minute. This gets crazy. I leave Edwards, you know, with this kind of heavy on my mind cause I don't know what I'm a do about this. I hadn't talked to Sue in, ah, man, I hadn't talked to Sue in two or three years. I mean it's crazy. And I'm going back--and check this out. I land my airplane at Travis Air Force Base, man. It, a forty-five minute flight from Edwards to Travis. I get out, there's a limo waiting for me, a limousine, dude, sitting there waiting for me, with a flag on it. I'm going what the heck's going on? I get out of my airplane, got my flying suit on, and this major ushers me in the limo. I said, I said, what's going on? He said, just get in the car, and don't say nothing. This limousine drove me to, straight to personnel, and they had all these papers for me to sign. And that's in the forty-five minutes from the time I left Edwards Air Force Base to the time I got back to Travis [Air Force Base], they had all these papers, all--you know. First of all, they, they had--they made me a regular officer. I had applied for regular, I was in the service nine years, man. I had applied for regular every year, and got turned down cold. All my stuff, all my education, all my flying, didn't mean a damn to them, cause I wanted to be a regular officer, cause I didn't go to one of the academies, you see what I'm saying? I came in through the cadet program, and they--always kind had been like a leper, you know (laughter), cause you know, you didn't come through the ROTC [Reserve Officer Training Corps], I mean you was like a, you know, a real slob coming in through the cadet program like I did. And so, but all of a sudden I'm a regular officer. And all of a sudden I'm signing all these papers doing, making me all these magic guys, that I had been trying to do for nine years, you know. And I walked out of there, and they said, you know, you've signed all this stuff now. You've got to test--like assigning me to test pilot school, I mean everything. I was all done in forty-five minutes, man. Story_ID: 61168 Speaker 1: And so now, I got to solve this problem with the, with the little woman. So I called her mother, cause I didn't know where she was. And her mother told me where she lived. And she was living with a white guy in San Francisco [California] (laughter). And so I called her up, and I was, I mean I was, and I started stuttering again, I think (laughter). (imitating stuttering) Ba-ba-baby, baby, I mean I got to talk to you, you know, we got to talk, you know. And we went to coffee down on Market Street, I'll never forget it, man. And I told her this story, I said, you know, this letter says, I could be the greatest Negro that ever lived (laughter). And she said, Ed, it sounds like this really means something to do you. I said, yeah, it does. And I says, I said, they're willing to pay you. She said, how long will this take? I said, well, test pilot's training is a year, and then after I get out of that, then I go into astronaut training. She said, well, I'll tell you what I'll do; says, I'm a give you a year. She said, but I screw who I want, okay. So I said, um-hum, that's a compromise. I was hoping she wouldn't say that part (laughter). And so, and so she said, yeah, no problem. And so I said, but you got have some--I said, what kind of clothes you got and all that kind of stuff because, because, man, it was right after that that this whole thing exploded, man. And she came back home, and all them pictures that you see in "Ebony Magazine", all staged. I mean and I never married her again. We never got remarried. But, so she came back for--and at the end of that year, she says, I'm gone (laughter). And then she, she gave me a year, man, but it got me through all the PR [public relations] crap. All them pictures you see and in all them things, you know, with the family crap and all that stuff, her watering the grass and all that old kind (laughter) of nonsense. What is this? (Laughter) But it was okay. We, we played it up good. Story_ID: 61169 Speaker 1: And, but, and the, and the trouble was that, in the final analysis, I got in the problem, and it was a big mess about, you know, the announcement with Yeager [Brigadier General Charles "Chuck" Yeager] because they tried to wash me out of test pilot school. I mean they, they told nobody to fly with me. They, they advised the other students not to socialize with me and not to drink with me. I wasn't a big drinker anyway, but, you know, not to do all socialize with me, not to do anything with me because they wanted me to be psychologically, walk away from it. See, cause if they made me feel at home, then I would stay. And so the whole premise was, look what Jackie Robinson did to major league baseball. You see what they did. They brought that one nigger in there, and the next you know, they got niggers all over the place. And look what happened to basketball. I mean you can't get a white guy on the court (laughter), you know. And that's what Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] is gonna do with the space program. All of 'em are gonna be black. Story_ID: 61170 Speaker 1: This raises an interesting question, at least, in my mind. It seems that within the ranks of the government or the Air Force, there are two opposing forces--. Speaker 2: Oh, yes (whispering). Speaker 1: --those that are trying to draw you in, guess, and those that are trying to keep you out. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, what was your analysis of this? Speaker 2: Okay, okay, what happened was, see, Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] thought they had elected him king. He didn't know about, you know, the three branches of Congress, you know (chuckle), you know, the Executive branch, Judicial branch and the, and the, the representative branch. And so Kennedy kind of felt that he could do anything he wanted to do. And this whole idea--this is what's fascinating about this thing, I was created because of Whitney Young, remember Whitney Young, the Urban League [National Urban League]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, when Kennedy was gonna be elected, he was Senator Kennedy, and he went to Harry Belafonte [HM] to ask Harry, he said, I, I need the black vote to win; said, I will not win--we did all these polls, we will not win without the black vote. How do I get it? Kennedy didn't know no black people. He didn't have no black roommate in college or none of that kind of stuff. He didn't--I mean and Kennedy was a liberal. He was not a liberal at all. Bobby [Kennedy] was a liberal. Kennedy was scared to death. He was Catholic, and he had all these problems, associated with being a Catholic. And he wasn't about to embrace black folks to ad to his problems, you know. So he was drug screaming into this black thing, trying to get this black vote thing going on here. And so, Dr. King got up and made his--I mean Belafonte set up King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], A. Philip Randolph, Roy Wilkins, the, the gang, and Whitney [Whitney Young]. They're sitting in this room. He said, what do I have to do to get the black vote? Dr. King made his spiel, we need garbage workers to have equal pay, and we need a civil rights bill. We need a voting rights bill, and yada-yada and everybody had their list of things. And Philip had this union thing he wanted to get (unclear) the unions. And Whitney came up with this nutty, crazy, off-the-wall idea, that, you know, Mr. President, he said, you know, we, we can't get our black kids in college. And we don't--and George Wallace is down there standing in the door of the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], etc., etc. He said, we don't need white colleges. What do you mean you don't need white colleges? Look, we got four military academies that we, that the government has total control over. We want to--we need to develop in America a cadre of black, in-intelligencia that are engineers, scientists, industrial giants, company CEO's [chief executive officers], these are the guys, the (unclear) (capitals?) of industry. And we, and we did an analysis, and come to find out that some huge percentage of people who are CEO's in the country graduated from a military academy, you know. And so, ooh, the light comes on, an idea light comes on. And so he said, we don't need those civilian universities. On top of that, they, they're not taking our kids. So what we'll do, we'll set up--I want you to set--we need to set up a deal where senators control the entrance to these things. So we get a bunch of liberal senators, even though they're not in the same state, and we'll just funnel these kids right into these academies. And so he said, how do we do that? And, and Whitney says, make a black astronaut. And King and all these guys supporting him looked at him, are you nuts? What is this? He said, make a black astronaut, and parade him around the country. And, and if they, and if they can feel him and touch him and all that kind of stuff, they're gonna go into science, they're gonna go into engineering. And he's gonna tell 'em, come on in, the water's fine. And just follow me. And that's what happened. So I became created out of that, the whole concept of it. Story_ID: 61171 Speaker 1: And Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] didn't get it because, you know, and we're still studying this, this thing about the archives. His first major speech was at the Coast Guard Academy in New London, Connecticut. And 5,000 white boys walked right in front of him. He could not find one recognizable black, and so it was after he was the President, several months after he was President that, boom, the idea light came on, that I see what Whitney's [Whitney Young] talking about, cause there should be some black kids walking out in front of me. They all had white suits on. So he called George Ready from Harvard, he was one of these Harvard professors. And George was my handler in the White House. So, and that's how this whole thing got started, you know. So now, you got the Kennedy, the administration thing with a mission. And this is mission is, is to paint--I made a hundred and fifty-six speeches the first year I was in the program, man. A hundred and fifty--you know, (unclear) that's a speech every other day, you see what I'm saying? And so, now, I'm in the--they stick me in test pilot school, and then give me a, a speaking thing of, of seventeen speeches I got to make over a weekend, starting Thursday and come back Monday. You see what I'm saying. And so now, I'm trying to go to school, and be this test pilot, trying to cheat death. And guys was dying out there like crazy, you know, and I'm worried about people dying, you know, around me and stuff. And so--and I'm out making speeches to little pre-school kids, you know (laughter). You know, what's up with this? You know, and, everybody got mad--I mean everybody out there got upset with me, the other test pilots got--and they should have damn well got upset with me. I'm sitting there, in their midst, I'm not one of those guys. These guys all belong to a fraternity that they created, that's their fraternity. It's like somebody going to a college campus and taking some black guy from nowhere and sticking him in the middle of the Alpha Kappa or whatever, Psi, you know, Omega something fraternity, without them voting on it. You see what I'm saying? And you're gonna like this guy, you're gonna accept him, you're gonna treat him nice, you're gonna be--teach him. You're gonna be friendly with him, gonna drink with him, you're gonna let him run around with you and have barbeques at night with him, and all that stuff, you know. And these guys said, to hell with that. (Unclear) You bring this nigger out here and gonna, gonna make us love him, un-un. So, now you got this backlash, both from NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] and the Air Force saying no way, un-un. I mean, boy, you are going down the toilet. I mean, you know--so now, we got a situation where they wouldn't fly with me, where they wouldn't talk to me, they wouldn't instruct me. So I had, I got through test pilot school by flying with other students, you know, cause we were assigned to fly. And there's nothing they could do about that. And I'd get up there and say, hey, man, how'd you do this; how'd you do that? Show me what you did here, show me what you did there. And they, and they would, you know, well, they were anxious to get through the, you know, figuring they're gonna get through, you know. And so they would do it, and they would show me what they were doing cause my instructors wouldn't. It was bizarre. I did briefings. At their briefings, they were briefed--debriefed for two hours. They'd debrief me in five minutes. I said, did I do anything wrong? If I did--if you did, I would have told you. I mean the mission's over, goodbye. See, now, and I'd go back home, and I started reading books and stuff like that, but I just couldn't wait till my turn to, to--cause you, you had the front seat, back seat, front seat, back seat about four or five times with, with the guy in the back instructing. But he would be another student, not the big instructor guy. And that's how I learned all the test points and all the test missions and stuff like that. I graduated eighth in the class, man, out of six--out of seventeen people--seventh in this class. Out of all these people, and that's with these people not flying with me, man. And that's, and that's with, with them not instructing me and trying to do all this stuff, and it's, and as a matter of fact, it's coming out in the movies, you know, well, how--you know, if I was so bad, you know, cause Yeager [Brigadier General Charles "Chuck" Yeager] came up with this idea that I was lower than the lowest, you know, I couldn't fly, I couldn't do this. So the question is, how did I get, how did I get rated seventh in my class, in my graduating class out of test pilot school? So I mean it was just, it was crazy. The whole things was nuts. And so, but I did graduate with honors and all that kind of stuff out of test pilot school; got all the certificates and centrifuge training and zero-g training, and all the training, and I passed everything with flying colors, you know. Story_ID: 61172 Speaker 1: But they tried to paint me in this thing, and so they were the forces of darkness put together, and then an anthropological study on me, beautiful slick-back book, man, anthropological study on Captain Edward J. Dwight, Jr., okay, (unclear) (crumb?) coat color, nice color and everything like that, man; open this thing up, and it was--the book was that, it was thick. And they had all these anthropological studies on people, and, and the solution, I mean the, the upshot of the thing was I was below the seventy-fifth percentile man. I was, and if you would take--and they had this graph where you had all these tall guys, and down to the little short guy. And about here is a little black guy, (unclear) black (unclear), that was me (laughter), you know. All the rest of these guys were, were shadow figures, but there was one little black guy right here, and it says, out of every hundred men, if you take any hundred men in the United States of America, I'd be shorter than seventy five of them. See, which meant--and the conclusion was they couldn't build a space suit small enough to fit me, thinking my hands are too small, so they couldn't build a space glove small enough to fit me, so therefore, I could not qualify as an astronaut cause they could not build a suit small enough to fit me. And then, in intell--they got into intellectual, my intellectual--nobody's ever tested me, measured me. They had my measurements from here to there, there to there, there to there, every place. They had full measurements of my body, supposedly my body, you know. But then, nobody had ever measured me like that, you know, in my, you know. And so now, we got all this stuff being presented to President Johnson [President Lyndon B. Johnson]--Kennedy was dead by then. And Johnson, well, my God, yeah, this is terrible, you know. Speaker 2: We've got to change tapes. Story_ID: 61173 Speaker 1: I could. I was in--flying up there all the time. Speaker 2: Okay. So they're... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 2: running you ragged basically. You speak and then you gotta... Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 2: keep up with what everybody else is doing too? Speaker 1: Exactly um-hmm. Speaker 2: And how'd you get--did you ever get any sleep? Speaker 1: Well you know, the sleep part was fascinating. Because they had a deal. Larry Morrison was the guy that started this thing [unclear]. Larry would say, "You come into class..." You had to get up early in the morning. The class started at six, seven something like that. And Larry would say, [shouting] "How many people in the world?" "3.9 billion." "How many astronauts are there?" "45 [unclear]." And the ratio of 45 to people to 3.9 billion, you know. And he'd say, "You're gifted. You're special. There's 45 out of 3.9 billion people [unclear]. Think about who you are." And I sat in the front row. So I would sit on the front row in every class. You know, every class I'd sit in the front row. And I'd say, "Damn! And I'm Black! Oh Lord have mercy! Oh my God! I got to be the superset Nigger in the world." You know [Laughing] "'Cause I'm one of these 45. I'm it! I mean I... Who can I call and tell? [Laughing]" And so I was so...I believed that stuff, man. I was eating it eating it up. And he would [unclear] this thing about dated activities sleeping and stuff like that. And so he'd go through this thing about, you know, God made the day in 3 eight-hour blocks, 24 hours. And so you work eight hours. That's why they'd do it that way and you'd sleep eight hours. That's why they give you eight hours sleep and then got eight hours to play. But astronauts are some incredible people. You know, why in the world would we waste that eight hours for sleep? Because we did...we still needed to play a little bit. We got to have some encouragement activity here. But this sleeping stuff, I mean we can work with that. And so now we had to come up with an idea. We had to go home and come up with something that we really wanted--it's called the golden apple theory. Where you have something that you really, really, really wanna do or want something really, really bad. And like I said some guy wanted to water-ski with Jackie Kennedy [Jacqueline Kennedy Onasis] and so they...and so every time you started thinking about sleep and getting tired, you saw yourself. And there's you and Jackie going Ha-ha. You know, waterskiing [Laughing] together. Hey Jackie. You know. In my case I wanted to be on the cover of "Look" or "Life" Magazine. And my vision was that I was in New York. And you know, how they have all the newsstands in New York. As soon as my-as soon as the magazine came out people are fighting over it. They were knocking each other down to get my magazine [Laughing] my cover shot. [Laughing] Beating each other up for my cover. Sothat's what I visualized. Okay. And sure enough, you know you start practicing this stuff. And pretty soon, you know, you're sitting down thinking about sleeping and being tired and stuff like that. You know. And you'd say, "Hey, I can't let this get in the way. 'Cause there you know...I gotta get that magazine that they're gonna fight over [Laughing] my picture on the front of that magazine [Laughing]." And so pretty soon I was sleeping two hours a night, Man. And I couldn't... I didn't wanna go to bed. And I couldn't wait to get up. And I mean... It just worked for all the time I was in the program. For four years I slept for about two to two and a half hours a night. And I just... I did not wanna sleep. 'Cause it did get in the way. It got in the way of all kinds of things that were going on. I mean, the studying or something that was, you know. But I did, and I'd go to sleep and then I'd get up and I'd run, you know, 18 million miles and go to class and do all that kind of stuff. So pretty soon I had this monkey on my back when I got out of the service. Because you don't go out in civilian life and, you know, sleep two [Laughing] hours a night. I mean there's no... kind of no need to be. You know. But, you know, I still have trouble today sleeping. I don't wanna go to sleep and I can't wait to get up. I just...I have a monkey on my back. 'Cause I got--I don't know how to handle it, but I'm working on it [Laughing]. Story_ID: 61174 Speaker 1: But, you know, with all these kind of disciplines, and then you're looking at where I'm listening to everything these people are telling me. That's what the problem was. See I was...I've never had a suspicious brain about these things. You see what I'm saying? And conspiracies don't, you know, play good up here in this brain. And so I just...I always give people credit for being pure of heart and pure of thought and pure of all these things. You know. So you give people the benefit of the doubt. So my theory about all the stuff that was going on around me. And I knew it was going on. But I was trying to give them the benefit of the doubt. They were just scared. You know, the boy is out--the test pilots they were just scared. You know. They didn't know what to expect of me. They didn't know what I was gonna do next yada, yada, yada. You know. And...it wasn't until...there were several major events that happened. The first kind of event was that they--they wanted to play games with my ethical or moral stuff. So I'm on the speaking tours, lots of parties. So the first thing they did was line me up with all these women. And they paid these women money, hard cash [chuckle] dollars. And my first deal was...it was in Ohio, I think. And they... and the driver, the limo driver parked and I got in the limo. And it was, of course, after this big speech. 5,000 people and I'm making the big guest speaker and stuff. And they said, "You're really short man." And I'm going... you know, by the time I got in town he'd said it about four times. I said, "Knock off the short stuff man. I mean, you know, I don't need that. You know, what's the point?" "[unclear] picked you 'cause [unclear]." I said, "You know, we don't need to deal with that." Well I didn't get the hint until I got in the elevator. And he took me to this room with flowers everywhere and there's food everywhere. And there's [Laughing] four of the most beautiful white women you ever seen in your life man, six-two [6'2"] [Laughing], you know five-eleven [5'11"] [Laughing]. You know. And my job was to pick one. [Laughing] And I'm this little bitty runt [Laughing] and they thought I was a big guy. They assumed that I was a big black guy. And they were like "Oh my what are we gonna do now?" You know. God, 'cause the women were kind of very interesting. 'Cause women don't really give a damn about how tall you are. 'Cause it's all about power man. It's got nothing to do with any of that stuff. It's got to do with power and money and, you know. If it's about power...money and power are irreplaceable factors. You know. You know, so here I got four proposals of marriage from [Laughing] these chicks, you know. And these women were women of the street calls girls and stuff like that. "Boy I wanna marry you. You're so cute. I wanna marry you [Laughing]", you know. "Okay [Laughing] babe." So anyway they make this report and take it to the President. And they said, "This little guy likes white women." And the person now, "I wasn't there. I was not in the room. But I heard what he said [Laughing]." President Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] was alive and [Laughing] he said, "Don't we all like white women [Laughing]? And so what's with this?" And they were disappointed. They spent money. Lots of money setting this up, Man. And this is the Pentagon. These are the guys...these are the plumbers. Oh you know, the members of--in Nixon's [President Richard Nixon] day we had the plumbers [unclear]. These are the guys [Laughing] that are setting me up man. And so then...the next thing they did was have some guys beat me up. And so I went...[unclear] I remember the first time I got beat up I don't know where I was. I was in Indiana some place. I had made a big, big, big speech and then you go to the cocktail party. You know. You go and you mingle and everything. And they paid the guy $500 to whack me. And what they wanted was an astronaut involved in an altercation. End of my career. You know, and it never hit the papers in both instances. And drinks were spilled and rinks...I mean the guy coldcock the hell out of me. I mean I saw stars man. So I jumped into my airplane. The same thing happened when I went to the White House. And I told--I said, "Look man these guys...I need a body guard." And they laughed at me. I said, "I need a bodyguard!" I said, "Rockstars have bodyguards. All these people have bodyguards. I need a bodyguard. I'm a little bitty guy I want a bodyguard." They said, "You're nuts! They not going to give you no bodyguard." I said, "You're gonna send me out there and parade me out there, I want a bodyguard." And so I talked to the [unclear] talked to the President and all these people. So they brought down Lerone-Elhart (ph.) Bennett from Minneapolis, Minnesota and said, "This guy needs a personal handler." But before they went that next step they asked me a bunch of other questions. And I told them about what was going on. And they said, "You're a liar. You are a absolute... you are crazy man. We picked the wrong guy." Story_ID: 61175 Speaker 1: And the next thing you know, they sent me down and they held... I was in the West Wing of the Whitehouse. In the White House they have...every office up there has a little closet thing. You know, and this is where the guys get a little nookie in the daytime and stuff like that. And they had little cots in there. They take power naps in there, whatever. And there's a little bed in there. So they cleaned all the beds out and they put a chair and one of these real little tape recorders and they went and got this spotlight like this thing here. And they set it up here and were shining it right in my face. And I didn't see the guy that came in. They brought this guy over from the Pentagon. The psychiatrist over from the Pentagon and sat me over in this little skinny room. And he sat there in the chair like you're sitting there. But he was in the dark. I could not see him. But the tape recorder was sitting here. These guys grilled me for eight hours. Wanted to know had my dad had sex with me and... it was bizarre. I mean for eight hours. "Tell the story again. Tell the story again." And then they'd go into my childhood. "How many times was I molested by my father? How many times was I molested by my uncles? How many times..." I mean it was crazy man. So I did that eight hours. I couldn't even get up and pee. You know. So something happened. I don't know. I guess I was... my story stayed the same or consistent. So then it was after that they got Elhart (ph.) Bennett down. Because they went and had meetings and stuff. 'Cause they told me, "Man we picked the wrong guy. You are crazy. You have been hallucinating about all this stuff and the pressure has gotten to you, kid. And, you know, you've got to go." You know. All of a sudden after that eight-hour grilling on tape, you know, they said, "Well maybe this guy's got something going on here. Maybe he ain't so crazy." You know. And so they started... And so they got the brother down so I could talk one on one to a Black guy and that 's when Elhart Bennett came down. They gave him this big title and all this kind of stuff. So he became my handler. And so he was sending people out there to Edwards [Edwards Air Force Base] all the time checking out what was going on. And he...come to find out that everything I said was true. So the White House stayed with me. You know, through that thing. Story_ID: 61176 Speaker 1: And so nothing changed until Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] got killed. Everything was working for me. And the other students began to come around. 'Cause they figured out, "Say wait a minute now. They tell us to stay away from this cat. The real deal is that that cat is gonna be the only one of us that's gonna go to the moon. If the President has his way, he's the only one of us that's gonna go! So we better be his friend [Laughing]." Because they found out that everybody that went to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] from this program was pulled down there by somebody that they already knew. They were friends. So all of a sudden you've got Dave Scott. You've got all these guys that are sneaking on the backside being my new friend [Laughing]. 'Cause they said, "Dwight's gonna go down there." 'Cause they, if they ain't washed him out (unclear). 'Cause I'm now almost through with the course. 'Cause they thought I was gonna wash out within the first couple of weeks and I didn't. So now these guys are coming around. And, you know, to my side. And these are students. These are fellow students. And so they're trying to brownnose me now and all kind of stuff. "Now Ed when you get down there, you know. You know, how we're friends Ed, don't forget us. Don't forget we're friends, Man. You know?" Story_ID: 61177 Speaker 1: And everything was cooking until November 22, 1963. We were in Seattle [Washington] going through dinosaur training which is a space shuttle now, and you know, you go in the simulators and you go up in space. And you go... and they had beer cans floating around in orbit. Budweiser six-packs. And you'd fly up there with your space vehicle and you look at it and see whether it was Bud Lite or [Laughing] whatever it is [unclear]. And you'd go you know and do all these different things with it. And then you land. And you have accidents on takeoff and all that kind of stuff, wind shear on takeoff and that's what it was for. So 9:00 in the morning, it was 11:00 Dallas time [sigh]. The [unclear] comes in and he says, "They killed the President." And he said it so... it's funny. And my memory is that "We killed the President." You know. And I've talked to some other people. And they said, "I don't know whether he said that or not." It sounded to me... I said, "What's this we stuff?" You know. And then they said, "And I think we got the Vice President [Lyndon B. Johnson] too." And man, there was me, I was a Catholic, Macintyre was Catholic. God I forget the other guy's name that was Catholic. He was Catholic too. There were about three or four Catholics in the, you know. And Kennedy had this... we all had this Catholic thing going on with Kennedy 'cause he was Catholic and stuff. And so those were the only guys that were... ah man! All the rest of the guys... you know, it was like strange. You know it was like eerie. And they cancelled the classes. Now about nine... you know, normally you don't adjourn to the executive dining room to eat caviar until noon. You know. And so we had an early lunch. And it was probably about 10:30, quarter to 11:00 thereabouts. First time dude I ever ate by myself. I sat at a table by myself in the executive dining room. And I'm over here, "Dwight, it's over. The Dwight story is gone. It is over. What's gonna happen to Ed?" Yada, yada, yada. By 1:00 we were on airplanes heading back for Edwards [Edwards Air Force Base]. Friday right? Fridays off. Saturday I go to work. Monday Morning I go to work. I'm in training now, you understand. You go... you have a little information box that you go in, you know. And there's just notes so if, you know, medical appointments, stuff they got. I had a big stack of papers in my mailbox. They had shipped my butt over the weekend to Germany [Laughing]. Story_ID: 61178 Speaker 1: I had orders shipping me to Germany [Laughing]. Speaker 2: Just that fast. Speaker 1: [Laughing] Monday morning Dude! I was going to Germany [Laughing]. So I didn't... What I did I was very calm. I checked an airplane out. And the guy said, "Well where are you going?" I said, "Well I gotta go back east." "How long are you gonna be gone yada, yada, yada?" So I took a T33 and I flew straight back to the White House. And man, nobody was talking. I mean Johnson [President Lyndon B. Johnson] was purging anything that, that anything that had to do with Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] or Catholic was gone. [unclear] out of here. Harvard...anything Ivy League had been fired by the time I got there. So I went to Bobby [Kennedy]. And Bobby said "You gotta cool it. You gotta cool down man. I mean, you know, we can't do..." I went to Teddy Kennedy. And I went to my handler, and he was packing [Laughing] his bags to go back to Minnesota. It was bizarre. You know. So I went over to the Pentagon. I don't know who I talked to at the Pentagon. But anyway I got somebody that cancelled the orders. And I can't remember. It might have been Bill Campbell. It might have been Bill. And they cancelled the orders. And said, "Okay don't worry about it. They said you're not going to Germany. Forget it." So I flew back. By the time I got back...I got back probably Wednesday night. I went to work Thursday morning. Had another set of orders shipping me to Canada. And so now the German order said that I was going to be a liaison officer for the German space program. For the German astronaut program. Okay. Canada, they don't have an astronaut program. And so now they shipped me to Canada, I was gonna be the liaison officer to American...I was gonna be the total big American liaison for the Federal Government to the Canadian aerospace astronaut program. [Laughing] You know, and they don't have an astronaut program either. So I don't know where they were gonna send me in the real world. But I said, "I'm not going anyplace." So I called... I got on the phone this time. And I called in. And so I got my guys to cancel those orders. It [unclear] kept me in the program. You know. So they decided after those two tries... the bad guys after those two tries of getting it passed... 'cause of all of the confusion that was going on. See. They figured they could get my butt out of the country. They wanted me out of the country is really what they wanted. So finally Kennedy's dead, I got a one on one with Johnson. A [unclear] with President Johnson now. 'Cause, you know, it's almost graduation time. Okay. 'Cause by now Kennedy's dead and I'm about to graduate with all my certificates and all... and they didn't want me to have all those things. Because I could walk out of there with all these certificates saying I did all this wonderful stuff. You know, and use it to go get jobs and do things with it. So they--these guys did everything in the world possible to get rid of my butt. And first of all they tried to declare me crazy. I mean I had gone through the White House experience. And then they wanted to try to declare me crazy on a low...on a base level to say that I was out of my brain. You know. So they just tried everything possible. And so finally I bided enough time to graduate. And you know, we all graduated. And so now I got orders. And they gave me the worst possible assignment I could possibly have. And it was like sending me...they sent me to Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio. Story_ID: 61179 Speaker 1: And ah man. I went up and I raised so much hell. And now 'cause I... the energizer bunny idea is running out. And I'm beginning to find out that these are really bad guys. These guys were not nice. Because after the... after they got me beat up, they had gone to...that didn't work. They tried the women, that didn't work. So they tried to make me gay. So now they're lining me up. I'm in Niagara Falls Country Club and I've been cracked a couple of times. So I've got ears in the back of my head. My peripheral vision... I can see eyes back here now watching people come near me. You see. So I'm... and we were eating. And then this brother waiter walked up to me. And he said, "Man you're the first Negro I seen. I've been working here 32 years." He said, "There's never been a Negro that walked in the front door of this club. Who are you and what are you doing here?" And he was a very candid openly. And I said, "We're--I'm an astronaut." You know, [breathing in] "Oh I see. Man. Oh boy this is history. I wish I had a camera or something like that." We came out of the bar and the bartender... I heard the bartender tell a guy, "They're in the bar. There Harry is. The little guy. There he is right there." So I walked up... I was into martinis then. And I got my little martini to go and everything. The limo's out there waiting for us to take us back to the hotel. And I get in it. And this guy walks up to me. A little skinny white guy with a [unclear] haircut with the little waves in it. But he combed it all the way down to here and then cut it like this, you know. And he had a silk suit on that shined at night. [Laughing] It looked like it was sparkling and stuff. You know. And he walked up to me and he stuck his knee between my legs. He tried to run his knee up the inside of my thigh. You know, I said, "Get away from me. Man don't touch me. Get away from me." And he said, "So you're the great Ed Dwight." And he says, "I'm one of your fans. I am one of your fans. I followed your career from beginning, I live in New York City, you know. And Ed you gotta come to New York City with me tonight." I used to be a bird watcher back in the old days. And I knew all of these, you know, red tail kind of tricks. I mean I you know. And so he says, "I understand... I've got a [sounds like] woopdown foobeboodehoop and I got [unclear]. I got all these things. And my whole apartment is an aviary. And you need to just come and absorb and enjoy." I said, "Man you better get the hell away from me. [Laughing] I ain't going to New York City." I'm going, "Who are you?" and he gave me his name and stuff. I said, "Man just get away from me. Okay." So I put my martini down, jumped in the limo and went back to the hotel... to the motel... hotel, motel. I got out of the bar. I don't know how that man... 'cause I left a man in the bar. The man was sitting over there at a table. "Ed, Ed, come over." And he had already ordered me a scotch. Well you know, and all black people drink scotch. You know. I said, "What's that?" They said, "It's scotch." You know. [unclear] drink. I said, "I don't drink scotch. I drink... I'm a martini man." You know what I mean. Story_ID: 61180 Speaker 1: And so we talked. And he says... and they had... the cute thing was they had telephones on the... and they had just started this. You know. And they had these little booth that had a telephone. And, you know, you'd call anybody you wanted on this telephone. He said, "Can we call Sue and the kids?" I said, "Well wait Man! How do you know my wife's name? What's that all about?" He said, "Oh [unclear] I told you I was your fan. You know, Tina and Eddie are your kids. I already know." So he called Sue." You know, and I talked to her, hey baby, how you doing. And then I hung up the phone. And so he says, "Can I walk you to your room?" I said, "No!" And he said, "What room are you in?" and I said "I'm in 252." [in taking breath] "I'm in 254! [clapping hands] We have to walk back." And so I... I'm going, "Now this is just too set up [unclear]... "I am not going in your room. I'm sorry, I'm not going in your room." He said, "I got something for you. I got something for you." I walk in there. Then I look-I peek in. This guy has two 36 short suits and two hats, 6 and 7/8. I used to wear these little stingy brim hats. Two stingy brim hats laying on my--he says, "Those are yours." I said, "Well what do you mean they're mine?" He said, [changing voice] "Those are yours. I bought them for you." You know. I said, "Man I am not... I'm not taking these clothes. You know." He said, "Just try one. Just try one of the hats on." So I took the hat and tried it on. It fit perfectly 6 and 7/8 [laughing]. And I'm going, "Get away from me [Laughing]." And just about this time he was getting kind of nervous and he fell down on his knees and he tried to unzip my fly. He was right here. And he tried to unzip my fly. And he got-and he was in there trying--and I hit this guy so hard. I mean I just came down. I mean I just went Wop! I hit this guy so hard and he rolled around the floor. And he said, "They didn't tell me I was gonna get beat up." That's what he yelled. "They didn't tell me I was gonna get beat up." And then stuff came from my feet all the way to my head. I had the first real, real, real, real, real stuff that--I mean. This was set up, I mean big time. And I... I went next door and started crying man. And I called my mom [Georgia Baker Dwight] [Laughing]. "Hey Mom! You're, these guys are criminals. [Laughing] They wanna hurt me [Laughing]. These guys wanna hurt me [Laughing]. This is a conspiracy." And I didn't want to get dad on the phone, because if you get dad [Ed Dwight]--but Mom and I talked. And I was... I mean I was in tears, man. I said, "This is ah!" This Ah! and so man, that's when everything on the inside of me changed. You know. I'll be honest, I said, "These cats are after me." And then pretty soon everything started really going down. It really started going down. Everything started going down. Story_ID: 61181 Speaker 1: So then they called me in and offered me, "Come in the White House" and they said... but I was not in the Oval Office. I was still in the West Wing. They called me up there. It was them calling me this time. And Johnson [President Lyndon B. Johnson] was President. Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] was dead. And they said, "Ed here. We know you wanna be an astronaut. We know. We know all the stuff. You worked, you did all this stuff. You got all this stuff done. And the President is so proud of you that he doesn't know what to do." He said, "But do you have one of those globes that turn around [Laughing]?" I said, "No." He said, "Would you go find one? 'Cause here's what...the President wants you to get into space. He wants desperately for you to be in space. Okay. And... but, you know, he just can't do it right now. Because, you know, you're a Kennedy guy. You know. The President's gotta have his own man. Well and so it would be nothing worse than having you come back from space. A Kennedy guy comes back from space, and now the President wouldn't be happy about that. So what we need to do, the President needs his own astronaut. You understand don't you?" I'm going, "[chuckling]..." he said, "Here's what I want you to do." He says, "You go back to the base here and you close your eyes and you spin that globe. And you stick your finger on any part of where that is. And that's where you're gonna go for the next three years. Okay. And we're gonna send you your check. And you'll have the same rank and all that kind of stuff. Just give the President time to get his man up in space and back. And the President promises you a space mission. I mean you got a guarantee from the President of the United States that you're going into space. But what you gotta do for us--what we want you to do, we want you to go back. And we want you to write, playing like you were gonna find this new astronaut to replace you. And we wanna know everything that you think you did wrong, everything that you think you didn't have and how would... What would you... How would you describe this guy? What kind of personality would he have? What kind of education would he have? What kind of temperament would he have? What kind of disposition would he have? And you put that on paper and you send it to the President." And then like a damn fool I went back and did it [Laughing]. I wrote the President a big long letter [Laughing] man. I think I said, and the last page he gotta be super Nigger or [Laughing] something like that I put on there [Laughing]. And they called me and thanked me for it [Laughing]. "Oh it was a fabulous job. Man, the President is in your debt. [Laughing] You know. And our promises are still good and everything, you know." And man, I look up one day, boy. And there were a whole bunch of other little incidents that happened. But trying to [unclear] thing. I went to the [unclear]. They asked me to go away and I didn't do the thing. I just picked a base. Story_ID: 61182 Speaker 1: Because the press was all over me like a blanket. And they were still all over me. And they were following my kids to school. And the Klan was all over me. I was in Ohio. And they had... the Klan would visit me every night 'cause of all of this notoriety and stuff like that. And the blow that really kind of got me really wanting to leave the military was I had asked the Air Force for help. 'Cause I'd integrated a white housing area in Ohio. And it was all over the front page, "Astronaut integrates Huber Heights." And again they had on there my address [Laughing]. And they had on there that the neighbors were bringing me fruitcakes and flowers and stuff. Which they never did. And the Klan was right across the railroad over there. They started in Kentucky. So they're coming up. So they visited me every night. And they were throwing rocks at my house and jacking my car up and letting the air out of my tires, egging my car every night. And with a bullhorn "Nigger go home. Nigger get out of here." So one night, Martina was...let's see. I don't know how tall Tina was. But they threw a rock... It was a den, but I turned it into a bedroom. But it had a huge picture window in front of it. And they threw a huge rock with a note on it, "Nigger go home." Threw it through the window. And a shard of glass had just... and it stopped right here. And she was sleep and it just [making noise like cutting] stopped right there. And the blankets and everything stopped it from cutting her neck. And Man, that did it. And I went and... I went to the air force. I said, "I'm out of here." I said, "I'm getting off this base... I want base housing and I need to get my life together and get out of here. 'Cause this is... I mean my... you know, my kid almost got killed last night." You know. And they went, [groaning]. So I said, "Look, I'm gonna go to the press. I mean, so you either straighten this mess out or else I'm gonna tell everybody about all this stuff that's been happening to me. And I'm just gonna let it all out." And then we just take our stands. You know. If you wanna declare me crazy. Well, you know, try that. And if you want to... So they put me on base within days. Got on base. Story_ID: 61183 Speaker 1: And then this other event occurred about the globe. In the mean time, I opted to go to--'cause the press was following my kids to school. And they were-I mean they got there, you know, 'cause my kids were going to private schools. And they would follow them to school and be waiting for them to get out of school, like the National Enquirer and stuff. You know. And right in the [Laughing] middle of this whole thing, Sue had left. And you know, I got the kids by myself now. So [Laughing] I got hooked up... man, I got hooked up. I went over on a test mission to California and I hooked up with another woman and married her [Laughing]. I was married to her for 30 days [Laughing]. She took [Laughing]--it turned out that right in the middle of all this stuff she said, "You know..." she says, "I'm pregnant." I'm fighting the White House, I'm fighting everybody. I'm fighting everybody like an octopus. I'm fighting everybody and this broad comes up and tells me she's pregnant. So I fly to California. She says, "Yeah I'm pregnant. I'm gonna have your baby." And all that kind of stuff. You know [Laughing]. And so, "I'm gonna tell the White House if you don't... [unclear] I want some money or I'm gonna call the White House myself." [Laughing] I'm going, "You gotta be kidding me." She says, "I'm not kidding you." She says, "I'll settle for $10,000. If you give me $10,000 I'm out of your life. Okay." And so [Laughing] I don't have no $10,000 to pay this woman. So she comes back. I bring her back to Ohio with me just to keep her shut up. And so I bring [Laughing] this woman in my house. And the next thing you know, she calls Ebony Magazine up and she says, "I got the story. I got the inside story on Ed Dwight and I want $10,000." [Laughing] So Ebony said, Charles--what's his name down there. The guy that wrote that article in Ebony Magazine, sent him down there. And the guy laid for three days with my old lady, man[Laughing], for telling him the story. And that's when this Ebony Magazine thing came out. A really rotten wrap that unraveled me man. If they hadn't...it had her picture in there. That I had accused the Air Force. That I was a subur... aw man it was really bad. So the White House calls me [Laughing]. The White House calls me and says, [Laughing] "Your ass is mud! You're dead. It's over. You [unclear] [Laughing]. It is over for you man. What have you done to the President? You called our President a racist [Laughing]." I said, "Aw man! Oh my God!" The base commander there calls me "Ed". And he said, "I want the woman off the base." What she did was she... I had beat her up. I took the woman and threw her out of my house 'cause she tried to kill me. You know, she got... you know, it turns out that she had put a contract on my first wife and all that kind of stuff. It turned out she was the biggest dope dealer in Pasadena, California. I [Laughing] didn't know nothing about this woman and we were married. Was the biggest dope dealer in Pasadena, California. I swear to God! And [Laughing] she told me, She was gonna get me [Laughing] killed." And so all this stuff started seeping out. So the Commander and General of the base call me in and say, "You got 24 hours to get this woman off the base." "Cause what I did... she tried to kill me one day. And I threw her out the house. So she came back and she had... she stuck her foot through the window and smashed... cut her Achilles heel. So she went to the hospital and came back in a cast all the way up to here. And the Air--police tried to arrest me for assault. And, I said, "You know, know, I'm not going any place. I'm not... this woman is crazy and I'm not going any place." And they... they could find the officers. 'Cause an enlisted man couldn't arrest an officer. So she comes back and she grabs one of the guy's guns... [unclear] grabs his gun out and gonna shoot all of us. 'Cause I was supposed to be in jail and I wasn't in jail. She said, "Alright. I told you I'll get his ass out of here." And she pulled this guy's gun out and they arrested the gun away from her. And so it gets back to the General next day [Laughing]. So he says, "You've got 24 hours to get this woman off the base." You know. And he says, "You we'll deal with next week." So I accelerated the thing on the globe [Laughing] and moved. Story_ID: 61184 Speaker 1: No. So after--you know, I had to leave Ohio. Because I got--I was persona non-grata in Ohio. And I wanted to get--way in the back in my mind I had hopes of getting back in fighters and be a real viable Air Force officer again. And I said, "Well maybe if I just get out of all of this mess and let all this stuff go and forget astronaut dreams, and just turn into this, you know, regular Air Force officer guy. You know, 'Cause I have these kids to take care of now." And that last year the kids had been in several schools. I mean, you know, and it was really tough on them and all that kind of stuff. So I decided that I needed to just, you know, kick back. So they asked me where I wanted to go. And I picked Holloman Air Force Base in New Mexico. And I picked it because it was in Alamogordo and they didn't even have a newspaper. They had no TV station and no newspaper. I said this is incredible. They had fighters. It was a top-secret base. You had to have clearance to get on that base. Right in white sands. And I said, "This is perfect for me." So I went there. And low and behold I undertook flying. And I was flying about four or five different airplanes. Man, I was happy as hell. I was flying fighters again. The kids were in school. And everything was smoking man. Story_ID: 61185 Speaker 1: And one of my classmates came down to visited me and got killed the next day. I mean I'm sitting around-- I watched him die. And I started-you know, I started adding things up. You know. And I had been out of the program now for about three years. Right. So I started adding things up. And I didn't realize I was doing this. I had a class picture. One of those class pictures that I showed you. And I was writing above the guy's head "died" and a date. And I didn't realize that when Jim died right there-- I'm looking at him take off and this airplane disintegrated and it blew into a thousand pieces. I'd seen Al Rupp (ph.) die in Ohio. And, you know, he had took off in a F-102. And the whole thing exploded right on takeoff. And it just blew. The biggest part that we found of him was a piece of his face about this big. That was the only thing we found of the man was a piece of his face. And in Jim's case we never found him at all. And the only thing we found of Jim--he wanted to be a fighter pilot, was like--it was like--somebody--like God took and burned right--and the patch was beautiful white. Not in no scaring, no burn, no ash on it, perfect, but it had been burned just around the outside of the patch like somebody cut it. You know. But it had burned right around the outside and the patch was perfect. That's the only thing we found of this guy. He wanted to be a fighter pilot. You know, and he died in a bomber. He was trying to do an acrobatic maneuver to show me what bombers could do and he took a B47 and he pulled up, and he took--he was gonna do a roll on takeoff. It was a hot day. He had a full loaded airplane. His wing tip hit the ground. The airplane disintegrated in a big ball of fire. Just totally disintegrated. And I did the actual investigation on Jim [unclear]. So I started looking at all this stuff, man. And I look up and out of the seventeen guys in my test-pilot class five of us are left. And I'm beginning to hear footsteps now, man. I'm going-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Five left alive? Speaker 1: Five left alive, man. Story_ID: 61186 Speaker 1: And I didn't realize it man. And I says, "You know, maybe I'm next." So now I go to the flight yard one day and my low crew chief guy. And he says, "Captain Dwight," he says, "I don't know. We might have a problem. Some guys came down here yesterday and I don't know what to do." I said, "About what?" He said, "These guys came down here and they said to me, what could I do to fix your airplane so it wouldn't come back. Would it be money or did I want a promotion?" This kid was eighteen years old. I said, "What? You've got to be kidding. Is this some kind of a joke?" He said, "No." He says, "'Cause they wanna know in a couple, you know, they wanna know, pretty quick what I want." And I said, "Well what do you want me to do?" I said [Laughing], I said, "I don't want you to do anything [Laughing]." You know. So I didn't fly that day. I just-I said, "I'm not flying." And so I went back and I went back, and I went back to the base officer. I said, "I'm not gonna fly today." "What's going on?" "I just--I'm not flying." "Are you sick?" "No, I'm not flying." So I went home that night and I wrote my resignation. Said, "I'm getting out of here. These people are trying to kill me now." [Laughing] You know, I mean, you know. 'Cause all these other guys are dead. Why are these guys gonna look at me, man! Is this crazy? And it will be nothing. You know, another guy died. I mean Ed Dwight dies in a desert crash and no--nobody's the worse for wear, man. So-- and so David said, "Wait a minute now. What do you mean you resigning?" I said, "I'm resigning. I'm out of here. I'm gone." He said, "Nah, you're not going any place." So the next thing you know, they took me off flying status and sent me to a shrink. He said, "You are crazy." And so they hired this shrink who happened to be my next-door neighbor, by the way, and--to declare me crazy. And I had to go to the shrink every day for--you know for like four hours until he declared me crazy. Well the problem is he didn't declare me crazy. He declared that I was more sane than all the rest of them. And what the Air Force had done to me, you know, I was doing good to have my mental faculties in order, because of all the stuff that was going on in my life. You know what I mean? That I should be crazy but I wasn't. You know. That I was the most sane guy that he had ever interviewed. You know? And he was overly aggressive, you know. His Napoleonic Complex was that I had been too--[Laughing] [unclear] all these other things. You know. Which was cool [Laughing]. You know, I'll take that. I'll take that rap. You know. So they tried to declare me nuts. And I says--and so he says--so they asked him to change it and he wouldn't change it. So the next thing they came up with rather than [unclear] they couldn't declare me nuts. So they--then they came up with a whole new tack. Story_ID: 61187 Speaker 1: They decided that I needed to go to graduate school. And my big failing in life was that I needed to go to graduate school to get my Masters and my doctorate in engineering. Finish it up and then come out of that tunnel and I'd be the--you know. And I couldn't turn that down. So I wrote them back and I said, "Thanks but no thanks. I have no interest in going to graduate school. I wanna get out of here." So we fought. I mean this went on for a couple--two or three months. And so the only--there was good news, bad news stuff, the fact that I didn't have a wife again and I got these two kids on this base, came to my rescue. 'Cause now I'm ready to plead guilty as charged [Laughing]. And so we used--and that was what we used. And General Kylie (ph.)--and all of a sudden--he was the commander of this base. Now actual, Kylie was a wing commander. He wasn't the base commander, he was a wing commander. So all this other stuff is going on under Kylie's nose. But he didn't know all this stuff was going on. And so Kylie came to my rescue. 'Cause we partied and all that kind of stuff. You know, a really nice guy. And so he really [unclear] and I told him the story. And he says, "You got--you're crazy." I said, "I'm not crazy. This is what has happened, man [Laughing] man." He said, "Well we gotta get you out of here for the kids sake. Excuse me you don't need to be in the service. You need to be out of here." And low and behold he came to my rescue. And then we got into a big fight with the Air Force. Since I turned the college down, they said, "Okay, we're gonna--we're gonna let him out with bad conduct discharge." So we fought over that for a month about whether I was gonna get a bad conduct discharge mainly because I'm on the base with these kids without a mother. And I had violated all these regulations and stuff. And they said they were gonna court martial me and all that kind of stuff. So he argued with them and argued with them. And he says, "And he gets a good conduct discharge and he's out of here." You know. "And you don't have to worry about this guy any more. Okay?" And man! By the time they got through the orders came down from the Pentagon giving me three days to get off the base. And then what my orders said, "If you're not off the base in three days you will be under arrest and placed in the stockade [Laughing]." So rather than having ninety days to clear the base like you normally have, I had three days. So I gave away all my furniture [Laughing]. You know. And I took my blue Volkswagen. And the only thing I took with me was a [Laughing] plant that I bought at K-Mart. Well it wasn't K-Mart. But it was one of them stores like K-Mart. And I had bought this great big huge plant, and I gave everything else away and I had my plant. And I hooked my blue Volkswagen and I stuffed this plant in it and I drove to Denver [Colorado]. And by the time I got to Denver [Laughing] it was dead [Laughing]. So I used all that space to--'cause I gave all my stuff away you know. I just brought my books and my awards and all that kind of stuff. But I left the base crying. Man, I cried all the way to Denver, man. You know, "Here these bastards--look at what they've done to me." You know. And for the first time in my life I can't fly airplanes. You know. It was crazy. And I was [unclear] death of these guys were flying over just doing normal missions and stuff. You know, and all of a sudden my life is over man! What the hell am I gonna do? I can't get in an airplane every day. You know, what the hell am I gonna do? Story_ID: 61188 Speaker 1: And then when I got out of the service I almost--I did go crazy after I got out. I mean, I tried to join up again. Man I was--'cause I didn't realize I had been told what to do all my adult life. I was--I'm out here on my own, Man. I gotta think for myself. Gotta go to work every day and I gotta think and I gotta--you know. I didn't realize that I had orders to tell me everything to do for all my adult life. I had no idea, that, you know, that all of a sudden I had to make these decision all by myself. What's up with that? You know. Crazy. It took me six months to get grounded, man. You know, and with people--Henry Frye became my shrink and all that kind of stuff. And I tried to join up, man. I said, "I'd give anything to get back [Laughing]. I'll do anything. I'll start out as a [Laughing]--I'll start out as a private! [Laughing] Let me back [Laughing] ." Speaker 2: What year is this? Speaker 1: '66 [Laughing]. All man. I said, "Good Lord! This is insanity." And, you know, I kept missing it. But it wasn't--but the stuff didn't hit the fan until I had applied for 32 jobs. And I had all this education, all this flying time. I had almost 10,000 hours of flying time. I had tons of flying time. I had a lot of test time. I had been flying every airplane in the inventory anybody had. I had been--done all the testing for United Airlines. I had did automatic landing tests with the space shuttle. I designed the whole automatic landing system for the space shuttle. That was what I was doing as a test pilot. And so I had--aw man I was a hot property man, from an engineering point of view and experience. 'Cause I had the flying time and what they called hard experience. Spacesuit experience, flying above-- you know, I had a lot of spacesuit stuff. The helmet, the whole thing. And guys were jumping ship. A lot of the guys that weren't dead were jumping ship. And they were getting in this test pilot school in the astronaut program but quitting and going to work for a company. See. 'Cause a cool deal like there's a space glove company. See space gloves go at $2 million apiece. Think about that. Right, so now if you know astronauts, and you work for the space glove company. And NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] can't buy anything unless they buy a large quantity. They gotta buy a hundred. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: They can't buy one or two or ten or twenty. They gotta buy 100. So the acquisition program, procurement program. So if you work for a space glove company and they're making space gloves and you know an astronaut and you go and work for them at $100,000 a year, $150,000 a year and space--and stock options, all you gotta do is call, "Hey Dave, hey man why don't you try my gloves?" You know I'm calling Dave Scott down there. He's at NASA. "Hey, this is Ed Dwight. You know, test pilot [unclear]. So man we got this new glove that's a fantastic. You gotta get over here and wanna try it." And [unclear] astronaut, goes, "Yes, send it down, we'll try it." So they go through the procurement process. Well they've gotta buy 100 $2 million gloves man! And so I've done--I've made my company all this money. So a $150,000 is nothing. See. And so--and them jobs are just--and these guys were getting these jobs. And I'd apply for these jobs and they'd say, "Yeah. Guy we want you, we need you." And man the next thing you know they'd be calling me back. "Oh, well we got a little problem here." "What? What's the problem?" "Why don't you try us again next year." And I'm going, "What is up with this?" I tried the airlines. Not an airline would touch me with a 10-foot pole. And I got a lot of experience. I mean, I designed the automatic landing system that the airlines use flying it. You know, for United [United Airlines] out of Chicago [Illinois] of all places. Flying a caravan off of Chicago. Nothing. Wouldn't touch me. Story_ID: 61189 Speaker 1: So I had been out of the service seven years, man. I was doing-- I had a restaurant chain [Laughing]. I went to work, you know. I had a restaurant, I was selling barbecue ribs man. I was an aviation data consultant for a company in Dallas, Texas. I was a-I got in the real estate business, I was selling real estate. Then I was one of the biggest land developers in town. Man I built the city of Parker [Colorado] out here, man. I'm doing all thisstuff 'cause I can't find a job. You know, I can't find a job! And so a job came up right out here at Stapleton Airport, FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] right down the street from my house, testing the Learjet. The new model 35 Learjet. And that was me. Man, 'cause I did some testing on Learjet when they was killing pilots. And I did the bell crank test on the Learjet. So man, I went down and applied for that job. And I took my log records and flying time. And he says, "Ah! [clapping hands] Gosh! You're a perfect guy. You know you gotta be running back between [unclear] Wichita [Kansas]. 'Cause that's where the Lear is stationed." I said, "Well not a problem, you know. As long as I end up in Denver [Colorado]." And I was to go down to Wichita and the first one that came off the line I had to do all the tests on it, you know. And so I worked for the federal government for 45 days. Got on the register and stuff. And Brawney (ph). Adams called me up in Kansas City [Kansas]--no I called Brawney. I said, Where's my-- my paperwork hadn't come through. I've been working, out here working. He says, "Ed," he says, "flying airplanes is really dangerous, you know." I said, "What are you talking about, man [Laughing]? You're talking to the flying genius of the universe. What are you talking about?" He said, "Ed, it's dangerous. And you have kids don't you?" I said, "Yeah." He says, "You don't wanna do this. You don't wanna be a test pilot." I said, "Brawney what are you talking about man?" You know. He says, "Well, you're pushing me." I said, "Yeah I am. What's going on man?" He said, "Well," he says, "you don't exist." I said, "What are you talking about I don't exist?" He said, "You do not exist. You're a nonperson." He said, "You know you have trouble getting credit?" I hadn't even thought about it. I didn't even apply for credit. I mean, you know, I hadn't even thought about it. He said, you know, you can't get a job, you know, in this industry. "Yeah that part I got." And he said, "You don't exist." He says, "I have a dossier in front of me that declares you a nonperson. You do not exist." I said, "What are you talking about dossier? What is that? What is a dossier [Laughing]?" You know. I hadn't seen all the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] movies yet. I had got in my car. I said, "I'm coming down." He says, "Do not come down here." He said, "Do not come down here." He says, "I will not see you." I said, "Brawney, I'm coming down there. 'Cause you're playing with my life. Okay. This is my life here." I jumped in my little blue Volkswagen. I drove straight to Kansas City nonstop. Walked in this guy's office on the 11th floor in the government building down in Kansas City. And he had two of the biggest guys in the building sitting in there and his [unclear] tape recorder. You know, flashbacks [Laughing]. A little tape recorder sitting on top of his desk and behind that tape recorder was a dossier about that thick. And in that dossier, man, I had-I tried--I was a Black-I was a, not Black Stone Ranger. I was a Black Panther. They had me going to meetings, dates of the meeting. I was running a Black Panther cell (ph.) in Los Angeles, California teaching brothers how to blow up Air Force Bases. Story_ID: 61190 Speaker 1: I threatened to kill the President of the United States in Albuquerque, New Mexico. I was on-- at 9:00 in the morning. I'm standing on an Old Town, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Old Town Albuquerque standing on a park--I mean standing on a table, a bench with a 45-caliber gun I was shooting in the air. I was shooting live rounds of ammunition. And the local police--since I had my full uniform on, were circling the square and they didn't try to get the gun away from me. Which is a damn lie. If I'm shooting a gun whether I had a uniform or not. While they're waiting for the air police from Kirkland Air Force Base to come and arrest me. So the air police came in, put me in st-- the Army took and put me in a strait jacket. In this report I was in F Ward which is the nut ward in any Air Force hospital for thirty days in a strait jacket. And all this stuff is listed. There's one story after another. And it's that thick. I'm a Communist. All the Communist meetings, what I-- where I went, what I did at the Communist meetings. Black--I was a Black Muslim [Laughing]. Speaker 2: [unclear]. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] [Laughing] I was an all-around dude man! Speaker 2: [unclear]. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's all there. It's all there. You know, and people are reading this stuff. And I was this God-damned lunatic [Laughing]. You know, it was a wonder I was just walking around free. I mean I was walking around, you know, ambulatory in the United States of America with all that stuff in my background file. And you know. So I-- he wouldn't give it to me. I said, "Well you've got my life in here." He said, "Ed, [Laughing] you need to start your life all over again." He said, "You change your name. Get a new social security number [Laughing]." And he's telling me all this stuff. "And if you really wanna fly, you know, why don't you start back in, you know, training kids. If you really wanna fly. Go to a flying school and teach kids how to fly [unclear]. You know. 'Cause you'll never fly, you know, real airplanes anymore." You know? And what's so stunning--what's so crazy about this, I was a co-owner of Star Aviation out here [Laughing]. And we had two Learjets and a W2B (ph.), and I was one of the owners of this aviation. We did charter work. You know, and I'm-- flying Lears [Learjets] anyway. You see what I'm saying? And so this whole thing is just turning into this gigantic nightmare. Story_ID: 61191 Speaker 1: Under the Freedom Information Act I, you know, wrote and got--tThey sent me four cases of source of information. And all this-- and all these things man, all the women and, you know, I was homosexual. And all my gay liaisons. They had all this stuff all written out in there. Some guy was just writing all this stuff up and putting it in there-- Speaker 2: Now the Freedom of Information Act-- Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Comes around in about 1976, I guess? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. No this was before. Speaker 2: Before '76? Speaker 1: This was before then. Because this was when I became a sculpture. [Laughing] This was when I learned how to do art real good, real fast [Laughing]. You know, I never had an art lesson in my life, you understand [Laughing]. And so all of a sudden this stark realization comes to me that I'm not gonna get a job. Because what had happened-- I didn't even know I was doing this. Every three years I was applying for jobs. And I was really disenchanted. I was trying to fly again. And so [unclear] twenty-three jobs on the second. I have all these job applications in a thing up there. And then three years rolled around and now this whole thing is, you know. So all this stuff is happening in three-year cycles. So now we're up to '74 [1974]. And so that's when I went back to art school and I went back to-- and got a Masters in sculpture from the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado]. And low and behold, man, I-- That's when I became an artist. I said, "Now I need to do something that these people can't get me on." You know. Because of all--if they're gonna be using this thing and I wrote to-- I got letters of apology from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] director saying that they'd destroy the file. Gary Hart [Senator Gary Hart] got involved in it and all that kind of stuff. So you know, it all got so twisted around that, you know. My life was just--it was--it was just insane. You know. And I'm trying to find something that I can do where I don't have to depend on any government sanction or anybody saying, "You can do or not do this," And all that kind of stuff. So art was the only thing that I could think of where nobody passed judgments on people. You know. So-- Story_ID: 61192 Speaker 1: Now there's just one more thing about that period of time. As of now, as we speak about his you're writing about it right? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And there's some production activity in terms of producing the story right? Speaker 2: Correct. Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So then-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] And you know, what we're doing, you can't tell a story this complex in a movie. It can't be done. So we're watering and seeing where how much can we water down. And so they've tried a-- I think the thrust of the movie-- in the book I can, because I can get into the real gory details with the book. So-- and I've got about two or three weeks to get a manuscript up to my guy in New York. 'Cause it's a race between getting the movie or the book out. Which one of those things is gonna come out first. So I'm trying to get the book out before the movie comes out. And--I mean they do this stuff. They shoot movies and they keep them on the shelf for four or five years [Laughing]. And if I can talk 'em into doing that. But Yaeger-Chuck Yaeger [Brigadier General Charles "Chuck" Yeager] has a big movie, blockbuster coming out. So HBO [Home Box Office] wants to jump on that and do some kind of journalism. You know. If they decide to go forward with this project. It has to do with some counter stuff. 'Cause they're making him the big hero [unclear] sound. And he was the guy that was a big participant in trying to originally unravel me. You know, 'cause I was not supposed to graduate. So he screwed up by letting me graduate. You see. And I should have been buried. You know, way earlier in the game. Story_ID: 61193 Speaker 1: I mean, I just should have just been a statistic. You know, "Brother tries to get into space." And, you know, I've been in the White House with generals, Two Star Generals, Three Star Generals and the Pentagon and places. And they'd say, "Ed, you know, you're ten years ahead of your time. So ten years from now it wouldn't work." It turns out that Guion Bluford [HM] went up--check this out. This is deep. Guion Bluford went up into space twenty years and three days from the time I entered the program [Laughing]. That's deep. You know, to me it's--you know. Twenty years and three days. And missed it by three days from the time I entered this program to the time he blew up--went up--into space. So it was twenty years. It wasn't ten at all. Speaker 2: Have you talk to Guion Bluford or--[simultaneous] Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah. Oh yeah. I--you know, I've done art for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. I've been down to Huston [Texas]. And I told Bluford this story. He and Fred Gregory [Frederick D. Gregory]. And they were going [unclear] "No shit!" I mean four hours! We were sitting there for four hours. You know, and then "Ed, come on! No kidding." And, man, they were--they walked out of that room going, "Man!" He said, "I couldn't have done it. I couldn't have done it Dwight." He said, "I couldn't have done it." I said, "You guys already here. What's up with that?" He said, "Yeah, because of you." I said, "No, no, no. I mean that's a whole different thing." You know. Speaker 2: Could they relate to any of your [unclear]-- Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Oh hell yeah. Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh yeah. They got it. They got it big time, you know. And they said we just need to know where to--you know. Because see I met Bluford--see Bluford had already gone up when I met him. See. Gregory was a pilot see. Story_ID: 61194 Speaker 1: I got into trouble with NASA because they had commissioned me to do a sculpture of all the black astronauts. And I wanted to put Greg--no, no, no. They wanted Bluford [Guion Bluford, HM] as the first guy is really what they wanted. And I said, "No." I said, "What I'll do is I'll do a sculpture of Bluford as the first guy that went up. But I want a picture of Fred Gregory down here." And they said, "What's that." I said, "'Cause Bluford was-- he was a mission specialist. Fred Gregory [Frederick D. Gregory] was a pilot. He flies in the front of the airplane. You know, he's the [Laughing]--the other guy is a passenger. So, you know, we should have the first specialist to go up and the first pilot to go up. An aircraft commander for Christ's sake." "We don't want the public to know about that kind of stuff. We don't, we don't, that's not how we do it here, Ed [Laughing]." You know. So, well you know, I said, "Well I'm not gonna do it without Fred on there too." Said well, you know, "Good-bye [Laughing]." They said, "Well we'll do it our way." I said, "That's okay." Speaker 2: So you never did it. You never-- Speaker 1: No. I just walked away from it. Yeah. And so--but anyway, that's kind of the nature of the thing. And then the rest of the art story is just-- mean, you know, this whole thing has just been an incredible journey, you know. And I got, I got, you know recognition sort of really, really fast because of all this stuff. Man, I was scared. Think about it, man. You know, I was scared of failure. I mean deathly afraid of failure. 'Cause I had done so many different things. If this art thing failed, man, my life, you know. I mean I couldn't consider any of this stuff worthy if I had allowed this art thing to go down the toilet. You know. Story_ID: 61195 Speaker 1: Yeah. How did your children fair through all of this? Speaker 2: Oh. Well Eddie [Dwight] didn't come out of this thing too good at all. He's still having real problems with this. The girl Tina, she came out pretty good. She's--but Tina is the true energizer bunny here [Laughing]. She never--doesn't let anything affect her. And even all the time she was going, she wasn't bothered by this stuff. Eddie was really bothered. Going to school. Having teachers not require him to bring lessons 'cause his dad was an astronaut. Getting beat up by other kids 'cause his dad was an astronaut [chuckle]. You know, coming home from school and getting whacked and beat up and, you know. So he--and they never bothered the girl Tina. But they--he caught hell. And so he's still reeling from all this stuff. And he doesn't realize it, but it was all those parts and pieces of all that half notoriety and disappointments and all those evil things. 'Cause things were happening to me. And it was like a sort of, you know--it was like a rippling effect, you know. And he couldn't--these kids couldn't help but be bothered by that stuff. 'Cause I was bothered. I mean he--I'd get up in the morning, you now, and around the base, if somebody got killed, you know, it was all over everywhere. The kids talked about it at school. So every the morning, you know, we'd get up, you know. And even when they were--when I got out of the military, you know, they'd say, "Dad are you gonna get killed today?" That was the last thing I heard when I walked out the door. "Are you coming back?" And I'm going, "Whoa! This is deep." You know. So-you know, if you've got kids running around saying stuff like that, and thinking stuff like that, that's not healthy. It's not mentally healthy. And Eddie buried it. I mean--so it didn't start coming out 'til later. And he just started unraveling. I mean, you know, as he-'cause he never finished high school. He just opted out. You know. And Tina on the other hand, [Laughing] she [Laughing]. She's still the energizer bunny [Laughing] walking around. Story_ID: 61196 Speaker 1: And your son [Eddie Dwight] helps you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, yeah, he works here. Yeah, yeah. And you know, a lot of it has to do with Eddie--he's a wonderful cook. And he was head chef down at one of the restaurants at lower Downtown Denver [Colorado]. Had been there for a long-about ten years. And he decided he didn't wanna work at night any more. You know. So that's why he--so I said, "You can come and work for me if you want." You know. So he's been working for me ever since. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He doesn't like it. Speaker 1: Oh he doesn't? Speaker 2: Hates it [Laughing]. I'm the [Laughing] worst boss in the world. Ask him [Laughing]. He goes--we're installing sculptures, you know, and I get to be a little tyrant when I'm--'cause I'm ordering him. You know. "Do this. Do that. Don't do this. Don't do that. Cut this. Do this." And all that kind of stuff [Laughing]. And [Laughing] so he--and he walked up to these workers, "I hate him. God! I hate him! God I hate him! God I hate him!" you know. He said, "Oh God!" he said, "One of these days, I'm gonna let him know. I'm just gonna let him know." [Laughing] "I'm just gonna let him know." And so next thing you know, these guys are reporting to me. "What the hell did you do to your kid man!" [Laughing] My kid is almost 45 years old man. He's up there talking, and I said "Eddie, what's wrong with you man!" He said, "Well [Laughing] what do you want me to say. [Laughing] That's just the way I feel." I said, "Okay [Laughing]." But anyway, we try to get along with each other. And the kid's got a heart of gold. But, you know, what can I say. Story_ID: 61197 Speaker 1: Okay. And your parents. How did they-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh my-- Speaker 1: Did any of this affect them? Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh my mom [Georgia Baker Dwight] is so an--she is fantastic. She's ninety-three, she's just totally fantastic. My dad [Ed Dwight] died in '75 [1975]. And he started smoking when he was fifty years old. Died of lung cancer. Three or four packs a day, man. So I go home and I said, "Dad, why are you smoking?" And Dad said, "Son, you don't know what it's like." He said, "You know, I play cards all the time now. You know?"" I said, "Really." He said, "Everybody else smokes but me." I said, "Dad, you're fifty years old. What the hell do you care whether these guy smoke or not? I mean what is that?" He said, "You don't understand son. You just don't get it. You just don't know. Well you just come and play cards and you'll see! Gotta [unclear] smoke free room and gotta have cigarette." You know [Laughing]. Story_ID: 61198 Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us briefly why did you come to Denver [Colorado] in the first place [unclear]? Speaker 2: Well I came to Denver because-- When I first came here in 1951 to test for pilot training and stuff like that, I'm from Kansas City [Kansas]. And everything is flat in Kansas City. And I'd never seen a mountain before. And we got in at 9:00 one night in the dark. And I got up the next morning. I was on the second floor of this baric out at Lowry Air Force Base. And I looked out the window and for the first time in my whole life I saw a mountain. And they were just magnificent. And it had snowed and all that kind of stuff. And I just didn't know--I mean it was just amazing. And from a distance they look really majestic. But they don't really look incredible until you get up in the mountains. You know, when you're wondering around through them. And they--then they really become, you know. And so I just though this--that God had done some really outstanding work [Laughing]. I said, "The boy had put his act together on this mountain stuff." You know [Laughing]. And so I decided that the first chance I got I was gonna head for Denver. And, you know, 'cause I had lived in California and I lived in the Far East, and I lived in Hawaii. I lived in a whole bunch of places in the East and South. But this place had clean streets. And it wasn't until I joined the historical society here, that I found out that Denver used to be a desert. This was a high desert. There was not a tree. Every tree that you see in this place today was brought in from someplace else. There was not one tree from the mountains over to Kansas on this whole place. So [unclear] back in the '20's [1920s] and '30's [1930s] was an architect that came from the East Coast. And he was the one that imported every tree that you see. And all the little children trees that you see, all these mighty oaks and stuff were planted by this guy. And I did a sculpture of him down-Saco DeBoer [S.R. DeBoer] was this architect. I did a sculpture of him down in the city county building. And so here you had this architect guy that brought-- hat made water. And, Of course, Cherry Creek runs right through Denver. And Denver was founded at the confluence of a Plat river and Cherry Creek. And so that whole thing started. It was all mining back in those days and all that kind of stuff. And he architecturally made this place a blooming--just a wonderful place. Excuse me. And so when I first got here the--there were certain areas there were trees [unclear]. Colorado Boulevard. There were trees all the way from this end of Colorado Boulevard almost all--not quite all the way to Colorado Springs [Colorado]. And then he had done 17th Avenue. He had done Sixth Avenue. And he had done specific streets and Spirit Boulevard. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 61199 Speaker 1: Now your sculpture of him reminds me of-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: The thing that you're most noted for right now. And that's sculpting. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: But that's something that you didn't do earlier. Am I right? Speaker 2: No, no. I didn't start doing sculpture 'til I was forty-five years old. And I'd never sculpted before. And I--what happened was I--actually I got into art back when I was working for IBM [International Business Machines]. And they had commissioned me. I used to come to work--I worked for IBM for about two minutes. And I used to go to work all dressed up in all these fancy suits and all that kind of stuff. Because I was--you know, I was a real clothes nut. I've always been a clothes nut. You know. And even in the Air Force I didn't wear real official Air Force shoes. I wore green shoes, but they had a style to them and all that kind of stuff [laughing]. I mean really. I was always in trouble with the Air Force 'cause I wore green shoes, not Air Force shoes. And all my uniforms were all tailored. Every uniform I wore was all tailor made. It was tailor-made to my little bitty body and it was cool. Man, I mean you know. They could see my pecs and all that kind of stuff. You know, [Laughing] I was a cool cat. And I prided myself with the shiny shoes, black socks and I was, you know. And my blue uniforms were tailor-made as well. And I got all my clothes tailor-made. So I got out-- they made them 'cause of my size. I couldn't buy off the shelf stuff. So when I got out I met Alan Berg. You probably don't know anything about Alan Berg. But Alan Berg was a Jewish guy that got shot, a radio station guy, by the Klan [Ku Klux Klan] here not long ago. You know, it's been far back. But Alan was a tailor. So he dressed me. And, you know, he had my high collars and I had two cufflinks on each sleeve. And Alan dressed me. And I was going to work for IBM all dressed up in this decked out stuff. Yellow puffs, yellow ties, orange ties, you know, double breasted suits and you know. Getting not quite orange, but, you know, getting close and stuff [Laughing]. And-- Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] It's the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know. So--and I'd go to work. And Bob [unclear] go, "Are you crazy? Are you out of your brain?" And they said, "Get that stuff off." And you know, "We take dark suits and stripped ties and standard stripe tie stuff." And I said, "Well Bob this is the way I am. This is who I am." And if you don't' want me to do it, I won't work for your company." And he said, "What!" I said, "No, I'm serious." So they did a poll of all my customers. I was the hottest salesman IBM had here. I swear to God I was. I got promoted six times in-- you know, I worked for IBM-- I actually worked for two years and I got promoted six times in two years. I was the hottest salesman they had in this region. And Bob polled my customers and they said, "Dwight is--let him be. Leave the boy alone." Story_ID: 61200 Speaker 1: So anyway, he said, "Look, we're buying a new building. We want you to decorate it. 'Cause you seem to have this color sense.' And that's what really got me back into art. So I couldn't find--they commissioned me to do all this-- find these paintings. And I was gonna be a dealer. Go find the paintings and place them. And I kept bringing this stuff down and going, "Gotta bring the stuff down." And they'd, "No Dwight, it's not corporate. It's not IBM [International Business Machines]. It's not us. It's not, you know." And so I had an office in Boulder [Colorado]. And I'm driving up and the idea light came on. And I said--I took me and my kids and we went in to the basement. And I took--I drew down 200 publications from IBM and I cut their own publications up and I made paintings out of them. And I made collages and I did paintings. I had color fields and I glued these collages and matted them down. I put [unclear] glass on them. Took them back down there, and he said, "Dwight [snapping fingers] this is what we're looking for." And I said--he said, "Who's doing them?" I said, "I found this guy. [snapping fingers] The cat is cool and he can get as many as you want." And so the next thing you know, I'm into--I mean I--I had decorated all these offices. You know? You know. I mean I was--and it came to big money. You know, and I hadn't gotten paid. And so I walked up and said, "Bob, this guy is bugging me about getting paid." He said, "Dwight don't bullshit me. You know-- We know you're doing this." You know. "'Cause you get too excited when you describe them [Laughing]." So I said, "Okay." And he says, "How much?" And I gave him a number. And he says, "Well you know I can't pay you." I said, "What are you talking about?" "He says, "You gotta-- I gotta have another company. Give me a company name." And I gave him a company, Creative Arts Enterprises. This was my new company. And he doubled what I billed him. You know. Which launched my--kind of launched my art career. Story_ID: 61201 Speaker 1: And you know. I mean it was--I mean it's crazy. It's just totally insane. And I'd been doing painting and stuff. So I had a show at my house in the '70's [1970s]. You know, and invited all my best friends and stuff. And I was fiddling around with welding. Welding little nails and things together, and little things together and stuff. And I had-- I was trying to teach myself how to weld is what I was doing. And I had sixty little pieces that I had done, that I had welded. I went down to the junkyard, I got all of these ball bearings and all this stuff and I started welding these things together. And I was making these stains out of this--it was all abstract. And I invited those people. And I sold fort-five pieces of the sixty. And I still have those--the fifteen that I didn't sell I still have them. I won't let them go. And I said, "Man this is incredible." And I made all this money. I mean, you know. Story_ID: 61202 Speaker 1: And then I got a commission to do at the Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado] to do Wright Brothers scene. The Wright Brothers, you know with a Kitty Hawk with, you know. And so then Octave Chanute was going with Bob--my boss's secretary. And Octave Chanute is the guy that did all of the bridgework and all the structure work for the Wright Brothers. He's a bridge maker out of St. Louis [Missouri]. Speaker 2: That's Chanute Air Force Base. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Chanute Air Force Base [Chicago, Illinois] is named after him. So Octave Chanute's grandson lives here. And he commissioned me to do all the planes to scale that his dad had done the structural work for, for th Wright Brothers. So I had to go back to the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.]. I got all those measurements. And they allowed me to do it. They allowed me to copy all this stuff. It was bizarre. And I made all these little airplanes for Octave Chanute III, or fourth or something. What the hell ever his name was. So I mean on the side-- And you gotta understand now, I'm--and I walked out and left IBM [International Business Machines]. You know, and I'm doing this art on the side at night, all night long kind of stuff. You remember I was telling you about no sleeping. So I'd get home at 10:00 at night and I'd work 'til about 4:00 in the morning welding and doing all this stuff. You know. And--but this was welded sculpture. It was, you know. It had nothing to do with what I do now. 'Cause I didn't know anything about model,model art. I had no concept and no idea that you could take what I was doing and do it simpler by-- with clay and wax and all that kind of stuff. 'Cause I would do it the hard way. You following what I'm saying? And so that really kind of got me into the art universe. Even when I--in my enterprise even when I was building condos, I'd go to my lender and I'd say, "I want an art budget." "Are you crazy?" I said, "No, I'm serious. I want an art budget." And so you buy one of my condominiums, you got an Ed Dwight sculpture or an Ed Dwight painting in the condo. Okay. So now--and that what's in some instances sold the condo. While they're sitting there, I got this abstract piece of art on the coffee table there or the model and I--and a couple of my painting on the wall. And that's what sold the condos faster and stuff. So I mean this whole thing was all working. You know, and my little head was just going crazy, but all this stuff was working for me. You know? But I was too chicken to trust it. So it was a long time before I ever went into art. Story_ID: 61203 Speaker 1: I kept--I did the restaurant thing, did the real estate thing. And I was just--doing the construction thing. And I was just doing anything because personally, this was a personal problem I had. I thought all artist were gay. 'Cause my father [Ed Dwight] told me that if I kept doing art that I was gonna turn--it wasn't gay, but I was gonna turn queer. And I says, "What's--", 'cause I didn't know what a queer was. But it stuck in my head all that time that if I would start doing art publicly people are conceive me as being a gay person rather than a straight person. And that sca--and I did not know that I started doing art when my dad--after my dad died I had-- I didn't put none of those puzzles together. I was avoiding the issue. And, you know, when he died in '75 [1975] is really when I--you know, [chuckling] when you give your soul to God. You know, I gave my [Laughing] soul to art. You know. It was him dying. And I don't know why. I mean it was just crazy. It was something that he had planted up here that I was gonna be this queer guy. You know. 'Cause when I started painting, after he told me that, you know, I thought it was something happening to my body. This was gonna make me-- and I was waiting for this metamorphous, you know [Laughing]. Remember the Incredible Hulk [Laughing] how they changed him over, you know. So I [Laughing] painting, I went, "[Laughing] Am I going through the transition or am I going through [Laughing]-- I mean something happening to me here, man." I'm [Laughing] going, "This is nuts." And so after my [Laughing] old man kicked off man, I had a clear shot. Because I wasn't worried about [Laughing] that. I didn't you know. And then I started talking to people, you know, and I found out all artists weren't gay [Laughing]. You know, there were a lot of straight guys who were--you know. 'Cause I was a hero. Think about that, man. I mean, I was a jet pilot astronaut hero. Think about it! That's deep. I mean so I'm not doing art! I mean you gotta be joking. This is some kind of joke that people force on people. Make 'em go from astronauts and stuff to painters and sculptures. Get out of here. No way. So I was really worried about that. And it wasn't until my old man died that I just said, "Screw it." You know. And that's when I came out of the closet [Laughing]. Story_ID: 61204 Speaker 1: And I went back to school and got a degree. 'Cause I gotta be legitimate and everything, you know. So that's how this whole thing got started. And then with the dossier kicking in about now too. So all these things climaxed into one little crescendo, you know. About my--feeling about myself and my own--about my own perceptions of who the hell I was and was I gonna step up to the plate. And what was I gonna do. What was the second act? You know. A used up astronaut walking around, "Oh yeah that's the guy that used to be an astronaut. But you know he really flunked out, you know. The guy couldn't cut it." [Laughing] You know what I mean. So you're walking around getting all these things. All these massages from people. People get drunk at your parties. They get crazy and say, [changing voice] "You weren't no fucking astronaut. You're crazy. You're out of your mind. You know, you flunked out sucker." You know [Laughing]. I'm going, "you said you were my friend the day before, Man. Now [Laughing] you're dogging me." And so they-- but you go through all these things. You know. And so I decided that, "You know, if umma do this, I gotta go all the way. I gotta go all the way with this thing and kill 'em. And mow down every critic that could ever come out of any place." You know. And the only way to do that was to get a lot of homework done. And I went back to school. And I-- I studied harder out there at that school [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] than anybody. And I was on staff out there. I was a staff member. And I ran the Sculpture Department. Story_ID: 61205 Speaker 1: And--you know, I just-- Ijust got so immersed in this whole concept of making art and being the baddest black cat in the universe. Now well I couldn't be the baddest cat in the universe or the baddest black cat in the universe was that it had to do with the way people perceived how Black people make art. 'Cause I came from a system that dealt some star power. What I mean by star power, if you were an astronaut, people just aggrandized you, they lionized you. You know, what I mean? You know. And whether you did anything or didn't do anything you got credit for just being there. You see what I'm saying. And for a general public small--smart ass people come up and grab you and yank your chain and all that kind of stuff. But the general public they'll idolize and lionize you. You know. Cause they don't know what you did-- really did and all that kind of stuff. And I got in to the art universe and there were no Black people in here that were for real. Hello! I mean where were the Black art stars? I mean, you know, you're talking about Bearden [Romare Bearden]? I man the Cattlers (ph.). You know, you got [unclear] Jacob Lawrence you got on that list. But these cats were not in the main stream, Man! You know. And these people are dying and kicking off and doing all these things. You know. And they-- and people are groveling around trying to find a history-- a legacy for them. "Well what did they really do to change the art universe? What did they really do to change the landscape of America artistically? How big were their body of work? Were their body of work really, really big? Enough to really dig into it and start finding some all-- all kind of new incredible stuff?" And the answer was no. Because Bearden had a very light, very, very light thin layer of stuff. As good as he was Jet--Lawrence had-- you know he did himself 400 works. But there was so much stuff repetitive stuff, and the way this whole thing was handled and the way--how he was handled and how the whole art universe handles Black artists in the first place. Because we don't belong. So all of a sudden I started, you know, asking and going and going to the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.]. Going to every show at Brooklyn Museum [New York City, New York], MOMA [Museum of Modern Art, New York City, New York], and all these places. Looking and listening and listening and to see what was going on. And wasn't nothing going on, man. There's nothing going on. And so I'm saying, "Well are these guys--do I pattern myself after the Jacob Lawrence?" So I went to them. And they told me to go "Go jump in the lake!" And I'm going, "Well where do I go to get-- Where do I go as a Black artist to get some solace? Some encouragement and get into this and get into that? Take that route. Take this route. Do you get with this dealer? Go here. Go there." Nothing. 'Cause they weren't talking. You know. And I was this smart-ass kid that didn't belong. So you look at all--I got all those Black art books here. But I'm not in one single Black art catalog that's ever been published in the United States of America. And I've been doing this for twenty-five years. You will not find me in any of those books. You know. Because you got Samella Lewis [HM]. You got all these people and David Driskell [HM] and [unclear] writing all these history books. David Driskell did everything he could do to keep me out of the Cosby Collection. You know. Because, you know what? I came along and I immediately became commercially successful. You know. And that wasn't in the game. You see, you're not supposed to be commercially successful. You're supposed to do art for art's sake. You know, suffer and have the Black experience. Every time I've ever been in any catalog, and I have one catalog called Choosy, the cat dogged me so bad. My problem was I didn't have the Black experience. I wasn't Black enough. And when I get the ni-- I need to go away and get the-- When I get the Black Experience I can come back-- I'd be the greatest artist in the world once I get this Black Experience. Speaker 2: Did he [unclear] tell you? Speaker 1: Oh yes. You know. And so all of a sudden you you had this isolation thing going down. About, you know, do you make a choice to be commercially self in the art universe. You know, where white people--my son [Eddie Dwight] came up to me when he was working for me. And he said, "Dad do-- you know I did a computer on yada, yada, yada." And he said, "You know, you sell 97.8% of all of your art is sold to white people." I said, "You gotta be kidding me. I said, "No Black people buy my art?" He said, "That's right." So we vigorously attacked the Black market. We started going to AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] conventions [Laughing] and Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] conventions NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] conventions, Black Caucuses, you know. And so we started massaging the black market. And we have a miniature black market. So, you know. But again we gotta play games with money. See. Because Black people are in a game and not in the system to spend big money for art. Story_ID: 61206 Speaker 1: You know. I've had arguments with guys with--this guy walks up to me and then he-- and we're in an art show there. And they opened on Los Angeles Boulevard in LA [Los Angeles, California]. And this guy drove up in a Rolls Royce and had an $89,000 license plate. And he walked in. And his old lady had a $4,000 dress. And she had a Mr. T starter kit, had all this jewelry on. And it was the middle of August and she had a fur. It was so God damn hot she had it hanging off her shoulders. 'cause it was so hot. But she had to show. You see what I'm saying. So the boy walks I and he says, "I want that. I want that. I want that. I want that. And I want it sent over to the house." I mean this cat is a--this boy is--this man is fantastic! I ain't never seen nothing like this in my life. "Fantastic. I want it sent over." I said, "Well I can't send it over now. 'Cause I gotta go back and we'll have to get you a copy." "Copy! What do you mean copy?" He said, "These aren't all one of a kind?" I said, "Of course not. They're not all one of a kind. They're editions." "You mean you think for a minute I want something in my house that somebody else has got?" And I said, "Brother--" and this guy is a very prominent doctor in LA. I said, "You know what, I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] last week and I was at an art exhibit. It wasn't my exhibit. But another guy drove up in a car that was a maroon Rolls Royce with brown rag top and it had $89,000 on their license plate [unclear], you know, I just thought about it." I said, "So there's another guy in Pennsylvania that's driving a car just like yours and he's got $89,000 on his license plate too." You know. "And so you're a smart ass aren't you?" I said, "No, I'm not smart ass. I'm just a realist." I said, "Your wife has got a $4,000 dress on." I said, "That woman will never wear that dress again in Los Angeles for the rest of her life. Now I don't know where y'all are going when you leave here. But she's got a $4,000 dress and she'll never wear it again. Okay. And so you're telling me about--" I said, "What good is IBM [International Business Machines] stock when there's just one share of IBM stock? You know, help me with this." He said, "I ain't buying your art, 'cause you're a smart ass." I said, "I might be a smart ass. But the whole issue is that if I was a white artist and said the same thing to you, you'd be buying this stuff up so fast, you would--" you know what I mean? And so, you know, we get into all these things in the Black community that has--it's a special needs thing that we get into. The Black community--when the Black community has to address the concept of decorating their houses and doing things and stuff. You know. And for a long time when it was real cute, you know, and they would buy art from me and jack me up, man. Story_ID: 61207 Speaker 1: I mean the only people that have stolen art--money from me are Black art dealers. I'm talking about big money. I'm talking about I go down there and I trust them and I bring my art to these people. And, you know, bring them into the 20th century with good art. And, you know, I sell $60,000, $70,000, $100,000 worth of art out of their places. And the money, you know--and they'll--one guy in St. Louis [Missouri], I went down there and the whole place was gone [Laughing]. I mean, you know. It was a gallery [Laughing] I left twenty-something pieces in his gallery. I go back to St. Louis and it's gone. The place is gone. And I asked a cat, "Where did this guy go?" He said, "Well he was selling pants down at Penney's the last time I saw him." I said, "Where's my art!" he said, "This guy came up with a U-Hall truck and they took it out of here and it's gone." You know. I'm going, "Oh my God!" You know. And so--and that was my experience with--my first entree to the Black community, to the Black art dealers, the Black gallery system and all that kind of stuff. So I was disillusioned. I mean what is this stuff all about? Story_ID: 61208 Speaker 1: And they talk all this junk about Black pride and all All this stuff about us sticking together. We gotta do this. We gotta die for each other and all that kind of stuff. And, Man, I found myself out in the field all by myself. And the whole Black art community turned a cold shoulder to me, because I was out selling art--like Samella Lewis [HM] walked up to me--and--I opened in--on Los Angeles Boulevard, you know, and we did a quarter of a million dollars on that show. And she walked up to me. She said, "How'd you get in here? We've been trying to break this gallery for I don't know how many years? How'd you get in here?" You know. And I said, "Well Nancy Wilson is a good friend of mine. So she just called the guy up and said, "Hey, I got this hot guy in Denver." And he said, "Yeah." That's how I got in [Laughing]. I mean it was really easy." You know. And you know. And so-- and I got caught up in the art mafia and all that. I've been through all those experiences and all kind of stuff. You know. So this whole thing-- I went into this thing for the purity of it all. You know. I, you know-- 'cause I wanted this-- 'cause I'm a guy-- I'm a pure of hear kind of guy, you know. And I wanna do pure things and do pure product and I don't want any seedy stuff. I want everything that leaves here to be just a top drawer. Everything that leaves this place has to be the best. You see. And, you know. And I come to the table with that idea and thought. But yet and still you see all these people who are the pace makers and art dealers and all this kind of stuff. And I-- And the white people have been very generous with me. 'Cause they've adopted me and they brought me into their universe and all that kind of stuff. They buy art from me and they pay for it and they don't play games with me. You know. But it was my disappointment, if you will, with the black community. And I'm not saying all the Black community. 'cause I got some of the best--Dr. McLarin and he owns thirty-two of my pieces. He's a brother down in Atlanta [Georgia]. And then I got a whole range of brothers around the country that buy my art, that hung with me through this thing. 'Cause they see through the fog. Because they see there's something at the tail end of this thing. Because the projects that I do. That's why I kind of went into public art. 'Cause of my disappointment with my day-today dealings with hacking through this maze of stuff. Well you know, you be nice to people. You go borrow money and you bring your art to these people, and they steal from you. You know what I mean? And these are sisters and brothers who talk this game about us sticking together and all that stuff. You know. So that's been my biggest disappointment with it. And then I moved into public art where these people couldn't play games so much. You know what I mean. So I started doing big pieces and stuff. And so-- And I haven't given up on the gallery scene. I haven't given up on Black folks. I haven't given up on any of that stuff. 'Cause-- but you gotta be in a position where you establish some kind of legacy of sorts. And we've got eighty sculptures around the country, public pieces of art, that we have established that-- but I don't get no play. Ed Dwight and-- you know, no matter where I go the issue is that Ed Dwight-- "Who is Ed Dwight?" You know. And there's no-- nobody in our-- and I'll go unveil and everybody will stand up and cheer, you know. You know and I got a "Yeah. [clapping hands] yeah yah Ed Dwight." You know. Yeah [Laughing] right. Well, you know, they'd never heard of Ed Dwight till that day, by the way. [Laughing]. But I'm standing on the podium giving speeches in Detroit and in Canada [chuckle] and all that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 61209 Speaker 1: And so now I'm this new icon if you will, because I did this thing. But they set up and they lied. Because they clapped [clapping] and they "Oh Ed Dwight, Ed Dwight." Maybe ten people in the audience knew who the hell I was before I got there. You see what I'm saying. And that's because of how the system, you know. Because I can't get no play in the Black community. You can forget that. They can forget that. You ever have any Ebony Image Awards and Essence Image Awards? They have not done one visual artist in the whole time they've been doing that stuff. What's up with that? You know. And there're people Tina Allen in California. There are people that need qualifying. There are people-- and we don't lionize in our community visual artists like the white people do. 'Cause all you gotta do is pick up all those white magazines and somebody's being lionized in the, you know. 'Cause that's what the historians and writers get paid for. You know. And we take and we're very choicey about who we lionize in the Black community. You know. And then our voices are all gone. Samella's [Samella Lewis, HM] is not writing any more. David [David Driskell, HM] is not writing any more. How do you get play? I mean how do you get a reputation? How do you get to be standing out as a real art star, as a visual arts star? And I write about this a lot. I've written a lot about the concept of what I call star power. Because we-- you can't name me one single African-American visual artist in the United States of America that's on the lips of people. You know. I mean that doesn't-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] None that I can think of. Speaker 1: Doesn't exist. You know. And then when the brother dies Bosqual-- Barkay whatever [Jean-Michel Basquiat]-- however you pronounce that dude's name-- A 23-year-old kid dies. You know, and then white folks jump all into that. See and they start lying and stuff and reproducing stuff that the man-- he didn't even do. Speaker 2: He's got a movie. Speaker 1: yeah, yeah. [unclear] I have-- I got it on tape. And, you know, but the brother died, see. And dreads and all that kind of stuff and he was gay and not gay, and Andy Warhol's lover and all these different things, you know, trying to make it real controversial figure out of this guy. And with pieces of work they can find for him they're selling for $100,000, $150,000, $200,000, $300,000 you see. And so-- but that can only last so long until the inventory runs out. You know. Unless they're gonna lie and start making more images, of, you know. So I don't know what the answer to all of this stuff is about what we in the Black community-and what you're doing here is wonderful to the extent that at least it puts people-- puts us on people's minds. You know. And so there are alternative I have, I gotta make a-- I gotta make a decision. Do I wanna be wealthy or do I wanna be famous. See. 'Cause if I wanna be wealthy, I can make little junk pieces of art like this and sell 'em--millions of these things. You know what I mean? And sell 'em for $10 or $20 and I can just be in business the rest of my life. And, you know, and just give 'em to somebody and you distribute them and sell 'em. You know. And do I wanna do that or do I wanna have a different kind of legacy. You know. You know, or do I wanna be famous. You know, do I want people writing about me. And so my solution to the problem is I'm gonna write about myself [Laughing]. Hello [Laughing]. You know. Because if ain't nobody else gonna do it, why shouldn't I? You know, and I'm in a bad market. See. And if I moved to New York-- you know, if I moved to New York tomorrow, I'd be the-- I mean with what I've got-- what I got going on here, man I mean I couldn't rest. I mean these people would be shoving stuff down my throat. I mean goodies and stuff and appearances and agents and all kind of stuff if I decided to move to New York. But I've been told that before. But I'm in Denver [Colorado]. Story_ID: 61210 Speaker 1: Your reputation is growing in public art. And your art--this monumental art in cities like Detroit [Michigan] and the piece South Carolina, a piece in Canada, a pieces in-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Um-hmm. Speaker 1: You've done for the Mall in Washington [D.C.]. And they all-- I mean most of them have historical themes. And they seem to be-- They have to relate-- They demonstrate a level and understanding of history and some historical statements. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And, I mean you're commissioned to make those kind of things. Speaker 2: Yeah. See but a lot of stuff is my own doing. So, you know. Because I precipitated all this stuff. And the reason why I did this because it had to do with my--when I went to--I have a real sad story to tell. I went to art school [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. And the first seminar that I went to had an artist. There was a guy that came in. They paid these guys to come in and do seminars for graduate students. And this guy got up and said--and I'm the only brother in the room. There were about fifteen of us sitting in the room. And this white guy said, He said, "There's never in the history of man that any piece of significant art has ever been created by a person of color." And everybody looked at me. "Ed." [Laughing], you know. And this was my first seminar. And I didn't know--I didn't know what to say. Speaker 1: He just came in and said that? Speaker 2: Just said it. You know. And I don't know whether he said it for my benefit or what he was--or why, man? I don't even know why this guy came out with this. But I was pissed. You know, 'cause I didn't have any answers. I mean, "Wait a minute man. What about the Egyptians? I mean they were people of color. Look at all them things they made over there [Laughing]. All those sphinxes and all that kind of stuff." You know. I mean Golee! Get a grip on this thing, you know. And as we go--you know. And I didn't know enough, I didn't know enough art history. I had no idea how to answer. And I'm writing an art book today. And I got a whole-- this whole beginning of my art book is based on what this guy said, and my reaction to what he said. You know what I mean. So I decided-- I said, "You know what--" And I looked around. And I--I said, "I'm a pop culture guy. And I looked around. I've been to New York and [unclear] go to [unclear] all year round. And I looked around and I didn't see any persons of color [chuckle] in any museums, in any galleries. And I said, "You know what? I don't know whether the cat's right or not. But it seems kind of strange that I'm going to all these places and I ain't seeing nothing that establishes the fact that people of color exist on the planet." You know? What's up with that? And so I decided--and that's when I first decided--I said, "I'm gonna populate the world with people-with things of color [Laughing]." You know. And so that's when I did the Buffalo Soldiers. You know. I gotta start some place. So I did the whole scene on the Buffalo Soldiers to establish in the hearts and minds of all those conservative turds that walk around buying all this cowboy art and all this John Wayne crap. And man! When they found out there were Black soldier and black cowboys and stuff, they were buying it by the dozen. I mean it was incredible. That they-that these conservative white folks did not know there were Black cowboys and buffalo soldiers and all that kind of stuff. You know. Story_ID: 71557 Speaker 1: You know, I-- it's a good-- You know, I don't know how to jump-start this career. And somebody said earlier-- and this is a real side board. But somebody said, "Why do I have all this stuff in here?" 'Cause no other artist in the United States of America has this stuff. There is not a single artist around no place that has a staff and a foundry and a studio this big. You can't find none no place. Okay. And the reason it's here is totally bizarre. And it's just the way my brain works. I went up North to have a cat-- a little bronze head, a little Black soldier's head casted to a white foundry up north up in Lola (ph.), Colorado. And the guy charged me double for everything. But I didn't get it 'cause I had the bucks to pay. So I didn't pay any attention to it. So the next thing you know he charges me all this big money. And he gave me this piece, and all that kind of stuff. And I went up there with a second piece. I go up there with second piece and they say, "Ed, you know--" He said, "I don't know how to say this to you. But, you know, we don't like casting Nigger art here." [Laughing] I'm going, "What?" He said, "We don't like casting Nigger art here, man." Speaker 2: And this is in--what year is this? Speaker 1: This is in 1974 thereabouts [Laughing]. And I'm going, "What?" "Yeah, Man I just don't feel comfortable doing that." And so I said to myself-- and so I grabbed my--I took my art out, and paid him for my little piece and left. And I said to myself, "Damn this is really incredible." And I decided--'cause I decided to become an artist by now. Right. And I said, "Man I'm gonna be in trouble if I can't get my pieces cast. Where can I go to get my pieces cast?" And so that was when I found out the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado] had a foundry. So I, you know, was motivated about getting my masters and was also motivated by the fact that they had a foundry out there. So I went out there and enrolled. And therefore I could cast my own pieces. You know. And then I learned how foundries worked and I learned how to cast bronze. I learned all this stuff about how to do bronzes and stuff. Okay. And low and behold I started out--went to industrial foundries. I never went back to an art foundry again. But I went to an industrial foundries and asked, "Could they cast my work?" And so he said, "Well you know, we don't like to cast art, but we'll show you how to cast." So all of a sudden I'm learning all about this casting stuff. So the first thing I did when I left the university was open up my own foundry. And I've had it every since. Because I don't trust anybody that, you know. And they're coming to me like-- I mean I get calls, you know, all the time, "Please let me cast your work." Because they see what I've done. But I'm doing this for myself. You see what I'm saying? And they're upset about this. Because look at all the money these guys are losing by me casting my own work. You know, we're talking about hundreds of thousands of dollars that they're losing money. Because some guy said to me, "They don't wanna cast Nigger art." You know. And I mean these people are honest nowadays. I mean they're trying their damnedest to get my business. You know, "Hey man, we'll do anything. We'll put you in the front of the line [chuckle]. We'll do anything man. 'Cause you're hot, Man." You know, I've just been dragging my feet about it. And I'm gonna have to be there 'Cause I'm getting tired and old. So I really I want to be there whether I let these people cast my work. But that's how this whole thing ended up getting started. Story_ID: 71558 Speaker 1: And then secondly, how do you become an artist? Forty-five years old, five kids. How do you--how do you become an artist? What do you do? You know, the first thing I wanna do is go out and buy some sandals, get an earring, get a nose thing and some dreads, man. And I said, "Well I'll be the only cat in town with dreads and two holes in him. So maybe I better not do that part." But I'm serious. 'Cause I didn't know what to do. How do you become an artist? What do you do? How do you do that? And so I started hanging out in art galleries and with artists and seeing how they-- what their lifestyles were. I started buying books that had their lifestyles in it. What would I do when I get up every day? 'Cause I'm a structured guy. What do I do? Do I drink coffee? Do I do art right away? Do I drink [Laughing] latte or do I drink--do I drink green tea? What the hell I'm supposed to be doing with this stuff? You understand? I don't know nothing about this bullshit [Laughing] but I'm trying to figure this out [Laughing]. You see? And all this stuff is getting in the way. Do I continue to wear my Brioni suits at art openings or do I dress down? Do I wanna go out and get some African stuff. You know what I mean? The stuff with the baggy shit and all that kind of stuff with my little hat on. And, you know, [Laughing]. And I know damn well I'm gonna be phony 'cause I can't pull that off. You see what I'm saying. And so I had guys to tell me to wear mink stoles and all that kind of stuff to go--go do all this stuff. I'm serious. If I have an opening, go up in a limo and have a mink stole that hangs all the way out there. I said, "Man, I can't pull that off. I mean that ain't me." I mean, you know. So I decided to go back to where I was. Where I was [chuckling] I wore suits. I wear suits to my openings. I wear suits in my unveilings. I wear all that kind of stuff. Okay. And so those were the dilemmas. Story_ID: 71559 Speaker 1: Then how do you do--and the next thing you do, how do you get out there? So I decided that I wanted to paint the landscape of Black folks. Although at the time I didn't know about what I was talking about. 'Cause I knew--I didn't know who Harriet Tubman was 'til I was over forty years old. I had no idea who Frederick Douglass was. I didn't go to Black schools. I mean I didn't know there was slavery. I did not--I was forty five years old and I was learning about slavery. I didn't know there was slavery. I don't know what these people-- and I haven't--and flying my jets, I had no idea what these Black folks were rioting about. Go get a job [Laughing] brother. What's wrong with you [laughing]? Like me [Laughing]. I'm flying jets, I'm cheating death. Get a job. You don't need to do rioting [Laughing]. You know. You know those were the things that, you know. So I'm--and George Brown a Black Lieutenant Governor here in Colorado pulled my coattail and said, "Dwight, you [Laughing] too white brother. I mean you're an [Laughing] Oreo sandwich. You're the epitome of Oreo sandwich. Oreo sandwich dumb [laughing]." You know. I said, "What are you talking about?" He said, "Ed, we got Buffalo Soldiers." He's the one that got me into this Bbuffalo Soldier thing. Speaker 2: Joe Briggs? Speaker 1: No, no. George Brown. Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] George Brown. Speaker 1: George Brown our first Black Lieutenant Governor gave me all these books to read. So therefore, I decided that I was-- so he gave me a direction. So I decided to paint all this landscape that I didn't see of all these Black folk that weren't there. I decided to put them there. And that was why I did- you know, that's why I went that direction. And then I had to become literate and be a mini-historian of slavery and what Harriett [Tubman] did and Fredrick Douglass tapes. Man, I'd play these tapes. Every time I do Frederick Douglass I play these tapes. I mean I got-- I'm a nut on videos. And I just went crazy with his Black history stuff. And like an immersion thing and all these images kept popping up. I mean all these images just-it was like they were exploding in my head. And, you know, and I was doing a Black cowboy thing. And I did a rodeo thing. And I did the Black jockey thing. And I did-- and then I did a little bit of the Black music. Story_ID: 71560 Speaker 1: And they got ahold of me in St. Louis [Misssouri] and they said, "Dwight, we got a good one for you. How would like to do a jazz thing two years from now in 1980." And I said, "God! I'm from Kansas City. You know. You know, Charlie Parker lived four blocks from my house man. Charlie Parker was the piece de resistance. You know. And I really wanted to be a musician. I really did. I had a saxophone. 'Cause Bert had an alto sax. I went and bought me an alto sax at Sam's, you know. And I tried my damnedest to play the saxophone, you know. And, man I couldn't--I just didn't--I mean I was just lost in all this stuff. And I'd go see Bert--and the worst thing you can do is go to a concert and see Bert play and see these cats play. Or Lou Jordan [Louis Jordan] play. You know, and they're going-- They're dancing all up and down this thing. You know. And I'm trying to make noises come out this thing. So I had to abandon this whole idea. But I became a jazz lover from a distance. You know. And allowed this side to manifest it through my hands, verses trying to play a horn. You know. But I tried every horn. I tried every instrument and I couldn't play nothing. I tried to play piano [Laughing]. I tried to play guitar. My fingers got sore [Laughing]. I tried--I just couldn't make this music thing work for me. You know. And my motives were all wrong. Because I'd go to these concerts and all that kind of-- can you understand? And the guys got all the women. See at the break, the women would rush up there, man. And I said, "That's where I-- That's where I am." 'Cause I was short. Couldn't get no stuff. So [Laughing] therefore that became my-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [Laughing]. Speaker 1: Thing to be a musician. You know for about five minutes there so I could get some chicks. You know. So [Laughing] my motives were wrong [Laughing] you know. So I decided to do this whole thing in art. You know. And so, St. Louis Museum--national park, National Park Service of St. Louis got me into Jazz stuff. And that's where all this jazz stuff comes from. So I kind of moved away from the cowboy stuff and got into the jazz stuff. And then I got some--really criticized 'cause it was too realistic, you know, by the general art community. They were purists, because it wasn't abstract enough. Story_ID: 71561 Speaker 1: And then I got into this negative space. I was the one who started negative space. And, you know, all this stuff you see with negative space with just hands and stuff I start at in the '70's [1970s]. And I was the first artist to do it. But I did it with cowboys before I did it with music. And I got thrown out of my cowboy clubs, because I had violated the rules of making art images by cutting the hands off. 'Cause I walked into my studio one day, and the sun was shining through a transom. And it was shining on a piece of bronze. A full life-size bronze with cowboys and Indians. You know. And all I could see was the sun was shining on it. And all I could see was that. And I went back and I redid that piece by cutting all--everything away but what the sun was shining on. And that's where this negative space thing came from. And, man, within two years every white boy that's in the cowboy universe was making negative space. Because my first show in Lubbock, Texas with it, they were walking out with arms full of my art [Laughing]. These white boys were really pissed off. Because, "What's going on here?" And they were buying all this art of mine because it was new. Nobody had ever done it before. And nobody had ever seen it before. So I knew I was on to something with that. And then the same thing happened when I got into the music genre. All of this stuff started playing. And it was great for music, because all you need is a face and hands and a mic and a horn. And you're free. You know. And that just totally exploded in America's face. And its' been totally commercial since successful. And I mean everybody that was hanging out around the edges about seeing what Dwight was gonna do, they got upset about it. Because it was a commercial success. And I was selling--you could not believe the art that I sold. There's just no way to even begin. But they were buying it in fives and tens and twelves and all that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 71562 Speaker 1: Which pieces of your work are you the most proudest of? Speaker 2: You know, you can't-- you really can't go there. And the reason why you can't go there, I mean there are pieces like on--I had a show with Miles [Davis]. I was--right before Miles died and they had a show. And the Museum of California that--it was for musicians that did art only. And I was the only non-musician that was invited to that show. And so that's where I met Miles for the first time. And he thought I was nuts! Because, you know, 'cause I'm hyper and all that kind of stuff. Miles [Laughing] is not a dude-- person of hyper [Laughing] you know. I mean this cat is, you know. He's cool [laughing] Miles was cool. But Miles was a painter. I mean so he had his paintings in there. You know. And I saw him. So I said, "Umma do--" You know, I'd already done-- He had already done a sculpture that I had done back in the '70's [1970s]. That was my first show in St. Louis [Missouri]. And his cousin bought it and gave it to him. And he was in his military thing and he was leaning way back like this, you know. Playing his horn, you know, and all that kind of stuff. You know. And Miles had that piece. 'Cause you know. And so he already had a piece of my work that I had already done. But I'd probably done about five or six pieces as his uniforms changed, I would change his sculpture. You know. So probably of my subjects, Miles is my favorite. 'Cause Miles was changing all the time. He'd never-- his music changed. His persona changed, his clothes changed and I kept up with him. You know. So the biggest piece I've ever done is of Miles. The big-- You know the big life-size piece that I've done. And he's still my favorite subject. Because of the color. His--Miles was colorful. He was--he just blew people away and he's still loved. So probably that would be if I were to say my favorite subject would be Miles. But I don't have a favorite piece though. Story_ID: 71563 Speaker 1: Well what are you working on currently right now? Speaker 2: Well I just finished the big Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] piece here. And I'm working on Dizzy Gillespie. And this is for his home town in Cheraw, South Carolina. And it's gonna be a sculpture of him playing. They're trying to make a visitor's center and all that kind of stuff down there. So that's my next big thing. And then I'm doing Mayor Washington [Mayor Harold Washington] in Chicago [Illinois] and then the Patriots Memorial [Black Revolutionary War Patriots Memorial] in Washington, D.C. It's gonna be--it's gonna be the old legacy piece. You know? And I gotta get that piece finished before I kick off. You know. And--because that's gonna be in a National Mall. And my dream is being up there with the big guys. You know, Felix de Welden and all those kind of cats. You know, that did all the Lincoln Memorials and all that kind of stuff. I wanna be a [unclear]-- see you get up there, they start writing books about you whether you want them to or not. You see [Laughing]. So I gotta put this piece on the Mall. Now that's my dream state. Is getting that thing finished. Story_ID: 71564 Speaker 1: Sir, what would you like to be remembered for? Speaker 2: Hmm. Oh you know, I don't know. I think, you know, those kinds of things take care of themselves. You know. And for people who know me, think I'm really nuts. You know. For people that, you know inside game and all that kind of stuff. Because, you know, 'cause they see me changing a lot with it. You know. 'Cause I am changing a lot. But I'm constant, but I'm changing. And I'm trying to find new ways to do old things. You know. And I'm trying to--I'm trying to beat this art game. And what I mean by that, I--you know, I wanna be on top of the art game. And ironically it ain't glory that does that for you; money is the--that's the only commodity that allows all these things to happen. 'Cause when you run around with guys like Richard McDowell (ph.) and the white artists these guys are making $5, $10 million a year. Hello! You know, and so what's wrong with this thing? What is wrong with this picture? You know, that a Black artist that has enterprise, that has entrepreneurial spirit, that has creative skill and all that kind of stuff, that's willing to risk stuff, willing to risk capital, as well as willing to risk creative energy, and willing to risk those things, but yet and still they exist and pull all those things together. And the--you end up in every case with all these other guys--they have capital support. 'Cause they have capital resources available to them where they can go borrow big money. You know, McDowell went out and borrowed about $3 million or $4 million bucks to get his-- when he left his gallery system, he had to go do it himself. So he had do go--and nobody fighting 'em about writing them checks for all that money. You see what I'm saying. Because they have--'cause that's the way the capitalist system works. But for a Black guy to do that, no matter all these things I've done, and I could have this guy for lunch, when you start comparing bodies of work. You follow what I'm saying? Whether you find it difficult to take my body of work as a Black guy and to go out there-- And they got-- I got track record that's-- this impeccable track record, you find nothing. When you go out and look at my sculptures, you don't find bad things. You find nothing but good stuff. You know. Story_ID: 71565 Speaker 1: I got in trouble in my deal in South Carolina. I did one of the most wonderful sculptures that's ever been done. And the Black community in South Carolina took me to task because, number one I talked too much with the white guy in South Carolina. Now here they had the flag up there. The memorial is a reaction to the flag. So they got together with the white folks and the Black folks all got together and had this big communion that they wanna do a sculpture on the capital grounds as a big reaction to the flag. The deal was, "Leave the flag up there and have this as a counter balance to it. Have the history of Black folks in South Carolina as a counter balance to the rebel flag." They got their legacy, we're gonna give you your legacy. Okay. So I go down there and I get into it, man. I mean I get into it serious. Because I took it seriously [Laughing]. I went down there, man, and Blacks folks jumped on my case. "You can't put that in there man, 'cause, you don't live down here man. We do. You can't put the Klan thing on there. You can't put this on there. We want no chains. We don't want no-- nothing about white people beating up Black people. We can't have none of that kind of controversial stuff in this memorial." Speaker 2: Do you think that kind of criticism reflect [unclear] kind of knowledge of our history? Does that kind of [unclear]? Speaker 1: Hey man when the sculpture got finished--I mean this shows how sad this whole story is. You know. And I--but this is the first public statement I ever made about that. But it sticks right here in my craw. Mainly because they called me in there, "Man, you're from the North. You don't understand. You don't know what it is to live down here. You lived in the North." I said, "You know, but you can't-- " "Why don't we do something abstract?" This is coming from the Black people! "Let's do something abstract." You know. "Abstract!" You ever heard about abstract in history? I mean abstract is Black folks getting beat up. How do you abstract that? What's up with this? Selling you on an auction block in Charleston! How do you abstract Charleston [South Carolina] where the Black folks getting sold!" Speaker 2: Are these politicians that are telling you this? Speaker 1: No. But these are art people and politicians and leaders of the community. And they're sitting there telling me all this nonsense about, "You gotta abstract this man. I mean we would feel more comfortable if you would abstract this man. Make it abstract." "I'm not abstracting anything." You know. And the white people on the other hand, check this out. White people telling me and pulling my coattail "Tell it like it is Ed." This is the white people telling me. "Tell it like it is. 'Cause we need it and it looks like they need it too." These are white people telling me this. So, you know, I come back here and, you know-- and my first efforts--'cause I went down there, they threw me out of that--they almost threw me out of the city. 'Cause you won't believe, I'll show you the drawings after this whole thing is over. It's incredible. 'Cause I asked them. I said, "Umma do it." There were twenty-three people sitting in the room. I said, "Here's what I wanna do." I said, "You interviewed me. So now I'm gonna interview you. And I want you and I want every one of you-- and I have my notebook here. And I want you to tell me in your vision when you go to sleep at night, when you close your eyes, what do you see as this memorial. What do you see there on that site?" And man I got twenty-three different versions of what I was supposed to-- of what they saw. I said, "Okay. That's what I need to know." So I went and I capsulized this stuff and I gave 'em-- gave 'em what they told me. And they said, "Uh-uh. That's not what I said. That's not what I meant anyway." You know [unclear] [Laughing]. And so they get this wonderful memorial down there. And all of a sudden they get pissed at me 'cause it looks too good! And I'm going, "What's up with that?" "Well if it was done not so good, white people are taking this over. It's now theirs. It's not ours." I'm going, "What is going on here? I mean what is happening? What do you mean? You got this thing with Black peoples' faces with the whole history of Black people in South Carolina. Everything they did and you got an end of a story. A wonderful story. 'Cause here's South Carolina today. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court is a Black guy [Ernest A. Finney, Jr.]. You got McNair [Ronald E. McNair]-well you don't. You got Marian Wright Edelman [HM]. You're there. You've got Jesse Jackson [Rev. Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] there. You got Althea Gibson there and I depicted all of them. That's the happy ending of the story. Yes we went through all this stuff. But this is the happy ending. We won! Damn it we won!" Story_ID: 71566 Speaker 1: And they--[clapping hands] White people are taking this thing over. It's not ours. And then they tried to keep my name off the thing, man. Black people! They don't want my name on the sculpture. And white people at council said, "We can't do that. It's against the law and it's in his contract. And it's against precedent. It's against all those things. This man has to have his name on the sculpture. He did it." You know. And [unclear] you got a group of cavalier Black people down there saying, "We don't want his name on there." So now we got--so what did I do? What the hell did I do? Did I go down there and did I save these people from themselves? Or you know? And the fact that they got more white people looking at than they got Black people looking at it? I can't do nothing about that. Speaker 2: [Unclear] what's the positive feedback that you received from the black community? Have you received positive feedback? Speaker 1: From where? From down there? From South Carolina? Speaker 2: Not just South Carolina. Speaker 1: Oh no, no. Oh no, no. Speaker 2: [Unclear]. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] Look the things that I get are from people of good will. You know. And when you-- when you've-- my whole agenda-- I didn't get-- this is the first time-- the only reason I brought the subject up is this is the first time in my monumental history that I've ever done anything where I got criticized by my client. The very client that I thought would be supporting me. 'Cause the white people just-- I thought-- the white people just went crazy. And, you know, it made them look great. "Look what you guys did for us. You got the right guy. We got the right images. We got the right everything. You guys oughta be happy." And these are white people talking to Black people in the room. These are Black legislators down there. And the white people are trying to convince them, "You got it. We did it. We just wanna-- We completed our mission." And the white guys are writing editorials about how incredible the sculpture was. Okay. And the Black people are telling me, "Don't come down here any more." [Laughing]. Speaker 2: Do you think maybe the Black people there are too angry to be satisfied? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. I mean no matter what I-- you know. And then I wasn't-- my problem was they didn't like 'cause I wore suits when I came to the meetings. They didn't like it because of the way I talked. 'Cause I do talk fast. I admit it. And they didn't like it. There were a whole bunch of things that they didn't like about just my whole persona. I was too northern. I didn't have the-- there was something about southern people who were really couched that stay there that are a part of the system there. There's something about them that, you know, it's like--it's a laissez faire kind of thing. They wanna get along with white people [unclear]. The whole under-pinning of this thing is getting along with white people. And not rocking the boat too much. It's getting along with white people. 'Cause this constancy of, "You don't live here, we do. We're the one that are going through this stuff every day. You're not. You can leave here. You live up there. You don't live down here." And so, you know, I'm going, "You know, does that mean you're not getting promoted right? Now what does all this mean?" In the end the art committee takes me to dinner and tells me, "Man, you're gonna make me lose my job." I said, "Hey Man, if this is gonna make you-- if an art project is gonna make you lose your job, then you should lose your job anyway." That's what I told him. I said what's wrong with that? I said, "That's crazy. you're the assistant superintendent of schools in the State of South Carolina and you're gonna lose your job over a sculpture?" "Well it's just too controversial." I said, "Well [unclear] Come on, Man. Let's get a grip on this thing." I said, "I'm doing the art. I'm the guy. Blame me [Laughing] for it." "No, no, no no! Everything you do is gonna be reflected through me. 'Cause I would have--I would have sanctioned these things you do. So we can't have anything in there that's gonna make these white people made man. We just can't have it. We just can't have it. You know?" And I'm going, "What in the world is all this?" You know. So anyway I did what I wanted to do anyway. And it's there and it's alive. And, you know, and when Black people call me at 2:00 in the morning, which they've done, crying on the their side of the phone, man, "Man, you've done it. I'm here and it's 2:00 in the morning and I can't believe what I'm seeing." Now that made me okay [Laughing]. you know, and all the little letter I got from the kids and all that kind of stuff, that made me okay. That made me cool. Story_ID: 71567 Speaker 1: You, do you get a lot of positive feedback-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Over time [unclear]? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh yeah, of course. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Now like I said, the only reason I brought the subject up 'cause that's the only negative experience that I-- that I ended up getting. You know. Out of all the memorials I've done, you know. But to get criticized because the memorial is too successful is bothersome to me. It's really bothersome. That means that we've got work to do in America on our Black folk. And about their heads and getting their heads rearranged. To rearrange the furniture up here a little bit. Because that's in our-- And my mission is that when people go to see the Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] thing, everything is impeccably done. It's impeccable. And I didn't leave any stone unturned. Everything that you see there is well thought out, well done and nobody can criticize me from any point. So now for-- Then now we get into the world of disbelief. Because of our own dislike of ourselves we-- "A Black guy could not have done this." I get blamed for that all over the place. Story_ID: 71568 Speaker 1: Do you think that there's any artist or anybody that is beyond criticism? Speaker 2: No, I'm not beyond criticism? No. But the issue is if you raise the bar-- Speaker 1: [unclear] impeccable. I mean, you know. Speaker 2: [simultaneously] No. If you raise the bar-- the problem is if a white guy had done it, it would be okay! See-- but I did it, it ain't supposed to be okay. That's what the problem is. That's where I'm coming from. It ain't [stressed clapping hands] supposed to be okay. The "I's" aren't supposed to be dotted and the "T's" are not supposed to be crossed. You had to leave something out. There had to be a dent over here. The thing had to be this way. Something had to be wrong. You know. And that's what the problem is. And you go and you do these things and you don't let these things be wrong. And then all of a sudden you have people that are just getting edgy about, "The brother didn't do this." And I went through a period of time, and thank God it's over, I had this white girl with me for a long time. And I fired him and Sandy left. And, man, I got calls from my best collectors, "What are you gonna do?" "What am I gonna do about what?" "Sandy left." "So what, so what." "Well we know she was doing all the art. You were just the front man Ed. We knew that." I said, "Wait a minute. You were buying art from me thinking what a great story that would be. Brother pimp got the white girl doing the work. I mean what a story that would be. I mean this art is gonna be worth millions. I mean you're telling me you did it!" [Laughing] I mean, what the hell kind of story is that? We gonna have to wait for it to cash in [Laughing]. Speaker 1: This is a dilemma. And I guess-- Speaker 2: Hmm. Speaker 1: I would hope that-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] It's crazy. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's a dilemma then for you to think that people disbelieved all of the things that you've done. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Story_ID: 71569 Speaker 1: You've had a busy productive life and people, that the fact that they don't believe it you-[simultaneous] Speaker 2: Well, you know, okay. Look in the real universe think about this. You know. Because I'm one of those kind of guys, I walk in-- and, man, I'll be walking down the street and shit happens to me [Laughing]. I swear to God. It's been the way of my life [Laughing]. I mean shit happens to me, Man. It just happens. You know. I got into the construction business because I wanna party. And a guy walks up to me and he says, "You're the smartest Negro I've ever talked to in my whole life." And I said, "Well you haven't talked to very many Negroes." And he said, "Nah man." He said, "How much money you make? You know, $40,000, $50,000 a month?" I'm going, "Yeah right [Laughing]." You know. He said, "Look If you're not, you should be." You know. And he stuck his business card in my pocket. He said, "If you wanna make $40,000 $50,000 a month, call me." You know. I went through every one of my suits [Laughing] trying to find that suit that he stuck that card in. Six months later I called this guy. We went to lunch and the next thing I know I'm in the construction business. You know. And I'm constructing buildings. This guy took me out to his house. And I went out to his house every night for three months. And starting at 10:00 at night when his day finished, we worked 'til about 3:00 or 4:00 every morning. And he made me memorize the Denver [Colorado] building codes. And I had to spit all these things out to him. And then he had me designing buildings and designing rooms and designing toilets and designing spaces and designing door jambs and designing all that stuff, while he was there watching me. And he taught me to do the construction business. And so I was my own my architect. I designed all my buildings. I designed all my site plans. I still do that with my art. 'Cause this guy taught me this. A white boy taught me all this stuff. You know, he was a little--he was an ex-POW [Prisoner of War] in Germany. He was in a Nazi concentration camp over there. And they taught him--he was one of the [Adolf] Hitler Architect guys. And he came over here after the war and he was the biggest builder in this town. And this guy adopted me and he was my mentor. And he taught me everything I knew about construction. And he taught me how to sell. He taught me how to build. He taught me to--everything about condomeni--you know. And I said, "This is incredible." And why--I said, "What do you want out of this?" He said, "I want you to be successful." You know. And this is my thing. He said, "'Cause Black people don't have an opportunity, and when we find bright Black guys we need to exploit them and bring this stuff to the--to the surface." Well so I used that. Every day with--every day the things that man taught me I use in every day. You know. You know, and when I was ready to leave, Man, he didn't like it. He said, "I don't think you're ready." But I left and I built the city of Parker [Colorado]. I built the whole damn city all by myself. Designed and built the damn city all by myself. You know. And it's still in existence. Right down here. Parker is one of my bedroom committees right down the road. Built the whole damn thing. Designed and built the whole damn thing. And, you know, and so-- because this guy taught me this stuff. And I listened real, real good. And I thought he was gonna come right up [Laughing]-- I thought he was a closet gay dude and [Laughing] [unclear]. I was waiting for this thing, you know. But it never happened. Speaker 1: So things happened to you. Speaker 2: Things happened to me, man [Laughing]. You know, so I just react to [Laughing]. Story_ID: 61224 Speaker 1: Mr. Dwight can you explain to us what your creative process is? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, I cannot do a piece of art unless I'm the subject [chuckle] and what that means is that I don't know how to do art. You know, I do art mechanically. And what I mean by mechanical, I figured out from a mechanical point of view I've got great brain hand coordination because of the pilot stuff. 'Cause you have to be a good brain to hand guy to fly an airplane. Okay. Because you gotta think of it up here, but you gotta actuate it through here. You know. And so sculpture is exactly related to flying airplanes. It's the closest relationship that I've ever seen. Because you have to have incredible good brain to hand coordination. When I used to teach, I had students that would tell me, "I know what I want, but I can't make it happen. I know what it's supposed to look like, but I can't make it happen through here." You know? So I have learned early in the game that I really have great brain and hand coordination, which allows me to look at a picture in a magazine, in a book I look at a horse and I can mechanically take some clay and take some wire and make the--'cause I have a sense of what an armature would be, where his legs would be, where his body would be. And then I would start adding clay to this thing or wax to this thing. And then I could mimic that what I was looking at. You know, it's like a musician's ear; it was a sculptor's eye. You know. And So I found I had this real knack for making things look okay. And then as I--when I got into people that's easy. Because the Greeks did this for us. It's an interesting phenomenon that what the Greeks did with like the human face. And people don't realize this. You know, if you were to draw a line between the pupils of your eyes and draw a line straight down, that's how wide your mouth is. If you take the tip of your nose to your eyebrows, that's how tall your ears are. And so 99% of the--well not 99, but 90% of the people all those rules. Your eyes are half way between the top of your head and the bottom of your chin. So no matter, you know, unless they--you know, some people have big chins. Like Jay Leno has a big chin. Black people have wider set eyes. The distance to--the width of your eye is exactly the distance between your eyes. If you take a pair of calipers and measure the width of your eye that's exactly the distance between your eyes. You know. So with all of those little things that the Greeks did for us, then I can take and I can mechanically make people look like they're supposed to look. By taking--if I take their picture and I get full shot faces in [unclear] caliper and I can mechanically make people look like they're supposed to look. Okay. Now but I-- what the artist part of it is-- and you see a lot of art that is not-- [stressed] not quite there. You know. You look at it and it's-- You know, there's another step that had to be taken. You know. And where the art part come in, where the creative issue comes in is not that first part with the mechanical part. The creative part is making the eyes sparkle and making the eyes have depth. Where you're look in. To say you look at a sculpture and you're looking into somebody's eyes versus looking at flat. You know what I mean? And so the realism of--'cause nobody's exactly symmetrical. You draw--put a thing between your face. This side--this side of your face is totally different from the other side of your face. And, you know, people don't realize that until they take a mirror and then they go, "What in the world!" 'cause eyes droop, one eye is up, one eye is down. You know, noses, the flair of the nose is different on one side than on the other. Some people got a flatter nose on this side than on it is on this side. And so all of those little nuances that I pick that up in a picture. And that's why I got pictures with all these different angles. And I go through all this stuff. And the results are the little bit things that I find that are peculiar to people. And I highlight those things that make it, make it look okay. You know, it makes it look realistic and all that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 61225 Speaker 1: But the other part that's more important is that I can't make a sculpture of anybody unless I'm them. It sounds really crazy. But--so that's why I ask for books. If somebody got any books on somebody, I'll read about them. And I become the people themselves. And I'm standing there and I'm being--I'm posing. So I become the model. And it's got a kind of a spiritual kid of ethereal things where I become like--for instance if I'm doing Frederick Douglass. I got Douglass videos of Douglass speeches. If I'm doing King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I play King speeches. I'm doing Rosa Parks; I play something somebody said about Rosa Parks. Somebody just doing a narrative about Rose Parks. You know, and that's how I get into it. But I become those people. If I'm doing a slave or something like that-- Like this kid here, I'm this little kid and I become this little kid. I go in the bathroom and [unclear]. He's waving for some other [unclear] to come on. This is on a memorial in Detroit. And he's already arrived at the bank and he's telling the rest of those guys to come on. Everything's fine, everything's okay. But I'm this scared kid. You know, sitting there-- standing there. Now how would I be standing? And I have this stance and I go in the bathroom and look in the mirror. And I stand this way and I stand that way. And I hunch over and I do all these different things. And I, how many fingers are twisted back this way? Or do I do the whole thing like this? Or do I do it like this? And I go through all these iterations in my brain to become this kid. You know. And I've actually become this kid. And if I'm looking at him and his eyes aren't right. So I'm like can I change it to fit what I would feel if I was him? So I go through a process. Then you try to deliver this process to other people. But I find that it's really hard to deliver this kind of message except to another artist or a student or something like that. You know, to have them go through this same process. 'Cause everybody has their own process for doing that. And this is the process that works for me. 'Cause I have to become the people that I'm making in order for me to make a successful image. And so my creative thing is peculiar to me. I try to deliver it in my talks and all that kind of stuff. So people will go find their own little way to do that. You know, to get to where they want to go. But the bottom line is the end product is if you look at the thing and you don't see yourself in it, if you will, you know--if you don't see the person that you are pretending to be-- if I don't see it, then I gotta go back. And I just walk away and I'll leave it alone for a day or two. And every morning I come in the studio I pretend that I'm visiting somebody's studio, not mine. And I walk up to something that I'm working on and I appraise it. Uh! If I can endure [Laughing] I go through this ritual every morning. And I say, "What did he do? God! You know, this guy really screwed up. 'Cause the fingers are-- this section of the fingers are, you know, that's too long. Damn." And so I come in, you know, and I cut it and I move it back and, you know. I go through-- You know. Every morning I go through the same ritual. Story_ID: 61226 Speaker 1: Do you ever look at your work in the mirror? Speaker 2: No I never. No I've never done that. No. But I see my work objectively every morning. 'Cause I play like I didn't do it. I'm walking into this stranger's studio and I'm the big artist creative guy. I don't know how I get so God damn smart [Laughing]. Speaker 1: [Simultaneously] [Laughing]. Speaker 2: But I go in and I look around and I see what this guy has done. And I look at all sculptures that I've done a long time ago. And I'll walk up objectively and say, "What in the world was this guy thinking when he did this!" [Laughing] And I go to the mold [Laughing] and I'll change the whole thing and do a new mold. 'Cause it was something that just doesn't hit me right [Laughing] or something you know. Speaker 1: Is it hard to be satisfied with your work? Speaker 2: Oh God! A Virgo! You gotta be kidding [Laughing]. Are you out of your mind [Laughing]? Of course. Yeah and that the problem, you know. You know, there are books that are written on when is a sculpture or the painting finished? There are books. You leave it alone. There's a time to quit. You know. Story_ID: 61227 Speaker 1: Okay. Now what are your hopes for the Black community? What are your aspiration for the Black community? Or what do you think? What do you project as what you would like to see the community do? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Well, you know, the problem I have-- because I grew up-- I grew up thinking of Black people as not very well put together as a group of people. And that's why, when I was making speeches and everything like that, when I was on the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], started on the Black circuit, I was encouraged, they'll paint us as victims. The big white devils is ruining resolve. I mean we couldn't get out of our hole because of the big white devil. My problem was I never thought that way. I never thought I was by myself. I never saw myself as a victim of anything. And I thought that--I never thought about group issues. Never in my life did I think about Black people as a group of people with an issue. All the issues that I had with the white community were private issues between me and them. I thought I was being criticized and not-- you know, 'cause I was short, you know [Laughing] or something. I'd think of something. But it wasn't necessarily 'cause I was Black. Even when I was called a Nigger it didn't really register up here. And I wasn't pissed. I wasn't anything. Because everybody-- mean white people called Niggers, niggers in Kansas City [Kansas]. But it didn't-- It didn't have any meaning for me. 'Cause I didn't know what a Nigger was. 'Cause I never looked at myself as a Nigger. 'Cause I-- In order for me to identify with that thing I would have had to id--I would have had to take that cloak, wrap it around me as a Nigger and being downtrodden and beaten and broken. And I Never looked at myself that [Laughing] way, you know. So when I got in with the larger issues and when I-- when the space program failed for me, it failed for me on a lot of things. And I could hinge it upon the President getting killed. Because the good part was my Blackness got me there [Laughing]. You know, that's positive. Right. So my down story was that got all these guys ganging up against me who, you know, who, you know-- it didn't have to necessarily be because I was Black. It's just that I was challenging them. You know, I'd come with all kind of [Laughing] [unclear]. You know. But I refused to go down that path solely because I was Black. That [unclear] stuff happened to me. You see what I'm saying? And no matter whether it was true or not, the fact that it was true, that it was because I was Black. But it took me a long time, till I was in my forties to start looking at this thing as group think. About thinking in terms of the whole Black system and how challenging the concept of Blackness in America and what it meant, and what it meant to white people. And it meant me talking to a lot of southern white people who told-- who bared their souls to me about their--you know, how they were trained and all that kind of stuff. To hate Niggers and do all that kind of stuff like that. You know. And then I began to get the feel for the group thing about us as a whole group being discriminated against. And not getting jobs, not getting equal pay and not getting all these things that we were deserved. But before I didn't have any feeling for that. Story_ID: 61228 Speaker 1: I mean I have a different feeling for it now. By readings, going back and reading, 'Advice to the Masters' and all these books, and all that kind of stuff that I was able to get my hands on, about what white people really thought. You know. And then all of a sudden I come to find out that, you know, the white people are a hell of alot more devious than I ever though they were. I mean it's some bad dudes out there running around. And it had to do with just destroying people based on their Blackness and nothing else. You know, not because they were smart and they're talented and all that kind of stuff like I classified myself to be. But just so based on because they were Black. And they're ignorant and they didn't deserve things solely on the basis of their Blackness and stuff. And so now I have a--you know, end up with a whole new thing and a new preachment if you will. And if I try to reflect this in my heart-- 'cause when I started doing Black faces man! The Black people were the ones who got on my case! 'Cause they looked too Black! Saying "Brother, God Damn! You gotta make their lips so big! Aw man! I said, "Well that's how they look. I got pictures of slaves. I mean that's how they look. What do you want me to do? Put thin noses and all that kind of stuff? What's that all about? That's crazy." "But you don't understand. No peo-- We don't even wanna see ourselves depicted like this. My first slave piece I did, on black [unclear]." I mean these Black people gave me the dickens! "Don't even show that in public. Who the hell wants to see people in chains and slaves?" You know. And white people bought [unclear]. What's up with that? You know what I mean. And a white secretary, I said, "Woman why did you buy this piece of art from me?" She said, "You know what, I'm a white secretary and I feel like a damn slave. That's [Laughing] why I bought it, at work [Laughing]. It makes me feel okay." You know. "That makes me feel okay, because I feel that, I feel like a damn slave, but this is real slavery here. Now you know, so I don't feel so bad going to work every day. And it's sitting right there in my front room and I see it every day." And I'm going, "Oh. Well okay honey." But, you know, something changed in the Black community. 'Cause the second edition has been all bought by brothers. Because they're lawyers and architects and stuff. And they put it in their front office to let everybody know they got a little black thing going on in the background. You see what I'm saying. And so something changed. And so-- and my art-- and I've stuck to my guns about it. And the fact of the matter is that the buyers that I'm selling art to are a lot more sophisticated and they're brothers that make a lot more money. And we're-- It's getting less cri-- but I'm mostly selling directly to them. You know, not through galleries and stuff like that. So, you know, things have changed-- things are changing in the Black community. Story_ID: 61229 Speaker 1: My problem in the new black community has to do with every brother now, "It doesn't matter to me brother." Most of the brothers now think they invented the wheel. I mean they got their because they did and nobody else. Ed Dwights and the Rosa Parks' and ain't nobody else that's been there before did a damn thing for them. And that's my problem. 'Cause I'm talking to them every day about, "Hey, you know, brother what's all this stuff about? You know? 'Cause I did this all by myself. I went to Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] and I went to Rutgers [Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and I went to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and I went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I did all this stuff and I did it myself. Nobody helped me do a thing man. So I don't know what the problem." I have a problem with that. Because in 1868 there was a Civil Rights Act. There was a Voting Rights Act okay. Black people--that's how Black people got in Congress. You know Reconstruction and stuff? Them white folks unwound the clock baby. They turned that clock backwards. They unwound the whole system. You know. And the concept that they can't do this in today's-- in today's market is hokey and crazy. Because we don't have any leaders. And we are so fragmented today, we don't have any congealed leadership. You know, they say, "Why do we need leaders? We can be individuals. We're gonna go lead our own. What do we need Dr. Kings for?" You know. And all you gotta do is look around you and see what this guy is doing to our freedoms. You know, and our freedoms--our freedoms, when those guys cough, we catch cold. And our freedoms are all intrinsically and tied into the freedom the white folks have. And now they're taking white folks' freedoms away from them. You see what I'm saying? And now this thing, this whole anti can be moved back in a flash, because there's no congealing. There's no--the white man does not have to deal today with-- I mean Jesse [Rev. Jesse Jackson, HM] has abandoned us. I mean this boy is running after all [unclear]. So we ain't got nobody standing tall. There is a tour de force against white folks misbehavior. And all we gotta do now is have the wrong kind of white folk. Like that cat that was running for President France. You know what I mean, that didn't get elected. But I mean the de-- who's to say that within a-- within a two or three presidencies from here that we won't get somebody crazy in the White House? 'Cause we do elect crazy people. We elected Nixon [President Richard Nixon]. We elected Carter [President Jimmy Carter]. I mean God bless his soul. But why the hell did Carter get in the White House? I mean that man didn't do nothing for four years. Nice man in the universe. But we do aberrational things in this country. Jesse Ventura being the governor of Minnesota. We have these crazy, nutsy things that we do in America. You know. And so who's to say that all these Black folks that have abandoned all these ties to any force, any monolithic force, you know, that we can bring to the white man as a voting bloc, as a voting force or anything? You know, we're fragmented and lost. And all these other people, [unclear]. Those other people there. They're still sticking. The conservatives are still sticking together. You know, and the Irish are still sticking together, and the Italians are still sticking together. And they're loose, but they're still sticking together. But--and we have--so busy running-- high telling it into the suburbs and becoming so disjointed and disconnected from the [unclear] that it's-- you know, I find it kind of disturbing. And I'm not gonna live long enough to see the solution to all that kind of stuff. But-- Story_ID: 61230 Speaker 1: Do you think that your images, images you've created, especially the public art--or are you consciously thinking that you're creating images to try to do something about this fragmentation? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: [unclear]. Speaker 2: By all means. See because-- If you go-- If you get a chance to go see the Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] [unclear] tomorrow, you know, what I've done-- and I did this on purpose. I went through-- there's a slavery-- I designed a cathedral. You know, when you walk in a huge cathedral they have the big altar. But you have these little bitty altars. Little apses they call them. Apses they call 'em. Where they-- you could do private worship and stuff. Okay. And I designed it based on that. Okay. So now when you go to that memorial you go the big altar with Dr. King sitting there and all the big hoopdy-doos and all that kind of stuff. But you go to the first little altar ant the first one is slavery. And the fact of the matter is that we were here before Columbus. So we were here before Jefferson did the family. I got all those-- I got all those quotes. Then we started off in 1600 and we go through a whole litany of events that occurred. A law that was established on the part of white folks that affected us. And man you go to that thing and you get-- you get a whole history. Date by date-by-date, activity-by-activity by activity by activity about white folks unraveling the law to make us less peo--less human beings and have less dignity. You see what I'm saying? And so if you go through there and you religiously read that stuff you can see for the first time in your educational history. Because they don't teach that stuff in schools any more. About what really happened here. And about what the struggle was and what people did. And the fact that you graduated from Harvard; you didn't invent the fact that you could be a white person in a Black skin. I mean you see what I'm saying? There was a whole bunch of stuff that went on. And if you don't pay attention to that lesson, you're gonna get swallowed up and killed in that--in the whole process. Because it can happen. 'Cause they're unraveling the law like you won't believe today. You know. Story_ID: 61231 Speaker 1: Okay. Now a couple of more things. Now that I know that you're concerned about passing the knowledge that you've acquired-- Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] Oh man. Speaker 1: This work on to someone else that's Black? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: [unclear]. Speaker 2: 'Cause I-- 'cause white people are coming in and they play this-- What they wanna know from me, they wanna know what I know. And they wanna know how to go out and make money. And they steal my brochures. They try to steal my images. And they try to do music stuff. You know. And so I just [unclear], you know. I can't get upset. But that's what the process is all about. You know. That's what I--that's how we develop a capitalistic system [chuckle], you know. And it has to do with mimicking people that are successful. So it doesn't bother me at all. And I'm in competition with guys that I teach. You know, I taught anatomy. I taught it really, really good. So I'm-- I feel pretty good about that. But the bigger problem that I have is that we're not making an--and I don't know when we're gonna make this. We're not-- there aren't any molds for making true unadulterated dedicated Black folk that are-- that are real art image-makers. That can view themselves as long-term pace setters. Because if you look in history we go back in the history of art from the beginning of time. Artists set the political tone in a lot of eras and generations. You know. And so--and art-- They're all tied in to who-- to big politicians and they had effect on what really went down. You know, the cultures. You know, they recreated Pompei from the whole art. That whole thing was gone. So they didn't know what kind of culture Pompei had until they [chuckle] looked at the art. And the art gave them a wonderful story about the whole--how the whole city ran. Who were the big guys, who were the little guys, how they'd think. What kind of food did they eat? [Making noise] olive oil, and books and stuff all came out through the art. You see. And so-- And we're not making images in the Black community. We're not making any formidable images that lay out number one what our culture is all about. We're not sticking to our guns about what we're all about. And because of this mad rush to integrated and to be melted into this larger society, some of us are too ashamed of what we're about. And it turns out that I didn't get on my feet until I decided that I was Black. Story_ID: 61232 Speaker 1: You know. 'Cause I spent most of my life running around trying to be a white guy. Let's get real here. You know, I'm trying to mimic white folks. It wasn't until them suckers did me in that made me come to the stark realization that, "I'm Black damn-it." So I'm-- And I didn't get any respect until I started acting Black! You know. And then when I went out there and began to preach and really believe, not just bull shit, but I really believed this, it wasn't until then I got respect from both communities. You know. Except for South Carolina, but you know. But it came rushing in man! From [unclear] that all of a sudden I'm a tour de force. Because I-- you know, because I believe in what I'm talking about. And when I get up in front of white folks, and I use the word "Nigger" a lot and I don't really give a damn about it, I'm not Richard Pryor. But the issue is that this is a mantra in this country for too long. You know. And for the concept of my using it or not using it and people getting all offended about it, that's a bunch of craziness. About using the word "Nigger". Because white people used it to define us for a hundred and something years. You see what I'm saying? And so for me not to get up there and deal with this thing in a realistic way, about what it was-- "Nigger" and I'm talking about Kansas City [Kansas] 'cause they call me Nigger all the time. But, you know, what did that do? You know? And I'm getting inflamed and enraged, but it does-- That was a definition of who we were. And so we need to move past this. Worrying about people calling us Nigger and get into stuff about believing in who we were and that we were called Niggers back to a long time ago. Hopefully we ain't being called niggers now. So, you know, if somebody call you a Niggers now and then the brother in the work place [Laughing], you know, where everybody get sued. We don't need that now. But the fact of the matter is that there was a time that it was in vogue and people used it. And we call each other Nigger all the time in our privacy and all that stuff. You know, how can we be so damn hypocritical and be running out and getting mad at somebody else 'cause somebody called somebody a "Nigger", when we call a "Nigger" to each other every day. You know, "They all [making noise]". So, I have problems with all that kind of stuff. You know, I really, really do. And so-- But it wasn't until I became Black inside of here that my life and my philosophy changed. My life became successful. My art became successful. And I didn't really start putting it out like it was. I became candid about it and I got respect. You know. And that was the kind of respect I was looking for. And I have it. And all my complaining [Laughing] and wining today notwithstanding because I want things to be right. You see what I'm saying. My wining has to do with, you know, of Black folks not being-- not acting right. Story_ID: 61233 Speaker 1: And-- But I got a good excuse for us not acting right. You know. Because like Dorothy Tillman [HM] tell me all the time, she's my big mentor. We talk [unclear] every night. Eleven O'clock every we have these midnight conversations. It had to do with-- 'Cause Dorothy been teaching me, you know. She said, "Ed, you know what really happened in slavery? Is the white man rearranged the furniture in our head. You know. And he had to do that in order to control us. He had to rearrange the furniture in our head. 'Cause we came to the marketplace with our furniture okay. We're little bitty tikes. We came to the thing with our furniture okay. Like every kid does. But this guy started when we were young and started moving the stuff around in our head. And so then we-- it's already arranged by the time we have offspring. We-- by implication we pass that rearranged furniture on to them unwittingly. We end up passing the weaknesses. White man ain't gonna let you do this and yata-yata-yata. But that are preachments and things we say and things we do, you know. And the way we address white people differently from we do Black people. Kids pick that kind of stuff up. You know, and they see the kind of respect, you know, that they--the way we have for white people that we don't have for Black people. They pick all these little things up. All these little cues to tell these kids that we're not as good as those white folks are. You know. And so we-- our enlightened class that our kids go to Harvard and then they're enlightened and they're above all this stuff. You know. That's-- We are separated. There's a big void in the middle. Because now what we've got-- we've got a lower class down here man that is outrageous. Story_ID: 61234 Speaker 1: Because these kids are-- like Frederick Douglass IV before said, "These kids that are empty vessels." Because these are kids having kids. And the only thing-- they come to the marketplace with empty vessels and ain't nobody putting nothing in there. Until they get to be teenagers and this music start or even preaching, they're putting baggy clothes, pimp stuff, dark glasses all this kind of stuff in that empty vessel. And it's the only thing they got to deal with. There's not a value. There's no value there. 'Cause ain't no parent put no-- filling that whole vessel up. 'Cause, you know, like me, my mother [Georgia Baker Dwight] had my stuff so filled up and I didn't have no time to be no gang member. You understand? I didn't have no time to be thinking about nothing in the streets. 'Cause my old lady filled my head with-- she had over-filled it. It was overflowing and coming out the top of my head. You know. And these kids today, they're just walking around empty. And to try to co--I mean I've got to teach these-- You got to talk to these kids. I go to these schools, Duke Ellington School. I go up there and talk to these kids. They come out here 'cause I had 'em coming out here. And they were down here for two weeks. I was gonna teach them how to sculpt. And, you know, they came in here and they sat down at that big table over there. And they-- all of them were wired for sound. Every one of 'em. [unclear] I said, "What is this?" And they got-- and I'm sitting there. I got six kids and they're going doom-doom-doom. I said, "Hey! Take that stuff off your head. And you put that thing in that bag and I don't wanna see it until you leave. You understand?" "Who [unclear]." I said, "You know, you're gonna come out here and you're gonna work your ass off. And you're gonna listen to what I have to tell you. And when you leave here, you're gonna leave here with something. You understand. With all that junk flying around in your head, how in the hell can you listen to anything I got to say to you?" You know. And so they went, "Oh! How dare you do this to them." And even the instructor, "We never tried that." You know? Speaker 2: [Simultaneously] [Laughing]. Speaker 1: I got letters from these kids. Saying, "Hey man thanks. Thank you. The most exciting thing ever happened to me in my life. There's a guy out there that's really real. You believe in what you're doing and you made me start thinking about something. For the first time in my life." You know. And I'm going-- and I went up there that day. And in all their classes all these kids got these things sticking in their heads! It's insanity. I mean how are you gonna teach somebody that's got [sounds like] Boop-tee-bop-ta-dada going on in their head? And so that's-- I'm worried more about them kids than I am about these guys up here that are leaving on the top side. I'm worried more about this. 'Cause man! This is really bad. Speaker 2: Is that what we find you working on? Speaker 1: All man! This is really bad. And when I get an opportunity-- I got a group at 5:00 tomorrow I got a group of them coming in here tomorrow. And I unload man. I really unload on these kids. Just about the very things that we've been talking about. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 61235 Speaker 1: Julieanna Richardson: You have the--it's a short answer. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, short answer. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about Ed Dwight? Speaker 2: Oh, "I was here. I raised a little hell. I raised some consciousness and I started people thinking about things." That's all I'm interested in. I want people to stop and think about things. Grown people, little kids, white people, Black people. I just want them to think. 'Cause we've-- we've stopped thinking [Laughing] awhile back. You know. And that's what my problem is. You know. And one of the things I learned in the space program is, "I'm alive and all these other guys are dead. But I have something to do with thinking [Laughing]." You know, thinking your way through survival...