 Story_ID: 394144 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me please? Speaker 2: Yes, Louis, L-O-U-I-S, O'Neil, O'-N-E-I-L, Dore, D-O-R-E [HistoryMaker Louis O'Neil Dore]. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: March 14, 1945. Speaker 1: Place of birth? Speaker 2: Beaufort County, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer. Speaker 1: The location of this interview? Speaker 2: University of South Carolina Beaufort campus [Beaufort, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: January 31st, 2007. Story_ID: 394145 Speaker 1: All right, Mr. Dore [HistoryMaker Louis O'Neil Dore], we're gonna start by me asking you what I call People magazine-ish type questions. Tell me do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably blue. Speaker 1: Okay. What about a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: What do you like to eat? Speaker 2: Seafood. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Not one that I can think of right off hand. Speaker 1: Okay. Where do you like to vacation? What's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I'm not a big vacationer; in fact I've taken very few vacations--very few vacations during my lifetime. I'm, I've been working a great deal and haven't vacationed much. Speaker 1: Where would you like to go? Speaker 2: You would be amazed at I have often vacationed right here in Beaufort County [South Carolina] or Hilton Head Island [South Carolina] sometimes when I need to get away or I wanna take my family away from home just for a few days, I'll go to Hilton Head which I think is a beautiful spot. But--and I've been to Hawaii on vacation but I don't vacation often. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think, I think the--this area is about as nice an area as you can choose to vacation (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, you're right, I agree with you. Story_ID: 394146 Speaker 1: Let's start with talking about your family tree. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's name please and spell it for me? Speaker 2: Emily, E-M-I-L-Y, Eddings, E-D-D-I-N-G-S, Dore, D-O-R-E [Emily Eddings Dore]. Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born? Speaker 2: December 24th, 1919. Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me about your grandmother on your mother's side. Speaker 2: My grandmother was Olivia, O-L-I-V-I-A, Watson Eddings [Olivia Watson Eddings]. Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: On my mother's side? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Clement, C-L-E-M-E-N-T, Eddings, E-D-D-I-N-G-S [Clement Eddings]. Speaker 1: Can you share any stories about your grandmother and grandfather on your mother's side? Speaker 2: I don't have any--I, I, I, I did not know my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He died before I was born. He died in the year 1934. My grandmother died in 1966 so I was in college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] when she passed-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we lived in different areas of Beaufort County [South Carolina] and didn't see her like a lot of families do on a daily or weekly basis so I didn't spend a lot of time with her but of course I knew her well. Spent some summers with her. She, she lived on Frogmore, which is on St. Helena Island [South Carolina]. That's where she was born. And I believe she was about seventy-two when she passed but anyway she didn't share many stories with me but I have a vivid picture of her. I have a, a vivid picture of her in, in and she--what I remember most about her was the fact that she did a lot of knitting, she made quilts and she smoked a pipe and she spoke the Gullah language and she, she--I can't really remember any stories that, that she told but I remember her well. Story_ID: 394147 Speaker 1: Well if you can't remember any stories that she [Dore's maternal grandmother, Olivia Watson Eddings] told, were there any stories that about you and her about times that you visited her? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was--I lived in a community in Beaufort County [South Carolina] that's called Burton [South Carolina], B-U-R-T-O-N, that's where I was, where I was born. I was born in the family home, not in a hospital, but in the family home and delivered by a midwife. My grandmother lived probably fifteen miles away. And she lived all of--most of Beaufort County that time was rural. For example, the area where I grew up in Burton was basically farming; a farming area, quite rural and today they're probably one of the biggest shopping centers that Beaufort County is about two blocks from where I grew up. So it's changed a lot, but anyway most of Beaufort County was rural and she lived on, on--at Frogmore which is one of the quote, unquote plantations on St. Helena Island [South Carolina]. Owned property that she and my grandfather [Clement Eddings] inherited from my great-grandfather [Dennis Eddings] about twenty acres of land, and they farmed and fished and so I enjoyed I've, you know I've always enjoyed animals and farming, that kind of thing so it wasn't, it wasn't, it wasn't really exciting, it wasn't the kind of excitement that a young person would look for today but and of course I was, I was very young at that time too so I don't, I don't have a lot of stories to tell about her, but, but I remember her well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I guess the most striking thing was that was her Gullah accent and the, and the way she, she spoke. Sometimes it was difficult for me to even understand what she was saying because of her choice of words and her intonations which is really what Gullah is, is about. She used words like care for car, bud for bird. If she wanted you to bring her something, she would say fetch 'em here, fetch for bring. Hunna for children or hunna for y'all, yenna for y'all or you all, things like that I remember that about her. But not a great deal. It's been a long time (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Story_ID: 394148 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother [Emily Eddings Dore]. Did she share any stories about her growing up? Did she grow up on this twenty acres out in Frogmore [St. Helena Island, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Yeah. When, when, when she grew up St. Helena Island [South Carolina] as well as all of the islands in Beaufort County [South Carolina] were very much isolated. There were no, there were not bridges as now they are a lot of islands where, where there's no access by bridge. But and, and that meant that that she was not aware of the broader culture but she related to me that that she for example never came to Beaufort, the City of Beaufort [South Carolina], which is the county seat until she was thirteen years old. And that her father [Clement Eddings] rarely came to Beaufort, but when he did come, he'd come by boat. In other words he'd leave St.--Frogmore which is on St. Helena Island and you'd have to cross the river to get from St. Helena Island to Lady's Island [South Carolina] from Lady's Island to downtown Beaufort and he'd go to the courthouse once a year to pay taxes and other than that there perhaps would be a trip maybe one other time during the year to come into, into town so to speak. So they were pretty much isolated and, and didn't, didn't leave home much. It was basically home and church. But, but she she related to me that she did a lot of fishing as a child and a lot about the way that they they lived for example. They were basically self-sufficient. She never spoke of my grandparents as having jobs but they basically farmed, fished, caught shrimp, fish, oysters, crabs and abundant supply apparently they were, they were much more in the, in the creeks and the rivers then than they are now for one reason or another. But and of course she told me that she had a horse when she was a child and you know she often mentioned that food was plentiful and she would sometimes be told by her mother [Olivia Watson Eddings] to at ten or eleven o'clock in the morning to go down to the creek and get something for lunch. And she would get on her horse and go across the marshes of what's called Dory Island [ph.] until she hit, until she got over to, to the channel and she'd catch enough fish and shrimp fresh fish and shrimp in an hour, hour and a half for lunch or dinner and you know she, she related that, that kind of thing to me. Story_ID: 394149 Speaker 1: How much education did your mother [Emily Eddings Dore] have? Speaker 2: She went to the sixth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. And where did she go to school, did she tell you? Speaker 2: At Frogmore [St. Helena Island, South Carolina]. One of the little you know country school houses in the community to serve just the children in the community until sixth grade. The only person in her family that went beyond the sixth grade was her brother, Anthony Eddings [Anthony Harrison Eddings]. He went to Penn School [Penn Normal, Industrial and Agricultural School, St. Helena Island, South Carolina] for eight years. Penn School was an agricultural and industrial school started by the Quakers on St. Helena Island [South Carolina] and he, he graduated from Penn I believe in 1936. I still have his high school diploma, which I'll share with you. And he also served in the [U.S.] Army in, and later on he became the, the first black magistrate in Beaufort County [South Carolina]. And she--I have, I have one aunt who's my mother's last sibling that is still living, she's ninety-five. And there are a couple of other siblings of hers that I remember that you know lived during my lifetime but that's none of them had any education beyond, well my mother went to sixth grade like I said and my uncle went to Penn School for eight years and I don't really know that any of the others I'm sure they had elementary educations but not beyond that. Speaker 1: Was she not afforded the opportunity to go to Penn School? Was it not founded then or do you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it was-- Speaker 1: --it there was another reason why she did not go? Speaker 2: No, I think, I think the fact is that when she became a young teenager, she met my father [Hezekiah Dore, Sr.] and they got married (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 394150 Speaker 1: Well, on that note, let's talk about your father. Tell me his name. Speaker 2: Hezekiah, H-E-Z-E-K-I-A-H, Dore, D-O-R-E [Hezekiah Dore, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And when was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in November and the exact date escapes me. I have it written. Speaker 1: Okay that's fine. Speaker 2: November of 1916 and he was born in Allendale County [South Carolina] about sixty miles from, from here. Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me about his mother. Speaker 2: His mother was named Delia, D-E-L-I-A, Doe, D-O-E [Delia Doe]. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know his father's name? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Well let's start with, with Delia. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Tell me about your grandmother. Speaker 2: Well she--I grew up next door to her. We lived next door to each other. As I said she--her family was originally from Allendale County which is about sixty miles from Beaufort County [South Carolina]. She along with a lot of other people from Allendale County, particularly all the black people who lived in our community came to, to Beaufort County from Allendale generally between about 1919 and 1925. The boll weevil destroyed the cotton crop in Allendale County for three years straight and there was no work and a lot of the people moved from Allendale to Beaufort County looking for work and she related that she and her two sons, that is my father and his brother [James Dore], walked from Allendale County to Beaufort County. They had a horse that they brought along with them and all of their belongings and they walked from Allendale to Beaufort and moved here to, to try to make a living and they came here in 1922. My father went to work on a dairy farm at an early age and helped to support his brother and his mother. My grandmother was a farmhand early in those years and then most of the time that I knew her she she did not, she did not have, have a job. But I, I don't know very much about her formal education. I knew that she could, could write some and she could read some. But I--she, she, she--I was, I was in fact practicing law when she passed so I knew her most of my lifetime. Story_ID: 394151 Speaker 1: Did you and she have a personal relationship where you might have learned some lessons from her [Dore's paternal grandmother, Delia Doe]? Speaker 2: Well, she, she I guess the family relationship was very close and she kind of looked after us as a, as a parent would I suppose you might say. She is very much a part of the immediate or extended family and so she, she I guess she was what I guess I'm groping for is that she, she kind of raised me and my siblings kind of like my parents [Emily Eddings Dore and Hezekiah Dore, Sr.] did. You know she was part of the family and, and you don't get a lot of stories because when I was growing up, it was being around grownups was not the thing to do. You, you needed to be busy doing something and if grownups were sitting around talking, you know you weren't supposed to be involved or listening to their conversations. Speaker 1: When I say stories, I want you to share personal things that you might have done with some kind of you know interaction with her. Not necessarily something that she told you. I mean if there's nothing to tell. Speaker 2: Well I, I ate with her a lot. I enjoyed her meals. She always had something to eat whenever you went in to her house. Didn't matter whether it was a meal time, there was always something there to eat. She'd always have something to give a fruit or some peanuts or pecans or and it seemed like everybody that came to her house, left with something. She'd always have something to give you. And of course she, she--I'm not a good story teller but she, she often taught us morals and ethics to live by and the way to live and how to behave and what good conduct was and why we should try to behave in a certain way and, and so forth. Story_ID: 394152 Speaker 1: What about church? Speaker 2: My whole family were big church goers. My father [Hezekiah Dore, Sr.] was a lay minister. My father went to second grade. But and, and, and so he was not a trained minister at all but he became a lay minister, he was very much involved in the church for example I mentioned to you that that most of the people that lived in the community that I grew up in migrated from Allendale County [South Carolina] to Beaufort County [South Carolina]. One of the first things that they did when they moved to Beaufort County was to build a church. The church was built in 1924 I believe either '23 [1923] or '24 [1924]. I believe it was 1924, New Hope Christian Church [Beaufort, South Carolina] and of course they're still a very much active congregation there today but religion was a bit part of, of our life. And everybody in the family worshiped a lot with big churchgoers. Speaker 1: What do you remember most about the church service? Speaker 2: Well I can remember church experiences, not so much-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the, the singing was, was different is what I call the old time spirituals and the old time gospel songs. They were, they were sung in a different way from the way that they are today. I've always thought that the, the people back then and when I say back then in the '50s [1950s] were much more serious about their religion in terms of translating it into the way that they actually lived or that they treated other people in the community and I think they took religion more seriously. But religion was a big part of our life. My whole family's life it seemed was revolved around hard work, studying hard and going to church. But I went to church often on a regular basis, when I was very young, as did all of my family, my sisters and brothers. We grew up in the church so to speak. And that meant revivals during the summer when you have church during the week and they called it big meeting on Sunday which it was the end or the wrap up of the revival and followed by a big feast of food after the second sermon on that Sunday. And I, I enjoyed, I enjoyed the the services a great deal but yeah religion was a big part of my life and my whole family's life. Story_ID: 394153 Speaker 1: Tell me more about your father [Hezekiah Dore, Sr.]? Speaker 2: Well my father was as I said he was, he was born in 1916 in Allendale County [South Carolina]. They moved to Beaufort [Beaufort County, South Carolina] when he was in--in 1922 so he would have been six years old. He--I don't know how old he was when he started working but it was a very young age. Started working on what was called Baustics Dairy Farm [ph.] and then he moved from there to a job on working for the Trask family which was a big farming family in Beaufort County. They were some of the biggest farmers in the county and they were, they were truck farmers. They planted a lot of vegetables such as lettuce, cabbage, cucumbers, corn, beans, tomatoes, a little bit of everything and he worked for about I guess twenty-six or twenty-seven years and I often refer to it basically as a new form of slavery because it was, it was just one or two levels above slavery, labor was very cheap. You could barely make a living off of the wages that were earned but he was a hard worker and taught us all to work hard. He--when he, when he was very young, when I say very young probably in his thirties, forties. He had acquired what I would call the equivalent of a high school education even though he never went beyond the second grade. He--we had a tradition in, in my family of coming home and doing your chores after school. You change clothes and got in your work clothes and of course we, we pump water for the hogs and the cows and cut wood for the fireplace and for cooking and, and after that was done, we'd eat dinner together and then we do homework. Well at night we'd gather around the dining room table to do homework and my father always sat with us and because he always sat around the dining room table with us when we were doing homework and we would have discussions about how to solve a math problem or how to do your English diagrams and so forth, he learned along with us. And when he was, I'm sure when he was in his forties, he had the equivalent of a, of a high school education. He functioned in math at least at the eleventh or twelfth grade level and in English and reading at the same level. So he along with his children educated, educated himself. And he, he was hardworking and he loved his family. I like to say that he and my mother [Emily Eddings Dore] lived for their children because they did everything they could for them. Story_ID: 392854 Speaker 1: We were talking about your mother [Emily Eddings Dore] and father [Hezekiah Dore, Sr.] who you just finished talking about your father and how he got an education along with his children-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --we talked about your [paternal] grandmother, Delia-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Doe [Delia Doe], but not about your [paternal] grandfather. And you said you didn't know much about him. Speaker 2: Very little. I never met him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I heard of him. I know that, that he was a white man and that he was supposedly a big farmer in Allendale County [South Carolina] and I believe I can't even be sure but I believe his name--he was referred to as Mr. Williams [ph.] and I'm not even sure of that, but I've never met him. For some reason we were insulated, when I say we I am talking about the children, my siblings, my siblings and I were insulated from any information about him. We're not told very much about him at all. But I am aware that up until very late in my father's life, he had a relationship with his father and that my father's brother [James Dore] also had a relationship with his father. In other words, he, he fathered two children by my grandmother. And they, they, they saw each other occasionally and, and they had, they--my grandfather recognized them as his children and had a relationship with them. That's about as much as I know about him. Story_ID: 392855 Speaker 1: Did you or even later on find out any information about any of your family members being in slavery? Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't have any stories. I've been able to interpolate-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --on my mother's [Emily Eddings Dore] side. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I think I mentioned to you that my grandfather on my mother's side was Clement Eddings and my grandmother was Olivia Eddings [Olivia Watson Eddings]. Well my great-grandfather was Dennis Eddings and my great-grandmother was Rebecca Eddings. My grandfather, Clement Eddings, was born in 1874. I don't know the--well yes he died in 1934 but because I know that he was born in 1874 that pretty much tells me that Dennis and Rebecca were slaves. He was born eleven--I'm sorry ten, nine years after the end of the Civil War. The Civil War ended in '65 [1865] and he was born in '74 [1874] so when he--I mean that tells me that Dennis and Rebecca were slaves, former slaves. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't have a lot of great deal of information beyond Dennis and Rebecca Eddings. I have some original deeds for property that Dennis and Rebecca Eddings purchased on St. Helena Island [South Carolina] and, and what is referred to as Frogmore [St. Helena Island, South Carolina]. I have a deed, an original deed where he purchased property in 1886 and I have, I have another original deed I believe where he purchased five acres of land in 1892 and of course these are handwritten deeds and they were handwritten by S.J. Bampfield. S.J. Bampfield was the clerk of court for Beaufort County [South Carolina] during Reconstruction and in fact there is an S.J. Bampfield lodge which is an Elks lodge located just a few blocks from here that was named in honor of S.J. Bampfield but he was a clerk of court for Beaufort County during the Reconstruction and the deeds are beautifully--he had a beautiful handwriting and they're beautifully written in long hand and they're made to Dennis Eddings and there's one in 1921 to Rebecca Eddings when she bought ten acres of land which was also rather unusual because when you look through the records of Beaufort County courthouse, you find very few deeds to women in general (clears throat). Excuse me. Where women took title or held title to property in Beaufort County whether they were white or black women before the 1950s. It's just not very prevalent and she took title to ten acres of land in 1922. And I believe that's right around the time that women first gained the right of suffrage. White women gained the right of suffrage. So I found that very unusual but I'm, I'm, I'm satisfied that they would have been former slaves. Story_ID: 392856 Speaker 1: Did the deeds tell how much they [Dore's maternal great-grandparents, Rebecca Eddings and Dennis Eddings] paid for the property [on St. Helena Island, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Yes. I can't remember. I think one of the deeds for ten acres that was purchased by Dennis Eddings, I think was for about fifty dollars, which I thought was kind of high in the mid-1800s. But I have copies of some of the deeds available if you'd like to see them later. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And one of the deed refers to the property which he was purchasing being a part of the land that the seller acquired by head of land family certificate. In other words, the person who acquires property by a deed is called the grantee. The person who is transferring title to the property is called the grantor. And the practice in the legal profession is that when we prepare a deed, we give what is called the derivation clause which says where the grantor, the person transferring the property or selling the property, how that person acquired it or where they got it from. And a couple of the deeds make a reference to those parcels being the same property applied by the person transferring or the grantor by head of family land certificate. And the head of family certificate was basically the way that the federal government transferred property to former slaves. You might recall that historically speaking the, the--well certainly in this area of the country, at--following the Civil War, the federal government gave to the head of the black family generally the, the man or the husband ten acres of land and it was given by what is called a Head of Family Land Certificate and there're a lot of them recorded here in Beaufort County [South Carolina]. They were signed by in most cases by what was called the U.S. direct tax commissioners and certain of these men were appointed by the president of the United States pursuant to and I can't give you the exact name of the act, but it was the legislation which established the Freedman's Bureau [Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen and Abandoned Lands] and, and legislation which provided for lands to be given to free blacks. But they were called, they were, they were called direct tax commissioners and of course the persons that signed the deeds in this area were direct tax commissioners for the district of South Carolina and I have some copies of Head of Family Land Certificates as well. But a couple of the deeds that my great-grandfather and mother acquired property by referred to head of land certificate number so and so which is also quite interesting. Speaker 1: It is quite interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah. And they are all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is it they-- Speaker 2: --they're all by the way some of those Head of Land--Head of Family Land Certificates were signed by General Tecumseh Sherman [William Tecumseh Sherman]. Speaker 1: What was it that you have? Speaker 2: I don't have some--I can, I can readily get copies-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --out of Beaufort County courthouse, but I just thought I'd mention it. All are not signed by the U.S. direct tax commissioners.- Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: Some are signed by General Tecumseh Sherman. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So you believe that the land that Dennis and Rebecca had that that your grandfather Clement [Clement Eddings] inherited that land? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, the, the pro- I own--I hold title to most of it today. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 392857 Speaker 1: So back to your mother [Emily Eddings Dore] and father [Hezekiah Dore, Sr.]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --they get married and where do they live? Speaker 2: In the same community where I grew up what is called Burton [South Carolina]-- Speaker 1: Burton, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) South Carolina an area north of the City of Beaufort [South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. And how many children do they have? Speaker 2: Eight children. Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me about your siblings and tell me where you fit in? Speaker 2: I'm number five. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My oldest brother was Hezekiah Dore, Jr. He has passed on. My oldest sister is Geneva Dore Cole. I have a sister Helen Dore McAfee, M-C-A-F-E-E. A brother Freddie Thomas Dore [Freddie Dore] and then I'm the fifth child. A sister Linda Laverne Dore, a deceased sister Beverly Dore McIntyre and I have a brother Emanuel Vincent Dore [Emanuel Dore], is my brother by adoption. And I have my youngest natural sibling is Lorenzo Claton, C-L-A-T-O-N, Dore [Lorenzo Dore], so they're, they're actually nine of us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sorry. Story_ID: 392858 Speaker 1: When you think back, tell me what as far as when you are living at home with your mother [Emily Eddings Dore] and father [Hezekiah Dore, Sr.], you know living in the community of Burton [South Carolina], what is your earliest childhood memory? What's the earliest you can think back? Speaker 2: Well up until recently my memory was quite good. It's not nearly as good as it used to be but I can for example remember getting dressed to go to school for the very first day when I was six years old. And I can remember first grade, grade school teachers. I-- Speaker 1: Well tell me about the first day of school that you're, how you were getting dressed? What was going on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was--it was very exciting for me you know. Getting ready to, to catch the school and we took a school bus to school. I went to Robert Smalls School [Robert Smalls International Academy] which was here in the City of Beaufort [South Carolina] so we took the bus about miles into town and we caught the bus about we got on the bus about 8:00 every morning to be at school by 8:30. And it was just exciting. I had four older siblings that were bringing books home from school and studying at night and telling stories about what happened during the school day. So I was, I was ready to become a part of that so to speak. And so getting, getting up and getting dressed and getting ready to go to school was exciting and I always enjoyed school. I enjoyed learning. And it was, it was always exciting for me. Story_ID: 392859 Speaker 1: How did your mother [Emily Eddings Dore] prepare you to go to school? Did you-- Speaker 2: Well she, she, she got us up early. We ate breakfast before we left home. And you know even when I was as young as six years old, she probably--I can recall that she helped me get dressed or one of the older sisters or brothers would help the other younger ones to get dressed and made sure that we were well groomed and brushed our teeth and so forth and got us on the way. But we always ate, ate breakfast and I often think about the fact that there is a lot of talk recently about how some kids never get fed before going to school. We, we were always fed and one and the very first thing that we did when we got home from school was to eat a hot meal or a snack before dinner. But it was, it was school was fun. Robert Smalls School [Robert Smalls International Academy, Beaufort, South Carolina] was grades one through twelve at that time. And the principal of the school was a gentleman by the name of W. Kent Alston, Alston, a very interesting person by the way. Of course Robert Smalls the school was named for General Robert Smalls who there's a favorite, a famous story about he was also a former slave who grew up probably a block from or two not more than two blocks from where we are seated in what is known as the historic the point in downtown Beaufort [South Carolina]. He was a slave here and grew up and knew the--he, he knew the rivers and the waters well and what he did was carried a boat over to the Union Army. It was called a Planter and there's a story called the 'Captain of the Planter' ['Captain of the Planter: The Story of Robert Smalls,' Dorothy Sterling] but it was, it was a Confederate boat that he took over to the Union forces during the Civil War and following the Civil War, he became a United States congressman from South Carolina and that's, that's whom my high school is named for. My grade school through high school was named for General Robert Smalls. There's a bust of him at, at Tabernacle Baptist Church [Beaufort, South Carolina], which again is only a few blocks away from here. But as I was telling you about Mr. Alston, he was a very, very dedicated principal. He tried to bring a lot of outstanding figures to the area to motivate students. For example I can remember when I was in high school, he brought Louis Armstrong, Joe Louis, the world heavyweight boxing champion, Marian Anderson, a lot of celebrities and notables to the school and, and he was a great motivator and of course during those days of course you know we--I went to school during the days of total segregation. The--Robert Smalls was segregated until well beyond my graduation from high school and most of my education has been segregated. But it was, it was quite an interesting early childhood education at Robert Smalls. Had some fine teachers. Story_ID: 392860 Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers [at Robert Smalls School; Robert Smalls International Academy, Beaufort, South Carolina]? Were there any other teachers besides the principal [W. Kent Alston] that encouraged you or that you remember? Speaker 2: Well the principal didn't encourage me that much because I didn't have a lot of contact with the principal. I just thought I'd mention some of the things that he did. He-- Speaker 1: Oh he did to motivate the whole school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but my first grade teacher was a lady by the name of Ms. Eicleburger [ph.] one of my very best teachers was Doris Heath, H-E-A-T-H. She's now Doris Mouzon, M-O-U-Z-O-N. She, she was just an outstanding teacher. One of the best teachers I had in my entire you know grade school or high school career. Speaker 1: What did she do to encourage you? Speaker 2: I don't know. It's, it's hard to put my fingers on it, but she was, she was kind. She always had a very kind demeanor, always had a smile. But what I remember was I thought that I learned a great deal in the third grade. I just felt like I learned so much. And it was always, it was just a good environment that was created. Speaker 1: Were your teachers black or white? Speaker 2: All black. The school was totally segregated. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they were, they were the best teachers that by any standards, by any measurement they were, they were outstanding teachers. And I've had other experiences and education. For example I was the classroom teacher at one point in my career. And, and, and of course I remember my college professors and, and so I, I have some idea about what makes a great teacher and I know that I had some outstanding teachers and there, they couldn't have been any better regardless of race. Story_ID: 392861 Speaker 1: Let me ask you--we're gonna go back to school-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --since we've talked about the elementary years [at Robert Smalls School; Robert Smalls International Academy, Beaufort, South Carolina], but when you think about your elementary days, what sounds, sights, and smells take you back to that time? Speaker 2: School was started every morning and most of the grades it was started with the Pledge of Allegiance at about eight-thirty and a lot of the grades we started not only with the Pledge of Allegiance, but a bible verse, the taking of attendance or roll call, and then generally reading or math or science and learning to sing. I guess that would be called the arts or the humanities but learning, learning to sing and, and what, what we call-- Speaker 1: Assembly or choir? Speaker 2: --assembly-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was every Friday morning that everybody went into the auditorium or the gymnasium in high school for an assembly program and sometimes plays were given, skits, very often plays. There was, there was always a lot of activity. There was always something, some class was putting on a program or giving a play or the band was providing music or there were people singing and on different holidays we would have programs and so forth and, and those were quite, quite interesting and, and great learning experiences. Speaker 1: What smells take you back to home? Speaker 2: It's hard to think of smells except the cafeteria. Speaker 1: Not necessarily in school, in the community [of Burton, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: In the community? I've always liked the jasmine, the jasmine flower and it grew wild in a lot of places around the the in the woods and you know there were lots of woods and trees and so forth where I grew up and there were a lot of narrow dirt roads. There weren't--we didn't have a lot of paved roads and we didn't have paved streets in the community. There was one main, main paved highway and the rest of it were small narrow dirt roads, a lot of live oak trees and the Spanish moss and the wild grapes growing wild, they were hanging off of the tree limbs and and wildflowers and I guess the, the scent that, that I, I'll always remember the scent of the yellow jasmine in my early days. But it, it--I always had a great love and respect for the outer doors and for nature. Speaker 1: What sounds come to mind when you're thinking about the outdoors? Speaker 2: Birds, just wildlife. There were always--I guess nature is kind, was kind of into the butterflies, and the birds and the bees. They seemed to be much more plentiful. You don't see as many now. When I was growing up there were butterflies seemingly everywhere all over the yard, all over the flowers. There were hummingbirds, bees and there were dogs and cats and animals everywhere and and so you know that that was a part of the, a part of my childhood. I was always around animals and always around something that was being grown in the garden or on the farm. And so I grew up with lots of animals and, and the outdoors all the time. Story_ID: 392862 Speaker 1: Tell me about the community and the people in Burton [South Carolina] where you lived? Speaker 2: We--there was a very closely knit community largely due to the fact that a lot of the people in the community were family members. There were probably my community was probably made up of four or five families at the most. You know between the cousins and the aunts and the uncles and so forth, and it was, it was just a small community probably a 150, two hundred people in the small community but that largely consisted of about four or five families and most of those families were relatives, were related to each other. And then of course beyond that was, was the school, the people that I knew in school but the community was small, it was rural. For example, in my community nearly everybody raised hogs, cows, chickens so I mean we, we ate basically what we grew. We, we had eggs always. I mean we didn't buy eggs out of the store we got them out of the chicken yard. We killed chicken for meals and we butchered hogs, generally around the wintertime. I participated in a lot of butcherings. In fact I butchered my last hog about ten years ago. But I mean you know in my community I grew up where, where there was no running water and we had outdoor toilets. I think my family got running water, indoor toilet facilities when I was probably in the ninth or tenth grade [at Robert Smalls High School; Robert Smalls International Academy, Beaufort, South Carolina]. There was a hog pen in the backyard. There was a chicken coup in the backyard and the fields were nearby. So that's, that's the kind of environment and that's the kind of community I grew up in. There were horses, mules that were used for plowing. It was, it was the country life. Story_ID: 392863 Speaker 1: So besides going to school, what did you and your brothers and sisters do? Did you have jobs? Speaker 2: Yeah, we--I had a rather unusual early work history. All of my older siblings found part time jobs. I think I mentioned to you earlier that my father [Hezekiah Dore, Sr.] was a farmhand and basically worked on a large truck farm and truck farming is basically the farming of vegetables for the market. Basically, it's a subsistence wage and we all found part time jobs and in some instances full time jobs. For example my brother, my oldest brother Hezekiah [Hezekiah Dore, Jr.], worked in one of the local jewelry stores in downtown Beaufort [South Carolina] after school. My oldest sister Geneva [Geneva Dore Cole] worked in a laundromat where she folded clothes and washed and dried clothes for people that came into the laundromat. That's, that was just the typical job. I have another sister Helen [Helen Dore McAfee] that worked in a grocery store as a cashier. And, and we all worked and held jobs even during high school, very early in life. I had a job, a full time job, when I was in ninth grade. I worked as a curb hop at one of the local fast food restaurants, it was called the Shack Drive-In [ph.]. And I started working there in when I was in ninth grade and I was working--I worked a forty-eight hour week from four in the evening after school until 12:00, 12:30 at night, six days a week and I did that from the time I was in ninth grade [at Robert Smalls High School; Robert Smalls International Academy, Beaufort, South Carolina] until one day before I left for college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And we worked real hard and that's how we were able to help each other get a, a college education. All of the brothers and sisters helped each other and helped the family to get ahead by working. We've always worked real hard. We always had a great work ethic. Story_ID: 392864 Speaker 1: So all of the children in my family, except my youngest brother [Lorenzo Dore] who was born with Down syndrome, eight of us, have college degrees and professional or master's degrees and so forth. The first five children in my family are two years apart. And that meant for my family that when my oldest brother [Hezekiah Dore, Jr.] became a junior in college [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], my oldest sister [Geneva Dore Cole] was a freshman and there were two children in college at the same time for ten years straight. And somehow we survived and it was because we all worked and helped each other and that's how we were able to to get through and of course wasn't quite as hard for the people that, the siblings that came after me. Things were progressively getting better. My youngest sister, Laverne [Linda Laverne Dore], who is five years younger than I am, finished her high school career in New York. There was--the Civil Rights Movement was taking afoot about that time and there were families, northern families, that wanted to help southern black families and I don't remember the precise name of the program, but probably five or six students each year left Beaufort County [South Carolina] to live with white families up north and went to to schools up north. My sister was one of them. Laverne finished high school and I think it was North Great Neck High School [sic. Great Neck North Senior High School; John L. Miller Great Neck North High School, Great Neck, New York] in Hempstead, New York and then went to college at Hofstra University [Hempstead, New York] and, and I mention that because as I said things were progressively getting better and so the the siblings that were--that came after me didn't have it quite as, as hard as I and my older sisters and brothers did but we worked extremely hard to get ahead. Story_ID: 392865 Speaker 1: So you graduate from high school [from Robert Smalls High School; Robert Smalls International Academy, Beaufort, South Carolina] in 1963? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Was there someone there who encouraged you to go to college or help you decide what college you would like to go to? Speaker 2: My oldest brother, Hezekiah, Jr. [Hezekiah Dore, Jr.]. He went to Morehouse College in Atlanta [Georgia] and I'm not sure where he got his inspiration because nobody in our community--he was probably the first child, first person in the entire community to to go to college. He was certainly the first person in my family. I think I mentioned that my father [Hezekiah Dore, Sr.] went to second grade and my mother [Emily Eddings Dore] went to sixth grade. He was the first person in the family to go to college. And certainly the first person in our small community there in Burton [South Carolina] and one of the few people that left my high school that went to to college and those days I think he would have graduated around 1956 or '57 [1957] from high school. People weren't going to college. Black kids weren't going to college. They were going--they were taking the Greyhound bus and heading up north as soon as they graduated from high school. They were trying to get out of the South to find what we call decent jobs, places like New York [New York] and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Chicago [Illinois] and so forth. The ones that didn't go up north to look for jobs in factories were going straight into the [U.S] military to try to find--make a better life for themselves. I doubt that more than 2 or 3 percent of any graduating class back then went to college but he, he went to Morehouse and of course after his first year we never heard anything in my household except Morehouse. And my other, my second oldest brother Freddie [Freddie Dore] went to Morehouse and of course I went to Morehouse. And you don't hear anything in my house except Morehouse because I have two sons [Anthony Dore and Bertrand Dore] that went to Morehouse (laughter) so Morehouse has been kind of a family, family tradition, family school but and, but he was, he was a big motivating factor in, in my life and in in of course why I went to Morehouse. Another reason was that one of the persons that came to to my high school for at least a couple of programs was Dr. Benjamin Elijah Mays [Benjamin Mays] and he was just an outstanding speaker and I had the opportunity to hear him while I was still in high school and anybody who heard him speak could not except be inspired so that had something to do with it too. Story_ID: 392866 Speaker 1: So you graduate [from Robert Smalls High School; Robert Smalls International Academy, Beaufort, South Carolina] and you quit that job as the curb hopper-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and go off to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Is this the first time that you're out of South Carolina? Speaker 2: Atlanta is the very first time I left the State of South Carolina. I had been going--the only other times that I left Beaufort County [South Carolina] was basically to go to Orangeburg [South Carolina] to see my sisters when they were away at South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Helen [Helen Dore McAfee] and Geneva [Geneva Dore Cole] went to South Carolina State College and we'd go to pick them up from school for for the holidays when they would be out for you know for Christmas, spring break and so forth, we'd go to Orangeburg pick them up and so I'd been to Orangeburg and I'd been to Savannah, Georgia, which is right across you know one county between Beaufort and and Georgia, that's Jasper County [South Carolina]. But Atlanta is my first trip out outside the State of South Carolina. I'm eighteen years old then and, and just graduated from high school. Speaker 1: Who's the dean at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] at this time? Speaker 2: Dean Brazeal [Brailsford R. Brazeal] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or the president Speaker 2: --Dean Brazeal. Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] was president, the dean was Dean Brazeal. But I can remember getting on the Greyhound bus. Atlanta was then eight and a hot--eight and a half hour trip from Beaufort by way of Greyhound. The Greyhound bus had stopped in all the little towns then. That, that was an experience, we still at that time, you know blacks still sat somewhere from the middle to the back of the bus. You didn't sit near the front of the bus. And, and I can vividly remember traveling to and from Atlanta during the holidays and when I came home for the summer months, taking the Greyhound bus through all the little towns in South Carolina and Georgia. Remember when I first got to Atlanta, the Bank of Georgia building was the tallest building in downtown Atlanta and I think it must have been fourteen stories high at that time. But even then, I mean to pull up to a Greyhound bus station where there were about fifteen or twenty other bus stalls with the buses pulling in and pulling out and there was only one bus coming into Beaufort and it was an experience and never seen anything except the gray sandy, loamy soil and there was red clay everywhere, hills. I never been any place except the little country where everything is flat, no hills and all of a sudden there are hills everywhere, and this red clay and it was an experience and now Robert Morehouse College and of course everybody was unloading in, in front of--behind what is--was Graves Hall and that was a freshmen dormitory. And Graves Hall is kind of like an institution at an institution at Morehouse College. But yeah, I have a very vivid memory of my early days at Morehouse and the people meeting people from everywhere seem like you know I had, I had a very limited life and had, had very limited experiences before I went to Morehouse and I met students from all over the country, professors from everywhere. About half of the faculty was white at that time in 1963 and I wasn't used to having white teachers or white professors that was a new experience for me. It was the first time I'd been taught by Ph.D.'s and and it was, it was totally new and exciting. Story_ID: 392867 Speaker 1: Talking about you riding on the back of the bus, did you just know that this was something you were supposed to do? Speaker 2: We were told (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you told? Speaker 2: We were told you know when you get on the Greyhound bus, go toward the back. Speaker 1: Well I mean your brothers and sisters or your parents [Emily Eddings Dore and Hezekiah Dore, Sr.] had they ever talked to you about segregation works or was it just something you just knew to do. Speaker 2: Habit, custom. Speaker 1: Just habit, custom. Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So civil rights and what was going on in '63 [1963] had to be new also outside of your small town [Burton, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Well civil rights began I guess around '73 [1973] because--I'm sorry '63 [1963] because I think, I think we were getting kind of activated around that time. But it was after my first year, after my freshmen year in college that I became active. I was, I was very active in, in the Civil Rights Movement from my sophomore year up until quite recently. I, I was one of the first organizers of the Democratic, the Young Democrats [Young Democrats of Morehouse College] or the Democratic Party at Morehouse College campus [Atlanta, Georgia], me and a few other guys organized the Young Democrats club. Speaker 1: You and who else? Speaker 2: A few other guys on campus. Speaker 1: Oh, you don't wanna say their names? (Laughter) Tell me who they were. Speaker 2: I'm not sure I can remember all of them but let's see, it's been a long time ago. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: If their names come to mind, I'll, I'll tell you who they were. But I became active in politics in Atlanta [Georgia] even though I couldn't vote there or anything I was active in voter registration and get out the vote efforts. I worked in Senator Leroy Johnson's campaign. He was the first black Georgia senator-- Speaker 1: Since Reconstruction (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) since Reconstruction. I worked in Leroy Johnson's campaign. He was the first black in Georgia since Reconstruction to be elected to the Georgia House [sic. Georgia State Senate]. Speaker 1: Did he die recently? Speaker 2: I don't know. He might have, I'm not sure. And it was probably during my senior year that, that I was involved I believe [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond was probably running for the Georgia house [Georgia House of Representatives] around that time but I was actively involved in you know get out the vote and driving people to the polls and found myself in these public meetings where strategies were going on to you know get blacks registered and to the polls and I was involved in downtown marches and picketing. I remember marching on Rich's [Rich's Department Store], downtown Atlanta and so forth. But everywhere I went even here in Beaufort [South Carolina], I was involved in, in the civil rights struggle. When I graduated from college, I came back to Beaufort to teach school. And one of the first things I did was got involved in in civil rights here locally. But getting back to Morehouse, and that was a very, very interesting period from '63 [1963] to '67 [1967]. Story_ID: 392868 Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] March on Washington? Speaker 2: Oh, it was just overwhelming. Martin Luther King is one of the greatest persons in my life. I idolize him. For me he is, he is like a prophet. And of course Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] was president while I was at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and his last year as president was the year that I graduated and Martin Luther King was the commencement speaker for my graduation. And, and so this was the first time that I was exposed to the likes of Dr. Benjamin Mays, Dr. Martin Luther King, Junior and at Morehouse we had a tradition of chapel. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Chapel was a requirement. We could only miss three days from chapel a semester and it was from breakfast to chapel and from chapel to class. There was always some interesting speaker that we had for our chapel services. Dr. Mordecai Johnson, Dr. Howard Thurman, just outstanding people. One of the persons that influenced me greatly my, my, my new religious thinking from the old church was Reverend Lucius Tobin [Lucius M. Tobin] who was my religion professor at Morehouse. There were a lot of people that impacted my life. I was in the economics department and Dr. E.B. Williams, a native South Carolinian was chairman of the Department of Economics and there were just a lot of impressive, impressive people around. It was, it was just a great experience coming from, coming from Burton [South Carolina] (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of your classmates-- Story_ID: 392869 Speaker 1: Who were some of your classmates during that time? Speaker 2: Yeah. I guess one of the, one of the best known classmate of mine is Herman Cain. Herman Cain was involved--he, he was one of the dominant owners I believe in, I don't want to get it wrong, one of the pizza companies, I believe it was Godfather's Pizza, but I'm not sure so I don't wanna-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but, he, he Herman became an outstanding businessman. He was and of course we had the same major, economics and business at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] so we took a lot of classes together. And most of the other guys were friends of mine Roswell Jackson. Most, most of my other friends were frat brothers. And some of my frat brothers were very impressive to one of the things that, that was important to me was that the graduate chapter of Phi Beta Sigma [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity] in Atlanta [Georgia] became involved with the undergraduates' chapter, undergraduate chapters in the AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] and they invited us to some of their monthly meetings and invited us to meals and dinner. They generally held their monthly meeting at Paschal's [Paschal's Motor Hotel and Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia] and invited the students from Morehouse and Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] to join in their monthly meetings and it was an experience. I mean we, we saw leadership at work. Brother Roswell Sutton [Roswell O. Sutton] who just passed a few years ago was president of Citizens Trust Bank which was one of the early black banks in Atlanta and he was president of the graduate chapter and you just, you just, you just saw leadership in Atlanta everywhere, black leadership in Atlanta everywhere. But I guess if I had more time to think about some of the students in my class, I could name some of the more, some, some other outstanding students, but the person that comes to my--just came to my mind was, was Herman Cain. We were classmates. You probably have heard of Herman Cain before. He ran for senator, U.S. senator not long ago on a Republican ticket (laughter). Speaker 1: So you pledged? Speaker 2: Sigma. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any other extracurricular activities outside of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was involved, I was involved in in college track for a short while. I was involved with the debate team for a short while and of course I was, I was actively involved in the Young Democrats [Young Democrats of Morehouse College] during my--during at least three years at Morehouse and I was of course I became a Sigma my sophomore year, Pan-Hellenic Council [National Pan-Hellenic Council], that's, that's about it. Story_ID: 392870 Speaker 1: So you graduate from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in what year? Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 1: And what were your desires? Why did you pick economics and business as your major? Speaker 2: I was, I was also interested in political science. I took political science as a minor. I, I thought that, that it would help me. I ultimately wanted to go to law school and I also liked business and I got what was, what I thought was a good combination for law school. But I got sidetracked momentarily and couldn't go straight to law school. But I did, I did when I graduated from Morehouse I had an academic scholarship to go to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] for a master's degree in business. And of course the Vietnam draft was on and I had done a lot of reading and thinking and talking about Vietnam and I was not philosophically inclined to go to Vietnam. I knew about the French experience in Indochina and it was about that time that there was an established policy of teaching deferments in certain areas of the country where there were teacher shortages. And one was Beaufort County [South Carolina] and I decided to come back home and get me a job as a school teacher. I would not have gone to Canada, left the country to avoid the war. I found what I felt was a legitimate way to get out of going to Vietnam. Had I been drafted I would have gone and I would have served but I did not want to go because of my--I was just--I was not in tuned to what was going on. And I came to Beaufort [South Carolina] and I taught in the public schools at St. Helena High School [St. Helena Island, South Carolina]. I taught economics and government. And of course I didn't have any education in my background. And when I say education, I'm talking about training to to teach school or be an educator. And so I went to Georgia State College [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] to get partial certification as a teacher. I had to have nine hours after my first year in order to get a, a temporary teaching certificate. So I went to Georgia State back in Atlanta [Georgia] again to get my teachers certification and I taught from 1967 to 1970 and the the lottery system was instituted for the, for the draft. Story_ID: 392871 Speaker 1: Let me ask you something. You said you had an academic scholarship to go to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but you didn't take that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You went back to Beaufort [Beaufort County, South Carolina]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --okay and then came back to Georgia State [Georgia State College; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Because I got, I got, I got the deferment by teaching-- Speaker 1: You did get the deferment though? Speaker 2: --by teaching, by teaching school. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you left here to get a teaching certificate at Georgia State? Speaker 2: While it was just during the summers. Speaker 1: During the summer, okay. Speaker 2: I, I went there to get the requisite hours for a temporary teaching certificate. Speaker 1: I gotcha. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then of course in about 1969 I believe it was, the lottery system for the draft was instituted and your birthdate was put into a lottery system and depending on you know, what number you got would depend on whether or not you were called for, for duty and March 14, 1945 was a lucky day I think it was something like number three hundred and fifty-four in the lottery system and, and back then they never got higher than number forty-nine out of three hundred--how many days in a year, three hundred and sixty days in a year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three hundred sixty-five. Speaker 2: I--my number was three hundred and fifty-four and they never got higher than maybe it was forty-nine or fifty. I decided that it was time to go to law school. Story_ID: 448877 Speaker 1: So, thank goodness for the lottery system you didn't get drafted [into the Vietnam War]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So now it's 1970 and you're getting ready to go to law school. Is that right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me what happens. Speaker 2: Well I had, by then I, I had gotten married. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My wife was Beverly Smith Dore and we met in Atlanta [Georgia]. She graduated from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and we left Beaufort [South Carolina] to go to Athens [Georgia] for the University of Georgia law school [University of Georgia School of Law]. Speaker 1: How did you decide to go to Athens? Speaker 2: It was, it was near my wife's home, Milledgeville, Georgia. And I knew I was gonna be studying a lot and she wouldn't have to go very far to visit with her family and then with her I expected law school to be very rigorous and it was and it was also I thought a very good school I thought they had a very good law school, one of the best in the Southeast and that's why I ended up there. Story_ID: 448878 Speaker 1: What were your thoughts when Charlayne Hunter [HistoryMaker Charlayne Hunter-Gault] and-- Speaker 2: Charlayne Hunter-Gault had left by then. Speaker 1: But she had already integrated the school [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia] and what were your thoughts at that time? Speaker 2: Well it wasn't very well integrated even though Hamilton Holmes, and Charlayne Hunter-Gault had, had gone there. When I got to law school at Georgia [University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia], there were I think two hundred and twenty students in the first year of class and there were four blacks. Prior to my class, three blacks had graduated from the law school in its entire history. The first black was--I'll think of his name in a second I can't think of his name, it's on the tip of my tongue. The second black was Robert Benham who ultimately became chief justice of the Georgia supreme court [Supreme Court of Georgia]. He retired as chief justice I believe about maybe five, six years ago. The third was Robert Mangham [ph.], a Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate from Atlanta, Georgia. And then there was my class, there were four of us. The first graduate his name will come to my mind. He's been very successful and I don't know why I can't think of his name. Speaker 1: (Laughter) It'll come to you later. Speaker 2: But anyway out of two hundred and twenty first year students, four of us were black. One was Jason, Jason Aushenbaugh [ph.] who had--he went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and had been in the [U.S.] military. He left the military after about twelve years as a major in the [U.S.] Army and came to law school. Kenneth Dias [ph.], who now practices in Athens [Georgia], has always practiced in Athens since we graduated. He was a graduate of the University of Georgia undergrad school. Charles Peterson, another Morehouse graduate who was in my class and who was a brilliant guy, quite, quite a good student and, and myself. No black professors. There just weren't many black students at Georgia at that time, period; but there were only four in the law school. Chester Davenport [Chester C. Davenport] was the first black graduate at a law school, very successful lawyer. Speaker 1: So how do you think you were treated since there were no black professors? What was your experience with the professors? Speaker 2: We were not, we were basically treated like all of the other students and except for one or two professors that you could tell were probably racist under the surface. We, we were treated pretty well. Story_ID: 448879 Speaker 1: Can you remember a time of blatant racism or prejudice towards you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And when was that? Speaker 2: My--I'm trying--it was my first year of law school [University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia]. Was in a pretty tough course we call it T and E, trust and estates. It was a required course at that time and it was two semesters and grades, good grades are hard to come by in law school. About seventy-five percent of the students are C students. So when you make a C in a course you feel like you've done well. Probably, probably 5 percent of the students are A students or less. And you've got a handful of B students and like I said probably 75 percent--75 to 80 percent of the students are C students ranging from a low C average to a high C average. You got about 80 percent. And you take one exam in a course and whatever you made on that exam was your grade in the course. So for a course like trust and estates, which weighed heavily into your average because it was a six hour course, you took the class for two semesters and at the end of second semester you took an exam and whatever you made on that exam was your grade in the course. And if you got of course a six hour and if you know about quality points and how many points you get for an A, B and so forth and how that figures into your average it's quite important. Well, the passing grade on the trust and estates exam was 70 and I made a 67 [percent], which was a D and I got a D in the course. And I later found that there were three white students that scored below me on the exam and got Cs out of the course and of course like I said there was a--your grade was whatever out the course was whatever you made on that exam and that, that was the, the, that was the biggest example of racism among professors. I experienced some racism among the students. For example the tax professor invited some students to his house one night and I was one of the invited guests and they were also most, most of the students at the party were white students that I had become friendly with, but one of the students asked the professor who gave the party why did he invite that nigger. I didn't hear him but other students at the party heard what he said and the professor was quite upset and I later found out during the course of the evening that he had made the comment, asked the professor why did he invite the nigger and it didn't bother me. I was thick-skinned. I knew that that existed and I didn't get all upset about it. But that's just another example of the racism that I met. Story_ID: 448880 Speaker 1: After being at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] for those four years and then going into that environment, I mean did you really have to make some adjustment or you just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh a lot of adjustments. Speaker 1: --okay. Speaker 2: A Lot of adjustments. I think there were probably three white students at Morehouse when I was there. And so I, I like I say I had never been in an integrated educational setting before except for professors at Morehouse. We had a substantial number of white professors and associate professors but not, not many students at all. So this was my, was my first experience number one of being in a large university. When I went, when I was--when I graduated from Morehouse we had a total student body enrollment of less than a thousand and when I went to Georgia [University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia], the enrollment at Georgia was over thirty-five thousand and I wasn't used to taking a class with a hundred, over a hundred people. I had been used to classes at Morehouse with fifteen to twenty-five people in a class. Some classes you had as few as ten people, ten or twelve people in a class. So going to a big university was a new experience. Going to school where I was not in the dominant race was another experience. And the just the experience of studying law which is an experience in itself; the method of learning is quite different. You--the Socratic Method is--was mostly employed in law school at that time. Generally, we read a great deal and most of the professors would stand you up in class and class was fifty minutes and generally during the course of those of those fifty minutes two students would stand to be asked questions about the study material so you might be on your feet for twenty to thirty minutes and get a barrage of questions and you never knew when you were gonna be called on and so it was--you had to prepare every night because you didn't know know whether you were gonna be called on the next day, and if you were called on it was not just to answer a question, you were on your feet for twenty to thirty minutes, sometimes the whole class period. And so that was another experience that I had not had before. So it was, it was very, very interesting. Story_ID: 448881 Speaker 1: Had you been following the career of Thurgood Marshall? Speaker 2: Mostly, mostly after law school [University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia] (laughter), mostly after law school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was, I was, I was quite familiar with his career, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, who did you look up to as far as, if anyone that you might have thought about who would be your mentor or? Speaker 2: There were not a lot of notables. I had a few, there were a few people around Atlanta [Georgia] of course, Senator Leroy Brown [sic. Leroy Johnson] that I spoke of earlier was a lawyer. Horace Ward who later became a federal district court judge taught me business law at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and I say Atlanta University I took eighteen hours at AU while I was in undergraduate school at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] because you could take courses in your major almost all of the schools there so Atlanta University had a program where if you were in undergrad school and took a graduate course that was required both in undergrad and in grad but at a different level, four hundred in college and a five hundred course but it's the same course and went to Atlanta University for your master's degree, you could get credit for it toward your master's if you made a B an A or B in the course and I had eighteen hours of A's and Bs at Atlanta University. That's one reason why I got a scholarship there and was about to go there but anyway Horace Ward taught business law at at Atlanta University at night and he later became a federal district court judge and you know Senator Leroy Johnson and there were, there were notables around Atlanta, lawyers and a few judges and but there were not many lawyers, black lawyers at all. I mean the legal profession was a white profession, mostly. There just weren't any black lawyers around. Speaker 1: So you felt that you needed to get into that field to establish (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I intended to become a civil rights lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I wanted to come back to Beaufort [South Carolina] and be a civil rights lawyer, of course that's not the way it turned out. Story_ID: 448882 Speaker 1: So what happens after law school [University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia]? You graduate in or you finished (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I finished in '73 [1973] and excuse me, and I intended to come back to practice with Charles Washington who is the only black lawyer in Beaufort [South Carolina] at that time and we had talked a great deal about me returning to Beaufort and practicing law with him and after my second year in law school, he passed. And so that kind of went out, went out the, out the window. But I came back to Beaufort and I was recruited by Beaufort-Jasper Comprehensive Health Services, Inc. [sic. Beaufort-Jasper-Hampton Comprehensive Health Services, Inc., Ridgeland, South Carolina], which was a local nonprofit community health organization headed at that time by [HistoryMaker] Thomas Barnwell from Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] and they hired me as their legal officer and we were doing a lot of different things quite differently back then. And I'm sure if you've ever had an opportunity to talk to Tom Barnwell he's told you about all the things that were being done at that time in, in '73 [1973]. We, we were an activist group and an activist organization taking water, potable water to a lot of communities that didn't have potable water and that meant drafting contracts and agreements and easements and deeds and so forth in order to effectuate these arrangements for local water companies that we started. I also moved into the area of grants writing for the agency. For example I wrote a grant to the Campaign for Human Development [Catholic Campaign for Human Development] which was a Catholic foundation or nonprofit and the catalog foundation and they jointly funded a community store in Daufuskie Island [South Carolina]. Daufuskie is an isolated island separated by the Calibogue sound from Hilton Head and most--all of the people there went mostly shopped in Savannah [Georgia] once a month and didn't have a local grocery store and I wrote a grant and got it funded--got a local grocery store basically funded for Daufuskie Island and made a lot of trips to Daufuskie to organize the local residents over there and was basically the, the legal officer for that organization. We also had a few small legal battles with the local hospital, Beaut Memorial [Beaufort Memorial Hospital, Beaufort, South Carolina] didn't wanna give black doctors privileges to practice at the hospital, staff privileges, but more particularly, that was a problem I guess more so in Jasper County [South Carolina]. Jasper County wanted nothing to do with black doctors in the little twenty-two bed hospital over there. Story_ID: 448883 Speaker 1: And so we were, we were constantly fighting those kinds of battles and I was used to it because for the three years that I had spent in Beaufort [South Carolina] prior to going to law school [University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia], those were activist years I spent most of my time downtown picketing in Beaufort, being threatened, my job as a school teacher being threatened. And I picketed downtown Beaufort every day for a solid year so that we could get black cashiers hired in the local department stores and black tellers in the banks and you know this was, this was in 1967 and and we didn't have black cashiers in local department stores and we didn't have black tellers in banks and it was a much different time. And 1967 doesn't seem like a long time ago but those were the conditions then and I can recall that I would get students that I was teaching at St. Helena School [St. Helena High School, St. Helena Island, South Carolina], drive them to town and we bring our picket signs and, and we'd march up and down Bay Street which is the main street in Beaufort until dark and the--we held an economic--we had, we had an economic boycott at that time. It lasted for a year. You know you leave the picket signs about six or seven o'clock in the evening, you go to a community meeting where you made strategies for, for you know your movement. We had a lot of move--a lot of strategy sessions at Penn [Penn Center, St. Helena Island, South Carolina] and it was at Penn that I met Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], and I met Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and came into contact with a lot of people who were field workers for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and was very much involved in the civil rights struggle. As I said I was involved in Beaufort, Atlanta [Georgia]. Everywhere I went, I always got involved. But to get back to your question, I returned to Beaufort and joined that organization [Beaufort-Jasper-Hampton Comprehensive Health Services, Inc., Ridgeland, South Carolina] and stayed there for three years, worked with [HistoryMaker] Thomas Barnwell and [HistoryMaker] Emory Campbell and Roland Gardner and other people. Story_ID: 448884 Speaker 1: And then after three years I went into private practice with a local white law firm [Moss, Carter, Branton and Bailey; Moss, Dore, Kuhn McIntyre, P.A., Beaufort, South Carolina] (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Did you do any civil rights work there? Speaker 1: No. We--civil rights was, was not really-- Speaker 2: Needed at that time? Speaker 1: --in vogue at the small law firm level. The civil--the public accommodations bill [Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title II], the Fair Housing Act [Fair Housing Act of 1968] and most of the civil rights legislation had been passed by 1973, '74 [1974] and I often told people at that time that the civil rights era was basically over as early as 1973 because the battle at that time shifted to economics and while a lot of people didn't realize it and didn't understand what was happening, the, the struggle for civil rights and getting the civil rights legislation on the books, voting rights and fair housing and equal opportunity and employment and so forth, all of those have been firmly established in the law and you'd get some a few cases of racial discrimination and employment, but there was not really a lot of civil rights work left to be done at that time. You couldn't make a living do it in a small town like Beaufort [South Carolina], you certainly couldn't. And so I, I became a plaintiff's trial lawyer (laughter). Story_ID: 448885 Speaker 1: And what happened then? Speaker 2: Well, that was, that was also a quite sort of unusual time. And often think how different things were not so long ago. When I came back to Beaufort [South Carolina] from law school [University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia], I was the only black lawyer, well there were only about a hundred black lawyers in the State of South Carolina and most of them were in Charleston [South Carolina] and Columbia [South Carolina], a few in Greenville [South Carolina], but they were certainly in the urban areas of the state. South Carolina was and still is composed of judicial circuits and at that time there were fourteen circuits and we had fourteen circuit court judges and it was based on population. So we had for example in a large county like Charleston or Columbia, we might have two circuits or two circuit court judges, whereas in the low country, there were five counties in the circuit, Beaufort [Beaufort County], Jasper [Jasper County], Hampton [Hampton County], Colleton [Colleton County] and Allendale counties comprised then and still do comprise the 14th Judicial Circuit. Well when I came back to Beaufort to practice law, I was the only black lawyer in this five county area for the first eight years of my practice. And so we talking until 1980, '81 [1981]. I was the only black lawyer in the low country. And so the courtroom was a new experience aside from being a young lawyer who was going into the courtroom to try cases, I was the only black lawyer in Beaufort County that was going into that courtroom trying cases and so that, that was another exciting period in my life. Speaker 1: Were your clients black or white or both? Speaker 2: They were, they were almost 100 percent black starting out but while I was at that law firm I gained some white clients and, and I have a significant white clientele today. Speaker 1: Okay. And how long did you stay with that firm [Moss, Carter, Branton and Bailey; Moss, Dore, Kuhn McIntyre, P.A., Beaufort, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: I stayed there for sixteen years and after the first five years I became a senior partner and when I became a senior partner I was the first black lawyer senior partner in a white law firm in South Carolina. Story_ID: 448886 Speaker 1: What kind of cases were you trying [at Moss, Carter, Branton and Bailey; Moss, Dore, Kuhn McIntyre, P.A., Beaufort, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: I was trying everything, personal injury which was basically automobile accidents. I did criminal defense work. I've tried murder cases. I've tried everything from a speeding ticket to, to a murder case. I've tried drug cases. In fact I was involved in the biggest drug cases in the history of South Carolina. It was called the Jackpot trials [Operation Jackpot]. Speaker 1: The jackpot-- Speaker 2: The jackpot trial, yeah. Speaker 1: What was that about? Speaker 2: There were thirteen criminal defendants, this was in federal court in Charleston [South Carolina], it was, it, it involved alleged drug ring and they were, they indicted a lot of defendants and they had basically obtained evidence against them over a ten year period under what we call the kingpin statute [continuing criminal enterprise statute]. And it was tried in federal court in Charleston. Story_ID: 392882 Speaker 1: So continue telling me about jackpot, the jackpot trial [Operation Jackpot] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it was the biggest drug case in the history of South Carolina. I don't know exactly how many millions of dollars of drugs were involved, but a substantial. I don't for example remember the lawyers name but I can remember the lawyer that represented--who represented Nori- Manuel Noriega having one of the defendants in that trial. I, I can't recall his name now but he was one of the defense lawyers and like I said there were thirteen defendants and two, two were acquitted and one was my client. So I mean I've tried like I said everything from a speeding ticket, you know failure to stop for a stop sign, blue light, assault and battery, attempted murder, rape, murder. I've tried every--just about every kind of criminal case there is. And I've tried personal injury cases, automobile accidents, injuries on the job. I've handled probably close to four hundred divorces during my career. It's, it's been mostly trial work. Speaker 1: Well this sensational drug case when your client was acquitted, just tell me more about this case because it was a sensational case here, here in the county, right? Speaker 2: Well it was in the state. Speaker 1: In the state, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: In the State of South Carolina. But there isn't a lot that I can say about it because I, I can't-- I mean a certain amount of it between my client were confi- you know as confidential (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, all right. Speaker 2: --as I said there were thirteen defendants and two were acquitted and one was the guy that I represented and it was, it was, it was, it was an international drug deal where a lot of drugs were coming from South America, mostly Costa Rica and other South American countries. Beaufort [South Carolina] and Hilton Head [Hilton Head Island, South Carolina] were one of the prime drop off areas. Drugs were taken off of the boats, Beaufort and Hilton Head and Charleston [South Carolina] and taken to farm (laughter) and they were stashed. They were called stash places or stash houses when they came off the boat, they were taken to locations. And then week, two weeks later put on U-Haul trucks and taken up to the north to be sold on the streets. But it was there were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year did this happen-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What year was this trial? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't even remember the precise year. It was, it was in the mid-'80s [1980s]. I would imagine my guess would be that the case probably involved 20, $25 million worth of drugs. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a big case. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Why was it called the jackpot trial? Speaker 2: That's the Operation Jackpot. That's the name that the federal authorities gave the case, Operation Jackpot (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], the bureau firearms, you know, the ATM [sic. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives], all of the federal agents that were involved and like I said-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I know, I know that one of the defendants one of the major defendants brokered a deal with the United States government and part of his, part of the arrangement for a plea of guilty in cooperation with the government was that he return to the government $6.5 million in exchange for not the charge of not paying taxes on that money, income tax evasion. You know you--that's one of the major charges when you sell drugs and you make money, you avoid paying taxes. He returned $6.5 million to the federal government as a part of his plea arrangement. So that gives you some idea what kind of operation it was (laughter). Speaker 1: Wow. Story_ID: 392883 Speaker 1: All right, so you stay at this firm [Moss, Carter, Branton and Bailey; Moss, Dore, Kuhn McIntyre, P.A., Beaufort, South Carolina] for sixteen years-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then what happens? Speaker 2: Decided that I was gonna practice law by myself. That I was gonna do it alone. Speaker 1: What was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a good relationship. I had a senior partner they only--you know there were guys, lawyers that come and go in law firms and for one reason or another, lawyers leave the firm and when I went there there were four lawyers and when I left there, there was only one lawyer that was more senior than I was. And he was really the lawyer that brought me there. Very, very decent person who still practices law, Jim Moss, James Moss, still practices here in Beaufort [South Carolina]. But as is usually the case, lawyers usually part their ways over money and you know your salary and that kind of thing. But we still have an amicable relationship but I just decided that it was time for me to leave and practice law by myself and it wasn't long after that that, that my oldest son went to law school and came back to practice law with me. Now I have two sons who are practicing law with me [at Dore Law Offices, Beaufort, South Carolina], Anthony Dore and Bertrand Dore. Anthony--they both went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Anthony went to law school at the University of South Carolina [University of South Carolina School of Law, Columbia, South Carolina] and Bertrand went to law school at Howard University [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]. And so I don't do quite as much trial work as I used to. I let them do the heavy lifting now (laughter). Story_ID: 392884 Speaker 1: What other organizations are you involved with? Speaker 2: I used to be heavily involved with the county and state Democratic parties. In fact in 1976 I was the first black chairman of Beaufort County [South Carolina] Democratic Party. Blacks were beginning to vote on a, on a wide, on a wide scale at that time and basically we were becoming involved to a larger extent with the Democratic Party locally and statewide. You see for a long time the Democratic Party was a white Democratic Party. But after the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965], and the civil rights battles of the '60s [1960s] blacks were finally beginning to vote in large numbers in the early '70s [1970s]. And we got involved in party politics and party building and in 1976 I became the chairman of the Beaufort County Democratic Party and became involved all as well in the state Democratic Party. I served on the Executive Council of the state Democratic Party. For example with Don Fowler [Donald Fowler] who later became the chairman of the national Democratic Party [Democratic National Committee]. He served as the national Democratic Party chairman under President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] and I believe up until President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] I believe, I'm not sure when his tenure ended but in the Democratic Party Executive Counsel it consist of about six or seven people in state that are at the top of the party hierarchy. The law at that time didn't pro- didn't allow any executive committee to be formed of the Democratic Party so instead they formed an Executive Council which was in fact an executive committee and it consisted of Don Fowler who was the chairman of the state party and a few other people who were elected to be on the council and I was on the council and served with him probably for about five or six years. And so that's one of the organizations I was very much involved with. I was also involved in education. I served on the South Carolina State Board of Education and ultimately became chairman of the South Carolina State Board of Education at a time when a lot of things were beginning to happen in education in South Carolina. Governor Dick Riley [Richard Riley] was the governor at that time and he was a very innovative governor in era of education, took a lot of ideas from Bill and Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton]. Bill Clinton was at that time governor of Arkansas and Hillary Clinton was the architect of his education program in Arkansas and Dick Riley borrowed a lot of the innovative ideas for education reform from Arkansas and of course when Bill Clinton became president of the United States, he appointed former Governor Dick Riley as his education secretary. So I served as the chairman of state Democratic Party when Dick Riley was governor of the state. We got the legislature to pass a one cent sales tax for education improvement and a lot of reforms were done in the EIA, Education Improvement Act [Education Improvement Act of 1984] with the one cent sales tax and I served on the Board of Trustees of Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina] and I've always had a, a pretty high interest in education too. Story_ID: 392885 Speaker 1: Any other organizations? Speaker 2: I mean a lot of organizations, probably too numerous (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Too many to mention, okay. Speaker 2: --to mention but those are just some of the--I've served for example on the Board of Trustees of Penn Center [St. Helena Island, South Carolina] for about ten, ten years and helped to promote the programs of that organization, particularly, the black land program. I got involved in that when I was still in law school [University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia]. There was a program to try to foster black retention and ownership of land in the South and more particularly Beaufort County [South Carolina] but it was funded out by a national organization that that gave--provided funding mostly in the south and southeastern United States for the retention of black land. You know that we've been losing land in the black family now by thousands of acres now for a long time. I was involved in that effort since I was in law school during the summers and, and move on to Penn's board for about ten years and there are other organizations like that that I've been a part of from time to time. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything up to this point that you'd like to talk about that we have not talked about? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything in particular. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: I think I told you I didn't have a lot of stories to tell (laughter). Story_ID: 392886 Speaker 1: We talked about your wife. Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm divorced from my first wife [Beverly Smith Dore]. She was the mother of my two sons [Anthony Dore and Bertrand Dore]. And I've remarried. My wife is now Vernita [Vernita Dore] and we have two daughters, Angela [Angela Dore] and Candace [Candace Dore]. Speaker 1: How old are they? Speaker 2: They are eleven and sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Two wonderful little girls. But I'm basically I'm, I'm still actively practicing law after thirty-three years I'm still at the office [Dore Law Offices, Beaufort, South Carolina]. I'm still the first one at the office every morning and I'm still enjoying it. Speaker 1: You said you also still own the land out in Burton County? Speaker 2: Out at, out at Frogmore [St. Helena Island, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Frogmore okay. Speaker 2: That basically was, was handed down from my [maternal] great-grandparents. It was, it was purchased by Dennis [Dennis Eddings] and Rebecca Eddings-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --starting back in 1886 and I still own that land today and enjoy it a great deal. It's quite peaceful, it's way out in the country, there's a little creek that runs right up to the shores and so I go out and I catch crab in the summer and shrimp and cook out there. On twenty-five acres there's a lot--that's not a huge farm or huge ranch, but that's a lot of space. No neighbors close by. Again the wildlife and the birds and it's, it's quite a peaceful environment when you wanna get away from practicing law and just wanna relax and do some thinking but I'm, I'm real proud of it. I'm real proud of the fact that I own land that my great-grandfather who was a former slave purchased and I intend to to pass that property on to my children and I have told them that it is to stay in the family. Of course you can't control what happens after you're, you're gone but they certainly know that I want that property to stay in the family. I've been able to hold on to it and you know taxes are increasing all the time, but I've told them that I've educated them so that they can make a decent living and they can afford to keep it. But that's one of the things that give me a lot of joy the fact that I, I can go out on a, on a little farm where I still have a few horses and cows and relax among live oak trees with Spanish moss that are about three hundred and fifty years old and think calmly in a peaceful environment and just get away. Story_ID: 392887 Speaker 1: But I guess of all of the, all of my experiences and the thing that I'm most proud of is that I, I was always involved in civil rights and I've earned a few awards for achievements and so forth in life but one of the things that's most important to me is that I have somehow helped along the way in the struggle for black people and for women and other minorities and I've had something to do with with gaining equality for for people and I guess that's what I'm most proud of. Speaker 2: When you think back over your life, would you have done anything differently? Speaker 1: Not a lot. Not a lot. I probably would have studied a little harder. But I can't think of a lot that that I would have done differently. I've always been very frugal, thrifty. Well, we've saved a lot. I've always valued land ownership and I've been acquiring land all during my adult life, hopefully that I can pass on to my children. I valued education and I've tried to foster an engendered value of education in my children. Obviously there are some things that, that you would do differently but for me no not a great deal. Story_ID: 392888 Speaker 1: Because you talk about the future generation and this information of your inspirational story will be shared with the future generations. What message would you like to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: Number one, they're a lot--there's a lot to be valued in the old values. There's nothing wrong with at all with having respect for adults and honoring the older people in, in your family. There's nothing wrong at all with having the good old manners. There's nothing wrong with saying yes ma'am, and no ma'am and not yeah and no or yes and no. There's, there's nothing wrong with saying ma'am or sir, nothing at all wrong with that. We--there's nothing wrong with respecting our women. You, you don't have to feel like you're out of step if you respect your, your sisters and your brothers but more so your sisters. Because after all those, those girls and those young ladies that you associate with and so forth are just like your sisters to somebody else and basically treat young ladies and young girls the way you want your sister to be treated and respect your parents and respect the elderly. There's nothing wrong with working hard to gain what you want and leave the drugs alone. Drugs are destroying black young people in America. Leave--just leave it alone. That would be my message to young people. Story_ID: 392889 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the African American community? Speaker 2: True equality with retention of what I tend to think of as the black subculture. I still think there's a black subculture that pervades our society. I think that there are some cultural differences that set us aside as a group and I think that there's some things that we need to hold on to despite how affluent we may become, where we live and what we eat and what we drink, there's some important things that we need to hold on to and if we don't have them we need to get them because those are the things that are gonna keep us together such as respect, good behavior, you know the, the basic old values that that we all grew up on and and learn that were important. I just feel like we're getting away from it and I see nothing wrong with the old system of values. We need to, we need to hold on to them and if we do I think it's gonna make us a stronger race and it's gonna help us survive into the future because we're moving into, we're in the age of information and technology and we've, we've gotta be--we've gotta chart a course and not simply wonder to wherever we may end up. Speaker 1: Well, if there's nothing else that you'd like to speak about, I wanna thank you from The HistoryMakers for taking the time. I know that you're busy, but know that this information is very valuable and we appreciate you taking the time to tell your story. Speaker 2: You're quite welcome. I appreciate the opportunity. Story_ID: 392890 Speaker 1: Okay this is my [maternal] uncle Anthony Harrison Eddings that is my mother's [Emily Eddings Dore] brother. His high school diploma when he graduated from Penn Normal, Industrial and Agriculture School [St. Helena Island, South Carolina]. Penn School after I guess the school has more history than anything else, Penn School was started by the Quakers from Pennsylvania to educate former slaves and it was started at St. Helena Island [South Carolina]. One of the first schools for freed slaves in the country. I think the most interesting thing that I like to point out about it is that this was really called the Port Royal Experiment. The reason why it was called the Port Royal Experiment because it was an experiment in deciding whether or not former black slaves could be educated and whether they could become enculturated into the American culture and so it was called the Port Royal Experiment and the Port Royal Experiment was started at Penn School at St. Helena Island for former slaves. Two ladies that first came to teach at Penn or either one of his teachers at Penn but it's always been kept with his diploma. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my [paternal] great-grandmother on my father's [Hezekiah Dore, Sr.] side. Her name was Millie Doe, D-O-E. I don't have a great deal of information about her I just have the picture. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my uncle Anthony Harrison Eddings. We just showed his diploma from Penn School. He, he was the first black magistrate in Beaufort County [South Carolina] and this is a newspaper article which is a tribute to him. He was known on St. Helena Island as Judge Eddings and this is a tribute to him in this newspaper article. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandmother Delia Doe, my father's mother. Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself when I was in second grade. It appears to be a scar but it's basically a blemish in the photograph on the what's that the left cheek? That's, that's my picture when I was in second grade. Speaker 2: This photograph is a, a picture of me when I graduated from Robert Small School [Robert Smalls School; Robert Smalls International Academy, Beaufort, South Carolina]. It's basically a graduation picture. Speaker 1: And this is a picture while I was in college at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife Vernita [Vernita Dore]. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me when during my early years of practicing law I was, I was probably in about my fourth or fifth year as a lawyer in my practice. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandmother's house, Delia Doe, and I keep making the distinction between Doe, D-O-E and Dore, D-O-R-E. About half my family uses the name Doe, D-O-E and about the other half uses D-O-R-E. The reason is because my oldest brother [Hezekiah Dore, Jr.] convinced my father that we should change our name from Doe to Dore because the name Doe is commonly referred to illustratively such as John Doe or Joe Doe and, and he didn't like that idea that it was a common name used in a lot of illustrations and so forth and convinced my father to change the name. So that's why some of us are D-O-R-E and others of us are D-O-E. Speaker 1: This is a photograph that I've been very proud of because it's taken in front of the law firm Moss, Bailey, Dore and Kuhn [Moss, Dore, Kuhn McIntyre, P.A.]. This is the white law firm that I joined in Beaufort [South Carolina]. When I joined it in 1976 it was Moss, Carter, Branton and Bailey and I later became a, a senior partner and that's just the photograph of me outside the front of the building. Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my uncle again Anthony Harrison Eddings. This is a picture of him when he was in the [U.S.] Army...