 Story_ID: 136984 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sure, it's Darryl, D-A-R-R-Y-L--middle initial W, standing for Westly-- Dennard, D-E-N-N-A-R-D. Speaker 1: Now how do you spell the Westly? Speaker 2: W-E-S-T-L-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It is September the 18th, 1957, in New York City, New York, in Harlem in fact, New York. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: My occupation is broadcast journalist and video production/marketing company owner. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January the 23rd, 2014. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMaker[s] location, which is at 1900 South Michigan Avenue in Chicago [Illinois]. Story_ID: 136985 Speaker 1: Okay, so before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --always ask that only require short answers-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --kind of like a warm-up. First one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Wow, it, it--you know, if it's a meat I have to say chicken. And so I enjoy buffalo chicken wings; I enjoy oxtails. I don't know about a favorite. You know, it depends on what I have a taste for. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think that would be blue. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: A favorite time of the year is autumn. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Haven't been to too many places, but I do enjoy the Caribbean. Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, I do, and I guess that saying would be: "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for and the evidence of things not seen." [Hebrews 11:1] Story_ID: 136986 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now I'm gonna ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Very good. Speaker 1: --but separately so we can keep them straight. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, first can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name currently is Eleanor, E-L-E-A-N-O-R, Dennard, D-E-N-N-A-R-D. Speaker 1: And what was her maiden name? Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Adamson, A-D-A-M-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what was her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth was November the 18th, 1938. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in New York City [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, in, in-- Speaker 2: In Manhattan [New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: In, in Manhattan? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: I never did a true genealogy, now did I really have the opportunity to talk extensively to my grandmother--on my grandmother in terms of my maternal grandmother--about her history, even though she helped rear me and my two sisters. So I only go pretty much back to just my grandmother. I didn't know my-- Speaker 1: Is, is this your mother's moth--mother--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Which is my mother's mother-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Lucille. Her name was Lucille Adamson. And my grandfather was Rueben Adamson. And my grandmother, you know, was a wonderful, wonderful woman and she taught me a lot about compassion, and she taught me a lot about self-reliance mainly because she was blind, and she helped raise--she raised eight children. She became blind in her twenties, as a result of cataracts and diabetes--complications from diabetes. And, and so I just remembered, in terms of when I was very young, she would bathe me and my two sisters inside the sink, inside of a small little tenement apartment building in the--in the Bronx [New York City, New York]. And she did everything. You know, she hung clothes, she cooked, and sew. And my grandfather, who died when I was very, very young--I think he died maybe in 1967 or somewhere around there--'67 [1967], '69 [1969]. I remember him primarily just in terms of on Sundays when I would spend Sundays with my grandmother. My grandfather would take me over to the steps of this theater on--it was near Brook Avenue and Willis Avenue around 139th Street in the true South Bronx [New York City, New York]. In fact, [Supreme Court] Justice [Sonia] Sotomayor is from that same neighborhood. And they had a big theater that I guess used to do vaudeville and show Spanish movies at the time. And we would just sit on the steps of the theater. And he really wouldn't read to me. I would just sit there with him and look at the funny pages. And, and so that's--I, I, I just found out to my dismay--not to my dismay, but I, I didn't know. I just found out that my maternal grandmother--I always thought that my family on my mother's side was from North Carolina, and then my mom's just corrected me. You know, we were just having one of those discussions. And she said no, you're actually--we're actually from South Carolina, I think the Charleston area of South Carolina--some, somewhere around there, and I had never known that. I always had--you know, all the way through my adulthood--always thought that my grandmother was from North Carolina. Story_ID: 136987 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, are there any stories about, about the family's migration to New York [City, New York]? Speaker 2: Not really. You know, I probably would have to talk to my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] about that. I know that they migrated to New York on my mother's side. This had to have happened before or in the early 1930s, because my mother was born in New York City, so they had already migrated up there. My grandfather [Rueben Adamson] was a World War I vet. I do know that much, and like I said before, his name was Rueben Adamson. And, and so primarily, it was just an existence. They were part of that migration from the South that arrived in Harlem [New York City, New York]. They at--they moved to Harlem, and my grand--my mother lived around 116th Street and 8th Avenue in the projects area. Well, actually it was more of the tenement build--not the tenement buildings, but the brownstones that existed over there. And, and that's pretty much where they migrated from the South to Harlem. So it could have been as early as the 1920s during that great wave of migration from the South into New York City. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your grandfather have any stories about the war--(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: No. He was not a very talkative man. You know, like, my grandfather was just a man of very, very few words. Like I said, even I would--I just remember-- you know, the few memories that I have of him is just him taking me by the hand, and then I'm going with him on a Sunday, and him opening up the, the newspapers and then passing me the little funny papers. And I would read--I would just sit there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause he-- Speaker 2: --five years old. Speaker 1: --passed away when you were--you were--you were young--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was less than--you know, if he--he had passed away in '67 [1967]--I think it was '67 [1967] or '69 [1969]. So that's '67 [1967]; I would have been ten. Or it might even been before that, you know. I'm not exactly sure. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But he was a man of very few where--words. He had--I just found out, you know, talking to my mother, that my grandmother [Lucille Adamson] had eight children. Well, she had eight living children and then she had two boys that died that I had never known. Then my mother had two additional brothers that I had never known about. And so, you know, we just started talking about family history and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so there are no--are there any stories from South Carolina that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, that's-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--told? Speaker 2: --you know, that's--and, and, and partly, I guess that's my fault, you know, even though I engage in, in chronicling the stories of others, I never really took the time to delve deeply into my own background. You know, I don't know if there is some sort of reticence on my behalf for doing so or what may even promote that particular lack of investigation, but you know, that--that's just the way it's been. And I think that some of that will be kind of highlighted in that I know a little bit more maybe about my father's [Glenn Dennard] side, only because my great-grandmother I did have a very strong relationship with growing up. But in terms of my grandmother, you know, it was--it was a super strong relationship. Don't forget she had eight other children, so you can imagine the numbers of grandchildren and-- Story_ID: 136988 Speaker 1: And we were a very close knit family. Speaker 2: Lots of cousins. Speaker 1: Lots of cousins, and I have two younger sisters, but we'll get into that I'm sure. But I have two younger sisters: Glenda [Dennard], who's a year and a half younger than I am--two years younger than I am; and, and Toya [Dennard], T-O-Y-A, who is actually eight years younger than I am. And so what would happen is that my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] always worked. And so we would spend time between my maternal grandmothers--or my maternal grandmother [Lucille Adamson]--and my paternal grandmothers, great-grandmother [Ceola Jones] and grandmother [Ollie Cammon]. As she would work, we would go back and forth to each of their houses. And it was just--you know, just a wonderful, wonderful time. You know, I can recollect when it would be hot and steamy in the South Bronx [New York City, New York], and, and people were playing. This was the Latin--the Afro-Cu--or Afro-Puerto Rican primarily--Afro-Latin experience that happened during the mid '60s [1960s]. And I remember as, as a kid when it would be very, very hot in New York [City], and you're in a tenement building, we would sleep out on the fire escape. And so we'd just open up the window to where the fire escape was, and we would spend the night in order to remain cool. And this is with my blind grandmother. I would be out on the fire escape, and she knew to take care of us, in terms of just put a little blanket out there. Fortunately, we lived on like the second--it was about the second floor. I think it was 21--building's not even there anymore, but it was 21 East Brown's Place [South Bronx, New York City, New York]. So real native New Yorkers that know the South Bronx know exactly where--the building doesn't exist anymore. When I drive through New York on my constant trips back home, I just remind my children and my grandchildren now, you know, that's where granddad, you know, used to sleep on the fire escape, or if I'll show them an old tenement building, and they see the fire escape 'cause you don't really see them here in Chicago [Illinois], you know. You know, in the summer times, we would listen to everybody playing the music in the schoolyard. And the sounds would waft through the air, and we would spend the night on the fire escape because it was hot inside. Story_ID: 136989 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] talk about growing up in, in New York [City, New York]? Did, did she grow up in Harlem [New York City, New York] or in the-- Speaker 2: She grew up in Harlem. No, she grew up in Harlem, and I was born in Harlem. And my--when I first--my sister [Glenda Dennard] and I, we didn't move to the Bronx [New York City, New York] actually until about we were four or six years old, so everything primarily was based in Harlem. And-- Speaker 1: So she went to school and everything in Harlem? Speaker 2: She went to school in, in Harlem. Indeed, she went to school in Harlem right, right near 116th Street. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, did she have any stories about, about-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she-- Speaker 1: --you know, the neighborhood-- Speaker 2: --she did. Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well, you know, her best friend--you know, I call her aunt Gloria--Gloria Pugh [ph.] is her name. And she and her best friend--my aunt is a year or two older than my mother, but they were best friends. And, and I forgot what high school she went to. She had actually told me, but I forgot what high school she went to. And my mother had to drop out of high school because she was pregnant with, with me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And--but then she went back and came back and completed and, and graduated from high school. And, and so she talks about how she met my father [Glenn Dennard], you know; and you know, they didn't know what to do and everything. And of course you know she had the baby, and, and I came around. And, and I lived with my mother, and she was still at home with her mother [Lucille Adamson] so I lived there. And it wasn't until later that my mother and father got married, actually after the birth of my, my sister. It was--you know, she talked about--you know, right after she graduated from high school, she immediately started working. You know, she worked at--this is when they still have manufacturing jobs in New York. And she was in Manhattan [New York City, New York], and I think that she worked at a, a toy manufacturer. And the thing that really, really brought that to, to life for me--or to light--was that there's this great television series, and especially me kind of loving New York and loving history. It's called 'Naked City.' And everybody--you know, a lot of people are familiar with that famous tagline. There are eight million stories in the 'Naked City.' This has been wonder (unclear)one of them. And-- Speaker 1: I think Karl Malden was in that and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Everybody--Dustin Hoffman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, you'd be surprised in terms of black actors. You know, Stirling Silliphant, who also did 'Route 66' was the writer of that. And he was very much interested in telling the--and the thing that really made it unique was that it was actually filmed on location in New York. You know, it wasn't they used New York City as the backdrop. Now you got shows, of course, that like to do that. And I'm glad for that 'cause I hate watching a show that pretends to be in New York like 'Kojak.' You would see 'Kojak' standing there on a corner that's supposed to be a New York corner. Then--'cause I try to pay attention to detail, you look and you see a red line on the curb, and you know that New York City doesn't markaide [ph.] streets; like that's an L.A. [Los Angeles, California] thing. So, like, who--you know, who are you fooling here and things like that. But 'Naked City' did--one of the stories was starring Robert Duvall. And he had been an ex-criminal, and he worked at a toy manufacturing shop. And that's where my mother worked at when she was like eighteen years old. She had just had me, and she worked at a toy manufacturer. And these are the kind of crazy toys when you would grow up in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], and they had all these like crazy little whoopee's cushions or, or x-ray glasses. This was-- Speaker 1: Now this-- Speaker 2: --the kind of place that was manufacturing those toys. Speaker 1: Finally, somebody that worked in, in an x-ray glasses factory, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And you know, if you got the back of any comic book it was like, see x-ray glasses see through, you know seethrough, you know--see through walls. Of course it didn't do anything like that, but that's--you know, that's when things were actually manufactured in the United States. Speaker 1: Okay--oh, okay, that, that, that is something. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A lot of people are seeing those ads, and you know. And imagine what they could do at school with those glasses. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --never materialized-- Speaker 2: That's right, other than give you a headache. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 136990 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard], did she have a--when she was growing up did she have an aspiration that she wanted to achieve that she, you know, talked about, 'cause some people wanna be, you know-- Speaker 2: I never spoke to my mother about what she really wanted in life. I think that what she really wanted in life I think was just to make sure that she provided for her children the best that she could. Now, in terms of aspirationally, you know, whether or not it was in the arts to be a dancer or a singer or a writer, things like that, I never knew. I knew that she has a great analytical propensity, and that exhibited itself when she did those manufacturing jobs. She moved from the manufacturing side, and then she became a cashier at the Pioneer Supermarket, which still exists to--I think it's still there right on 126th Street and Lenox Avenue [later, Malcolm X Boulevard, Harlem, New York City, New York]. And this is right across the street from a lot of people that are watching now Sylvia's [Restaurant]. And--but Sylvia's didn't even exist at that time, you know, when she started working as a cashier there. And so she was always very, very agile, in terms of being able to figure out numbers and do math and stuff like that. Story_ID: 136991 Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: That [Pioneer Supermarket] was near the big corner of 125th [Street, New York City, New York] where the, the speakers would, but-- Speaker 1: Exactly. No, I-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I--you know, and as we go into and you wanna find out more, I'll tell you an interesting story about when the riots broke out in the '70s [1970s]--'68 [1968], '70s [1970s], you know. And I happened to be right there in Harlem [New York City, New York] when they broke out, and you know, I got a chance to see some incredible things, 'cause my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] was a, a, a supermarket cashier at the Pioneer Supermarket there on 126th [Street] and Lenox [Avenue, later Malcolm X Boulevard, Harlem, New York, New York]. And I started working there as a stock boy--a stock and delivery boy--at about ten--ten years old I think. And I would go down there and help put stuff--and you know, I got paid off the books of course--and help stocked the shelves. And then I would help people with their packages. I would pack the groceries. And even to this day, I get kind of upset when we don't engage with vigor at whatever job we decided that we want to participate in. As a stock--as a packer, I took pride in the fact that you had to learn to take the heaviest items and put them inside of a brown shopping bag and put them at the base, and then build the lighter items on top of that so nothing will get crushed and the weight would be equally distributed. And then you place that bag into another bag, because many times people had a shopping cart. And you had to make sure that these two bags could fit identically inside the shopping cart, and you kind of built upon that. And it was just, you know, looking at that attention to detail was something I learned, you know, having to stock shelves. When, you know, you had these very small supermarkets-you didn't have mega supermarkets in New York [New York] at the time--you have very small shelf space, so you had to make sure that the cans were stacked evenly and identically on top of each other. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, there was no room for irregularity. Speaker 2: A lot of stocking going on I guess, you know-- Speaker 1: Well, there was. Speaker 2: --in--(simultaneous)--small-- Speaker 1: You know, because people-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --yeah, it was a small store and you know, you did your canned goods and in terms of your corn and your green peas and stuff like that--had a small little meat department. And then, you know, the checkout was ma--my mother punching in the information, and then ringing it up, and then figuring--and the other thing that, you know, that was unique is when you went to buy groceries--and this is something that I think when you talk about my mother's aspirations; she always had this analytical mind is that when people went to buy groceries back then, it wasn't like today where automatically you know how much an item costs. And to make things easier for you, they end up--they don't put that the item is twenty-nine cents, you know, or sixty-nine--or even if it is sixty-nine cent a pound, you don't have to figure it out because the scale electronically does that for you. But you have to realize that as a young person, if somebody got three and a half pounds of, of sweet potatoes and it's nineteen cent a pound, you have to figure out how much is three and a half pounds' worth. And, you know, so-- Speaker 2: It's much different from today when you press a picture of a hamburger--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It, it, it very much is, and you know, I--you know, I, I--you know, people get kind of--well, how did you figure that out? I'm like, you know, it's kind of simple. You know, all you do is just round up. If it's nineteen cent a pound, and it's three pounds, then what's that? That's sixty cents, you know. And so if it's two and a half pounds, then I just take half of that off; it's fifty cents, so. Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But that's another story for two and a half pounds of potatoes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that's a easy way to kind--kind of do it there. Story_ID: 136992 Speaker 1: So let me--let me go to your father's side. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, it is Glenn Westly Dennard. Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: You know, that is--I think it was somewhere around March 17th I think, and also '38 [1938] or '39 [1939], one of the two. Speaker 1: Okay and where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Tampa, Florida, and then he moved to New York [City] I think when he was about two, from what I understand. Speaker 1: Okay, so he's raised in New York City? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: I had a--my grandmother, who I didn't call her grandma. I called my [grand]mother on my mother's [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] side, whose name was Lucille [Adamson], like I said before, I called her Ma. So that was grand--it was either Grandma or Ma. And my grandmother on my father's side she didn't want us to call her grandma, so we called her Ollie. Her name was Ollie Cammon. Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell-- Speaker 2: O-L-L-I-E-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--okay. Speaker 2: Cammon, C-A-M-M-O-N. And, and then my grandma-great-grandmother, her name, who was Ollie's mother, was Ceola, C-E-O-L-A, J-O-N-E-S. And I never really knew--my father was a very light-skinned man, almost reddish--ruddy in color, but he had real kinky red hair. And, and it wasn't a vibrant red; it was more like a burnt red. And so people--his nickname was Red. And, and he was a very cool, suave, debonair type of individual, and just matter of fact, and--but you know, he had a darker side, you know. So he, he was incarcerated and you know, got busted for drugs and things of that nature. And he was a hustler in Harlem [New York City, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, so was, was he--so there were periods of time when he wasn't with the family--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I remember distinctly when he was sentenced--when he was sentenced to jail. And he--I think he did maybe a year--a year and a half. And I had to go up to the court--the court complex in the Bronx [New York City, New York] and, and witness that. And then he came home, you know, a little bit later after that. Speaker 1: Na--now was he--how old were you when he was sentenced? Speaker 2: I think I may have been about maybe eight--somewhere around there. I was about eight-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --eight or nine. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and, and was he able to, you know, get back into society, you know, I mean, and, and function-- Speaker 2: No, he just pretty much after that--you know, he was always functionable--he was always functioning. He was a very, very renaissance type individual. He painted, and enjoyed music, and, and hung out with a lot of luminaries from the world of jazz--Sonny Rollins and this brother by the name of Pucho [Henry "Pucho" Brown]--matter of fact, Pucho is still around, and he has a band out called Pucho and His Latin Allstars [sic, Pucho & His Latin Soul Brothers], with the Four Tops and people like that. But, you know, he pri--primarily just ended up hustling--what they say hustling in the streets-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --until he died. And he died, you know, still out, but you know, it's believed that he was murdered and stuff like that in Harlem. Speaker 1: So what--when did he pass? Speaker 2: About 1986 I believe it was. Speaker 1: Okay, so he would have been in his fifties or-- Speaker 2: Right, in his forties actually. Speaker 1: Oh, forties, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Late forties, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Yeah, all right-- Story_ID: 136993 Speaker 1: So did--now did, did your father [Glenn Dennard] have any stories of growing up in-- Speaker 2: My dad was, was a man of few words, you know, but he tried to poignant in terms of his advice to me. And so when he came out I remember he had a job as a installer of--what was it? It was--in New York [City, New York] they have what is called these security--they had these doors that had this metal--this stainless rod that latches onto the door and-- Speaker 1: It's bolted to the floor. Speaker 2: It's a bit--there's a hole-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --there's a hole in the floor, and then there's this heavy metal rod. And the rod slips into the lock and then--and it's like that's a security mechanism for you trying to break into the door. And so my father used to install those inside of tenement buildings throughout the Bronx [New York City, New York]. It was called Fox Lock [Fox Police Lock Company, New York City, New York]; that's what it was. And, and then he would--he would do that. And I remember, you know, traveling around with him as he would do that for a little bit. And, and you know, he would sit me down, and he would say, "Son, and life is a tough breast, but you gotta suck it." You know, those weren't his exact words, but you know, that's the kind of advice that my father would offer me. You know, I'd say okay, dad. You know, I'll--I, I--I'll think I know what you mean (laughter), you know what I'm saying, but at seven, eight years old and you hear that, you know. And no matter what you do just be a man; just be a man; do what you gotta do. You know, those were the kind of, of pithy sayings that my father would pass on to me. Speaker 1: What did his father do? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, I just--and I'm trying to--the thing is, my grandmother [Ollie Cammon], if you look at pictures of her, she looked like Lena Horne. She had straight hair, very, very sharp cheekbones and angular face, very beautiful woman. And like Lena, you know, people would look at her and say wow, you know. She was very light-skinned. And, and so I didn't know. You know, I, I--it didn't really dawn on me or something until I got--later, until I got much older. You know, 'cause my great-grandmother [Ceola Jones] was jet black, African, strong, and tall. She had the same high cheekbones and everything else that you could see in terms of my great--my grandmother . But you could see that she had to--had to marry somebody halfway white, or whoever. I don't know who my paternal great-grandfather was. I don't know what happened even to this day. You know, I tried to glean that information from my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard], in terms of, you know, who was--who was Ollie's father, (laughter), you know-- Speaker 1: It was sort of like--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Likely, it could have been somebody white. Speaker 2: Oh, it could have been. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Exactly, very much so. And it could have been something where my great-grandmother may have been raped. I don't know, you know, but I know that, you know, she loved--they loved each other, and they lived with each other until their passing. Story_ID: 136994 Speaker 1: You had started to say something about the migration [Great Migration], about how we don't know-- Speaker 2: Well, I, I just think that, you know, when you look at the--Chicago [Illinois], it's kind of easy. There were two great waves of migration that occurred. The first wave, of course, was after World War I [WWI], when you had a people that were in the South that migrated up--the South and also some of the outlying mid-states that migrated to Chicago following World War I, because the Chicago Defender went out there and said look, there are jobs now out here. And then the second great migration happened right after World War II [WWII], when there were also new jobs that had been created as a result of the war effort. Then what happened we know that during that first migration, the majority of them came from the southern states, in terms of maybe North Carolina and some of the outlying states. And then they moved to the southern tip of Chicago and the southern area of Chicago we, we now call Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] and stuff like that. And then the second wave that happened later found the migration over to the West Side of Chicago, and that tended to be from the Arkansas region and places like that--Alabama, Arkansas--and then they moved up there. And so in terms of New York [City, New York], my father [Glenn Dennard] and his family, you know, they moved and just like my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] did or her family, they moved to Harlem [New York City, New York]. Harlem was the place where you, you sought to make your living. And then as Harlem expanded, it expanded into the southern area of the Bronx [New York City, New York]. Because if you know anything about proximity or the layout in New York, you have the tip of Harlem 159th Street--158th Street, around there. Then you have the Willis Avenue Bridge, 138th Street Bridge [Madison Avenue Bridge, New York, New York], and those go directly into the Bronx. Speaker 1: The old Yankee Stadium and all-- Speaker 2: That's exactly right. You know, you go right into it. You know, actually, it's a little bit south of Yankee Stadium, and then as you head up further, it goes directly into Yankee Stadium. And so from a migration perspective, in terms of seeking housing--affordable housing--you move out of Manhattan [New York City, New York], then you go directly over the bridge into the Bronx. And then that enclave in the Bronx was the southern tip of the Bronx, henceforth, all these black and Latino people living there. And so what happens? It becomes known as the what? It was always the South Bronx, but euphemistically it became known as the black area, the South Bronx [New York City, New York]. And so as I grew up, I would say I'm from the South, even though when I was raised in New York City, I was raised around 183rd Street and Bathgate Avenue, which is near 3rd Avenue, which is closer to Fordham [University, New York City, New York] in the Jewish sections--in the Jewish and Italian sections of the Bronx. Then the South Bronx, even though people would ask me--they say what, what, you know, where are you from? And I would say the South Bronx because euphemistically it means that's the black area of the Bronx, even though it's not the southern tip of--Fordham Road is not the South Bronx. Willis Avenue, 138th Street, that's the south tip of the Bronx, so--you know, just a euphemism to say the South Bronx. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: And that migration, that's what happened there. And that's exactly what happened in terms of my family. We moved from Manhattan, over the bridge, into the Bronx. Story_ID: 136995 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now was your--was your father [Glenn Dennard]--did he finish school-- Speaker 2: I think--yeah, he graduated high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he used to paint and, and enjoyed music. And I remember him taking me, hanging out with him, and we--took me to the Apollo Theater [Harlem, New York City, New York] one time. And as he was at the Apollo Theater, he was backstage, you know, getting high with some of the performers. And-- Speaker 1: You said, said he's friends with Sonny Rollins. Speaker 2: Sonny Rollins, yes--Sonny Rollins. If I mentioned the name, he, he knew my father, yes. Speaker 1: And your father was an art--an artist. He was painting-- Speaker 2: He was painting. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He was--he was a painter. Speaker 1: What kind of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Artist? Speaker 1: --did he do? Okay. Speaker 2: Abstract, things like that, you know. Speaker 1: Right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He--and he loved music, you know. And then he also loved like informing us on history. So he would get us black history books at the time, black history coloring books that had just came out. He got me a book about Greek and Roman mythology that was a coloring book where I learned about Achilles and how Achilles was dumped in the pool. And the mother dumped him in there, and his skin in a sense became indestructible except for that one area where she held him up by his heel. And then, of course, you know that he was shot there in that heel and ended up dying, you know, so; and books of poetry; and he would also get my sister and I--my sisters [Glenda Dennard and Toya Dennard] and I--he would buy us records. And we would literally listen to--in addition to taking us to the movies--my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] and father taking us to the movies--he would also have us listening to records. And then he would have us listening to jazz records. So on a Sunday, as we were still living in Manhattan [New York City, New York] at the time, and I wish we could have stayed there because if they could have bought that that would have been incredible. But we were right around 96th Street and near Amsterdam Avenue. And I remember we would walk over to Central Park, and he would have a photographer come and take pictures of us. And during that Sunday--I remember on Sundays my mother would be cooking. And they were very, very young at the time, 'cause they had us as teenagers. And I remember two songs in particular that were always played on the console stereo. And one was Dinah Washington, 'What a Difference a Day Makes.' And the other one was, was 'Song for My Father,' by Horace Silver. [Musical beats] and so, you know, I was always filled with jazz, and he had an incredible jazz collection. And--but you know, I just remember, you know, he was tied into that kind of hustle aspect of New York City. And as I got older, I would kind of hang out with him. And my cousin actually ended up spending more time with him on the hustle side. 'Cause, you know, he kind of aware--made me aware of the streets of New York and how to navigate the streets. I knew how to navigate them to a certain extent, but he also showed me how to kind of make money. And we did things legitimately, but you know, he's like hey, this is how you do this; this is--you know, we're gonna go over here; and you can open up the doors in front of Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York City, New York], and people will give you money for helping open up the door. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, 'cause always--with so many people I guess it's always something to do--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, it was always-- Speaker 1: --if you-- Speaker 2: --something to do-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and New York was our playground. And I think I mentioned to you before. Since my grandmother [Lucille Adamson] on my mother's side had eight children, my cousins were my surrogate brothers, so I would spend time with my cousins--my male cousins--during the summer, and they would spend time with me. And you know, we would go over there and spend maybe two weeks spent--we called it spending the night. And I would just spend two or three weeks with them, maybe even longer sometimes, maybe almost an entire month just spending time with my cousins. And then during the year, of course, on weekends get ready to go over my cousins' house and hang out with them and stuff like that. And they always had kind of different jobs, and so I would learn how to hustle the streets with them. Story_ID: 136996 Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story about how your parents [Eleanor Adamson Dennard and Glenn Dennard] met that they tell? Or did they always (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I think--I think yeah. My mother told me she saw him. You know, he was kind of unique looking. You know, he's this light-skinned brother with red hair. You know, he was a very natty dresser and stuff like that, and real cool. And she told my aunt--she goes that's him; that's, that's gonna be my husband. And they were in high school, and that's what happened. They got together and I popped out before they were married so (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 136997 Speaker 1: So, so when you think about your parents' [Eleanor Adamson Dennard and Glenn Dennard] personalities and their, their interests, their talents, their dispositions, how they look even-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Who, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: You know, I, I look like my mother, but I look very much like my father. I think in terms of my demeanor and my actions, I'm very much like my father. In terms of my compassion and, and sense of--and sense of largesse, a lot of that comes from my mother. But also my father was a person of fair play in trying to give back, so that came equally from both of them, and the sense of respect and, and being your very best. And then, you know, once again, I would be remiss if I didn't say that it wasn't just mom and dad. You know, it was also the influences of my great-grandmother [Ceola Jones] and my grandmothers that played a dramatic role in help shaping me into the individual that I am. Story_ID: 136998 Speaker 1: Now your two sisters [Glenda Dennard and Toya Dennard] as a--they're both younger than you, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And they're--one is eight years younger-- Speaker 2: Right, and one is two years younger. Speaker 1: Two years, okay. What are they doing now? Speaker 2: One [Toya Dennard] is--works at Yankee Stadium [Bronx, New York City, New York], and that's the youngest. And she manages concession stands there and/or concession stand at Yankee Stadium. And my oldest sister [Glenda Dennard] is a phenomenal--not homemaker, but also does in-home care for people that may be indigent or for children that, that need overseeing and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so both of them graduated from high school. My other sister, Toya, actually went to the college that I graduated, and she was following in my footsteps. And then my mother's sister had died--abruptly died--and she left a infant baby at the time. And so my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] said she couldn't really stop working in terms of what she was doing, so my sister selfishly--selflessly I should say--stopped going to school, and then she went back to New York City and helped raise, at least from infancy until he got to be about two or three years old, my cousin. And my cousin now is twenty-six years old--twenty-seven years old, and he only knows my mother. Then after that, my mother primarily took over the raising of him, but it was my sister that was the stopgap person that allowed us to make sure that the baby had a nurturing environment. Unfortunately, she never went on to finish school, but she was selfless in terms of just saying hey, there's a need here. I'm gonna dedicate myself to help take care of one of our own, and then my mother filled in. And so he only--even though my mother is his aunt he only knows her as mom, you know. He--she was his legal guardian, and that's his mother, you know, my mother. And it's not unlike, you know, a number of grandmothers having to raise grandchildren as the primary caregiver. Story_ID: 136999 Speaker 1: Okay, so the household when you were growing up was, was it just you--you, your sisters [Glenda Dennard and Toya Dennard], and your mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] and father [Glenn Dennard], or did grandparents live with you? Speaker 2: No, no-- Speaker 1: 'Cause I know-- Speaker 2: --the grandparents--what happened--let me give you a great idea. My grandmother [Lucille Adamson] lived on Prospect Avenue around 169th Street in Prospect Avenue [Bronx, New York City, New York]. And then my grandmother [Ollie Cammon] and great-grandmother [Ceola Jones] lived literally down the block from us. And so we lived at 2235 Bathgate Avenue, and my grandmother lived at 22--we lived at 2255; they lived at 2235. And so they had like a two-family house that they lived in. One family at the lower section and then they lived on top. And when my mother had to go to work, my grandmother and my great-grandmother would watch over my sister and I--my sisters and I. Speaker 1: This is an extended family situation. Speaker 2: That's exactly--I said--that's why I said-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I can't say that the influence came from mom and dad. The influence was that, you know, when I came home from school, my mother was working. You know, she also help pay. You know, she paid my great-grandmother 'cause my grandmother also worked as a cashier. And she was at the Polo Grounds, which was near the old Ebbets Field outside--in Harlem [New York City, New York]. And so as they were working, we went to neighborhood schools. And so we would get out of the school right on the corner and just--and as we--and go right over to my great-grandmother's. And then as we got older, we didn't have to do that because I was old enough, and we just--we still watched them, in terms of my great-grandmother and grandmother. And they ended up moving to a different apartment, but they weren't taking care of us at that time. Because by the time I was fourteen, fifteen years old, there was no need for babysitting because I would watch--my sisters were in school, and then my mother came home at an appropriate time. So by the time she got home, we were all ready for her. Story_ID: 137000 Speaker 1: Now you've described growing up on some level already, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, it was absolutely incredible. You know, it was--you know, New York [City, New York] is the palette that shapes me, you know, that colors my life, in terms of whether it be the Lower EastSside and my father [Glenn Dennard] taking us when we had to go get our schools clothes, and we would go to Delancey Street--the Delancey Street area, even though you didn't shop on Delancey. You actually shopped on Orchard Street. And we would go there and buy our clothes. And we would stop at Katz's [Delicatessen]. And I still today go down to Katz's and get my roast beef sandwiches and stuff like that. And my father would tell me, son, this is an important place. All of our politicians would come here, and you know, and they would stop here 'cause this is an important voting area. It's the old Jewish section of New York--the East Side, the Lower East Side of New York. And so you had that. And then I grew up right near Little Italy. So if you look at the movie that actually tells a lot about the neighborhood that I grew up in, it would be called 'The Seven-Ups.' And that's with Roy Scha--Roy Scheider and Tony Lo Bianco-'The Seven-Ups.' And the reason I say that is because I remember when they were filming that movie, and it took place right in Little Italy around Arthur Avenue of the Bronx [New York City, New York]. And then when Roy Scheider is talking to Toby--Tony Lo Bianco, they're actually talking, and they're talking outside of this big schoolyard, this big facility. That was my high school, DeWitt Clinton High School [Bronx, New York City, New York]. And so, you know, here it is you have the Jewish influences of New York via Fordham Road; then you also had the Italian influences; of course, you had the black influences everywhere; and then you also had the Puerto Rican and Latino influences, all kind of melting together. I was involved with the Boy Scouts, and we had a, a Quaker scout master by the name of Dale Embick [ph.]. And so we had Germans, and Cubans, and Puerto Ricans, and, and Irish, and, and just everybody, you know, all part of this troop, Troop 298 in the Bronx. And it was an incredible, incredible experience growing up. I went to integrated schools. It was P.S. 59 [The Community School of Technology] in the Bronx, and that was from first grade--never went to kindergarten--started at first grade--first grade through fifth grade. And it went up to fifth grade. Then for sixth grade I went to EBB, Elizabeth Barrett Browning High School [sic, Elizabeth Barrett Browning Junior High School, P.S.] 115 [Bronx, New York City, New York] just for a year or maybe for two years. I went there for two years and--'cause in New York they have a thing called junior high school. And so you--so from fifth grade--so you go from first to fifth grade; then from seventh to ninth grade you go to a junior high school. So I went to junior high school. Actually, like I said, I went to Elizabeth Barrett Browning for sixth grade; then I went to junior high school 45 [Thomas C. Giordano Middle School 45, Bronx, New York City, New York]. And it's interesting. The reason I say that is that junior high school 45 was right near Little Italy, and that was an experience, you know, walking through Little Italy to get to high--to get to junior high school. And Tony Curtis actually went to my junior high school. And then from my junior high school I went to DeWitt Clinton High School. And you know, if I were to give you the list of people that graduated from DeWitt Clinton- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's-- Speaker 2: --absolutely incredible--white, black. You know, it was just an incredible list. Speaker 1: That's right, it's a well-known, well-known school. Story_ID: 137001 Speaker 1: So when you were in--as a--as a young person, what were you interested in? Did you foresee what you're doing now when you were-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: You did? Speaker 2: When, when I was in high school [at DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York City, New York], I remember that--and she was--she was mimicked on 'Saturday Night Live.' And if you remember Gilda Radner, and she would do "Hi, I'm Roseanne Roseannadanna." And actually, the name of that person was Rose Anne Scamardella. And Rose Anne Scamardella was a--she was a reporter-anchor for 'Eyewitness News' in New York [City]. And this was the same news station that Geraldo Rivera did the big Willowbrook [State School, New York City, New York] stories. So here 'Eyewitness News' is just starting as a format and stuff like that. And I remember I was in this advanced reading class at my elementary school. And in this reading class we used to have to read the New York Times everyday. And at first I thought I wanted to be a newspaper reporter. And then with the onset of 'Eyewitness News,' and I was in high school, I decided that I wanted to do broadcast news reporting, and because Rose Anne Scamardella had came to our high school and did a story. And I said wow, look at that; that's kind--that's what I wanna do. Speaker 1: Okay, so was this the first time you sa--you know, you, you witnessed a live-- Speaker 2: It was the first time that I actually saw it actually being done, but I always enjoyed journalism, you know, when I was younger back in--as I mentioned, reading the New York Times and kind of falling in love with storytelling. But then I decided that when I was in high school and I was involved in--at the high school level was a program called College Bound that--and this was an all-boys high school in the Bronx [New York City, New York]. I was in College Bound, and then I was also in Upward Bound at Fordham University in New York City [New York]-- Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: --in the Bronx-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at the Rose Hill Campus. So I had these two external programs that were steering me in the direction of the importance of education. That was something that was stressed, because I think it's important to note that I had--nobody in my family had ever graduated from college, and this is something that trouble my grand--my grandmother [Ollie Cammon] was a brilliant woman. She read fastidiously, and, and she always regretted the fact that she didn't have a formal education to ma--to the extent that she would write me letters while I was in college, explaining to me the necessity of, of graduating. And you know, I'm sure I'll go onto it as I talk about my personal life. But I remember she would say--you know, she would come up and sometimes say I'm not stupid; I'm not stupid. I'm--you know, your grandmother's smart. And I'm like, you know, Ollie, I would never even think something like that. You know, because a lot of times I think she equated a formal education as being a barometer of one's intelligence. And none of my aunts or uncles or anybody had ever graduated from college, you know, and nobody really even owned a home. This was just a regular existence that, that you know, a lot of people from New York City had, you know. You lived in a tenement building or you lived in an apartment building. You didn't own that. Story_ID: 137002 Speaker 1: And so because of these programs like Upward Bound and College Bound, I had the opportunity. I did really, really well in high school [at DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York City, New York], especially during my junior year. And because of the height of affirmative action occurring at that time, especially with regard to college admissions, I had the opportunity to go to a number of schools. So I went to Fordham University [New York City, New York] with the Upward Bound program, and took an English course, and got a "B" in that. And then I got accepted at Fordham; I got accepted at LIU [Long Island University, Brookville, New York]; I got accepted at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I didn't know anything about HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], but I did get accepted at Morehouse. Because the reason why I got accepted--I'm gone tell you a few more schools--is because, since I was involved in these college programs, their main raison d'etre was your gonna fill out applications to all these schools 'cause you got good grades, and I ended up getting accepted. I got accepted at Columbia University [New York City, New York], I got accepted at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], and Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts], and like I said, Morehouse. And then I got accepted at the four state schools that I applied to. And-- Speaker 2: So were you always a good student in school and? Speaker 1: I was a decent student especially in high school. You know, I think I started to flourish then. In my junior year I had really, really good grades. Speaker 2: Did you have a mentor in high school-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --or was there anybody that took a special in, in-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --interest in you or? Speaker 1: I think that the mentors were these programs. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Upward Bound and College Bound. So I had--you know, they made sure that--you know, they were like, Upward Bound was designed on Saturdays we had to go take refresher courses or remediation courses in English and writing and in things like that to make sure that when it came time to doing college level work you had that ability. And then College Bound made sure that whatever track you were on in terms of all of your classes at school, you were on the right track to gain college admissions to a good school. And then they also did extra correct--extracurricular activities. Like, we would to go to--we would go to plays. So I remember in 1974, '75 [1975]--I graduated in '75 [1975]--we went to see all of these great plays. You know, I saw 'The Wiz' on Broadway. I saw 'That Championship Season' on Broadway. I saw 'The Me Nobody Knows'--you know, this really incredible experience that was part of the Upward Bound and College Bound experiences. And they had counselors there that one on one said, this is what you need to do, Darryl. This is how you do that, you know. Let's make sure that these applications are sent out on time. And that's why they had that bridge program. And during the summer what we would do is that with Fordham University we would actually live on campus for four weeks--four to five weeks--and engage in the real college experience. Story_ID: 137003 Speaker 1: Well, they say middle school is a time of crisis in a lot of--especially for black males, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --whether they're gonna finish school-- Speaker 2: I would say even earlier than that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would say even earlier than that. I would say--you know, I do a lot in terms of mentoring young boys, and I would say around third grade nowadays. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They kind of become disinterested if you don't keep them hooked. It begins at about third grade. You know, I don't know if that's considered middle school. I still consider that kind of like elementary school. Middle school I look at seventh, eighth, ninth grade, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 137004 Speaker 1: I know you said earlier that you were working as a--doing stock and bagging groceries at the--at the stores-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --where you mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] was a cashier--Pioneer Food Market-- Speaker 2: Pioneer Food Market [sic, Pioneer Supermarket]. Speaker 1: Yeah, and-- Speaker 2: They called it supermarket even though it was in a--nothing like a supermarket where we enjoy nowadays. Speaker 1: Right, right, but you know, were you ever--I mean, so your father [Glenn Dennard] is hustling basically. And you said your cousin, you know, really followed in--followed behind your father in that terms of--in terms of hustling and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --picking up-- Speaker 2: But he also taught me how to hustle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and, and part of hustling was working. You know, you, you--you know, I, I remember I used to shine shoes. And you know, I would go up to Fordham Road with a buddy of mine and he was white. And I made my own shoeshine box, and go shine shoes for twenty-five cents. And sometimes the fact that they saw a young black kid and a white kid ten--twelve years old working together, you know, they give you a dollar, so I was shining shoes. And I remember at ten years-old, they had a women's store right on 182nd Street--183rd [Street] near 3rd Avenue, between 3rd and Bathgate Avenue, and I saw a purple dress there. And I said I'm gone buy that. And I actually saved up the money from working as a stock boy and shining shoes to buy that dress for my mother. And I bought that dress out of my own money, and I'm only like ten, eleven years old. And then as I got to be fourteen I had three jobs. And they were phenomenal jobs that helped shape me into the individual that I am today. One was a counselor for--'cause I had to get working papers. At fourteen in New York [City] you get what called working papers. You go down to the state building--county building--and you know, they give you a little physical, and then they give you a blue card. And these are your official working papers, and--'cause of the child labor laws. And I was a youth counselor, and then I used to work at-- Speaker 1: At, at age fourteen? Speaker 2: At age fourteen, yeah. Speaker 1: I would think-- Speaker 2: I was a youth counselor. Speaker 1: Well, what, what age youth were you counseling? Speaker 2: They were for the younger kids that were involved in the summer program at the Salvation Army and also at Our Lady of Salvation Church on Washington Avenue. And so, you know, we would go there and there would be younger kids, and you would just help in terms of counseling the younger kids. Speaker 1: In terms of the activities and-- Speaker 2: The activities-- Speaker 1: --and during the summer? Speaker 2: --during the summer. And then I also worked as a--actually it was just store support at the corner delicatessen that was owned by Joey [ph.] and his Italian family. And so I would, you know, take care of the register and cut meats and things like that that you do at a grocery store. And you know, it was a corner store. It wasn't a full grocery store, but it was a corner Italian deli, and I worked there. And then the third job that I had was working with this brother called Crazy James. And Crazy James was his--he had to be maybe in his thirties at the time. He was young bro--you know, he was relatively young. I just remember, you know. He wasn't old, and he was hustler. You know, he worked like maybe as a--excuse me--he worked as maybe like a plumber or something like that or--you know, or a handyman, and the he had a pickup truck. And so then he would grab me and another one of my boys and, and then he would pick me up in the Bronx [New York City, New York]. And we would go in his pickup truck over to Hunts Point [Bronx, New York City, New York], and that's where they would sell all the fruit and the fruits that's getting ready to rot. And you get it for really, really cheap prices--inexpensive prices. And then we would load these boxes of fruit, whether it's cantaloupe or watermelons or potatoes. And you know, you get it at a great price. Then we would take it and we would drive through Harlem [New York, New York], whether on 125th Street and like Amsterdam [Avenue], or we would go to 145th Street and maybe 8th Avenue. And then we would just set up on the corner there, and then we would sell the cantaloupes. Say here, "Ma'am, would you like some cantaloupes," and the cantaloupes would be like three for a dollar. And you know, the woman would come by, and the older women they would say "Boy, is that sweet?" "Yes, Ma'am, it's sweet; it's sweet," you know, and then, you know, you cut it open and stuff like that. And so I was hustling with him, so I was working, you know, those three jobs during that summer when I was fourteen. Story_ID: 137005 Speaker 1: --Acquire any broadcasting experience in high school [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York City, New York]? Speaker 2: In high school--in junior high--in elementary school. I don't know. You know, I, I tell people--because I also teach broadcasting--teach journalism and, and I've been a college administrator, and I tell people all the time that the actual on-air portion of broadcasting is more theatrics. You know that's the theatrics; that's--and the strength of journalism is your ability to write and tell a story, and to tell a story eloquently and precisely and also in a balanced fashion. So I think that those aspects, in terms of the theatrics of broadcasting presentation, and voice, and, and inflection, and things of that nature, you know, they came kind of early, because I just had such a rich, rich education. And this was the school that was literally across the street from me, P.S. 59 [The Community School of Technology, New York City, New York]. You know, we had a glee club where we would put on these lavish productions, in terms of, you know, singing songs and, and staging. And then I remember I was in 'Peter and the Wolf' and had been going to young people's concerts. You know, in New York [City] they did a lot, in terms of the educa--I'm just enamored of the education that I receive there in the Bronx [New York City, New York]. You know, I, I, I can't speak highly--more highly of it. You know, I didn't pay a dime for it. This was a regular public school--neighborhood school education--neighborhood school education where, like I said before, you know, I was in like five--in New York they tended to track you back then. So if you were in 5-1 or 5-2, those were the best classes. You know, that's where you kind of put your advanced students. And I, I don't think they do that. I don't think they discriminate like they do, you know (laughter). They do that on tend--you know, you could tell who's in like, your advanced--they'll call it honors and stuff like that. They were kind of blatant about it. This is 5-1, 5-2, 5-3, 5-4, 5-5, 5-6-5-6, you know, you were having problems there. But if you were in 5-1 or 5-2, you know, you knew you were pretty much doing well. And so I had, you know, just in terms of just this very, very well-rounded education. And then as I got to junior high school, you know, we had to read [William] Shakespeare, and you know, and quote [Mark] Twain and, and things like that. And then also in junior high school, I remember there was an instructor or teacher by the name of Stephen Bast [ph.], and I'd failed to look him up. But he was also teaching at NYU [New York University, New York City, New York] and he taught a film class. He taught a film class at my junior high school, and I used to make films back then. That's what I do now with my production company. But he taught us how to make films back when I was in junior high school. In another class that we did in junior--and this is the thing that really--my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] still has the examples of the woodworking class and also the clay-making class. We had a pottery class. This is all in junior high school, where we literally made pottery from clay dust. That's how big the studio was. And so we would go into--this is junior high school. And we would take the regular clay, and as we took the regular clay, you add water to it and then you knead it to get all the air bubbles out of it and stuff like that. And throw it on the, the, the, the table to, you know, knead it and cut it up and stuff, and then put it on a potter's wheel. And I was doing that in junior high school, woodworking, film making, pottery, pottery from scratch, not pottery from here's a piece of clay and you know, Play-Doh it thing--no. Put it in the kiln, learn how--you know, learn how that if you didn't get all the air bubbles out, what's gonna happen is that piece of clay is gonna crack once it's fired. And this is all in junior high school, man. And then go to high school, and in high school, you know, you are taking these great courses. And, in addition to that, you know, because we were such an academically active school and competitive school, you had to pass swimming at my high school. You could not graduate school, just to show you an emphasis of kids doing extra correct--curricular activities. You couldn't graduate high school unless you graduated from a semester of swimming, and this is no-joke swimming. This is like, fifth period winter or either summer--winter or fall semester, you had to go in the water every day. Fifth period may have been your swim period. And then you always did it around lunch, so you had a chance to dry off. But whatever period that was, you did swimming, and then you went to lunch, and then finished up class. What's happening like that? You know, things like that don't happen nowadays. And so, you know, you look at the education. It's just--and the, the sad reality is, is that you have kids that have really no exposure to these types of great experiences-- Story_ID: 137006 Speaker 1: You know, in New York [City, New York], like I said before, you know, they were just really, really fastidious about hey, we're going to expose you to different things. And that's what Upward Bound and College Bound was all about, exposure. We're take you on a college tour; gonna take you to Broadway so you learn the etiquette of being quiet; gonna take you to young persons co--Young People's Concert by Leonard Bernstein so that way you know--you know, what it's like to see a ballet, an opera performed, and a [New York] Philharmonic Orchestra play. And these were all the things that helped shape me, in addition--so, you know, if you--if you kind of look at that and juxtapose that in terms of going to Lincoln Center [for the Performing Arts, New York City, New York]--and my cousin grew up in the projects right adjacent to Lincoln Center. And so what we would do as kids is that we would go to Lincoln Center, and look at people go into the opera at night, and open up the doors for them and say, "Hello, have a good evening," and they would give us, you know, a little tip for opening up the doors as they pull up to Alice Tully Hall. And then we'd go through the underpass and through the subway area there, and then right outside of Lincoln Center is projects where my cousin and my, my aunt and uncle lived. So, you know, these were the kind of experience going to--they had a, a delicatessen--they had a restaurant at the base of Lincoln Center called Footlights. And the person would go, "Fifty cents minimum charge." And it was the honor system, so you would go there and you would say this is what I had. And then at the end, you would go to the line and say this is what I had, and then they would charge you. So we would go in (laughter) and say--eat a hamburger and you know, maybe a, a, a, a, a frank or a hotdog--you know, we called them franks in New York--and then say yo, I had French fries, man. That's fifty cents; that's twenty-five cents (unclear). I had French fries and a soda; that's fifty cents. Because the person, when you would come in, would say fifty cents minimum charge. And so you would ever do what the minimum was, even though you ate a whole lot more (laughter). You know, it was like--you just knew about these little get-overs that you had. Story_ID: 137007 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now when, when you were in high school [at DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York City, New York] did you--when you were on the verge of graduation, were there--did, did you have-- Speaker 2: There was another mentor there. I'm sorry, but go ahead. I don't wanna (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay, go, go ahead--go ahead. Speaker 2: No, no, there--was Greg--was it--I think it was Greg Perry [ph.]. It was either Greg Perry or Greg King [ph.] is his name. And he saw me. I was a skinny little kid, but I think I was a sophomore at the time. I was a sophomore, 'cause in, in high school in New York [City], you had junior high school, and junior high school went up to ninth grade, and then you began high school at tenth, eleventh, and twelfth grade. And Greg saw me doing gymnastics. Now we had a world class gymnastics team at DeWitt Clinton High School, you know. Several of the guys at--well, my contemporaries actually made it to the Olympics. I think Mario McCutcheon was one of them, and then Dwight Stones also was a contemporary and stuff-- Speaker 1: High jumper-- Speaker 2: --like that. Speaker 1: --right? Wasn't he-- Speaker 2: Bloodstones was a high jumper, exactly right. And Ricky Sobers was there a year or two before I was at DeWitt Clinton. Speaker 1: He played with the [Chicago] Bulls for a while. Speaker 2: That's right, exactly. And so, you know, these were the kind of individuals, you know, that were part of DeWitt Clinton's athletic scene. And I wasn't supe--I was athletic, and I loved playing every sport--baseball, basketball, football, swimming, the whole nine--but I wasn't at that super high caliber. But Greg saw me, and he was working on his doctorate. I remember he was working on his doctorate at NYU [New York University, New York City, New York] in some sort of athletic-related endeavor. There is this young brother, you know, working on his doctorate, his Ph.D. And he goes, "Man, DD"--he called me DD--"DD, man, I got this program, man. I want you to run track for me." And I ended up running track for him through the West Side YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], the very famous YMCA on 72nd Street and Amsterdam Avenue on the West Side New York in Manhattan. And we would run all across--we'd run some state track meets, and then we would in Armory meets indoors and stuff like that, and up at Van Cortlandt Park [Bronx, New York City, New York]. And you know, I did that for about a year or two. And so I was also doing AU intramural type--not--it wasn't really intramural, but it was--it was associated with the YMCA. Speaker 1: What was your event in track? What was-- Speaker 2: Quarters and 880s. Well, back in the day, there were 440s and 880s. You know, it's not meters. They didn't have meters. It was a 440-yard dash and the 800 and the 880. Speaker 1: Yeah, 440 is a tough race. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's a tough race. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a fast race. You gotta be super fast there. And I did better, you know, at 880 and quarters. We called them quarters 'cause they were like a quarter-mile, and then that's one lap completely around; and then the 880 was two laps completely around. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you were in good shape? To run-- Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: --to run that-- Speaker 2: I was. Yeah, I had-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I had--you know, I had good wind. I had very good wind. Story_ID: 137008 Speaker 1: Were you--were you in any journalist related clubs or anything in high school [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York City, New York]? Speaker 2: No. You know, once, once again, like I said, I was taking classes with College Bound and Upward Bound. In Upward Bound, you know, so they were making sure that I had those requisite skills to do whatever I wanted to do. And I think that that kind of manifested itself when I took a class--excuse me--when I took a class at Fordham University [Bronx, New York City, New York], you know, after I'd graduated. I had graduated, and then they did--after you graduate, it's called a bridge program to make you bridge from--to allow you to bridge from high school into college. And so they said hey, we want you to take--and this is Fordham University, arguably one of the best Jesuit colleges in the country or the world for that matter, and rigorous. And so I took freshman English, and I got a "B." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, and that's-- Speaker 1: So did-- Speaker 2: --never taking a college course before, which I thought was pretty good. You know, they were happy about it. Oh, look, you know, he got a "B." Story_ID: 137009 Speaker 1: Now, now did you graduate with any special honors from DeWitt Clinton [High School, Bronx, New York City, New York]? Speaker 2: No, no, I just--you know, it was--I graduated in terms of--I think the honors was--the honors came in the fact that I got accepted at so many schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the reason why I didn't go to a Columbia University [New York City, New York], even though I got accepted there, or go to a Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], was because I looked at the state schools, and they had broadcasting. State University [of New York] College at Buffalo [Buffalo, New York], when you look--when I looked at the Baron's Handbook. The Baron's Handbook had Buffalo State as highly competitive. You know, so you had superior, you know, then high compet--and it was a highly competitive. And talking to my guidance counselors--Neil Harold [ph.] was my guidance counselor at, at DeWitt Clinton [High School] and--Jewish guy and wonderful man. And he would just read the New York Times every day, and he would fold it. He was a fold reader of the Times. He's like, "Darryl, you sure you wanna do this? You sure you wanna that?" And I was like, "Yeah, I think so, Mr. Harold." And another teacher that kind of, of--teachers I should say--that kind of gave me a sensitivity in terms of what I wanted to do in life. One was Mr. Kelly [ph.]. Mr. Kelly was this big, broad, Irish teacher from the streets of New York. And he tried--even though we were at an all-boys school, I think he tried to make us aware of stereotyping. And you know, so he would go, "How do you look at your hands?" And you know, most of us, you know, you do it like this. "How do you look at your fingernails?" And he said, "Do you look at your fingernails like this? Well, you know what they say if you look at your fingernails like that?" And, and then in addition to that, he would tell us his little war stories about what he would do growing up in New York, how they would take some dog dung, and put it in a newspaper, and then throw the newspaper off of the roof and light it on fire. And, of course, somebody would come by the street, you know, seeing something on fire. And they'd try to stomp it out (laughter). And then at the same time--so that was Mr. Kelly trying--you know, doing that identifying with us as kids of the street. And then I had Mr. Erlich [ph.], and Mr. Erlich was my social studies teacher. And he did a thing in New York--you know, they call it the dozens, but in New York City we called it snapping. And so, you know, it's like, your mother eats... You know, your mother got hair on her chest and things like that. You know, it's just like what's called the dozens we, we called it snapping. And so Mr. Erlich would--you know, he would come out with crazy snaps. You know, your mother eat gorilla biscuits to grow hair on her chest, and you know, things like that. And we like, yo, Mr. Erlich, come on, man, you know. And then he really sensitized me to how I looked at me as a young black man. And he told me, and you know, I can remember it as clear as day; it was about 1974 or so--'75 [1975]. And he said I don't understand you guys. He goes, you guys go see all of these crazy movies like 'Super Fly'--you know, he was talking about black exploitation movies--and you don't say anything about 'em. He says, "How do you go see a movie like 'Super Fly' and then not say something about it?" And when he said that, I never went to see 'Super Fly' until I was much, much older. 'Cause he said--you know, wow. You know, what he has to say there holds some validity. He goes, you guys talk about you're so cool and stuff like that, but the you go, you know, patronizing to these kind of movies that, you know, show you in a negative light. And I was like, okay, interesting, you know. Story_ID: 137010 Speaker 1: And then I went to college, of course. And in college there also other support. Speaker 2: This is fall of 1975. Speaker 1: Fall of 1975. Speaker 2: State University of New York in Buffalo [sic, State University of New York College at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York], right? Speaker 1: That is correct. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I graduated [DeWitt Clinton High School, Bronx, New York City, New York] at seventeen, so I hadn't even turned eighteen yet. So I'm seventeen years old, and you know, attending college. But you gotta realize that I was familiar to a college environment because I'd already spent two semesters--two summers--at Fordham University [New York City, New York]. So I was used to what a college environment was all about, and just had a wonderful, wonderful experience at Buffalo State. Story_ID: 137011 Speaker 1: Now this is a time, just nationally, that black people were breaking into national news as commentators. And I, I think it was the time--around the time that Max Robinson became a anchor on ABC News--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, probably-- Speaker 1: --night news ['ABC World News Tonight']. Speaker 2: --a little bit, yeah--late '70s [1970s] I think-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --seventy-eight [1978], somewhere around there. Speaker 1: Yeah, this, this is all--I mean, Tony Brown's got 'Black Journal' [sic, 'Tony Brown's Journal'] on public television. Speaker 2: Right, just starting it. He was just starting it a little bit later. Speaker 1: Okay, so you, you were aware of these-- Speaker 2: I was aware of them. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But you gotta realize I, I wouldn't even give them credit as much as I would give the black correspondents in New York City [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And-- Speaker 2: And what I mean by that, you had Gil Noble. Speaker 1: Right, 'Like It Is.' Speaker 2: 'Like It Is.' So, here's Gil Noble, and I'm watching Gil Noble every weekend. And I'm watching Gil Noble during the week, because Gil Noble was also a weekday anchor reporter. So I'm watching Gil Noble, and I'm watching Bob Teague, and individuals like that. In fact, I had read Bob Teague's biography. So Max, of course, came about with 'World News Tonight,' but he, he was here in Chicago [Illinois]. I didn't know about him being here in Chicago at the time. I do think that there was a, a Chicago connection that I had no idea of until I was much older. And we had this one brother from Chicago. Like I said, I played ball; you know, I played all sports--baseball, basketball, football, and even swimming. This, this was a unique thing about New York City. What I was trying to say about, you know, the experience of the streets and how they shaped me into I--into who I am today, it's just absolutely phenomenal. Story_ID: 137012 Speaker 1: In addition to that, we had swimming pools in New York [City, New York] that I would go to during the summer and--at Crotona Park and Central Park. And you know, they had public pools for kids to swim in. And then they had a thing called the Swim Mobile. And it was a tankard truck--a tankard trailer truck that, you know, you would go and swim in. And these were the kind of activities that I did, so you learned how to swim. And then we also--we would go up to the Bronx River up by Pelham Parkway [Bronx, New York City, New York] and, and literally swim in the Bronx River by Pelham, Pelham Parkway and Saw Mill Road [sic Saw Mill River Parkway], as you head up into upstate New York. These were all the experiences that I had. And then, of course, you know, I also had those experiences through the Boy Scouts going camping five times a year during the weekends, and then spending a summer or two in summer camp. And the my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard] also had us go to a black summer camp called Camp Eureka [Roscoe, New York]. And this is very im--very important. And Camp Eureka was a black summer camp, and it was adjacent to this other camp that white--rich white folks used to send their kids to to learn how to work, to get a work ethic. And we kind of always marveled at that. Speaker 2: How someone would need to go to camp to get a work ethic? Speaker 1: Well, you know, to teach your kids the fundamentals of work and stuff like that, yeah, you know. It's like, we're going to summer camp 'cause it's fun. But you know, in a sense, I don't think it was something that was overt all the time, but that's really the reason for the camp existing. And you know, they had much--they many more amenities than what we had at Camp Eureka. And Camp Eureka was just beautiful. Speaker 2: Is it upstate New York or? Speaker 1: This was in upstate New York-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --by Beaver Kill, yeah, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so--and so my mother would pay, save her money, and then she would send us away to summer camp for two weeks, and that would be my sisters too. Speaker 2: So you spent a lot of every summer away from home, I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I did. Speaker 2: But in--you were-- Speaker 1: Because my-- Speaker 2: --involved in activities (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: But involved in, in phenomenal activities, you know, super nurturing activities. And, you know, they weren't activities where I was being, you know, molested or abused or anything. It was activities that was just opening me up, you know, to, to the world. Story_ID: 137013 Speaker 1: My cousin taught me how taught me how, ten years old--yo, we'd go down to Delancey Street [New York City, New York], and he'd say here are pants. Now we can pay to get our pants, because back then you would buy these loud, polyester pants and they didn't have a hem in them. And he said you don't need to--we don't need to pay these guys to hem it. I'm gonna show you how to hem your pants. And so we would fold a crease where we should have the hem, and then we ironed that crease in there. And then he taught me how to skitch stip--or, or how to--how to sew using a skip knot then or a skits--or a skip stitch. And then I would learn how to--and I still know how this day. I could hem these pants with a cuff in them and look like a tailor would do it. And that was my one cousin--my cousin, Zachary--Zachary Adamson--who would that. And then my cousin, Earl, he went to high school in the Bronx--Morris High School [Bronx, New York City, New York], the same high school that [HM] Colin Powell graduated from. And he would hang out with this young guy--this older guy that was selling insurance. And we would go all the--and he was also a Jewish number runner. And we would go all across the Bronx hanging out with Fred [ph.]. And my cousin, Zachary [ph.], ended up following me at Buffalo State [State University of New York College at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York] 'cause he had relatives in Buffalo [New York]. And his uncle was one of Maltin--Malcolm X's right-hand men. And then my cousin, Earl, he--at seventeen he left for the Merchant Marines. And so, you know, I'm trying to get him to write a book because his stories are incredible, what he saw--he saw the world at seventeen, eighteen years old back in the '70s [1970s], and you know, a whole different world than what it is today. And so these were all the experiences that, as I went to college, I already had experience doing. And so going to Buffalo it was like--I, I went to Buffalo, and I didn't mention this, primarily because it was highly competitive, it offered broadcasting, plus I was gonna have to pay to go to school. They literally were gonna pay me to go to school 'cause it was the state school and based on my financial eligibility. And the other piece was that I knew I couldn't stay in New York because of the pressures from my friends in New York to hang out and get high and stuff like that. And you know, I had wonderful friends. One of my closest friends is Thomas Woodley [ph.]. His name is Pee Wee, and Douglas Graham and Michael Graham. Michael passed of AIDS back in the '80s [1980s]. And Mr. Graham was like a father mentor to us. Douglas and Michael were from Jamaica. Their father was from Jamaica. They were from the United States, but father was very influential, in terms of he was a social engineer. And--not social engineer, but a--was an architectural engineer. And he would spend a lot of time with the kids in the neighborhood and stuff like that, and very, very strict disciplinarian, you know, first generation from Jamaica and stuff like that. And Pee Wee was like my right-hand buddy, and he would follow me through Upward Bound and through high school and stuff like that, and he's still a close friend of mine today, as well as Douglas. Speaker 2: But you had to get out of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I had to. No, I'm just being realistic. You know, there was no way, even though--you know, Fordham University [Bronx, New York City, New York]--I could have went to Fordham; I could have went to Columbia [University, New York City, New York]. But knew for a fact that there was no way that I would be able to go to those schools and still what I had to do academically. It was just too much pressure. Story_ID: 137014 Speaker 1: Now did you find SUNY Buffalo [sic State University of New York College at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York] to be, you know, what the--what it's described as being, a high-end school of communications? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, definitely. It had a phenomenal, you know, communications program. And back then it was actually--my major was speech and theater arts. Now when I told you before about junior high school and elementary school with the glee club kind of preparing me for my career in journalism--well, broadcast journalism. It was called speech and theater arts and then they changed it to communications. Academically, that's what it was first listed under my degree. And you know, I had incredible instructors. One of them was Bob Shield [ph.]. He was my speech instructor. And Bob went on to work with Pat Robertson at his university [Regent University, Virginia Beach, Virginia]. And he was in charge of the speech and theater program, and just a phenomenal instructor. He didn't let you slide by with anything. You know, you took his speeches--Intro to Speech class and he wouldn't allow you to speak, even with a New York accent or anything. You know, he was like, if you're gonna speak, learn how to speak. Speaker 1: Now is that--is this difficult? Now, New York [City] is a huge place, so many people, everybody has a--seems to have a New York ac--accent. I just wondered if it was--is, is it tough to get rid of a New York accent? Speaker 2: It was. You know, and I still--you know, there are people that can hear certain words that I may say. You know, when I get comfortable you'll hear--you know, glimpses of that New York accent come out. I had to get rid of it. Because if I'm going to be serious--and once again, Bob Shield was instrumental in this, you know--New York. If I say I'm from New York--yeah, I'm from Harlem [New York City, New York], you know. You know, where you going? I'm going to Madison Square Garden--Garden--in New York you say garden. You don't say garden. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: You know. Or when--are you heading out to Long Island [New York City, New York]? I'm going out to Long Island. How to--you know, I look kind of ridiculous (unclear)--I'll say, you know, I'm going out to Long Island. I'm going out to Long Island. So you learn to get rid of those, those regional dialects because they're not conducive to you advancing in terms of your career as a broadcaster, because you're taught in broadcasting school to strive for a Midwest dialect. That's really what you're su--you know-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: --Minnesota. Speaker 1: This is interesting, and I don't understand the reason why. I don't know why people-- Speaker 2: That-- Speaker 1: --aren't trying to-- Speaker 2: Regionalize their speak? Speaker 1: --talk like people do in New York. I mean, I don't--I don't understand-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the reason, but-- Speaker 2: That--that's what you're taught. That's what you were taught-- Speaker 1: It is a be-- Speaker 2: --in broadcasting school. Speaker 1: Like, really the majority of Americans have a flatter accent. Is that what (unclear) about? Speaker 2: I don't know if it's a flatter accent. I just believe that that was the norm that had existed. And you have to look at it, because even if you want to--I think it's actually a continuation, if you will, but with less stringent adherence to a very sort of New England English type accent. Because if you look at the forerunners of broadcasting, they sounded much more akin to an Edward R. Murrow or a--or Sander Vanocur--but Sandy's a little bit later on, but a Walter Cronkite, Edward R. Murrow, and you know, individuals of that ilk. When you listen to them or you--you know, even if you listen to some of the rate or--the reports that were part of the news reels: "Hello, this is, you know, James Sorenson [ph.] telling you the news of the"--and these were guys from the United States, but they were speaking with this almost like Cary Grant-ish--you know, or a Gregory Peck, if you will, type of dialect. You know, like, who really speaks like Gregory Peck, you know? But this is what you kind of strive for. So fortunately, we didn't have to get engaged in that, that sort of, you know, New England type of deliver of this is Edward R. Murrow and stuff. But it did have that what's called a, a Midwestern standard to it. And that's what you as--ascribe to in speech. That's why my degree originally was in speech and theater. Because they say hey, if you are gonna be on air, then you have to be able to sound like that, because this is--this is the standard that we want you to ascribe to. Story_ID: 137015 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, well, what were some, some of your experiences at, at SUNY Buffalo [State University of New York College at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York]. Was--did they have a, a black student organization? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, definitely. Oh, it was phenomenal. It was a predominantly--excuse me--it was called Buffalo State--SUNY College at Buffalo, but it's known world over as Buffalo State. Randy Smith graduated from, from school there. Speaker 1: Great basketball player. Speaker 2: Great basketball player, who recently died by the way too. Story_ID: 137016 Speaker 1: So, we're talking about like, Randy Smith was at Buffalo State [State University of New York College at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Randy Smith. Let, let me explain to you what happened when I got to Buffalo, New York. You know, and I wish that this--I think it exists to a certain extent and maybe at some HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], but as you had mentioned, this was during the time of a black awareness that we had. And I can remember this tall brother--tall light-skinned brother. I had just arrived on campus. And I'm also part of what's called a SEEK program that was founded by Arthur Eve--Search for Education, Excellence, and Knowledge [sic, Search for Education, Elevation, and Knowledge]. And, and so it was a continuation of like the Upward Bound program and the College Bound programs. And it was there to ensure that, you know, so-called underprivileged youth had the opportunity to make sure that they graduated. And even outside of SEEK, the first thing that happened--here I am on campus and this little, you know--kinda think I know my way around and stuff like that. And this brother had went over to me--and he was a senior I think--and he said yo, young blood--heard it clear as day--you know, big campus; it was an inner city campus sort of like U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] or University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Buffalo State is right in the heart of Buffalo--and he grabbed me. He said, "Come here man." He goes, "I wanna show you--I'm gonna show you what you need to know." He goes, "Where's your room?" And then you know, we went and took me over to my room. And, and I just realize that in Buffalo we call it the Scajaquada Expressway [New York State Route 198]. And then if you watch PBS and it says, "I'm Sacajawea," you know, but it's named after Saca--so-called Sacajawea [sic, named for Scajaquada Creek], that I never knew it was pronounced Sacajawea. But in Buffalo, it's called the Scajaquada Expressway, and the dorms were named after Scajaquada. You had Scajaquada East and Sajac--and Scajaquada West. But we didn't call it Sacajawea. We called it Scajaquada. Nonetheless, so I got my room. He said, "Come here, man; I wanna show you now." So he helped get me situated, and he said--and he literally took me by the hand almost. You know, it wasn't by the hand; it was like, you know, this was his obligation as making sure--because we also had a major--to show you how serious Buffalo State was--Buffalo State also offered a major in African American Studies. And, in fact, one of the great leaders in African American Studies--what the ha--I think his name will come to me as, as, as we talk, but I can't think of his name right now. Speaker 1: This--is [HM] Molefi Asante? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right. Speaker 2: This--but you gotta realize before Molefi Asante was Molefi Asante, he wasn't Molefi Asante. He was at Buffalo State with a different name [Arthur Lee Smith], and then he changed his name while he was at Buffalo State because this was the incubator of programs that started happening all across the country were, were--was right there at Buffalo State. So I say that because the individual took me and he said, "Hey man, this is the bursar's office, and this is where you go to pay your bill; and this is the student union, and this is where you go to do your lunch, and you're gonna get, you know, a lunch pass; and this is the dining hall." He spent the entire day with me. "This is the library. You need to make sure that you have your library card to access all this. This is where you go to get your ID card." Nobody told him to do this. He wasn't part of the SEEK, you know, greeting team. It was just like his was his obligation. Here's a new young blood comin' on. And I immediately grav--I was like cool, man. And then, you know, of course, I fit in with, you know, my freshman and there was a big New York City [New York] influence there. Story_ID: 137017 Speaker 1: And the name of the black student organization [at State University of New York College at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York] at the time was called the BLF, and it just shows you how things have changed (laughter). It was called the Black Liberation Front. And so, you know, that's what we were all about. And we had--it was a component of the Student Union Board. And the Student Union Board--so Buffalo State is the largest college in SUNY system. So we had like 13,000, so you could see how big it was. There were 13,000 students at Buffalo State. That's pretty big for a college, you know, that's not a university. And so we have 13,000 students at the time, and every student had to pay a three to five hundred activity fee, so you can imagine the monies that were there. And that went through the--that went to the Student Union Board coffers. And, and so one year, you know, with the BLF and all the black students, we realized--we said yo, man, you know that less than 10 percent of the population votes, you know, for officials to the Student Union Board? He said yeah, yeah. I said yo, what we gone do--we're run the gamut on 'em. And so we decided, and it was like my--I think it was my sophomore or junior year--we decided to run a whole slate of candidates. And then there several white girls that were in love with some of the black basketball players, so we said okay, you need to run for state [sic student] senator (laughter). And so we ended up controlling the Student Union Board and all the monies associated with that. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: And then we started an additional organization because they were funding. We would do annual--you know, we would bring in speakers from all across the country and concerts. We brought in The Blackbyrds and Funkadelic and you know, and--and who else did we bring in--Cameo. And back in the day, recording artists didn't go to outside venues to do a concert. They did those concerts at college campuses a lot of times, and a lot of times it was like in the gym. You can have a big auditorium. You know, the biggest place at the college campus was the gym, and so we would do these concerts at the gym. And then we would fund them; then we would do an annual weekend. And the way you were budgeted was that you may have been budgeted for thirty thousand dollars to do all of your activities for the year, and then you have to give back like six thousand dollars at the end of the year--at the end of the semester. Speaker 2: Now did you get a chance to interview any of the entertainers that, that the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, not really. You know, I remember hanging out, you know, like when the Blackbyrds came, you know, and talking them or Cameo. You know, because I was executive board member of the BLF, so you know, you would get close to them in that sense. But, you know, everybody was much younger, and it was a much freer type of existence. And, and so that's primarily my relations with those individuals, you know, the fact that we were helping to sign the checks for them. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right. I thought I'd ask that in light-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --of what you- Speaker 1: No, that didn't happen until later. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: That happened later on. Speaker 2: All right. Story_ID: 137018 Speaker 1: So was it--there any--other than Bob Shield [ph.]--were there any other mentors there [State University of New York College at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York] or no? Speaker 2: You had doctor--what was her name--Phyllis--Dr. Phyllis--was it Phyllis Schwartz [ph.]? She was a great instructor of mine, I think it was. You had Dr. Baskerville [ph.], who was a speech pathologist. Neil Cheslick [ph.], who was a broadcasting instructor. These were all individuals--and also you had an individual by the name of Richard Allen [ph.], and he was my counselor for the SEEK [Search for Education, Elevation and Knowledge] department. And he was a really soft-spoken individual. And he would--he would like, Darryl--you know, because what happened was that before they gave you a check from your financial aid, they wanted to talk to you to see how you were doing in class and stuff like that. And he would sit me down and he would go, "Darryl, how, how are things going? Is everything okay?" I said, "Sure, Mr. Allen. Yeah, yeah, you know, man, got it--I got it under control. Yeah, Mr. Allen, come on. I need you to sign this check release so I can pick up this check," (laughter). And I was like one of the kinda shining startup students, and so ended up having me on a program called--wow, what was it called--cooperative education. And so I ended up working down at the Federal Building with [U.S.] Customs Service [later U.S. Customs and Border Protection]. And I ended up falling behind a whole year almost because I ended up working down there, and the Customs Service ended up loving me, and they wanted me to come on board, even though I--they knew I was majoring in broadcasting, but yet they enjoyed the fact that I was kind of knowledgeable, and my personality and stuff. And then right adjacent to that was the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] 'cause we were in a federal building, the older federal building downtown Buffalo [New York]. And they were like sending me--the FBI and CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] sending me recruitment (unclear)--hey, Darryl, you know, you're getting ready to graduate. When--please consider us. I'm like, are you crazy? I'm gettin' high, and you want me to do this (laughter) (unclear). I don't think so. I don't think it's a good fit right now, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So, yeah, I, I wondered where that came from 'cause I saw it on, on, on the Internet that you worked for U.S. Customs Service-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Speaker 1: --at some point, you know. Speaker 2: Yes, I did. That was through cooperative education. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I worked there for three years--two or three years opening up mail and you know, import--it's called import specialist, so people that wanted to import--you have the Canadian border there, and people that wanted to import things to the United States I'd have sure that they had all the proper documentation. And the beautiful thing about that was that that cooperative education experience had me working in all aspects of customs, from receiving to inspection. So I would also spend time at the mail facility; I would spend time at the border; I would spend time at the main downtown offices learning all these aspects of customs-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and had built some friendships that, that last until this day in fact of people that really, really enjoyed me down there. But you know, they also knew that I was going to school for broadcasting. And you know, they got a big kick out of the fact when I became a news reporter in Buffalo. You know, that--"That's our boy Darryl that used to work down here." Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 137019 Speaker 1: So this was your--so you--well, tell us about graduation. I mean, what was it leading up to graduation-- Speaker 2: Oh, it wa--you know, I had a dramatic change. I had--I was on the radio in college [State University of New York College at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York].And so on the broadcasting side, you know, I'm majoring in broadcasting. And then we had a radio station that we were trying to get FM status. It was an AM carrier current called WSCB [Buffalo State College carrier current]. And so I used to do a jazz radio show. And then my--beginning of my junior year, I ended up moving off campus. So I would come, go to school, and then like on Thursday nights, I would come to do my radio show and things of that nature. And you know, I had several different girlfriends and stuff like that. And then I met this one girl, 'cause I was working down at the federal building, and she struck my eye, and she was my future wife [Darlene Dennard]. And you know, I said wow, who's she? And she was working at a store cora--called Pantastic down at the Main Place Mall in Buffalo, New York. And I'm working, so during my lunch hour I'll go down there and see her, and then we started lightly dating and stuff like that and became enamored of each other--in love. And I gave up all the other girlfriends that I had and stuff like that. And I think it was--and I say this before graduation, because this happened before I graduated. This is 1979 right now, and that was a very, very pivotal year for me because like I said, I had to take an extra year because of cooperative education. And you couldn't take--cooperative education didn't allow you to take a full-time schedule, even though I mistakenly tried to take one. And, and then what happened was that I had fallen in love. And I remember writing inside of a diary of mine a friend had gave me. And I said I wanna know the Lord. I really wanna know the Lord, you know. And I--you know, I wanna know who he is. I want God to manifest himself to me. And-- Speaker 1: Now were--I didn't ask you ask you about your church life grow--growing-- Speaker 2: And this is important, you know, and the reason why because this is all tied into school. You know, I'm hanging out; doing everything; hey Darryl's a cool cat and stuff like that and you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but, but was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: None, you know, the only church experience that I had growing up was the Catholic church, Our Lady of The Savior--Our Lady of the Savior or something like--I think it's something like that. I can't think of the exact name. And that was the only experience that I had in terms of church- Speaker 1: --So what-- Story_ID: 137020 Speaker 1: What happened in '79 [1979] to awaken this feeling of-- Speaker 2: There was--my best friend is named Ronald Brown [ph.], and, and he would--we were both freshmen at the time. And we met and you know, just hit it off fantastically. And he was a brother that you know, came from a very, very religious family, Pentecostal family, and college was an entirely new experience for him. I had been a little more exposed and much more worldly than he was. And he had a--he and his friend, Hugh--Hugh Williams [ph.]--he--they would--they knew all of us were hanging out on Saturday and Friday nights, you know, going to the disco and going to all the parties at, at, at school [State University of New York College at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York]. And what happened was that on Sundays he would like, "Hey Darryl, man, can you come to church with us? Can you come to church with us?" And we would go to this church called Emmanuel Temple, and it was PAW church, Pentecostal Assemblies of the World. And here I am like, you know, hanging out like crazy Saturday night before, and they, you know, they come and get us. And then we would take a car over to Emmanuel Temple on Richmond Avenue in Buffalo, New York. And then the pastor would up in this (unclear) voices--this kind of deep, you know, voice and you he would go, "I hear that the college students are here--is here. Can, can a college student stand now so we can acknowledge you?" And you know--and then Ron, cause I'd be sleepin' in, you know, the service, and then he would hit me. "Yo, D, stand up for a second." I was like, "Oh, okay, yeah, yeah." And you know, the congregation was proud of the fact--now here are these eighteen, nineteen, twenty year-olds that are in church on a Sunday. And so, you know, I would do that and then in terms of always trying to be aware and knowing--you know, having this inbred in me, even as a boy scout, to do the right thing, and to try to do good to people. I knew that there was something missing, because I couldn't stop. People always thought that I had my life together. Yo, D, man--you know, D's got the girls; D's, you know, he's with it; he's with it and so. And I knew I wasn't with it. You know, I'm like suffering from anxiety because I couldn't get like this little monkey--this marijuana monkey off my back. And I'm like, what the heck is going on? You know, I'd smoked cigarettes for like a year or two of my life--two or--two or three years, and I just quit that like that. But in terms of, you know, doing reefer and stuff like that, I couldn't stop. And so what happened was that I remember writing in the diary: Lord I wanna know you. I wanna know whoever you are, you know, not--you know, because of me being very afrocentric, I didn't wanna engage in this thing in terms of white Jesus and stuff like that. And then I had my, my future wife [Darlene Dennard], and we had--you know, we had relations. And she--we, we, loved each other. And then about four months later, you know, it, it dawned on me that wow, Jesus Christ is, you know, he's the Lord, and I gotta do something about this. And, and so what I did, which was an incredible thing, was that I took all of--all of my drug paraphernalia, all of my albums and everything, and I broke them up--which I didn't have to do that 'cause, you know, I listen to jazz now. But, but I had to do that at that particular moment in my life. And I-- Speaker 1: What, did you link the two together, the getting high with the music or? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was just anything having to deal--was too worldly. Don't forget this is a Pentecostal type of experience. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: And, and the Lord just came into my life that day. And I said Lord, you know, I'm nothing without you. And that day--you know, this is thirty-five years ago now--that day I stopped smoking. I haven't touched--haven't been influenced to touch any reefer since then--just completely stopped; you know stopped, you know, messing with the ladies then that I had and stuff like that. And you know, everybody was like shocked. Yo, man, D don't get high no more man, you know, but I was still the same guy. It's just that I don't get high. And you know, but I'm still--you know, and I changed my, my jazz show that I did. I changed that to a gospel music--contemporary gospel music show called 'Music of the Light.' Before, the show used to be called 'Shades of Jazz.' And yo, this is Darryl Dennard with 'Shades of Jazz,' yeah, and that was heavy in terms of Miles [Davis] blowing us away there on, you know, 'Maiden Voyage' [album by HM Herbie Hancock], but (laughter)--now here's Andrae Crouch with Music of the Light. And, and it really like hit my grandmother [Ollie Cammon], who I told you loved education and loved the fact that her grandson was getting ready to graduate from college. Because before I graduated from college I got married, and that shocked her, you know. She was like--I know it really, you know--you're doing what? And I thank God for my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard], and she always taught me to be independent of never really putting any clamps on me. She realized that I made proper decisions all through my life. Even going away to school at seventeen, I was primarily the, the one behind that. And, and so hey, mom, getting married, and my wife was a wonderful woman. She said no matter what you choose to do, I'll wait for you. Speaker 1: Now, now-- Speaker 2: And she [Darlene Dennard] just happened to get saved at the same time too- Speaker 1: Now-- Story_ID: 137021 Speaker 1: Now I mean did--I was gonna ask you if she [wife, Darlene Dennard] influenced you in terms of-- Speaker 2: No, because we were what you call it. You know, what happened was that at the same time I had this awakening, she had it, literally like within months of each other. Then she said I can wait for you. You know, I love you, but if you have to go out there and do whatever you need to do. And I said no, I don't need to do this, and so I said let's get married. Speaker 1: So, so-- Speaker 2: We got married about three-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --or four months later. Speaker 1: Was it the interaction with Emmanuel Temple [Baltimore, Maryland] that, that made the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, well, the seed was planted there obviously. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know, but it--the, the real trick--and it wasn't a trick, but the real thing--the real cap--capstone was I was in my apartment, and I was watching this movie called 'The Late, Great Planet Earth' by Hal Lindsey. And I'm--you know, I love science and things of that nature. And I'm watching this movie and it talked about Jesus returning, and it asked the question: are you ready? And I just surmised from a very scientific level, as well as from a deeply spiritual one. I said wow, the Lord is coming back and I'm not ready. And I just that--at that particular moment, that's when I threw away everything that--you know, all the drug paraphernalia I had in my house and all that other stuff and just threw it away--the using profanity, you know, things of that nature, and just gave my life over to Christ and never looked back since. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, okay. So, so this is just before graduation. This is-- Speaker 2: It's about a year or two before graduation. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And then I had my parents [Eleanor Adamson Dennard and Glenn Dennard] come up and my grandma [Ollie Cammon]. And this hurt my grandmother, 'cause my grandmother was undergoing cancer surgery. So she came up for my wedding in 1979, and then the following year, 1980, I went to graduation before I actually got my degree. And because my grandmother was recuperating in the hospital, I know it hurt her. Because, you know, she made it for my wedding, but she didn't get a chance--the thing that she really wanted--you know, she loved my wife and everything, but the thing that she really wanted to be at was seeing her son--her grandson walk across the stage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she wasn't able to make that--she lived to be--lived fifteen, twenty years--fifteen years after that, but I know that that was one deep regret of her life, that she didn't get a chance to see me walk across the stage. Story_ID: 137022 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, now you started working at WGRZ [Buffalo, New York] before graduation, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I did--I did a phenomenal internship there. And that internship happened in the nine--1980. And I worked with an individual named Stewart Dan, who was the news director at the time. And he ended up moving here to Chicago [Illinois] and heading the NBC bureau here in Chicago. And, and these internship were phenomenal. You know, I had to do everything from hanging lights--it was a non-union shop, so they allowed me to do everything in terms of the internship. And then I remember--you know, I met with Stewart. I said, "Stewart, you know, I'm getting ready to graduate, and I want a job as a reporter." And he said to me, "Well, I think that's great." He said, "Need to apply to Elmira [New York]. Have you applied to Elmira in New York?" 'Cause you have to understand that Buffalo [New York] was a thriving city at the time. It was top thirty market. And most people didn't start in Buffalo, you know, in terms of being reporters. You went to a smaller market, and then you worked your way up to a market the size of Buffalo. And I said no, but what happened was that a friend of mine name--I forgot who it was--and he was the--he was like the--this was the other thing about affirmative action was that every news department had a community service representative that was on the air and that was responsible for increasing diversity at the time. And I remember him coming to me. He says, "Darryl, there's an opening"--you know, I had already done it--done my internship there. And he said, "There's an opening for a production assistant." And these PAs--this was my official title, but I was a cameraman, I was a lighter, audio person, and you know, here's the job for you. Now you--you know, we can--we're, we're offering it to you. It's not on air, but it's behind the scenes. And so I, I was working--right before I got that job I was working at Syms--excuse me--selling clothes. And even before that I was working at a place called Berger's [L.L. Berger] in Buffalo, New York. And my wife [Darlene Dennard] and I were working at Berger's together, which was kind of a wild experience. And then Channel 2 called, NBC affiliate WGRZ, and the rest as they say is history. I ended up going to work there behind the scenes, and I would talk to my good friend, Larry Frasier [ph.], and he was one of the videographers there at the time. And they would allow me to work on the weekends, going out with the news crews. And so on Saturdays, if I had to work the weekend news, I would end up staying at the radi--at the television station for maybe fourteen, fifteen hours because I would come in early off the record or off the books and work with the news reporters, going out tellin' the stories, going out with the photographers and acting as a behind-the-scenes producer. And then I would end up doing the, the studio camera for the six and eleven o'clock news. And that's how I got my teeth wet or that's how I got my hands wet, in terms of actually learning the craft of broadcasting and news. Story_ID: 137023 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, what were some of the--are there, there any memorable stories from those days [at WGRZ, Buffalo, New York]? Speaker 2: Oh, certainly. There was this tremendous hotel--there was this tremendous fire at this, this great landmark--this great landmark church that, you know--I, I think somebody may have died there and as well as this warehouse fire that they had where several people died. And it was a national story, and I ended up covering that. And another major story was that this train derailment that they had, you know, that resulted in a fire, and they literally caused damage to this, this historic landmark building that was right by the river and the train rail station in one of the suburbs of Buffalo, New York. I had to end up cover that. And then I also remember when Maynard Jackson got the--when Atlanta [Georgia] got the [1996 Summer] Olympics [Atlanta, Georgia]. Maynard Jackson happened to be speaking in Buffalo [New York] at the time, and I had to end up doing a live reporter for the national news, both on--one on the warehouse fire that happened, as well as with Maynard Jackson. And so those were things that kind of got me--'cause everybody that's a, a youth reporter or a young reporter, you wanna get that exposure on national TV, and those were kind of like entrees there. Speaker 1: Now did that interview reverberate nationally? Did you-- Speaker 2: It did to a certain extent. I didn't get any national offers. Story_ID: 137024 Speaker 1: We were talking about the early days at, at WGRZ [Buffalo, New York]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and what happened was that I had a chance to--as I was at WGRZ, I had a chance to do both reporting. I moved from the technical to the talent aspect of broadcasting. And we had a major purge in about 1986 I believe it was, and we let go of about 20 percent of the news department. And I happened to make it through, and so I would do, on limited occasions, anchor during the weekend, and not getting paid a lot of money--maybe twenty thousand or something like that. And--but I was doing what I wanted to do, and that's an important note. Because there were people that--who was making as much as I was without a high school education that were working at any of the automotive plants in Buffalo, New York, but I was doing what I wanted to do and what I was--felt I was meant to do. And it just so happened in--I believe it was 1987 that [Osbert] Ozzie Bruno, who is the national sales director for 'Ebony/Jet Showcase.' He happened to be in Buffalo, New York, to try to syndicate the show. And unbeknownst to me--I remember watching the show one time, and Tom Joyner was the host of the program at that time. This is when it first came out in its first iteration. And I was like, watching Tom, and Tom's a friend, and Tom had asked Billy Dee [Williams]--you know, 'cause Tom's more of a comedian, you know. And he asked Billy Dee--he said, "Billy Dee, Billy Dee, you know, how you get your hair like that?" You know, and Billy is, you know, from Harlem [New York City, New York]. He's like, "Come on man, you know, man, this ain't my real hair. You know, it's my real hair. Man, it's conked, you know, it's a process, man. You know, it's not my--my hair isn't normally like this." And I said, "Man, look at that." You know, I could do what he's doing, and I wouldn't ask Billy Dee how his hair his like, but I could do what he's doing, you know. And, and then what happened was that Ozzie Bruno was in town, and inside the lobby of Channel 2, the NBC affiliate WGRZ, they had our pictures hanging up, and so my picture was in the lobby. And Ozzie had asked the receptionist; she said, "Whose picture is that?" You know, I'm young at the time--twenty-eight, somewhere around there, you know. And she said, "Oh, that's Darryl Dennard. That's one of our reporters, substitute anchors, you know." He goes, "Oh, really." And I just happened to do a report. She--I think he either gave her my card, or her his card to give to me. And he said, you know, well--and he watched me that night, and I think he ended up calling me. And he said, "Hey, you know, would you ever consider, you know, hosting the 'Ebony/Jet Showcase?'" And I said, "You know, what? You know, yeah, I--I've seen that before." He goes, "Well, you know, I had a chance to watch you, and I'd love to, you know, present you to [HM] Mr. [John H.] Johnson and [HM] Linda Johnson [Rice] and, and see, you know, what they say." So, once again, I'd only been on air, even though I started at GRZ maybe '82 [1982], I'd had only been on air no more than a year or two. And, and so he ended up setting up an interview with me. And this was in the summer of 1987. And he ended up setting up an interview with me to be interviewed by Mr. Johnson and Linda Johnson at Johnson headquarters on 820 South Michigan [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], and they flew me in. Story_ID: 137025 Speaker 1: And, and so I remember flying into Chicago [Illinois]. I hadn't been to Chicago before. And I flew into Chicago and met with [HM John H.] Johnson, and we had an interview. It lasted all of maybe twenty minutes to a half an hour. You know, and Mr. Johnson asked me questions like, well, you know, tell me a little bit about yourself, where you're from, things of that nature. And you know, I told him who I was, and you know, they had probably already sized me up way before then--spoke maybe two or three, five minutes to, to [HM] Linda [Johnson Rice]. And I think you know, the job was paying like sixty thousand dollars or something, which would've put--three times what I was making in Buffalo [New York], plus it was--it's national job, and, and everybody knew of Johnson Publishing Company. And so, low and behold, I was gettin' ready to leave, and Mr. Johnson and Linda stepped aside for-[Osbert] Ozzie [Bruno] wasn't even--I don't even know if he was there at the time, and Ozzie is a good friend of mine. They stepped aside for maybe five minutes or so, and I waited outside their offices. And then Mr. Johnson came back and he said--said well, Darryl--and he would speak forthrightly to you--he goes you man--you know goes, "What do you think about becoming the host of my television show?" And here I am, you know, in Buffalo. And you know, so I went, "Well, Mr. Johnson, you know, could you give me a little bit of time, you know, to think about it." And he cut right into me. He said, "Think about it? What you talkin' about thinking about for? Now I'm offering you a job to leave Buffalo, New York, and you're tellin' me you gotta think about it." I said, "You know, you're right, Mr. Johnson. Yes, sir, I'll take it," (laughter). Literally, that's what he--he said, what you gotta think about leavin' Buffalo, New York for? I said, you're right, Mr. Johnson. Please forgive me. I'm sorry. I will take the job. He says okay, good, now Linda take care of that. That's exactly the way it happened, man. And I remember in my soul how I felt. 'Cause I was gonna go back home to my wife [Darlene Dennard], and we had already had my--you know, our daughter [Autumn Dennard]. And my daughter is like--it's '80 [1980], so she's about four or five years old at the time, 'cause she was born in '82 [1982], so this is '87 [1987], you know, five years old. And, and so what happened was that I told my wife I--you know, I'm driving back, and I don't think I called her or anything because there's not like cellular phones and stuff. And I remember driving back--driving out to the airport--out to O'Hare [International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], inside the express lanes, which was kind of weird for me because you know how the express lanes are divided in the middle. And then you had traffic heading one direction, and traffic heading in the opposite direction, and we were heading on the outbound traffic in the afternoon. And you know, I went back home, and my wife met me at the airport, and I said get your bags ready. We're moving to Chicago. And Mr. Johnson actually increased my salary by ten thousand dollars when he offered me the job. He didn't let me know. I accepted at, at that base salary, but he said no, pay him more. Speaker 2: So this is--this is really exciting, so. Speaker 1: It was a very exciting time for me. You know, I ended up--I had a beautiful going away party with all of my church members. I went to Bethesda Full Gospel Tabernacle in Buffalo, New York. And the current pastor is Bishop Michael Badger, but Michael was a contemporary of mine. And at that time the pastor was Reverend Billy White, and he's a white guy that was the pastor of this interdenominational Pentecostal church--phenomenal church in Buffalo right on Main [Street] and Utica [Street]. And, and so everybody was just like overjoyed, 'cause they would watch me on TV of course, but you know, I was very much into the ministry and so was my wife, and my buddy, Ron, and my buddy Byron--Byron Brown and Ronald Brown--no relations. But they ended up throwing me a nice little going away party. And Byron Brown became the first black mayor of Buffalo, who just got elected to his third term. And, and so we left. My wife and I we left; we packed our bags and, and came to Chicago in 1987. Story_ID: 137026 Speaker 1: Now when you were in Buffalo [New York], were you--were you the only black reporter for [WGRZ]-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, no-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --we had two other--we had three others. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Don't forget. This is the thing that I find incredible about this. In the 1980s and '90s [1990s], there was so many more black people on television and particularly in newsrooms that don't exist nowadays. I'm just appalled at how few black people, you know, are on TV especially in the newsrooms. And I think that's even indicative of Chicago [Illinois]. But in Buffalo we had myself, two other black male reporters, and a black female reporter, you know, while I was there. And then we got another black female anchor. So that's, you know, four people in prominent positions--four to five people in prom--that are of color. Now if I bring about, you know, some of my colleagues here, I don't even think there's channel--Art does some substitute reporting. Speaker 1: Art, [HM] Art Norman? Speaker 2: Art Norman--very good friend of mine, phenomenal brother. But if you look at Channel 5, except for Christian, Christian Farr--I think that's his name--who--he's married to Barbara Jo--[HM Robert] Bob Jordan's daughter, Karen Jordan--was another black reporter at--in terms of black male reporter at Channel 5. They got a black sports guy, but you got a city that's a chocolate city, so to speak. Where are they? Where--you know--but yet in the 1980s and '90s [1990s]--and I don't wanna get ahead of myself here, but look at all the black programming that we had; look at all the black syndicated--you alluded to this earlier, you know, we were talking. Speaker 1: In the 7--late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s]-- Speaker 2: Well, not even in late ta--I'm talking about the real proliferation didn't just come in the late '70s [1970s]. The real proliferation came in the late '80s [1980s]. Now let me explain to you what I mean by that. In the late '80s [1980s], in terms of Bill Cosby's being syndicated, but that's on network level. But look at the syndicated level. You had Essence. Essence had its TV show. You had Tony Brown, ['Tony Brown's Journal'] which is syndicated, it had its TV show. You had 'Ebony/Jet Showcase,' which was syndicated. And you had--who else was--Morris Day was doing a little syndicated show at the time. So you had all of these, you know, syndicated shows that were national--oh, 'Showtime at the Apollo' was a syndicated show. Look at all these syndicated shows that are happening that are black writers, black producers, and things of that ilk. Where are they now? You got 'Black Enterprise' that I hosted, you know. Fortunately, that's still around in our world with 'Black Enterprise' or the 'Black Enterprise [Business] Report' too. And I did 'Minority Business Report' that was a nationally syndicated program, but where are they now? Where are the Essence? Where are the, the black--the 'Ebony/Jet Showcases,' if you will? You know, you have '106 & Park,' but that's cable. I'm talking about national syndication. Speaker 1: Yeah, like Byron Allen's got some-- Speaker 2: Byron Allen-- Speaker 1: He's coming out-- Speaker 2: --and he's doing-- Speaker 1: --with a (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --a phenomenal job with his stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I'm not taking anything away from him. I'm just saying oh, so Byron Allen had a show back then. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Unclear)--it was just a plethora. You know, and the 'Essence Report'--Felipe Luciano was the anchor of the 'Essence Report.' And Felipe is unique because he's a black Puerto Rican, so he would talk to that Afro-Latino experience that always--nobody is like--you know, the eight hundred-pound gorilla in the room that nobody talks about. You know, you know, you look at baseball nowadays, and you see all these black folks, but there are fewer African American black folks--native African American black folks in baseball than ever before since integration, since Jackie Robinson. We're maybe down to two--you know, three to five percent. But yet you look and you say wait up, man. Look at Manny--you know, Manny Rivera [Mariano Rivera]. And you know, and you look at Big Papi [David Ortiz], and you know, all these--but they're all Latino-- Speaker 1: Some-- Speaker 2: --they're from the Dominican Republic and Panama and Cuba. Story_ID: 137027 Speaker 1: You know, some people have suggested that we've interviewed that, that, the period of the--I guess mid-'70s [1970s] through the mid-'80s [1980s] was like a golden age for blacks in broadcasting and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, of course. No, I, I, I, I would concur. You know, you, you look at the '80s [1980s], you know, and '80s [1980s] led to Spike Lee. You know, late '80s [1980s] everything is exploding. Spike is doing his thing. We were nominated with the 'Ebony/Jet Showcase.' Deborah Crable and I we were nominated for an [NAACP] Image Award, you know. Nowadays, you know, you give Image Awards to anybody that seems black or ha--just has a black theme, you know. I'm not taking anything away from that, but you know, there's just been a dilution, if you will, of us producing things. The only thing that I'm encouraged about is that technology advances now allow us the opportunity to tell our stories at a much more affordable rate than ever before. You know, you don't always have to spend millions of dollars to produce a movie nowadays of high quality that, you know, can watch without having to say that was shot, you know, on a hand[-held] camera. Story_ID: 137028 Speaker 1: Now you're a member--I mean, you, you--you're a veteran of this business now and you--you're a member of several professional associations. You have your own production company. Do you have an analysis as to why--I mean an opinion as to why-- Speaker 2: Oh, I definitely know why. Speaker 1: --affecting the different-- Speaker 2: You know, why is because nobody's feet have been held to the fire with regard to accountability. What happened was that all of those television stations they didn't do it altruistically. They did it because they were forced to do it, because their license was associated with diversity. Now you get rid of those hiring goals, and you get rid of those affirmative action incentives and, and, and objectives, and it's like what I need to do this for anymore? I don't need to have, you know, a person in place of color. I don't--you know--and you literally build an audience unfortunately on the backs of black folks. You see it today. All of these people that had these little talk shows now and these--you know, these are my beautiful brothers of the other persuasion. They end up havin' black folks in the audience because they know if they get a modicum of black folks watching the tube, they're gonna maintain a level of ratings because we in aggregate watch more television than do our white counterparts. So, you know, Katie Couric has a bunch of black people. Dr. Oz, every time you look around he's interviewing somebody black in the audience. Now, I'm glad in a sense, you know, that we're having this opportunity, but it's disproportionate in terms of the black folks he has in that audience versus the people that are watching his station or watching his show. It's not reflective there of that. But he knows the importance of that particular demographic. Unfortunately at the hiring level that doesn't exist. I, I, I get appalled; I get appalled at--you know, and I'm being honest here. I get appalled at the lack of diversity when you look behind the scenes of network shows. You know, and they--you know, you watch the football game and (unclear)--hey, you know, during the holiday season, we wanna show you everybody. Like, wow, now it's 70 percent, 80 percent of those people that are on the field; you're not even 10 percent of that crew that they show on TV--not even 10 percent. Look at all the engineers and the camera people, and you know, and the audio guys holding the parabolic microphones. Where are they? So, you know, I, I just think that entities--you know, and we say well, we don't--you know, we're in a colorblind society. If we're in colorblind society, why does our president get so much flack. Why do people point their face--point their finger in his face? Or why do people call him a liar in the halls of [U.S.] Congress while he's delivering a State of the Union adr--Address? And he takes the high road. And I think recently he opened up about racism a little bit in a recent interview that he conducted with New York Magazine. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And you know, I'm just saying when you're not held accountable--you see, when your guidelines or your license is tied to diversity, then you make sure that you have a diverse workplace, and everybody benefits from this diverse workplace. Speaker 1: So we don't have the agitation that we used to have--the applied agitation--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I don't--I wouldn't call it applied agitation. I would call it we don't have in place the constraints that force people to do the right thing. That's what we don't have in place. When you allow a radio station to just get a pro forma--excuse me--to just--a radio or a television station just to get a pro forma license renewal for something that's supposed to operate in the public entrance--interest, convenience, and necessity without having them held accountable to having a workforce that's representative of the population, then they're not gonna do it. But you're equating it to agitation in the '70s [1970s], but that agitation was based on laws that were in place that said when you looked at your public file, you had to show this is how diverse we are. You could look. This is how--you know, this is who we're hiring, and nowadays, you automatically get renewed. Story_ID: 137029 Speaker 1: We have a deregulated FCC [Federal Communications Commission], right? Speaker 2: We have a very much deregulated FCC. But you know, this is for things that operate or are supposed to operate in the public interest, convenience, and necessity. So where is the diversity? Speaker 1: Is there--I mean--I guess you could argue that, that the deregulation of the FCC not only harms us in terms of--but it harms the general public too--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well (unclear) because it, it doesn't produce a diverse flow of voices. It's actually went the other way around in terms of--in terms of journalism. You know, people feel as though, you know, well, journalists always have a liberal bias. No, you know, there were people that were extremely liberal in their views. It was just that a lot of people like that gravitated toward the--but you don't always--you know, it wasn't a thing in terms of yellow journalism where you're trying to force a belief on somebody. They were still objective reporters. Personally, they didn't put their personal beliefs into stories unless the story called for that. But now, you know, if somebody doesn't side one way, oh, it's just a liberal media. Now why was the liberal media good for Edward R. Murrow? Why was the liberal media good for Walter Cronkite? Why was the liberal media, you know, good for Harry Reasoner and Cronkite and Blinkley [ph.] hump--and Humphrey [sic Huntley, Chet Huntley] and Boink [ph.]--and [David] Brinkley? Why is it good for them, but yet now it's not good? Now you have to--you know, your, your equated, you know, with--and literally at times not even telling truth or speaking truth. So, you know, as, as a broadcast journalist, that's, that's where we are. Story_ID: 137030 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, well, let's go back to the 'Ebony/Jet Showcase.' And so this is--you were joining 'Ebony/Jet Showcase' in a reinvention of the program, right? Speaker 2: It was a reinvention, right. I took over for Greg Gumbel. And Deborah Crable had anchored alongside Greg for at least a year or two. And then, you know, we took it to new levels. You know, we had incredible national syndication. And during that time I interviewed Michael Jackson and Sammy Davis, Jr. and people like Bill Cosby and Ray Charles. You know, the list goes on. And then, of course, younger people, you know, people that were my contemporaries: Guy, and Teddy Riley, and L.A. [Redid] and [Kenneth] Babyface [Edmonds], all of these people kinda come up--Aretha Franklin, Mario Van Peebles, all these other individuals. And it was just a phenomenal experience to be able to travel all across the country, representing the premier black publication, and telling the story--telling the story of these unique entertainers. Speaker 1: So you would actually travel to wherever they-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --were most of the time or? Speaker 2: Always. Speaker 1: Always, okay. Speaker 2: We went to where the story is. We did--we conducted I would say just a handful of interviews in Chicago [Illinois]. The vast majority of every interview that we conducted with the 'Ebony/Jet Showcase' was conducted on location. Story_ID: 137031 Speaker 1: Okay, so for instance, the Michael Jackson interview I-- Speaker 2: The Michael Jackson interview was at Universal Studios in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And he was getting ready to go on the 'Bad' tour. And to this day, I'm one of the few people--to this day, I'm one of the few people to actually interview Michael, and there's only a handful of us. There's Martin Bashir, there's Diane Sawyer, Oprah Winfrey, and myself to actually sit down and do long form interviews with Michael. Speaker 1: What was that experience like? I mean, Michael Jackson has since passed away. I mean, there's a whole--he has a--still has a tremendous following. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: He also is--you know, for me one of the more strange--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you know, he was strange. You know, when you got money and you're strange, you know, then you're called eccentric, so. Michael was--you know, it, it was--it was unique for me because he's a year younger exact than I am, just one year younger. He used to be my exact same complexion. But I remember when I first met him I was like--he was--his complexion as changing, and it was weird because he was like the color of my palm. I'm like I've never seen anybody that kind of color before, you know. And he was extremely soft spoken and very gracious. And-- Speaker 1: Now this is for--before his complete transformation. Speaker 2: This 'Bad.' If you look at 'Bad,' it wasn't a complete transformation. Speaker 1: He had like a--I, I saw--I was looking at YouTube last night, and he had like--his hair was still curly. Speaker 2: His hair was curly-- Speaker 1: His, his complexion-- Speaker 2: --and stuff like that. Speaker 1: --was not as white as it-- Speaker 2: It wasn't as white, exactly. But it was-- Speaker 1: Now his nose was still-- Speaker 2: --his nose was still--had nose work, but the thing I said, it was more like the interior of my palm as, opposed to the way he ended up porcelain white. And he was just very soft spoken, very, very gracious. And the reason why he did the interview for us was because of his very, very strong relationship that he had with Mr. Johnson--[HM] Mr. John H. Johnson. And he trusted Mr. Johnson trusted me to conduct the interview in a way that wouldn't try to bring shame to him. Speaker 1: Okay, this is like pre-Michael Jackson scandals too. Speaker 2: Yes it is. Speaker 1: Pretty much--wa--was he married at the time? Speaker 2: No, he'd didn't marry Eva Presley or-- Speaker 1: Lisa Marie Presley. Speaker 2: Lisa, Lisa Marie or Eva Presley--where I'm gettin' Eva? He didn't marry Lisa Marie Presley until later on. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, I know it's close to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, this is--this is just 'Bad,' you know, and he'd just finished doing, of course, 'Thriller.' And then he took about a year or two hiatus, and then he came out with 'Bad,' you know. Speaker 1: Is, is there any particular thing he said that really stands out--(unclear)--with you? Speaker 2: Well, you know, he, he talked about the fact that, you know, people didn't understand him. And you can see this online, in terms of the interview. We--I know that Johnson had the tapes conducted from the interview. And you know, it kind of like kind of blew me away because I realized just how sort of sheltered he was, you know, and how it really impacted him in terms of people impressions and opinions of him. And, and I expected a deeper sense of articulation from him. You know, I was like what up, man. You kind of like rich. Man, you got money, you got this and that, you know. I expected a higher degree of articulation, but he was just a very humble individual, you know and, and spoke very, very softly and, and didn't speak in an erudite fashion. Speaker 1: Right, right. Do you--okay--I don't it must be something else I should ask about this Michael Jackson interview. Did you-- Speaker 2: You, you, you can't you know. Speaker 1: --did you--wa, wa--what was the provocative thing you asked him I mean? Speaker 2: Well, the, the provocative thing, you know, he talked about his interest in bones. And, and the they asked us to strike that. They asked us to strike that--any reference to that. Speaker 1: An interest in bones? Speaker 2: Yeah, because he also collected the bones of David--I think it's David Merrick [sic, Joseph Merrick], the Elephant Man. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so they said no, we don't wanna talk about that, so make sure that that doesn't hit the air and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And so, you know, once again, weren't there to be a crusading journalist or engaged in gotcha journalism. We were there to just profile the individual and be gracious that he allowed us to, to talk to him-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --you know, and to tell his story. And then he was gracious. I think my daughter still has it. He signed a--he signed a photo to a daughter to my daughter, Autumn--said here's to Autumn, you know. And she still has it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She would have been about what--seven or eight then? Speaker 2: Exactly. Yeah, she was maybe five or--she was about five at the time 'cause she's '82 [1982] and this is '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: That's rights. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 137032 Speaker 1: Yeah, let me ask you about Oprah Winfrey. She's not interviewed much--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, and in fact, people that are--you know, if you Google my name, it pops up there because somebody actually used the interview that I conducted with her. She's since gone on to do a number of interviews, but back when she became Oprah, you know, she--we had the Chicago [Illinois] connection. And I remember her crying, you know, when she--when I interviewed her, and it was in Chicago at her studio. She had just bought her studios, Harpo [Productions, also known as Harpo Studios]. And she was just talking about the, the woman that has the multiple disorders--identity disorders--and just how gracious she was. You know, and I was just blown away by her sensitivity. And the fact that here is this, this woman that, you know, is destined for stardom and destined for greatness and--but yet still touched by the common person. And so, you know, and here she is, you know--went on from there of course, you know, when we conducted the interview in the late '80s [1980s, interview aired in 1990] to build--become arguably one of the most influential women in the world. Speaker 1: Right, I--and I don't think maybe in '87 [1987], her, her background was well known because-- Speaker 2: No, no, because-- Speaker 1: --she had just started--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --she was primary--she was starting. She had-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --just started the 'Oprah Winfrey Show' maybe in what--'80--'87 [1987] or '88 [1988], somewhere around there, yeah. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--I think here in Chicago--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, the 'Oprah Winfrey Show' she didn't start until '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: Okay, the big--the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause she was doing Good Day Chica--she was doing the Chicago show, 'Good Morning Chicago' [sic, 'AM Chicago'] or whatever it was. It wasn't until about '87 [1987] that she did--'cause we ended up interviewing her I think in '89 [1989] or so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so she was--you know, taking off. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, definitely. Because in that era there was, you know, Phil Donahue that kind of ruled the airways, and then boom, here's Oprah. Hey, everybody I'm here. Speaker 1: Did, did she--did, did you learn anything about her you didn't really know before? Speaker 2: I think that the fact that fate--God is not a respecter of person in that He will take--there's a beautiful scripture in Corinthians, and it says that God takes the foolish things of the world to confound the wise. And it takes the weak--He takes the weak things of the world to subdue the strong [1 Corinthians 1:27]. And I think that Oprah is indicative of that, the fact that--and she mentions this. You know, to look at her and to look at her background and stuff like that, she doesn't fit a European beauty standard or anything like that. But yet she has this gift that automatically touches people--that her gift has allowed her to grow into where she is today. And she knows where her blessings come from. And I think that that--the thing that I glean from that is that the world will say one thing, but God will have another plan for you that will supersede what people believe as the common root to success is. Story_ID: 137033 Speaker 1: Okay, now you interviewed Sammy Davis, Jr.-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --as well. Now-- Speaker 2: Sammy was incredible because he used to watch the show in Las Vegas [Nevada]. And he told me, he says, "Man, I watch you--man, I watch you in--I watch you in Las Vegas. You're doing a good job." And I was just--I was like blown away. Wow, here's arguably probably one of the greatest entertainers that ever lived, and he said that he watched me you know, on TV. And it was an incredible experience. And I actually interviewed him at Johnson [Publishing Company] headquarters [Chicago, Illinois], and so we had that black-eyed peas and chitterlings, and collard greens 'cause that's what he wanted when he came to talk to [HM] Mr. [John H.] Johnson. Speaker 1: There--there's a--just, just--I know other--we've interviewed other Johnson employees that talk about the kitchen at Johnson-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --Publishing. Speaker 2: My wife [Darlene Dennard] will tell you that she enjoyed the fact that I gained weight, you know, while--she was always worried about me maintaining a certain level of weight. And she was happy because you could--there was no way that you couldn't gain weight. You know, every day it was fried chicken, and black-eyed peas, and candied yams, and collard greens, and cornbread. That's what we used to eat during lunch--smothered pork chops. And these were some beautiful women behind the--in the kitchen area that knew how to throw down. And that's what we would eat, you know. I think it was either free or some ridiculously low price, and then everybody would eat up there during the lunch. Speaker 1: Okay, so (unclear)--anything else about Sammy Davis Jr.? Now what was he doing at that, that point in time? Speaker 2: He had pretty much was, you know, kind of was--he was together with Altovise [Davis] at the time, and so this was the later stages of his career. And so he's primarily, you know, just kind of like chilling out. And then later on from there I think he became sick with the throat cancer that he had. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So this was not too long before he ended up passing away. Speaker 1: So was he reflecting on his long career-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --at the interview? Speaker 2: He was always in the moment. You know, he was like, hey, man, you know, this is what I do and you know, I'm just grateful to be here and stuff like that. Story_ID: 137034 Speaker 1: Now when you traveled for 'Ebony/Jet Showcase,' what kind of crew did you take with you? Were you and [Deborah] Crable-- Speaker 2: We had--we were very, very fortunate that [HM] Mr. [John H.] Johnson really wanted us to employ black crews whenever possible. And so many--Bill Dill and Eli Clark [ph.] and several other (unclear)--Pierre--I can't think of his last name, but wherever possible we would find those black crews and use them, and then in some cases travel with them. We went to Jamaica. We traveled with a black crew to Jamaica to, to film us--in Atlanta [Georgia]. You know, we would just look for those black crew all across the country and hire--try to at least hire them first. Speaker 1: Okay, primar--I mean, how many staff would, would-- Speaker 2: Travel? Speaker 1: --travel--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: At first, it would be myself and one of my producers. And then later on, Deborah [Crable] and I would travel by ourselves. Our producers would line everything up for us. You know, it was just a matter of saving expenses. And our producers would line up who we were going to interview, and we try to knock out two interviews a day. And in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] that gets to be very difficult, just based on logistics in terms of traffic and stuff like that. And you know, we pull into the city, get in there a day or two before, and then go and interview, whether it was someone like Mario Van Peebles at his apartment or if it wasn't Mario Van Peebles, it might have been [HM] Jasmine Guy at her apartment and stuff like that. And then while we were on the West Coast, I may go up to San Francisco [California] then hop a plane to San Francisco. And in San Francisco, I ended up interviewing Jasmine Guy and also interviewed Sheila E. So we tried to be economical, but at the same time went to where the stories were. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and--now did--Sherman Hemsley is an interview that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we had went--when it comes to Sherman Hemsley, and we actually went on the set of 'Amen.' He was doing 'Amen' at the time. And you know, arguably he had one of probably the most prominent African Americans--black folks on TV, given the success of 'The Jeffersons' and then the recent success of 'Amen.' And so we interviewed a lot of the people from the staff of 'Amen.' And I think he was apprehensive, because Sherman was a very, very private individual. And like I said before, we weren't there to delve into a person's private life. And he was just overjoyed at the fact that, you know, I was just there to highlight him and to talk about things associated with his career and didn't talk about any areas he didn't wanna speak on. And if you look online, you'll see this picture of the two of I together, and he still has on a hat. And that's what he decided to do 'cause he was that afraid that he had to put on this facade, so to speak, as opposed to letting his hair down and just talk personally with me. And you know, he enjoyed the fact that, you know, I just kept it at a professional level. And he just thanked me, you know, effusively, in terms of the route that I took for the interview. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did anything--is there anything special that--is there anything special that he said that, that-- Speaker 2: No, he was just like-- Speaker 1: --that you remember or? Speaker 2: --you real--you know, people enjoyed--you know, and this is something I always received in jumping from 'Ebony/Jet Showcase' to 'Minority Business Report' to 'Black Enterprise [Business] Report' is that I take pride in trying to ask very sensitive, probing questions that actually have some thought behind them. And I think people appreciate that fact that you don't just come out with a generic question at somebody. I try to actually listen to what's being said and then formulate a question based on a response I received, as opposed to coming out of left field with something that didn't even take into account what was said before. Story_ID: 137035 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay, you--so is that generally your philosophy of, you know, as an interviewer? Speaker 2: I think so--is do your homework, and to ask something that's relevant, to ask something that probes a little deeper than beyond the surface, to, to ask something that is going to cause somebody to speak from the heart, and to glean some information that people didn't know before about an individual. You know, that's difficult to do. That was one thing that I always kind of disliked about celebrity journalism--and, and I made my living off of celebrity journalism--is the fact that you end up having to ask these really generic questions. And nowadays because we're so enamored of this cult of personality that we go out there and you see people trying to make themselves part of the, the interview. Hey, how's it going like you know this person. You really don't know this person that you're interviewing, and as such, do you just walk over to somebody and start asking them about their personal life? And you know, I kind of appreciate those artists and those individuals that say I'm not gonna talk about that. That's none of your business. And then you know, you try to laughingly shake it off, or you try to find--you (unclear) and you try to find a way to, you know--woe, well, how are the kids doing, you know, as you're gettin' ready to end the interview. And then the sad part about that is that you just conducted an entire interview about the movie, because that's the only reason why that person is speaking to you, to promote this movie, but yet the thing that becomes the lead is you asking that last-minute question: By the way, how's the kids? How are the kids? That's what ends up leading, because people feel that's all that you know, the people wanna know about, are the personal aspects of these people as opposed to what they're tryin' to do or promote. And so you really have to admire those individuals and say look, I don't wanna talk about that. If you talk to me about that, I'm outta here. Story_ID: 137036 Speaker 1: Now do you--do you, in the course of doing interviews for 'Ebony/Jet Showcase,' I mean, did you have a chance to warm the people up before you sat 'em down? Speaker 2: To a certain extent, yeah. And, and then, you know, you talk to them and they said well, you know, what are we here for? And for a lot of times it was for a promotion. You know, people wanted to promote something, so you had to make sure that you were there also to get the job done, to promote whatever it is that gave you entree to get that interview. Then, once again, listening as opposed to having all these precept questions. Sure I had preset questions that I was going to ask, but by listening to what's being said, I think that that afforded me an entree to eliciting a different response from them, because they said hey, this person is actually asking something probative. This person is, you know, kind of going beyond the surface. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, considering the nature of 'Ebony/Jet Showcase,' in terms of this, you know, keeping the interview focused on the professional life of a person-- Speaker 2: No, we did the whole profile. Many cases, you know, it was about us exposing a behind-the-scenes picture, if you will, those interbu--those individuals that they were watching on TV, 'cause there were no other programs that, that was doing it. You know, '60 Minutes' does it of course, but they have twelve minutes to do that profile. We were conducting those profiles--sometimes if, you know, like in Michael Jackson that was a fourteen-minute piece that we did on him, so it took two and it was almost the entire show. So we went behind the scenes to try to show you this individual. We went to the house when I did Michael [Jackson] (unclear). You know, we went to his beautiful homes in the San Francisco Valley [California] there, and you know, showed him hanging out with his wife at his complex and them playing music and stuff like that. Or Barry White, when I interviewed him at his complex showing him inside his own studio that he had built into his home. How many shows--you know, shows do that all the time now, but nowadays stars don't always wanna give you access like that. So the only time that you actually interview them is on a press junket. And that's when, you know, you're trying to get something in edgewise to make it to the newscast, as opposed to actually doing a profile of them at home. Story_ID: 137037 Speaker 1: Okay, now how was Deborah Crable to work with? Speaker 2: Phenomenal. You know, Deborah is a very close friend of mine, probably one of the greatest voices around, and just an outstanding individual. You know, she's like a, a sister to me, and a person that, you know, I care for deeply, and just a beautiful, beautiful, you know, talent. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now you were host of--a co-host of 'Ebony/Jet Showcase' from '87 [1987] until-- Speaker 2: From '87 [1987] to '91 [1991] Speaker 1: To '91 [1991], okay. Speaker 2: About five years, '87 [1987], '88 [1988], '89 [1989], '90 [1990], '91 [1991], five years. Speaker 1: Did you kind of figure that it was--it would last about five years or was it-- Speaker 2: No, they actually--[HM] Mr. [John H.] Johnson decided to change direction. And so I think if the both of us--I think Deborah and I were let go and then they brought in two other new people, or--you know, and then just decide--and then the show ended it up--it was canceled maybe a year or two after that--after we departed. Speaker 1: (Unclear) when, when you look at the list of peep--people who hosted, it seemed to be like a, a pattern of reinvention of the show in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --so many-- Speaker 2: And I don't if it was reinvented after we left it. Deborah and I kind of established the standard, so to speak, and--you know, in terms of taking you behind the scenes and, and showing you the story where it actually exists. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, would be different from--so when Tom Joyner started, he--there, there wasn't a lot of that done--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They did. Yeah, they did all location stuff, but Tom's style was totally different. Ours was much more akin to what you say on 'Entertainment Tonight' or '60 Minutes.' So with Tom it was much more centered around Tom the interviewer--you know, the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, as opposed to here are segments that are featured here. And like I said, it was much more akin to 'Entertainment Tonight.' These are the stories that are happening. These are the individuals that are making news that we wanna tell you about. And then we also expanded the show to go on location to various cities where we would go to a particular city, and then show you all of the places to hang out in that city. So we did that with New Orleans [Louisiana], and we did that with Atlanta [Georgia], and we did that with Jamaica, and we did that with New York [City, New York], where we would go to these various locales, and then show you black life at these locales. So, you know, it became also like a travel log, if you will. Story_ID: 137038 Speaker 1: Okay, so, you're in Chicago [Illinois]. By '91 [1991] you're here five years. And now how were you adjusting to Chicago life? Was it different from-- Speaker 2: I loved it. You know, my son was born in '89 [1989], and my daughter, she went to--my daughter [Autumn Dennard-Merritt] went to the [Chicago] Harvard School [Chicago, Illinois]. And in fact, [HM] Toni Preckwinkle was one of her in--instructors. And, and then my son [Darryl Dennard, Jr.] was born at--where was it? What was the name of the hospital there on--I can't think of the name of the hospital, but it was right off of Lincoln [Avenue]. And it's not Jones. He went to Jones High School [sic, Jones College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois], but it was a hospital right off of Lincoln, not too far from--and it's not even a hospital now. It's a condominium--and Lincoln Avenue, right near the pizzeria there, near Sheffield [Avenue] and around there. Speaker 1: I know what you mean, but I can't think of it. Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't think of the name of the hospital. And that's where, you know, he was born. And then both of my children went to Ray School [William H. Ray Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And he ended up going to--went to Jones High School. My daughter went to Kenwood [Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And he ended up graduating from Cooper Union in New York City, and my daughter ended up graduating from Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. But I say all that was that I knew that I enjoyed Chicago, so I didn't look for jobs outside of the Chicago area after I was let go from 'Ebony/Jet Showcase.' And then in '93 [1993], Fox News came calling--Velma Cato, who was the news director at that time. They were starting a brand new show called 'Good Day Chicago.' And so they hired me as one of the main anchors to anchor 'Good Day Chicago.' Story_ID: 137039 Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in '93 [1993]. In, in the interim, did you--did you--now, now I know you did news and traffic for a number of different programs Speaker 2: No, that was radio. That was later on. Speaker 1: Oh, radio. That's--so that's much later. Speaker 2: Right, right, so I did the-- Speaker 1: Okay, so the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I did the morning newscast. That would be my next move from broadcasting. From '91 [1991], I kind of just did smaller jobs and stuff like that. And then in '93 [1993], I ended up getting a job. I think I started working with the city colleges as a health recruiter for Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois] in the Health Sciences Department. And then Fox [News] came aboard. And I did Fox New for about a year and a half and the program kind of went down. And then after that, my good and, and mentor, [HM] Don Jackson, called me about '95 [1995], '96 [1996], and he asked me to come in to host the 'Minority Business Report.' And I ended up hosting the 'Minority Business Report' from '96 [1996], '95 [1995], '96 [1996] all the way until about 2005. And then the 'Minority Business Report' became the 'Black Enterprise [Business] Report,' and then I hosted that for three years. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is television? Speaker 2: This is all TV-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --syndicated television-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --through Central City Productions [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So Don Jackson through Central City Productions hired me to host the 'Minority Business Report,' and we helped give [HM] Mellody Hobson her start. She was one of my weekly correspondents. And she would come on and provide us with tips--financial tips of that nature. And she went on, of course, to super (unclear) and to write (unclear). And first--when I first started hosting, I hosted with Nydia Rodriguez [Terracina]. And then from Nydia Rodriguez, I hosted with Zoraida Sambolin. And, and so that was--those were, you know, two great female co-hosts and stuff like that. And then in between, there were little short stints. I think Deborah [Crable] and I had co-hosted maybe once and twice. And--'cause I was the producer too. I ended up--at first I wasn't the producer, and then John--Don allowed me to become the producer of the show. So not only was I hosting the show, but I was also producing it. And during the late '90s [1990s], early 2000s, I also started doing also started doing part-time work for Clear Channel Radio, WVAZ [Chicago, Illinois]. And I started doing news on the side, just on a-as a freelance thing. Story_ID: 137040 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, in terms of 'Minority Business Report,' is there any memorable stories that--I mean, you know, what was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think that that was a phenomenal experience. You know, we taped at Channel 9 [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois], so I got a chance to know all of the WGN News crew, because that's who we worked with over there. And, and then we also traveled with the 'Minority Business Report.' So we would travel. I would go to Congressional Black Caucus and tell the story from there. I would go to New York [City, New York] sometimes and, and you know, talk about interesting stories there. But primarily 'Minority Business Report' was designed to allow people to come in and talk to all of these great business leaders that are in the Chicago [Illinois] area, both Latino, Asian, and black, and profile their particular company and that individual while we were there. And then we had other segments. Like, [HM] Mellody Hobson would come on and she would do a financial segment. And then we had Bruce Montgomery. He would come on and do a technical segment--excuse me. And then we asked Sporty King, and Sporty King would come on and he would do--excuse me--and then we asked Sporty King, and Sporty King would come on and do an inspirational segment. So, as a producer, I already had it mapped out how long everything was going to take and who was going to conduct the interview. So it was just a matter of filling in the holes and putting in interviews in those particular areas. And we conducted the interviews on set, and so that's what made it work. And [HM] Don [Jackson] was assured of my capability, not only as an on-air host, but also in terms of producing the show. And I'm eternally grateful to him for that opportunity. Speaker 1: So Chicago was known as a business mecca for African Americans-- Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, and that's what--that's why it was so easy for us to do a show, even though it was nationally syndicated, called 'Minority Business Report.' You know, because we had on the [HM] George Johnsons and the Baldwin Ice Creams and, and the Soft Sheens and, and the Rands, and you know, just goes on and on. And then also we would feature those individuals. We would every year do an on-location show from the Chicago Business Opportunity Fair, and then end up doing tons of interviews there of all of these--you know, it's 'Minority Business Report' so it's just not black business. And then we also would go to the outlying areas and interview people in Detroit [Michigan], and as well as Idaho--not Idaho but Iowa, and, and things of that nature, and looking at the black businesses that are in the surrounding areas. Story_ID: 137041 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, is there any particular story that really, you know, is memorable that you--I mean all of these are remarkable people, and I know just sitting here interviewing people, I learn so much about what folks are doing-- Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: So what--is there something that really-- Speaker 2: I think that just the opportunity to see these individuals and to see such a diverse representation of engagement or a diverse representation of the areas where we were conducting business and are conducting business is actually the salient factor. If you look at how thick Black Enterprise used to be back in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s] and 2000s, and the diversity, so we would interview all of those individuals that were--there were far more dealerships, in terms of big auto manufacturers, black-owned dealerships, at the beginning of 2000s than there are today. There were far more franchise owners. There are more franchise owners now I think, but you know, when you take into account the differences of business, there was--you know, of course, we had black cosmetic firms. There's only one now, you know, that I can think of, you know, and that, of course, is Luster [Products Company], but everybody else is kind of gone. But if you take into account the '90s [1990s], and the '80s [1980s], and the beginning of the 2000s, there were a number of black-owned hair care products, and a lot of them were based right here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah, now one phenomenon that characterized I guess the late '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s] was the competition by minority businesspeople for the business of the black community. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You had a particular sharp competition between-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --black businessmen, Arab businessmen, and Koreans-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, that still exists. You know, but that's on the retail side. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: I'm speaking more of the manufacturing side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, from the retail side it's hard for black-owned business to compete because they're not buying at quantities that Asian vendors are buying. And so--but on the manufacturing side--don't forget Soft Sheen was a black-owned company, Johnson Products, you know, was a black-owned company--you know, not Johnson and Johnson, but Johnson Products was a black-owned company, headquartered right here. So--and then you look at the proliferation of Jheri curls, you know, where you needed to have this product in order to get your hair done, it bode well. And so, like anything, you know, it became very attractive or takeovers. (Unclear) said there's a lot of money to be made there. So I think it's important to look at the manufacturing side of something as opposed to the retail side. You know, there are different dynamics that go into the retail element, in terms of being able to buy from overseas and, and to carry all of those kind of items that go along into a beauty shop that may be run by, you know, an Asian vendor, as opposed to manufacturing this product, this hair gel, and Pink Lotion [Luster product], and things of that nature that, you know, people they tend to have a workforce that is predominantly African American. Story_ID: 137042 Speaker 1: So what were some of the concerns or some of the other minority business people doing business in the black community in those days? Speaker 2: I think that what we tried to expose with 'Minority Business Report' was, of course, the diversity of this diverse set of business providers, and, and that's key. So it didn't just--and I think that people like Jim Reynolds and [HM] John Rogers [Jr.] are indicative of that and people of their ilk in terms of financial services. And then there are manufacturers, and in addition to people being manufacturers, there are people that are involved in service areas. And then we also have CFOs. You know I think we still have more CFOs--not CFOs, but CEOs probably in the mid-2000s than we currently have right now. But you know, when you look at Barry Rand, and Ken Chenault, and--I forgot the name of the sister that was over one of the biggest advertising agencies. You know, we had that, 'cause that was my daughter's [Autumn Dennard] keynote speaker when she graduated from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] in 2004. We had that back in the beginning of the 20s--the 2000s. But, you know, you can count on hand. There's--for Darden Industries [sic Darden Restaurants], there's a brother [Jeff Davis, CFO] that, that oversees Darden Industries, which of course is Red Lobster and, and Olive Garden, and stuff like that that has a black CEO. But we still haven't seen tremendous gains there commensurate with our growth in terms of population. Things have somewhat stagnated on the minority business side. And, and in some cases, tended to recede. Speaker 1: Okay, now are you called upon to talk about, you know, the state of black businesses-- Speaker 2: A little bit. Speaker 1: --because of the, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a little bit. You know, not as much as, as one would think, because I think it's like--you know, there's a saying in the--in the Latino community, and it revolves around color and race. And it says stop hiding your grandmother in the kitchen. And so what that is you don't always want to expose some of the troubling--or what you perceive as troubling aspects of what exists in your background. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were--so 'Minority Business Report' is still going on? Speaker 2: No, no it-- Speaker 1: It's not. Speaker 2: --it became-- Speaker 1: Became Black Enterprise-- Speaker 2: 'Black Enterprise [Business] Report,' and now it's 'Black Enterprise Report' that's out of New York City [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay--(unclear) show-- Speaker 2: Right, so this whole show. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so do you miss that or? Speaker 2: I miss--you know, I miss being on air on a regular basis, but you know, I had my own production company. And with my production I had the opportunity to do documentary work and, and tell the stories of some of my corporate clients and community based organizations that need exposure. And I'm able to tell their story in a very eloquent, affordable fashion. And so in that sense it's very rewarding, and it's just a continuation. Many times I may voiceover that piece. And so it tends to be very rewarding in that regard. And then, you know, I'm also hiring folks when, when I do that. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 137043 Speaker 1: Now, now you--when did you start Double D Productions? Speaker 2: Started it in '96 [1996] I believe. Speaker 1: Was this your first production company? Speaker 2: This was my first production company. Yes, you know, I realized the need for me--I said as I was looking for work--and then it's important to note that in '96 [1996], '97 [1997], I began an association for eight years with Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois], and I became their executive director of broadcasting and theater. And, and so that was a tremendous opportunity for me, because I also held my--and then it was kind of crazy 'cause I was executive director of broadcasting, and then I was also doing 'Minority Business Report,' and I had my own production company. So there was a lot that was going on at that particular time, and I had the chance to touch the lives of individuals that wanted to pursue degrees in radio and television. And so that was just a tremendous opportunity for me to teach at Kennedy-King College. And I tea--I did teach for a little while, but I was primarily an administrator. I was the director of the entire program--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Kennedy-King has a full studio. Speaker 2: Oh, it's a phen--I helped designed the current studio-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that they have. Yeah, I, I helped design that with the architects. Speaker 1: Right, and there was a story. Someone was telling me at one time a story of--like a struggle in city colleges as to where WYCC [PBS Chicago] was gonna be lo--located. Speaker 2: Right, and WYCC used to be located--when we were putting together the designs for the new Kennedy-King [College], we realized that having a working television station right adjacent to an associate degree program was a win-win situation. And so we moved WYCC from then [Harry S.] Truman College [Chicago, Illinois] over to the new facility on 63rd Street and Halsted [Street]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, even in the old Kennedy-King, there was a full studio--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, definitely, a full studio. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a phenomenal studio--full studio. That's why, you know, people that receive their associate of arts degree in radio television broadcasting, they got a phenomenal experience. And I ended up producing with the students to give them the on-air and behind-the-scenes experience. We did a weekly newscast. It's kind of more like monthly to tell you to truth, but it was called 'Info Central.' And this put Kennedy-King on the map nationally. We received national awards for this. And what it was was that all of the students would end up hosting sort of like an 'Ebony/Jet Showcase' if you will. And whoever came to town, I would have the students go on location and interview them. And then we would feature things that were going on at the college or the colleges. And then we also would have celebrity interviews. So we interviewed people like [HM] Danny Glover, Tyra Banks, Enshe Vesta [ph.], all of these individuals that came in--Gwendolyn Brooks, all of these people that came into town to do different things. When they had a press availability, I would take the students down there and teach the students how shoot and how to conduct the interview, and the we would put it together in a half an hour magazine show called 'Info Central.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so, so your students were able--were, were any of 'em able to--well, I know some of 'em were, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, they got jobs. Yeah, yeah and you know, some of my Latino students ended up going to Miami working for Telemundo. Several of my students--cause I also was over the radio station. Several of my radio--several of my students are on-air--they're on-air as we speak right now, in terms of--at the various radio stations. And you know, I just--I fill in for Ty Wansley on V103 and Gospel Radio [WGRB AM] 1390. And one of my former students there, Marsha [ph.], and she is-she's like, "Hi, Mr. Dennard." They all call me Mr. Dennard. And they're like, yeah, yeah, you know, you were so instrumental in helping me get to where I am today, so it's a good feeling. Story_ID: 137044 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about now Double D Productions-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it stands for--you know, it has a double entendre--stands, of course, for Double D, meaning Darryl Dennard. But also I would be remiss if I didn't say it also stands for my wife, who's a major part of my life, Darlene Dennard. So, Darlene and Darryl, and you know, we're soulmates. And, and you know, she's just a phenomenal writer, and so Double D Productions is indicative of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Whenever possible, she will help me out on shoots and--not only from a writing perspective, but also she does makeup and wardrobe. And it's just good to kind of keep things in the family there. Speaker 1: Okay, and Double D, now what, what kind of--so you do like documentaries and-- Speaker 2: I do (unclear) and documentaries. There's a documentary called 'Culture of Calm: A Calming Presence.' That was a documentary that I wrote, directed, produced, and my company shot that we did for Chicago Public Schools in the wake of the Derrion Albert killing. And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And what happened there? Tell us about that. Speaker 2: It was--what happened was that there was this--what happened--because there was so much national attention focused on the incidence of violent crime being perpetrated against high school youth and grade school youth in Chicago [Illinois] that [HM] Eric Holder and Arne Duncan came to Chicago to try to stop this senseless violence that was going on. So through some of the recovery funds--national recovery funds that were available, they created a one on one mentoring program that was designed to go to several targeted schools, and connect with community-based organizations like Chicago Youth Centers, the Urban League, the 100 Black Men of Chicago that I was associated with, and provide one on one mentoring for at-risk youth. And this one on one mentoring include at school and after school programs that we would follow through on these students to help ensure that they would stay out of trouble and away from violence, and stop violence before it actually was perpetrated. So what I did was that I did a documentary--an hour long documentary--and it focused on five archetypes. These aren't stereotypes these are archetypes. And these archetypes were students that were reflective of some of the at-risk categories that these students were involved with. And so that happened in 2011 that I did that. And it's available. You can look at it on YouTube. Story_ID: 137045 Speaker 1: And the other piece that I did that I'm extremely proud of is in 1999. I produced an hour long documentary, along with Habilitative Systems, Incorporated called 'Heading West,' which chronicles the history of the black migration to the West Side of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Now the West Side--Chicago has two significant black populations. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Probably more, but the two divisions that are normally discussed are South Side and West Side. Speaker 1: And that's why we did--we chose the West Side. Habilitative Systems was located on the West Side and Coy Pugh, who was a legislator at the time, was able to get some money to tell the story of the West Side. And so they hired me and my production company [Double D Productions] to tell that story, and it's a phenomenal, you know, historical piece. You know, if you look at it, we feature inside--I'm very proud of this thing. We feature the likes of--[HM] Vernon Jarett is in it, [HM] Timuel Black, Frank Reed. You know, these are all individuals that have been interviewed by HistoryMakers I'm sure, but all of them tell them story of growing up on the West Side of Chicago or the significance of the black migration to the West Side of Chicago. Story_ID: 137046 Speaker 1: Yeah, you, you alluded to the, the migratory patterns in the beginning of the interview when we talked about the, the second wave in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: It is. The West Side is considered--but ironically, it is even in that regard it's a second wave. Because if you know anything--and I learned this by directing and producing this documentary. If you learned anything about black folks in Chicago, the original area for black folks to live was on the near West Side, and that was the Lake Street corridor. That's where black folks lived in the 1800s and the turn of the 20th century. They didn't live south at that time. They lived right on the Lake Street corridor, and then they started to migrate south. And once again, it wasn't until after World War II [WWII] that they started migrating even further west into the Austin neighborhoods and stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, the--those--well, the commun--those near west communities like--around Farragut High School [sic, Farragut Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and other places, they, they were primarily Eastern European I think at one time, when Jewish-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --so, so black people started coming in after World War II and-- Speaker 2: Black people started coming in after World War II because of the availability of jobs like at Sears [Roebuck & Company] and Western Electric [Company]. And even to this day, if you look at the way [HM] Congressman Danny Davis' office is located, that's the old Sears building. And if you keep on going inside around that corridor, you also had the Western Electric factory. So you had all these manufacturing jobs in addition to some of the stockyard jobs that were on the West Side of Chicago as opposed to the South Side of Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay, I know that people have tried to explain the dif--difference to me many times (unclear) West Side and the South Side. 'Cause when I first arrive here-- Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's, it's based on a secondary migration. You know, the first migration happened from those that tended to be in the northern parts of the South, North Carolina, and then Kentucky and Indiana and places like that that ended up moving to Chicago from that first established area around the Lake Street corridor. And then they migrated south, and that happened all the way up until the '20s [1920s]. But then after that--and that migration stopped because of the Great Depression. People weren't migrating as much during the Great Depression. And then after that, with the war effort, there was this proliferation if you will of jobs that occurred on the West Side of Chicago because of the manufacturing base that existed there. So the [Chicago] Defender once again they shoot a clarion call, hey, come to Chicago. There are jobs here. But it was after World War II. Speaker 1: At a certain juncture these jobs begin to dry out--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, of course. That was just--you know, that's what's called the rust belt. Speaker 1: Right, did--was Nancy Jefferson a key person I guess in terms of--the, the documentary in term--terms of you know, what happened on the West Side? Speaker 2: I don't know. Nancy Jefferson--I'm trying to think--I didn't talk to her. No. Wait--was she a--I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Had a big social service agency on the West Side-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, very much--you know. Speaker 2: I'm very proud of the documentary. You know, we interviewed--we talked about the churches that were over the on the West Side, Quinn [ph.] and, and several of the other ones, St. Stephens [St. Stephen A.M.E. Church, Chicago, Illinois] I believe is another one. You know, we, we did a big piece on the churches. We did a big piece on Marshall [Metropolitan] High School [Chicago, Illinois], which was a big entity on the West Side. We also talked about what happened over in Union Park during the race riots of 1919, you know. And that was as a result of D.W. Griffin's [sic, David Llewelyn Wark "D.W." Griffith]-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-'Birth of a Nation.' Speaker 2: 'Birth of a Nation.' So, you know, we, we covered a lot, a lot material and also talked about this incredible woman. I don't know if it was Mrs. Jefferson or not. It may have been Mrs. Jefferson that had this in the park district. We interviewed some of the park district's historians, and she did this phenomenal thing over near Garfield Park there. I believe that's what it is, over there--the conservatory over there. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: And just talked about how she was holding cotillions and plays and marches all on the West Side of Chicago. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's quite a bit of history there. And I think a lot of the blues musicians-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --be on the West Side. Speaker 2: Definitely. Well, that was part--we also covered Maxwell Street too. And so, you know, that was that migration on the Near West Side if you will. That's what, you know, when you look at that corridor there. That's the Near West Side, as opposed to Austin communities like that. Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right. So, so this is produced in 1999. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-nine [1999]. Speaker 1: So is it still being showed or referred to and everything? Speaker 2: It still could be. You know, it aired on PBS on Channel 20. And I think I need to revisit it. You know, it's something that I plan on revisiting to just update it because I looked at it and it's pretty--I'm pretty proud of it in terms of a piece of work, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, it's called 'Heading West.' Speaker 2: 'Heading West.' Story_ID: 137047 Speaker 1: Now in 2002, you became the host of 'Know Your Heritage,' if I'm-- Speaker 2: I also--that's right, I also hosted--I forgot. You know, I hosted 'Know Your Heritage.' I also hosted the NAACP ACT-SO Awards [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics Awards]. And all of that was based on my relationship with [HM] Don Jackson and Central City Productions. I was his go-to guy in terms of being able to host different shows that his company produced. Speaker 1: And you, you also pop up in you know, hosting the fireworks at the Taste of Chicago-- Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: --and a lot of-- Speaker 2: I did at the live broadcast. That's when I was at Fox, probably about '94 [1994] or so. And I hosted the live television broadcast that they did annually from the Taste of Chicago. And then I also did a documentary that was up for an Emmy about this young girl that was burnt in a, a fire on the southwest side of Chicago [Illinois]. Deandra--Deanna [ph.] was her name. Speaker 1: Okay, was she--was she the victim of a crime or, or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She was--came from a somewhat dysfunctional family, but I think what happened there was that she also was involved in a fire, and she was kind of burnt in the fire because people weren't paying attention as much as they should have. And this was our way of telling her story and, and shedding light on the fact that people have to take care of our children, our most precious resource. Story_ID: 137048 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So are--what project are you working on now in terms of, you know, production? Speaker 2: You know, I-- Speaker 1: --or do you have a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I'm, I'm looking at producing a new men's--you know, something having to deal with programming for men. And that's where my heart is right now. I attend the Apostolic Church of God [Chicago, Illinois] where I'm on the men's leadership team there. And also the brother 100 Black Men of Chicago. And so I do youth ministry called Young Brothers for Christ at my church. I'm, I'm very, very sensitive to the plight of African American males and particularly African American youth. And I just think that we have to aspire to the highest levels that we can achieve. And at the same time, it's incumbent on us to make sure that we take a philosophy of each one teaching one, and spending time to actually intervene in the lives of young people. You know, far too few of them have an advocate. Far too few--you see a lot of what are called--you know, young boys acting out. And so who's gonna be there at the school to speak for them and speak on their behalf. And sometimes I find myself, because of my youth ministry, having to go to schools to speak on behalf of youth that have gone through my program. And so I wanna do something that helps to empower them, that helps to steer them in the right direction, and know the importance of doing the right thing. That is just so critically important. There's nothing wrong--this is what I try to tell my youth, and it's a little statement I got from my mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard]. It says, there's no bad in good. And there's nothing punkish about being a good guy. That's where the true strength is in doing well and setting a high moral standard for yourself. And I try to incense--or I try to instill that particular in philosophy and to anybody I meet. You know, you don't always have to take the least common denominator. If you wanna bring attention to yourself, do it in a servant's fashion. Do it so that others will extol who you are rather than you always trying to speak about what it is that you do. Everybody wants attention. We, we live in this cult of personality where everybody wants the spotlight focused on them. Well, do something that's deserving of that, and the greatest thing that you could do is to serve others. And you may not always get the recognition that you want, but in the end, you don't do it for that. You do it because it's the right thing to do. Story_ID: 137049 Speaker 1: Having grown up in New York City [New York] and in--you know, growing up familiar with street life--I mean, is that a help in forming the message that you deliver? Speaker 2: Oh, I, I, I think that that and the fact that you are not tied to a sense of underachieving based on where you came from. You know, I could say well, look, I came from a, you know, single parent--pretty much single parent, head of household. We weren't greatly above the poverty level and things like that, but that's not an excuse for underachieving. And there are so many vast opportunities for people here in this country that there is no excuse for anybody not to be well read. You have the Internet now, so there's no reason for anybody to be ignorant of an education. There's no reason why we have to raise children that don't even understand the necessity of just saying yes or answering in the affirmative as opposed to year, what and huh. And you look at the violence that's being perpetrated. And I recently did a--one of my corporate clients was the Illinois African American Coalition [for Prevention], and we had this youth adolescent intervention program to try to stem the violence this past year, 2013, for youth ages sixteen to twenty-six. And I remember clearly I was interviewing--I did a roundtable discussion with some of the young people involved in the program. And the young lady--and she was clearly able to take care of herself, and she said, "It's crazy out here." I'm quoting her. "It's crazy out here. These young people, you know, them young, young boys going around saggin' and actin' a fool in there." And I said, "What are you--you know, how are--what do you mean young people?" And she says, "I'm talking about boys twelve and thirteen, and they'll shoot you in a second." And if you look at some of these horrific stories that we're hearing about now, it's not being perpetrated by people in their twenties and thirties. It's being perpetrated by people that are teenagers and pre-teen now, when you look at the senseless violence that's going on in our community. So it's incumbent on us, anybody that's watching right now, to take an active interest individually in somebody's life, in a young person's life, you know, to steer them. I don't--you know, when I do my Young Brothers for Christ, they may call me Brother Dennard, but I don't want them to say yes, sir and all that. All I want you to do is just say yes, because that's the way you should answer an adult. That's the way you should answer anybody, not yeah, and huh, and what, just yes. Did you take out the garbage? Yes, not yeah. It automatic--you know, it's something as simple as that I think that helps instill a moral fiber in us that's just so deficient nowadays. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so you're, you're looking at doing something to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I think just to--just to instill a sense of, of role modeling if you will, almost like a, a virtual role model, so to speak, just to say hey, I can look at this and I can learn something about maybe how I should act. You know, we love fashion, but yet we don't always dress appropriately. And it's funny because, if you look at what some of the arbiters of style and fashion now, they're actually going over on the other side. You know, you look at a, a Jay-Z, and he kind of--during the Grammys he had a suit, of course, on. And he kind of got down on--you know, I remember he made a statement about somebody had won an award, and he had on, you know, his baseball cap and stuff like--he says you know, where you at? You know, at you at the whatcha call? Are you are the flea market? He literally said--you know, and then you look at a Justin Timberlake and he's talking about suit and tie and stuff like that. You know, people are kind of change their attitudes when it comes to style. And I look at my daughter and my son-in-law, and they own a clothing line and two clothing stores in Chicago [Illinois] called, called Sir and Madame. And they say what they're doing is trying to dress the urban sophisticate. And I say all of that because it goes back to what I said before about not always having to lower yourself to the least common denominator, but actually using that or aspiring to that which is above the fray. And there's nothing wrong with that. There's nothing wrong--you know, I think it's--there's nothing wrong with aspiring to the best in a person or the best in your abilities. And many times we--and it goes back to everything that I've said in this interview. It's about exposure. Story_ID: 137050 Speaker 1: When you're exposing, people don't enjoy the, the benefits that come with polite society if you will, you know, what it means to get dressed up and literally go to the opera or something like, and to enjoy an evening like that and understand the etiquette that's involved. And you know, and this, this is--this is cross-cultural. There are a lot of people that lament the demise of civility all across the board. You know, you don't just go to the opera in your jeans. You know, people do it nowadays, but there's something to be said about having to maintain protocol. And I think that I just like to see protocol, and I'm not talking about protocol to the extent that you end up ostracizing somebody. I'm talking about protocol to the extent of you allow people to enjoy a level of functionality and entertainment that only comes--that's inside of the demands or the constraints that exist in that particular venue. If you don't know the necessity of being quiet when you go to hear classical music or an opera, then everybody suffers from that. People suffer nowadays when they go see movies when there are people texting. Let me tell you something. That's a major distraction when somebody goes to a movie to text and starts texting, because that light, no matter what, what you think, I--my--you know, we're all programmed to when we see something lit up in a dark movie theater other than the screen, your attention is going to focus to that device. But because of the lack of civility and a lack of etiquette, we think it's okay. Unfortunately, there was somebody that was just killed as a result of that. Story_ID: 134262 Speaker 1: What's the competition like for a production company these, these days, I mean--? Speaker 2: Well, I think that it's a very sad situation right now, because what has happened is that anybody that owns a camera now--and these cameras take phenomenal pictures, you know. In fact, I could take a picture or I can take video on my phone that's HD quality. So before, you know, you could have a client, and you say I wanna charge this amount to go out and shoot something, and everybody's questioning that amount. Well, why is that? You know, somebody else is willing to do that for $300 dollars. So I think that the proliferation of affordable equipment has changed the dynamic of production. And so it makes it very difficult, you know, for people unless they're in the industry and they know, and unless you're at the super high end, and they know the quality that you're gonna receive. For them to be willing to pay, everybody's always looking to do things on the cheap, so to speak, and don't take into account that you're not just getting me shooting something or my company shooting something at a high level, but you're also getting twenty, thirty years of experience that I bring to this piece and that has to account for something. Speaker 1: What does the field look like now for young people coming out of college? Speaker 2: I, I think that it's--I think it's two-fold. I think that I would love to see--and this goes, you know, back to what I was talking about in terms of an education. I would love to see people having a greater knowledge base than what they currently possess. And the sad reality that you encounter nowadays is that there's a great degree of ignorance, just in terms of general knowledge, of a lot of people--young people nowadays. But yet they become incensed when you bring out that ignorance in them. I'm not--I know this. I know that. No, you really don't, because if you did know that, you probably wouldn't have made that statement. You know, you're not as informed as what you think you are, but everybody has this sense that somebody owes them something, or that, you know, I got something to say. Well, then say it, but say it based on a sense of intellect. Say it based on an acquired knowledge base. Don't say it just because YouTube and Vimeo give you the opportunity to say things that make no sense whatsoever. You know, I, I, I, I, I just--I, I, I literally go crazy over newscasts wasting time offering tweets of people. Is this person an expert? So why are you tweeting their comment? What, what's going on here? Because we wanna show that everybody has a voice. Just because having a--have a voice doesn't mean that you're an informed voice. It's a big difference. But yet, you know, we, we had this sense of cult personality, where everybody has to have the ability to say something. I think everybody has the right to say something, but make sure that you're informed in terms of what you're talking about. You know, I don't--I don't tweet. You know, I believe that if I have something to say then I'll say it, but I don't need to offer my opinion about everything that goes on. Story_ID: 134263 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what do you participate in in terms of social media these days? Speaker 2: Hardly any. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Hardly any. Yeah, I'm pretty much old school when it comes to that. I just think, you know, I'm, I'm private, and I try to maintain a level of privacy. And people know where I am and, and who I am based on the media. But I try to live my life in a fashion that--you know, that tries to bring honor to those that I work with. Story_ID: 134264 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now tell me about--now have you been a member of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ]? Speaker 2: I've been a member of the National Association of Black Journalists, member of the National Alliance of Market Developers, the 100 Black Men of Chicago, and the National Black Public Relations Society. Speaker 1: And now you were--I have a note here that you were vice pre--president of the National Black Media Coalition. Is that, that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, that was way, way back in the day with [HM] Pluria Marshall [Sr.]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, back in the day, you know. Back in-- Speaker 1: We interviewed him and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you know, he discussed his struggles with the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Well, you know, and his son, [HM] Pluria Marshall, Jr., is station owner and a newspaper publisher, yeah. His father is a true trailblazer in that regard. Speaker 1: Right, a real warrior. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Very much so. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, so are--so you're still like active in the-- Speaker 2: In the 100 Black Men-- Speaker 1: --black media-- Speaker 2: --of Chicago, yeah, still active there, not as much as I should be. You know, we just--I just missed one of our main meetings, but I saw a lot of my colleagues there and--so they're beckoning me to, to come back. Story_ID: 134265 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well tell us--now you've told us a lot about your family, but tell us some more about your, your wife [Darlene Dennard] and your two children. Speaker 2: You know, I am just blessed with a beautiful wife that is the, you know, the, the spiritual rock of our family. She's, as I said before, a phenomenal writer and gifted singer. She is on the Apostolic Church of God [Chicago, Illinois] Praise Team, and she was in the choir for some twenty years, and just a real prayer warrior for our family, and a phenomenal mother, and just a wonderful role model of what the Bible talks about in terms of what a woman is in Proverbs 31. And then, you know, her mother was Virginia Sims [ph.], and her grandmother was Lucy Campbell [ph.]. And mother was just an incredible woman in Buffalo, New York, that took me under her wings. And when we first got married, and we didn't make a lot of money, so we ended up living with her mother for a short while and then ended up getting our apartment in Buffalo. And fortunately ended up--even as I was working at Channel 2 [WGRZ] in Buffalo [New York], ended up living back, as my daughter--ended up living back with my wife's mother before I took the job with 'Ebony/Jet Showcase.' And that--I'm so grateful for that because her mother actually died suddenly while we were still living at the house there. So for my daughter to have her grandmother around from birth until she was about four years old was a phenomenal experience for her. So we do that now with my two grandchildren, Ari and Milo [ph.]. They're used to having their grandparents around all the time. And so--in fact, I was a little late to the interview today because I had to drop them off at their school. They call it school; it's actually a preschool daycare. And--but they're so used to seeing my wife and I that the first thing that comes out their mouth if I go pick them up or if my wife just picks them up the first thing out of their mouth is where's granddad? Or, you know, and if I'm picking them up? Where's grandma? Because that's their reference point. They know that when they see granddad, they see grandma too. And it's just, you know, I'm extremely grateful for my children. And my son-in-law is a phenomenal young man, Brian Merritt, and you know, my daughter has his last name, so she's Autumn [Dennard-]Merritt. And it's, it's a wonderful thing-- Story_ID: 134266 Speaker 1: The thing that I've always had difficulty understanding is this false image that's perpetrated with regard to in-laws. I, I, I don't understand, you know, when you watch in the media and you know, and TV, it always like, well, hi daer, my mom's is coming over. Oh, no, you're mother's coming over. You know, like looking at in-laws as a negative thing. I never experienced that. My mother [Eleanor Adamson Dennard], even though my father [Glenn Dennard] and mother were separated the vast major--they were married and then, you know, they became separated until my father's death. They didn't live together. You know, I was primarily my mother and my grandmothers raising me into adulthood and my sisters [Glenda and Toya Dennard]. And my mother helped take care of my father's mother [Ollie Cammon] and my great-grandmother [Ceola Jones] on my father's side. They looked at her as like their main daughter--one of their main daughters. And there was never any discrimination; in fact, on my mother's side of the family everybody knew my father's mother and grandmother. You know, they would all come over. You know, there was no separation then, even though that wa--they were her in-laws. They were her main family and likewise with my wife [Darlene Dennard]. I loved my wife's mother [Virginia Sims] like she was my mother, and my wife calls my mom "mom." One of the greatest gifts that I received as a young father and, and now grandfather, was about four years ago on Father's Day. My son-in-law [Brian Merritt] came up to me. He used to call me Mr. Dennard. And he came up to me. He said, "Mr. Dennard." I said, "Yes?" He said, "You wouldn't mind if I called you dad would you?" And I said, "Wow, son, that's, that's incredible." And so my son-in-law calls me dad--in-law calls me daddy, doesn't call me by my first name, doesn't call me by my last name. He calls me dad, and we have a wonderful relationship his parents--with his parents. Both of them are physicians, Dr. Carolyn Meritt [ph.] and Dr. John Meritt. And you know, we have a relation where we love them like their part of--they are part of the family, and that's the way we love them. There's no separation there in terms of in-laws. And so I never really understood that because I never encountered that. There's no difference between my mother-in-law and my mom's. It's just the opposite of my wife's situation. My mother--you know, my wife calls my mom's, mom. I call my wife's mom, mom. My son-in-law calls me dad, calls my wife mom, and that's the way it is. Story_ID: 134267 Speaker 1: Okay, and--well, did you wanna talk more about your son [Darryl Dennard, Jr.]? I think you-- Speaker 2: Oh, my son, yeah, and I'm, I'm extremely proud. I, I love him, you know, to death--to life actually. And he is a phenomenal artist. He's currently working with Jeff Koons right now in New York City [New York] where he paints for him. And, and he is living in Chinatown [New York, New York] with his own studio. He is just across media. He's a phenomenal sculpture, and painter, and photographer, and writer. And I'm just grateful to see him blossom into becoming a great artist. Story_ID: 134268 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now when you look back on your career and everything you've done up to this point, and I've realize you're still working, but is there anything major you would do differently if you could go back and change something? Speaker 2: Not really. I think I would save more if I had it to do over, you know, to kind of avoid some of the pitfalls that I've had in life. But I wouldn't do anything differently than maybe, maybe trying to meet the Lord at an earlier point in my life, but you know, all things in time, and God orchestrates all things based on his timeframe. In the words of that great Negro spiritual: He may not come when you want Him, but He's always right on time. Story_ID: 134269 Speaker 1: Okay, again when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think the greatest legacy is embodied in what I tried to give to young people that come after me, what I try to give as a father, what I try to give as a teacher, what I try to give as a Sunday school teacher, what I try to give as a mentor to young people coming up. That's really what--you know, I think the entertainment aspect of what I do and what I've done is great, but the thing I find most rewarding is being able to hear a young person come up and say hey Brother Dennard, I remember, you know, you all that time that you devoted with me for Young Brothers for Christ. I'm married now, and I'm doing this, and I'm doing that, and to hear people say that I was instrumental in helping them to where they are. You know, that's, that's really the main reason for being here is, you know, only what you do for others last. It's not really what you do for yourself but you know, how--what did you do to help somebody else. You know, what kind of servant with--were you? And I think service is one of the greatest--service and the other word that I would add to service is that of--that of actually being there, being responsible, being dependable, knowing that when you--when somebody needs you or needs to depend on you, you can be there for that individual. Service and dependability I think are two of--if I were to be recognized for something, they would be the two words that I would love to be recognized for: service to his fellow man and somebody that you could depend on. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, is there anything we haven't mentioned that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Nah, nah, I think we did pretty well there. Story_ID: 134270 Speaker 1: We'll think--we'll discover-- Speaker 2: Yeah, of course-- Speaker 1: --tomorrow-- Speaker 2: --I'm sure-- Speaker 1: --a lot of--but the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I just want to be remembered as somebody that truly cared about uplifting individuals regardless of race, creed, color, national origin; somebody that truly cared about people and that wanted to show the love of Christ in everything that he did. If I could do that, that--that's great, you know. I gotta give my all to Him, 'cause He gave His all for me. And it sounds, you know, perfunctory, but that's, that's where I stand in life, because I'm reminded of that scripture that says: for me to live--for me to die as Christ, then to live his gain [sic, "For me, to live is Christ, and to die is gain" Philippians 1:21]. And, and so if I could do things that's gonna help somebody along the way, so to speak, and somebody can look at me and say oh, I'd like to do what he does but then realize that you need to do it the right way, that you don't always need to skate at trying to accomplish something, but give somebody your very best when decide to do something for someone, that's the kind of legacy I wanna leave, that I gave my very best in service to others. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Sure...