 Story_ID: 630578 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Yes, I will. My name is Dr. Lewis Eugene Dodley [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley]. Lewis is L-E-W-I-S, of course, Eugene, last name Dodley, D-O-D-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Well, 12/25/40 [December 25, 1940], Columbus, Ohio, in Grant Hospital [OhioHealth Grant Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio]. And it's still standing. Speaker 1: Okay. And sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I'm a retired, I guess maybe a neuropsychologist. I like to say that I'm an Afrocentric psychologist, and work a lot with troubled folks, period. Speaker 1: Okay. And what's today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Today is April the four- 6th, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Two- Columbus, Ohio. You're at 204 Sherborne Drive, in a neighborhood called Eastgate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Where I always wanted to live. Story_ID: 630579 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They're kind of like a warm up. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: And the first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. My favorite food in a group is seafood. Not because you see it, but I do, I like to see food, period. Speaker 1: Okay, I know that gag. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I like, I like purple and pink, and there's a reason for that, too. Pink, maybe because of my grandkids. All of my granddaughters love pink. And I try to dispel that myth, that real men can wear pink, too. So, and purple, kind of royal, it's an exciting color for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, I think I like the spring equinox. I like it, because it's a new start. Anything that you've done before, you can--that you didn't like to do, that didn't work out for you--now you've got a new chance. And it seems like everything now is so alive. And that's the way I feel. So, I like spring a lot. It's very significant for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I've never really taken a vacation except for, a couple of years ago I took the kids down to Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida], because I felt like I wanted to do something for them. But my favorite vacation really is being on my boat going fishing up to Lake Erie and staying two or three days; eat what I want to eat and have my family with me, they're playing. And going to Buckeye Lake [Ohio], places like that. But I just like where there's water; I like water a lot. And that's one of my favorite places to go, thing to do. Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I have two. And it kind of ties into what I do. My favorite phrase is that, "It's better to build children than to repair adults." And that, "A warrior doesn't build a shield on the battlefield." And I help young people analyze that, what that really means, you know. Even when you're dating, why should you have--you know, you can't build a shield on a battlefield. What does that mean as far as dating, education? You name it, you know. So, those are my two favorite sayings, I believe. Story_ID: 630580 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] side. And, but we're going to try to keep them separate until we put them together-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --so we won't get them mixed up. So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Lueatta Jane Dodley [Lueatta Stewart Dodley], Lueatta, L-U-E-A-T-T-A. The reason I'm smiling is because when we were kids, she let us--call her by her first name, but we couldn't pronounce it. We used to call her Lee-ella. (Laughter). And we stopped, because when we started school, all the other kids would be calling their mothers mom. So we felt embarrassed, so we started calling her mother, mama. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was her maiden name? Speaker 2: Stewart. Speaker 1: Stewart, okay. So, Lueatta Jane Stewart? Speaker 2: Stewart. Speaker 1: S-T-E-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry, S-T-E-D--I'm sorry, S-T-E-W-A-R-T. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Virginia, and I believe she was born in 19--and I have to look this up, you know. And this--one thing about this process, it makes me really go back and look at some things. I believe she was born in 1931, somewhere along in there. Let's see here. But she was--let's see, well, I'm forty. I was born in '40 [1940]. Speaker 1: Yeah, so she was probably born earlier than that. Speaker 2: In twenty--no-- Speaker 1: Did she have you when she was really, really young? Speaker 2: She had me when she was fifteen--sixteen, sixteen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have to do my math (laughter). Speaker 1: That's 1924, I think, you know. Speaker 2: Right, let's say '24 [1924]. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, '24 [1924]. Speaker 2: Because my dad was born, he was also born in 19--no, he was born in 1922. Yeah, he was a little older than she was. Boy, those things I have to block out. Speaker 1: Okay. So she was born in Virginia. Do you know where? Speaker 2: Luray, if I'm not mistaken. Luray, Virginia. Speaker 1: Luray, how do you spell that? Speaker 2: L-U-R-A-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, what do you, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well, as far back as I can go is her mother. Her name, her mother's name was Emma. And she was born down there. So, my grandmother, not my great-grandmother, on her side. And her mother's name was Emma Stewart [Emma Boyd Price]. I know she married a pastor down there. His name was William Price, then she changed her name to Price. And there's a lot of questions that we didn't ask, because we didn't know. "Why was you Stewart and he's Price, but you were married?" But we didn't ask. Speaker 1: So, Reverend Price would be like a step grandfather? Speaker 2: That's exactly right, exactly right. But we didn't know how to say that when we were little. We weren't allowed to say it. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories on that side of the family about the end of slavery or-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --Reconstruction, or any of those struggles? Speaker 2: Mr. Price was a self ordained preacher who talked about his father. One of his brothers remembers slavery real well. Now, I never met that side of the family, except for Mr. Price. Now, I keep saying Mr. Price, because we wasn't--that's what we had to call him, Mr. Price. Even though he was our grandfather, we called him Mr. Price. He had talked about how we had to be real humble, and that he saw and heard a lot of different things that would scare his brother. They weren't allowed to talk back. He remembers one time he wasn't allowed to look at quote, a white woman. He said he had trouble even today when he walked down the street to even make eye contact, because of the things that he heard when he was a kid. I do know that one of them worked in a slaughterhouse, and introduced him to chitterlings. And we got the whole story about chitterlings like that. He said, "Well, that's the only thing that was left, that's why we ate them," and so forth. So, I learned that history a long time ago from my grandfather, Mr. Price. I know that he had a--for some reason I know he, the only thing he would eat a lot of times would be milk and bread mixed up. But we didn't know what was going on with him. I think he had ulcers or something at the time. And, but he was kind of a real strict person. We really, as a kid, didn't really want to go to their house (laughter) a lot, because he was real strict, but a good man. I think what he was trying to do was prepare us to be real disciplined in life. He didn't show a lot of physical affection, but we were never hungry. But he was very strict, I remember that, on her side of the family, my mother's side. Story_ID: 630581 Speaker 1: So, was your mother [Lueatta Stewart Dodley] raised in Virginia, or? Speaker 2: No, she actually was raised here in Columbus, Ohio. And she didn't have any brothers or sisters. She had some cousins that's here. And that side of the family, it seemed like I wasn't exposed to as a kid as much as my father's side [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.]. We become more closer after my mother passed some years ago than we were when she was alive, with that side of the family. But, and it was just kind of a mystery about some things that I still--this process is making me really want to go back and look myself a little deeper. Speaker 1: Okay. So, was your grandmother [Emma Boyd Price] and Mr. Price [Dodly's maternal step grandfather, William Price] in Virginia when you would go visit? Or-- Speaker 2: No, they would, they moved up here. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they-- Speaker 2: They moved up here, and actually lived in Flytown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And well, actually Flytown is a part of Columbus that was a lot of Italians. Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd heard that name-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --since I've been here. And what, how did Flytown get its name? Speaker 2: Well, I think it got its name--and like I said, before I heard the term, "Man, you're really fly," means that you're really hip. And if you really want to have a party or do something, eat all night long, have bootleg parties and so forth, but have a real close family networking, you go to Flytown. And people just migrated to that part of town. I think there were some slaughterhouses over there at one time, and people moved there to be close to work. There was a lot of industry back during that, in that part of town, on the West Side of Columbus. And even now, they still have quote, a Flytown reunion. It's not as big as it used to be, because Flytown now is downtown Columbus, Ohio. But it used to be a time that you could party, and people from the East Side [Columbus, Ohio] would go to Flytown. And that's what we called it. Bootlegging things like that-- Speaker 1: I know the explanation I heard, I think from somebody earlier in the week was that the slaughterhouses created so many flies. Speaker 2: Oh, that could have been, too. I'm talking about the flies. Speaker 1: I don't know. You know, it's interesting. I don't know if anybody really can pin it down, but that's the-- Speaker 2: That could make sense. Because like I said, there were slaughterhouses over there, and all kinds of stuff. In fact, there's still a little sausage place over there. They still manufacture and process meats and so forth. And that makes sense though. It could be because of the flies. But I heard because it's if you go to Flytown, you got to be fly. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were these slaughterhouses, were these--I know this is the home of Bob Evans [Bob Evans Restaurants, New Albany, Ohio] and there's a lot of German type sausages and that sort of thing-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --here. Speaker 2: Schmidt's-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Sausage House [Schmidt's Sausage Haus und Restaurant, Columbus, Ohio] is still here, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I never really--my father--no one in my family worked in that area, in that arena. They worked in factories, but not in slaughterhouses and things like that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now did your mother go to school here in Columbus? Speaker 2: My mother always, she was a housewife. And then when times got tough, my father worked at Timken's [Timken Roller Bearing Company; The Timken Company]; it's a foundry. They make roller bearings for wheel casings and so forth. My mother used to do day work. She would go out in a little area called Bexley [Ohio], and I remember her going to big old houses and cleaning them up, and a couple of times I had to go with her. And I always felt like, "Boy, what do you have to do to get one of these houses?" But the people she worked for were really nice to her, I'll never forget that. And when she took me with her, they would feed me and so forth. And then sometimes I resented it. It was like, I felt like I was a little slave boy all over again. But like I said, they were really nice. And my mother, with my two brothers [Gilbert Dodley, Jr. and Robert Dodley] and I, raised us. She developed a problem later on in life with some alcohol issues and I'll talk about that and I think I know why that happened. But between working and being a housewife, and my father working two jobs, she did a real good job. Story_ID: 630582 Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about growing up here in Columbus [Ohio], what it was like when she came along? Speaker 2: Well, I, she used to talk about how strict her father [sic. stepfather] was to her, like she wasn't allowed to go to dances and do things like everybody else did, and how when her, my father [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] and her started dating, how Mr. Price [William Price] didn't want that. And they would sneak off and do things. She talked about one of her best friends--what's her name? Marsha [ph.] was her name, and she was a very attractive woman, as I remember her as a kid. And my mother and her were very good friends. They worked at a place called Islay's together, an ice cream place, at the same time; that's how she met her. She tells the story that one time she was on the bus, and there was a controversial figure who sat next to her. He was the town--how can I put it? They used to call him Bluebeard, and he used to wear a turban. He had a real beard. Back during the day, in the '50s [1950s], that type of attire was kind of foreign to people here in Columbus. So, Bluebeard wore a turban, had a beard, and he was real quiet. And everybody was a little bit afraid of him, even grown men. But he wasn't a very big man. I remember my mother coming home one time scared and crying. And my father was furious, "What's wrong, Lueatta [Lueatta Stewart Dodley]?" "I done sat next to Bluebeard." I said, "What are you talking about?" That's what he said (laughter). She said she got on the bus--well, really it was the trolley. It wasn't the bus, it was the trolley. And when she--he was sitting there, and she didn't notice him. She sat next to him and then she got ready to get up, and he said, "Don't move" (laughter). So she had to sit there until he got off, an extra stop, and then she got off. So, and I think that--and my mother was a very simple woman. And so she tells that story, and how she at one time applied for a job at an insurance company to do something, but she was so bashful, you know. And she talked about how she wanted us to be a little more assertive. She didn't want us to be like her, and so forth. And she had a tough life, but I think that's largely because of her father. Because I felt it too, you know, as a grandson to him. And so made sense to me when my mother had some difficulties later on in life, because I don't think she had a chance to really be a child. Story_ID: 630583 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family now. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. Gilbert, G-I-L-B-E-R-T, Blossie, B-L-O-S-S-I-E, Dodley, D-O-D-L-E-Y [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And what's his middle name again? Speaker 2: Blossie (laughter). Speaker 1: B--? Speaker 2: B-L-O-S-S-I-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, there's got to be a story behind that name. Speaker 2: Well, he was named after his father. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his middle name, they called him Blossie. Now, Blossie--well, you're talking about my father now, I'll wait. But when I think about them two--my father had four brothers, and my grandfather really taught me the significance of work. I still remember who my grandfather worked for. He worked construction, and his hands were rough. But he liked to fish. This is my grandfather. And he would take us fishing. And I remember one time we were throwing rocks in the water, and we were getting too close. He said, "Now, I done told you, stay away from the bank." Well, my brother Robert [Robert Dodley] wasn't born. My brother Gilbert [Gilbert Dodley, Jr.] was born. And--no, Robert was, he was just young. He just didn't go, that's what it was. So, what he did when we kept on throwing them and playing around, he tied us to a tree (laughter) so that we could only get just so far. He said, "I told y'all to stop, didn't I?" So, that's how he stopped us. I remember him picking dandelion greens. Every time we'd go fishing, we'd bring back more greens and stuff like that did we did fish. And then (laughter) he'd bring them home and put them in a pot and would be cooking them. And I notice my grandmother [Susie Dodley], Sweetcake, that's what we called her, would never eat none. And later on in life, we wanted to find out, "Sweetcake, how come you never ate none of grandpa's greens?" She said, "He never cleaned them." Well, (laughter) because he always said to us, he said, "It's going to boil anyway," and he didn't rake off the worms or whatever. But we didn't know, but it was good to us. So he'd fix some greens and fry some cabbage in a minute; greens and cabbage. And his favorite fish to catch was carp, of all the things. But, it was something about the way he did it that made it taste good. A lot of people said, "I ain't eating no carp, because of the mud vein." But my grandfather, Blossie [Blossie Dodley], he knew all of those things to do, and he passed it down. He knew how to survive. He taught my father how to deal with racism, but he didn't know what the word meant. I know--I knew he--we used the term racism, and you had to be humble, and my grandfather was. Yet and still he was a mean man, but smart. He--there's a story about my grandfather, that and I remember hearing it when I was about eighteen years old. I went to this bar, and was sitting there. Because I never--I was just fascinated about what the bar was like. When I went in there, somebody heard my name. They said, "Dodley [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley]," they said, "do you know Papa Dodley?" I said, "Yeah, that's my grandfather." Oh, man, they started telling all kinds of stories about papa Dodley, you know. One of them, I hate to say it, but there was a guy messing with him, a younger guy, picking at him and picking at him. "Old man, you can't shoot no pool." And the guy say, "Man, you better leave him alone." "Oh, I ain't scared of that old man." Well, here it is July, ninety degrees, and he's picking at him. So my grandfather said, "Okay, I got something for you." "Oh, shut up, old man." Well, my grandfather went home and got a pick axe handle. He put a coat on and put it in his sleeve, and walked into this--the place was called Two Dice [ph.]; that was the name of it. He walked into this place, and the guy kept right on picking at him. Now, they asked him, "If you see somebody walk in there, and you're arguing with them, and they come back with a coat on and it's ninety degrees, shouldn't you suspect something's wrong?" Well, the young boy kept on. The story is my grandfather grabbed him, bit his finger off because he kept pointing at him, brought it home and threw it--gave it to my grandmother, and she jumped away. (Laughter) The police came. When the police came, he was sitting there with my grandmother. And they said, "Is Gilbert Dodley here?" He said, "Yeah, he's upstairs," talking about my father (laughter). So, they took my father down to juvenile--took him--no, I don't know where they took him now. But anyway, because of the fight and some other stuff. And my grandfather's rationale was this. He said, "If I go to jail, nobody's going to eat. I'm the only one working. I made a mistake." He said, "I'll make it good for that boy," you know. He went and got him out and so forth, but he, my father took the blame for something his father did in order to preserve the family, that sort of thing. So, Blossie was a wonderful man. I have a picture with him. He always went to church every Sunday, you know. He drank a little bit too much sometime, but you wouldn't know it, you know. He taught me a lot about nature. I think he's one reason why I like to fish and do stuff outside. He showed me how to make mud chicken one time. He said, "You know, slaves didn't have all the convenience of ovens." So he took some mud and packed around the chicken one time, I'll never forget it, gutted it. He got it and some kind of way, he put it in this fire. When you peeled the mud off it was just some meat, just as white. I said, "Man!" So, Blossie was something else. I still think about him. He, he's one reason why I wasn't afraid of the devil. Because when you're a kid, you think about the devil. I say I think about my grandfather, and he would knock the devil out. That's how bad I thought he was. That's Blossie. Story_ID: 630584 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you when your father [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] was born. Now he, you say he was born in 1922? Speaker 2: About '22 [1922] when he was born. Speaker 1: Okay. And was he born here in Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: He was born in Dal- Dalton, Georgia, where Blossie [Dodley's paternal grandfather, Blossie Dodley] was born. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But he came up here at a very young age. Speaker 1: Is there a story about why the family moved here? I know it seems like it's, that everybody should know why. But-- Speaker 2: Yeah. I think Blossie moved here because he did a lot of construction work with his hands, digging ditches and things like this. And he said he moved up here because the jobs were better. The racism, he was afraid of that, because he had a bad temper. So, he moved up north to work, and did construction work. I know he did construction work, that's all he did; digged ditches, cut trees down for folks, did handy work. But he just said he just couldn't make it down there, down South. Now, I know nothing about my great-grandfather. I'd like to know who Blossie's father was. Wow. Speaker 1: So, did he ever talk about it at all? Speaker 2: No, no. And the only uncle I have alive is Lawrence. Lawrence is eighty-four. And I didn't get a chance to call him to tell him what I was doing, because he may know himself. And like I said, for the process is going to make me look a little deeper, for me to, you know, to find out more about my great-grandfather on that side. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so your father, we know he went to jail once (laughter) for his father. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But, but what other, what stories did he have about growing up in Columbus? Speaker 2: My father? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, my father had the two brothers [Lawrence Dodley and William Dodley]. He talked about how--well, he went to East High School [Columbus, Ohio] and Champion Middle School [Champion Junior High School; Champion Middle School, Columbus, Ohio], the same school I went to. And he talked about how he was glad he went to an all-black school. There was a principal there by the name of Mr. Mitchell [J.A. Mitchell] at the middle school level that really kept him on the straight and narrow. We had a shop metal teacher by the name of Mr. Burrell [J.P. Burrell]. The reason why I'm saying this is because all these teachers, and Mr. Stanfield [Jere Stanfield], all of them come from the same school, historical black colleges [HBCUs], or wherever they come from. And I remember as a kid doing something wrong, and my father had to go to school with me, at the middle school. And we walked in the building, and he had his hat on. And I thought my father was going to defend my honor, because I didn't do anything. They kind of think I didn't--but I did. The principal, who he had when he was a kid, looked at him and said, "Take your hat off in the building." My father took his hat off. I said "Man, if he's going to tell my father what to do, I don't--ain't no way for me." But anyway, to make a long story short, he talked about how he had good role models when he came here. There's a guy by the name of Mr. Claude Willis. Right now Mr. Willis might be eighty-eight. He was at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. This used to be called the black Y, down on Spring Street [Spring Street YMCA, Columbus, Ohio]. It's not down there now, but I have bricks. Any building that has significance for me, I have a brick for my pyramid out in the yard. So anyway, my father talked about how, again, how Blossie and my grandmother [Susie Dodley] wasn't always together, in the house together, but they were still married. He would move around quite a bit sometimes. He remembers selling newspapers to make money. He was real active in sports. He was a real avid baseball player and football player, my father was. He, he didn't talk too much about the war [World War II], when he got drafted, when he fought. I think he--I have some pictures of him. I know he was stationed for a while in Germany. I remember how he was talking about--when I went to see the 'The Tuskegee Airmen' [sic. 'Red Tails']. I just got a whole new perspective about military life. And when he went in--in fact all my uncles went in, and all of them had stories when they'd come back. One of the stories my father told was that they were in the barracks one time and they were, one of the guys was playing with a gun. And he said, "I ought to shoot your toe off." This guy, he was playing. Bam! He shot the man's toe off. But he didn't mean to do it, it was an accident. Oh, man, you know. And we laughed about it, you know. It was just one of them kind of stories that was passed down by my father. I remember him saying that he got really homesick one time and actually cried, because he missed Sweetcake, my grandmother, and how he couldn't wait to get back home. And I think he was in the, he was actually in the motor pool, where he took care of trucks and things like this, which spilled over to what he's doing--what he did when he came back from the war. Story_ID: 630585 Speaker 1: So, your dad [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] was in the war [World War II], he, in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in the [U.S.] military. And he, like I said, picked up the art of working on cars and things like that, which spilled over to--from as much as I remember my father always worked two jobs, one at Timken Roller Bearings [Timken Roller Bearing Company; The Timken Company] and then at, it used to be, it was the Ohio station, which is Standard Oil [Standard Oil of Ohio], which now I think is BP [BP Corporation North Amerca Inc.]. And he was the manager, him and this other guy who actually owned the station, and he just happened to be white. His name was Mr. Jones [ph.]. And they would have conversations about racism, and so forth. Because what would happen, my father, by working at Timken's the guys would come down there and want to get gas, and didn't have any money. But they would pay him on payday, so my father helped establish a little account. And Mr. Jones said, "Look, if they don't pay, you will." My father said, "Okay." So everybody in department seventy-one, when they filled their tanks and got gas, they came down to the filling station. And he kept a running tab on all the guys, like a little account, and made Mr. Jones a lot of money, I know he did. Because at that particular time, on Town Street and Oak Street, Broad- no, it's actually at Oak--Parsons Avenue, Parsons and Town, across from where the health department [City of Columbus - Columbus Public Health] is now. It used to be the blind school [Ohio State School for the Blind, Columbus, Ohio]. Well, that's where my father worked, and that's where the station was. And these guys would--right off the main drag, before the freeways, of course. And they would come and fill their tanks up every Friday, every Friday, and then everybody would pay like this. This guy also had some apartment buildings that we cleaned up. That's how I got my job working with my dad there. But at the filling station, I learned how to work on cars myself, which helped me out. I started out washing cars, and I could move a little bit. Then they showed me how to change the oil. So today I'm pretty good about cars, based on that. I remember my father was talking about inventing a fitting on a car, where you lubricate it. A lot of the cars didn't have grease fittings in the wheels and for a long time, and he suggested that. And later on, it come to pass that they did put fittings on these particular cars. I think it was a Comet [Mercury Comet], if I'm not mistaken. And I told him, I said, "You know, it's too bad you didn't have enough money to ask somebody to write this up and patent it." I said, "That was a good idea," like that. He used to come up with all kind of, all that kind of stuff like that. Speaker 1: So, you said that--I remember in the old days they used to have to lubricate the bearings and stuff, I mean, the joints-- Speaker 2: The joints. Speaker 1: --of the car with a lube job. But nowadays they don't seem to-- Speaker 2: They don't do it. Now they don't do it. They used to do it like that a long time ago. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And then they, then they switched to put those grease fittings back in, at least on this Comet anyway. Now, I like to think that if he had done something a little earlier, suggested that to someone who had the resources, you know, what could have happened. You know, he may have gotten some credit for it, I don't know. Speaker 1: He had a real good idea. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: If he had the means to have it capitalized or-- Speaker 2: Right, he just complained about it. He said, "These people with all this money, they build these cars so you have to take them back to the manufacturer," is what he said a lot of times, you know. He said, "There's no sense in not having a grease fitting up in that cupping like that," you know. "If you put one up in there like that, you don't have to worry about the one down at the bottom," like that. And then a couple of years later, they had them on like that. I remember there used to be at least eight grease fittings on all cars. Now you don't do it at all. It's like I date myself sometimes, you know. I say, "Okay, do you do lube here and everything?" They say, "Sir, we don't--," and I'd say, "Oh, I forgot, you know." But, yeah, he, my father--and working--when I helped him--I guess I'm saying that because of the African Americans--Mr. Jones wasn't real comfortable with them at first. In other words by my father working there, he let my father have a lot of leeway with the credit for these guys, and that sort of thing. He also brought in--this guy wasn't washing cars there, either. My father said, "Listen, let's wash cars here too. That'll attract more business here." And he did, and we did. I mean, and I was the one who washed people's cars. They used to call me dazzling Dodley [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley], because I got them clean so well. I loved it when I was a kid, to work. He taught me the value of cleaning something. I like, I like to wash a car and look at it myself and say, "Man, that looks good," like that. They had these real big old whitewalls, they were real wide. And I remember my whitewall brush. I'd get a lot of tips, because I'd make the car look real good. There would be even times when I would even go to a person's house and pick up their car and bring it to the station and take it back, and they'd bring me back, all for--all kinds of stuff like this. And a lot of it was because of my father. He was an entrepreneur and didn't know it. And so, he taught me this (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just industrious, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 630586 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents [Gilbert Dodley, Sr. and Lueatta Stewart Dodley] met? Speaker 2: What did they say? I know they met in junior high school [Champion Junior High School; Champion Middle School, Columbus, Ohio]. He was walking home from practice, and he was shy, and she was shy, too. And they often wonder how they got together. I know that by her living on the West Side and my father living on the East Side [Columbus, Ohio], he didn't have the money to ride the bus. He talked about how he rode his bike over there a lot when they met. They both got in--I think--in fact, he went to Mr. Price's [Dodley's maternal step grandfather, William Price] church one time to impress them, to show that I really do like your daughter. And it was a church on the West Side of Columbus [Ohio], I never will forget that; he told me that. I remember he said the first time they held hands, Mr. Price saw it and he said, "What y'all think y'all going to do?" He made him start thinking right away, by just holding hands that that's a sign of affection. I remember him saying that he didn't have a lot of money, but he borrowed one of his brother's bike, another bike, to impress her. But it was always this thing about bicycles, like that. Then she had one, and they'd go bicycle riding together a lot. I know that when he'd come back--well, see, now I know it was sports--bicycle riding--oh, and picnics, they used to go on picnics together. But other than that, that's all I know; that after practice he saw her and they started talking. And they don't--they didn't tell me a lot--the fill in the gaps kind of thing. The only thing I know is that when I was born, he was about seventeen or eighteen years old, and he didn't have any insurance. And they said, "Well, you know, Mr. Dodley, we can't let her go home with no insurance. We got to get our money." My father walked towards him and he said, "I tell you what. You raise him. Just raise him." He said, "I don't know when I'm going to have a job. I don't know. I'm just going to walk out the door." And so they said, "Oh, well, wait a minute. Hold up sir, hold up." You know, so he was saying that he was just so frustrated at the fact that he didn't have insurance at the time. And he was working at that filling station if I'm not mistaken, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, the hospital [Grant Hospital; OhioHealth Grant Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio], you know, was trying to get paid. Is that it? Speaker 2: The hospital--say it again now. Speaker 1: The hospital was trying to get paid, and they wanted him to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, they were upfront. You know, you got to have this money to pay this bill, you know, like that. And he didn't have the proper insurance. But I remember--in fact I looked at my birth certificate and how he wrote down unemployed, like that. But then he started working at Timken's [Timken Roller Bearing Company; The Timken Company] after that too, if I'm not mistaken. Speaker 1: Now he-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 630587 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now he--now this is prior to the war [World War II]. And you were born in 1940, right around the war. Speaker 2: Forty [1940], right. Speaker 1: He's [Dodley's father, Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] eighteen, your mother's [Lueatta Stewart Dodley] sixteen. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, did he finish high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] before-- Speaker 2: He finished high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He did finish. Speaker 1: Did she get a chance to finish? Speaker 2: She didn't finish. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She didn't finish. I never saw a diploma from my mother--when you said that. Speaker 1: So he was drafted I guess in forty- was he drafted in '41 [1941], or-- Speaker 2: It was about '41 [1941] when he was actually drafted-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and went in. Speaker 1: The U.S. goes into the war in '41 [1941]. So he's away for what, the duration of the war? Speaker 2: No. You know what? I'm not sure. I think he--probably four years, and that was it. I don't--he didn't sign a recommitment to go back in. I think it was a four year term at the time. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: You know, and that was it for him. Speaker 1: So I guess he was gone the whole time of the war, I guess that four years-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in Europe, and came back I guess in forty-- Speaker 2: Came back-- Speaker 1: --in about '46 [1946] I guess? Speaker 2: That's about right. You're helping me process it. It was about '46 [1946] when he came back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And like I said before, I remember as a little boy, Union Station [Columbus Union Station, Columbus, Ohio] downtown. In fact, the arch is still down there. I still remember daddy coming in with a uniform with my mother, and I was there. And there's something about the brothers too, one of them, Gilbert. And just seeing him getting off that train, it was--yeah. Speaker 1: So, this would have been, you'd have been like four or five I guess? Speaker 2: I think I was about-- Speaker 1: About five? Speaker 2: About five. I remember seeing him in a uniform, yes. Speaker 1: You were born in '40 [1940], so he would have been here maybe a year before-- Speaker 2: Before that, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Listen, you helped me with that addition. (Laughter) Right, that's right, yeah, right. If I--he came here--you know, he might have come on leave and did it. Story_ID: 630588 Speaker 1: Now, who were your--tell me about your siblings. And, now, you're the oldest? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what other siblings do you have? Speaker 2: Two other brothers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One named Gilbert [Gilbert Dodley, Jr.]--and there's a story behind that--and then Robert [Robert Dodley]. Now, Gilbert is a year younger than I am, but I wasn't the junior; he is. And I often wondered why for a long time. The reason why I wasn't a junior is because my father had a brother named Lewis [Lewis Dodley] who died from pneumonia early, when he was around fourteen years old, if I'm not mistaken. And they were real close, even though he has two other brothers, William [William Dodley], Uncle Bill, and Lawrence [Lawrence Dodley], then there was Lewis, but he died of pneumonia. My father and Lewis were real close as kids. And it hurt him really bad, so he'd name his first son; he told my mother [Lueatta Stewart Dodley] that. He told her, he told his mother [Susie Dodley], "I want to name my first child, if it's a boy, after Lewis." Not--and it's interesting, no pictures of him. I mean I know he existed, but they didn't have cameras. You know, I think about Polaroid cameras, but they were expensive back in the day. So, there's no pictures of Lewis. But so, anyway, I was named after my uncle. Now Gilbert, he's a year younger than Robert, my brother. He worked, he stills works for the Department of Taxation [Ohio Department of Taxation] downtown. So, it was just the three of us. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we lived on-- Speaker 1: Gilbert was born in '41 [1941], I guess? Speaker 2: In '41 [1941]. Speaker 1: As your father was leaving, I guess? Speaker 2: Right, right, that's right. Speaker 1: The last one is-- Speaker 2: Robert. Speaker 1: Robert, okay. Speaker 2: And he's, he just had a birthday, he was born in March. Robert is three years younger than I am. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, three years younger than I am. And that's the only kids, the only brothers and sisters I have. Story_ID: 630589 Speaker 1: Now, you grew up on the (audio disturbance) East Side of Columbus [Ohio], right? Speaker 2: Right, on Talmadge Alley. Speaker 1: Okay. Talmadge Alley, okay. Speaker 2: The reason I'm saying that is because that's where the King center [The King Arts Complex, Columbus, Ohio] is now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when they blocked it off--you could go through all the way from Long Street to Mount Vernon [Avenue]. But now it's Talmadge Street, because of the King Center, I believe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They elevated it. Because it's-- Speaker 2: I believe they did, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, tell us, now did you live there the whole time that you grew up? Or did you all move-- Speaker 2: Well, we didn't move too far away. Well, it's interesting. Because on Talmadge, I got pictures of it. It was like a flat, and we had these steps. We weren't allowed to move, you know. If we wanted to go outside, "Stay on those steps." Cars, I mean, they'd go up and down the street. You know, but we played rock city and, you know, we did a lot of things on that stoop, to tell you the truth. And then we had a back, but we shared it with three other families; a big backyard with a big old trash container back there. And the reason why I went to Gar--I didn't go to Garfield [Garfield Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio]. See, Garfield--and what was kind of significant about Talmadge, Talmadge was divided by a street called Spring Street. If you lived on the south side of Spring Street--wait a minute--there was the--yeah, the south side of Spring, you went to Douglas Elementary School [Douglas Alternative Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio]. If you lived on the north side of Spring Street, you went to Garfield, which was an all-black school. Well, at that particular time, I would say at Garfield you had to fight a lot (laughter) at that school. So, my parents [Lueatta Stewart Dodley and Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] were kind of glad I went to an integrated school, which was Douglas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's where I met my first friend. His name was Gerald Perez [ph.], I never will forget him. He was Mexican. I didn't know it, I just thought he was just a light skinned white. But I remember crying, because my mother left. And he tapped me on my shoulder and he said, "Listen, man. It ain't that bad, we have recess." I said, "What's recess?" He said, "We go out and play, and stuff like that." And we were friends all the way through the duration of elementary and some of middle school. He went to another middle school, but then we wound up together at high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], playing football together. Speaker 1: Now, that--he's a Mexican you said? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Well, that was--well, I don't know about-- Speaker 2: There weren't that many. Speaker 1: --this, but I know in Dayton [Ohio] there weren't that many Mexicans-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --in those days. Speaker 2: I found out later on that he was. And it was interesting. As an adult, out at the football game I saw Perez on the back of a jersey. I said, "That can't be Gerald's son." But it was his grandson, and he was there too. We kind of hugged and so forth. I hadn't seen him in years, like I said. Because my son was playing, but his name was Long [Mark Dodley] at the time. My grandson, one of my grandsons was playing, and we hooked up together then for a few minutes. People used to kind of tease me for having a friend like that, because most of my friends were black. Speaker 1: Now, was there a Mexican community in Columbus? Speaker 2: They were on the West Side [Columbus, Ohio]. The only thing I know it was just, it wasn't that many. I remember meeting Gerald's mother and his sister. He had another younger brother, and I never--I didn't--well, his younger brother--a year's difference was about four years difference back in the day. He had a sister, and I would--you know, it's making me think. I might want to try to see if I can find him now. But there was a small contingency of Spanish speaking people on the West Side. It's still that way now. It's more now, of course, but just a small--not many. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Gerald. Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. Now you were on Talmadge for how long? Speaker 2: Oh, I was on Talmadge from birth until about ten years old. Speaker 1: Okay. And then where did you move? Speaker 2: Then we moved to Ridge Street, which was still on the East Side of Columbus, 1203 East Ridge. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was kind of integrated, too. In fact, that was the first time I had pizza, when I moved over there. Story_ID: 630590 Speaker 1: What were, what was the neighborhood like that you grew up in, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: I'm writing a book called 'Emotional Pillows' [ph.]. And the reason why I'm writing that is because I think that we need more memories of good things, to pull through. And that's an internal thing, because they can't take that away from you. A lot of our kids I work with don't have a lot of good memories. But when I think about mine when you mentioned that. Growing up for me, the neighborhood was integrated. We played a lot of sports. There were a lot of older men on that street that would take us and play baseball with us across the street in a field, or something like this. I remember playing, the first time I played hide and go seek was in that community, because it was safe. Talmadge [Talmadge Alley; Talmadge Street, Columbus, Ohio] wasn't as safe, because of the traffic. On Ridge Street, the traffic was--we had a front yard, not just steps. I remember back on Talmadge though, growing up in that community, just for a moment I really had some nice memories. Because the big yard we had, we shared it with about four other families. But there was a big trash dumpster thing there, and every Thursday or Tuesday, I'm not sure when it was--Mr. Caldwell [ph.] had a trucking company, and he would empty this trash thing. And we had a game called kill the rats. And when you'd pick one of these things up, rats would go everyplace. So, every Thursday night we'd go rat hunting. Speaker 1: Now, describe what you're talking about. Is this a pit or something that people would put trash in? Speaker 2: Yeah, a big wooden box. It had a door on it; well, it had a top. The door--and he had some kind of way he would scoop the stuff out and throw it in his truck. But when you disturbed it, underneath there these rats would run everyplace. We even had them named. We had BB guns, and rocks and sticks to kill them. Then we would have a bet on who killed the most, like this. The one--it's funny, he always got away from us. We named him. I don't know what we named him now, but we named this rat. And then one time when he did kill him-- Speaker 1: You torn them apart (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, you could. We did. (Laughter) This one, seems like he ran with a limp. Now, have you ever heard of a rat running with a limp? I think we called him Limpy. But for whatever reason he would run in that same hole, and we just could never get him, like this. So finally we got him, and James Caldwell [ph.], one of our neighbors, killed him. And we gave a party, "He killed the rat," this sort of thing, like that. "He killed Limpy," like that, so a little reputation came about. And also, that was part of our rites of passage. There was also a big tree on this street, and if you could throw a football in between these two big trees, that's another way you got a good reputation, okay. Because instead of saying, "Go down thirty yards and then do a right angle," you would run down close to Miss Mary's [ph.] house, then you'd cut over back by Mr. Bill Ray's [ph.], and catch the ball. We didn't use (laughter) a numbering system. So, there were a lot of landmarks on that street. There was a lady by the name of Miss Queen [ph.], and she had the biggest cherries in the world on her cherry tree. Well, we would go take them. And she got mad at us because we would just--we'd take her cherries, but what it really was, we didn't know that she didn't want us to trample down her flowers. So, what she said was, "Listen," and she'd point. She got on the corner and told us, she said, "Listen, y'all can have all the cherries you want. I'm going to open the gate up. Just don't trample my flowers." Guess what? We didn't want them, (laughter) because we wanted the thrill of taking them. (Laughter) So, we didn't want them after that. But we had a nice community. All the grownups knew all of our parents. You couldn't do nothing wrong. That whole thing about it still takes a village, it still takes a village, because it was a village that raised me. And if something--if your mother called you, if you didn't hear her, something's wrong, because you're out of range. And my mother [Lueatta Stewart Dodley] had a little thing she would say, "Lewis [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley], Gilbert [Gilbert Dodley, Jr.], and Robert [Robert Dodley]," it was almost like a song. And we could be two or three blocks away, and it would echo down. "Hey, man, your mother's calling you." And we knew she was, and then we'd head on back. Story_ID: 630591 Speaker 1: And I know that every two weeks we got a haircut, because our parents [Gilbert Dodley, Sr. and Lueatta Stewart Dodley] said you were supposed to have your hair cut neat all the time. If nothing else, we did that every two weeks. And my first barber, his name was Mr. Chester Hunt [ph.], and he was also a historian. I sat in that chair, and he'd tell us things about the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and things like this and stuff. And no cussing in this--my father would drop us off and we'd sit there and wait until they'd come pick us up, like that. And all the men in there had a lot of respect for each other. So, even--Mr. Walton [ph.] had a grocery store. If you wasn't in there in there he'd say, "Go down to Mr. Walton's, and I'll pick you up down there," because they all knew each other. There used to be a cleaners right here on the corner. We could stay in there or whatever. But I'm saying that everybody's businesses really knew these kids, and I had a real strong appreciation for black businessmen. Because where I grew up, on Long Street, in that area, and Talmadge [Talmadge Alley; Talmadge Street], there was a dentist, insurance man, a hat shop, grocery stores. A medical doctor lived across, next door to us. I mean, it was just there for us like that, and a lot of us took advantage of it. Selling newspapers, we used to sell a paper called Night Greens [sic. Night Green]. And the reason why we called it Night Greens was because the paper was green, and we had to sell them at night. And the chant was, "Journal, journal, Night Green," like that. When you heard that chant you'd go in the bars and the guys would say, "Hey, come on, young blood, I'll probably"--you know, "How's your grades?" you know, that sort of thing. They always asked how your grades were, and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Now, was that actually the name of the paper, Night Green? Speaker 1: The Night Green. Speaker 2: Okay. And it was a black paper? Speaker 1: Yes, I think it was a derivative of the Sentinel, the Ohio Sentinel, but then they called it the Night Green. Speaker 2: Okay. Did it have like special information for nightlife or that sort of thing? Or-- Speaker 1: No, it was the newspaper mainly geared towards--I would equate it to, like the Columbus Post here today. It focused on the black neighborhood, the black community. And it's interesting, because I think that Mr. Lynch [Amos H. Lynch], who they honored not so long ago, as an elder in the community, he was part of that many years ago. Speaker 2: Okay. You were saying, you were talking about the barbershop and the lack of cussing in the barbershop. That's a--I know my dad was a barber, and that's true, that young guys in the barbershop, the guys didn't cuss. Speaker 1: No, oh, no, you don't see that. No drinking, no acting a fool, no disrespect at all in the barbershop we went to. Now there may have been a few, but we didn't go in there. And even now, there's a man who passed. I have to mention his name, Mr. Brooks [ph.]. He's on Mount Vernon Avenue. He was a stable person in the community. He died two years ago. And it really--because I went in there yesterday to get my beard trimmed, and it really felt kind of empty. But his daughter is going to maintain it. And the guys in there who had been kno- who knew Mr. Brooks as well, said that it definitely felt different without him being there. But customers are still coming in there. But he was a real stable man in the community. He was involved in his church, and a chess master. You would bring your kid up and he'd teach him how to play chess, he would do that. He loved history, loved history, and always had some kind of challenges for you when you'd go in there. You didn't sit in Mr. Brooks' chair without learning something about yourself. He said, "I'm going to get in your head more than one way." (Laughter) I love that phrase, "I'm going to get in your head, all right." And he helped me out. In fact I think he helped me to--in a lot of ways, do what I do today. Story_ID: 630592 Speaker 1: Was it--was there an outlet for black books when you were growing up at all? Speaker 2: Not really. I didn't--you know, it's interesting. No, not a lot. They were there, but not as accessible as they are now. When I think about black magazines, the only one I can think of when I was a kid was Ebony or-- Speaker 1: Jet. Speaker 2: Jet. Speaker 1: Yeah, Jet, the little one. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, they still have it of course. But that's the only one, you know. Essence, Black Business [sic. Black Enterprise], none of that stuff was around at all. I tell you, it was so bad, I still remember reading the story about the boxcar kids [The Boxcar Children]. And I don't know why that stood out. But these were all little white kids that didn't have no mother or father, and they grew up in this boxcar. And you can still find that book. But I remember though, drawing an analogy; that could be me in this boxcar. And the teacher, Miss Bates [ph.], I'll never forget her. She was white, but I loved her, because she made me, made us think like that. She really taught with her head and her heart. Speaker 1: So, this is at Douglas [Douglas Elementary School; Douglas Alternative Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio], right? Speaker 2: Douglas. Speaker 1: Douglas, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And did you like school? Speaker 2: I did like school, especially if I knew what I was talking about. I liked raising my hand. If I didn't know--I didn't like it if I didn't know what I was talking about. (Laughter) But I enjoyed school. I enjoyed school because of the sports. I enjoyed the camaraderie we had with each other. I liked at the elementary level the teachers, and especially my first crush; I still think about her. And we--she still lives in Omaha [Nebraska] now. We never dated, but Yvonne [ph.] lived on Monroe [Avenue] and I lived on Talmadge [Talmadge Alley; Talmadge Street]. And she's just a good friend. And she was one of those kind of folks that--even today, her parents lived down the street from here, but they're deceased now. My best friend's parents used to live down the street, and they're deceased. I lived in the same neighborhood as a kid--as an adult--and I have so many memories about this part of town. And I tell people all the time that I'm lucky, because I lived three miles from everything that's significant for me: where my parents [Lueatta Stewart Dodley and Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] are buried and where they met; where my ex-wife [Constance Jenkins] used to live; and my elementary, middle [Champion Junior High School; Champion Middle School, Columbus, Ohio], and high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]. All of this is in a three mile radius today. So when I take my grandkids to school, it feel like I'm still back in the '60s [1960s], you know. Story_ID: 630593 Speaker 1: So, I take it Douglas Elementary School [Douglas Alternative Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio] is not named after Frederick Douglass. Because-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, it was not. I would venture to say that it was not. I'm not laughing because--but they could have. But, I know--I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah. They named the street-- Speaker 2: There's a street named Douglas [Street] that was on--I know that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, and it wasn't Buster Douglas either. Buster Douglas wasn't even thought of when that street was (laughter). Speaker 1: That's right, he's from Ohio. And there're some people that have gone--that we've interviewed have gone, went to school with him, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Buster Douglas. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: The heavyweight champion. Okay, so, as you move into grade school now, were you a good student? Did you get good grades? Speaker 2: Yes. I, I had trouble with algebra. And I think the reason why is because it wasn't taught by somebody who looked like me and expressed how you could do that. I was always scared of that stuff for a while. No one told me that the pyramids--you know, you had to be mathematician to build them, and those mathematicians looked like you. I always thought mathematicians were like Einstein [Albert Einstein], somebody like that. So anyway, I even had trouble with geology, because it's hard for me to conceive the Andreas Fault [San Andreas Fault]. What's a fault? I didn't, I couldn't put that together. And then I found somebody who said, "Man, you know, like, look at the sidewalk. See how it's cracked?" You know, and the way he talked, it made me understand the concept a little bit different. So, I think I was a good student. I liked to learn, but I liked for a person to be patient with me. I used to like to compete against some of the other girls, because some of the other guys in my group, they wouldn't. There were only two or three guys that were very, very, smart when I was coming up. I mean, they showed it. And they're doing real good now. One of them is deceased now. Eugene Jackson [ph.] is one of them. He used to be in the Harlem boys choir [Boys Choir of Harlem] for a minute, and a nice guy. In fact, I got a picture of him when I graduated, a class picture with him. So contrary to common belief, even though my parents always stressed education a lot--I had an aunt that was real smart, Aunt Jean [Alta Jean Dodley], that helped me out in school, too. Plus, like I said, it was a way I could be close to some, a couple of girls I liked. I was just bashful, and couldn't say anything to them. And some of my best friends, especially in middle school [Champion Junior High School; Champion Middle School, Columbus, Ohio]--I know I'm jumping back and forth--one of them was Fulani [Sokoto N. Fulani], before he changed--his African name was Charles Nesbitt. Fulani and Facizzi [ph.], they both were part of the Talmadge village [Talmadge Alley; Talmadge Street]. And we went to elementary school together, and we all played sports. So, sports, actually that and industrial arts as a side thing. I liked working with my hands and doing stuff like that. We were allowed to have singing groups in our school. And I was part of a group called The Four Mints. I was one of the original Four Mints. Speaker 1: The Four Mints? Speaker 2: Yeah. And we used to sing at the black talent pageants, and things like that. So, that was kind of middle school and high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]. Back in elementary, I remember I liked playing with blocks, so I could build stuff. I remember though, at one time there--I don't know if I should say this. Yeah, I'll say it. When I was in elementary school, my mother [Lueatta Stewart Dodley], I always felt drank too much sometime. And I think that's also the reason why I do what I do today, become a drug and alcohol counselor as well. She wasn't, she was a beautiful woman, but sometimes she drank a little bit too much. And at the elementary school I went to, Douglas, I sat by this window and I could see. And when we had teacher conference, she would walk, you know, and I could see her. And when she turned certain--when she crossed Broad Street, I could see her coming. And I always hoped and prayed that she hadn't been drinking, because I think the teacher could smell it. And so when she'd come to school--I'll never forget one day. I can still visually--visualize seeing her walking to the school one day for teacher conference about something, and having Beech-Nut chewing gum. It's the yellow wrapper with black letters--Beech-Nut--or red, anyway. And she had--I know she was trying to camouflage that she'd been drinking, because it was early in the morning. And I often felt like when she did that, the teachers knew it, but just didn't say anything to me about it. She wasn't staggering or cussing. She just giggled, was real giddy when she got that way. And maybe they didn't know; I don't know, but I always felt like they did. And then when she'd leave, I felt a little embarrassed. And then I got to thinking about how hard it was for her too, but that was later on. As a child, I didn't think that. But I just remember always thinking that I would never want anybody to, to, to drink like that. I think that's part of the reason why she died so early. My mother died when she's sixty-five, sixty-seven years old. Story_ID: 630594 Speaker 1: Did that influence you later on, in terms of how you approached drinking? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. In fact, I have two brothers [Gilbert Dodley, Jr. and Robert Dodley]. Like, when I learned more about the disease itself, and how it is a disease--and I tell people all the time, if you don't think it's a disease, you hyphenate the word disease and you get dis-ease. And have the prognosis, and you can diagnose it. And it's treatable. And I had to think about my mother [Lueatta Stewart Dodley] that way, because at first I was mad at her. And, but that wasn't her fault, because she would go through phases sometime. Now, the term is called blackout, when you drink sometime and you forget what you did. Like, I remember sometimes I would say, "Look," the night before, "I got basketball practice tomorrow. Can I have an extra seventy-five cents for lunch?" "Yeah." The next morning, "Mom, where's that money?" "What money?" "You told me--." "I didn't tell you that. Quit lying." And I'm thinking, did I--maybe I didn't, that sort of thing. Well, anyway, I worked through that later on in high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], that it wasn't her fault. You know, I had to reflect back on her childhood and so forth. And I think that's the reason why now, I even when I work with my kids, I tell them, "I'm not helping you with your foundation. I want to help you with your footer, which sits on top of the foundation; the things that really make you who you really are, the things that you are born with," like this. And I like to quote Kahlil Gibran lot in working with kids, and the fact that you're born with a purpose. And I had to--at the time I didn't know all this stuff. But I'm glad that my purpose is what I, what I do. In other words, I always liked to talk. I always wanted to influence people. Even in high school I was the one the guys said, "Man, Lou [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley], Johnnie Mae's [ph.] mad at me, man. And what can I do?" They always asked me. Then I would call Johnnie Mae and say, "You know, you ought to give Robert [ph.] a chance. He didn't really mean nothing like that." And all the girls liked me like a brother, so I thought. And later on in life they would tell me things like, "I wish you had talked to me then. You didn't--." I was--I just didn't, you know. So, I think that that kind of influenced me on what I'm doing today. Also, especially today, some of our young men are really mad at their moms and their dads, you know, because we got whole new drugs out there now. But I have to remind them that they weren't born that way, and that you do have a purpose in life. And it takes an elder to bring it out, not an older. Because when you start drinking, you'll just be an older. You don't--you have knowledge, but you don't pass it out. You just sit on it, you know. Our pastor used to say that there are people who get all they can, and then they sit on their can so you can't get none of it. And that's not a true elder, you know. But I don't know. The original question was--but now I've kind of moved away from it. Speaker 1: Well, let me just track that. So you went to Champion Middle School [Champion Junior High School; Champion Middle School, Columbus, Ohio], right? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Champion and East. Speaker 1: East High School [Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: High school. Speaker 1: Now, did you--now, did you ever run for class office or anything? Or-- Speaker 2: What did they make me? Did I ever run for anything? No, but I was always--I didn't wanna run for no class office, to tell you the truth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they always voted me real, calm guy. Something like, they'd say that he's always mild mannered. Speaker 1: Balanced? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't run for any office or anything like that at all. Story_ID: 630595 Speaker 1: What activities were you involved in in school? Speaker 2: Well, sports, of course. I did, I actually ran track. And I actually got in college because a guy saw me high jumping. At my height, I could jump 6'1" at the time. And Mr. Stanfield [Jere Stanfield] saw me in gym class and told me to go out for the varsity team, run track, and I did. I threw the shot put and the discus. And for my size, forty-four feet were pretty good for a twelve pound shot. And then the discus, I could throw about one hundred and thirty feet. Now, I didn't win no state records, but I won some meets. I was involved in the men's glee club that we had--sing at East [East High School, Columbus, Ohio]. And the debate teams, I'd be on those kind of things, because I liked to try to prove people wrong. So debate teams, I was on that. And I used to--I think I probably graduated--well, in elementary--in middle school [Champion Junior High School; Champion Middle School, Columbus, Ohio] I was probably about a 3.5 [grade point average] student. And I remember--the reason I remember that so well is because in high school I carried that along with me, too. And one of the reasons why I went to Otterbein for a while is because my grade point average was high enough to get on the football team--to get there. And there were some other athletes who applied, but they wouldn't--their grades--Robert [Dodley's brother, Robert Dodley] was a better athlete than I was, but his grades were bad, so he couldn't get in. We all went to this--there's a Dairy Queen down here on Sunbury Road--Sunbury, right behind Dominican College [College of St. Mary of the Springs; Ohio Dominican University, Columbus, Ohio] where--it used to be owned by a coach at Otterbein years ago, Moe Agler [Robert "Moe" Agler] was his name. And he came and watched us play football one year, and he recruited me then, but my grades were good. So, my grades were pretty good all the way up through elementary [Douglas Elementary School; Douglas Alternative Elementary School, Columbus, Ohio] and high school on up. Speaker 1: Now, did you take the general course, the college prep, or the business course? Speaker 2: Well, I think mine was more general. We didn't even--I wasn't really properly prepared for college, they said. In fact, there's a story behind that too. Speaker 1: So at East, just--I'm sorry--but at East, when you were going there was the population mostly black, or was it 50/50? Speaker 2: No, no, it was-- Speaker 1: More-- Speaker 2: I would say 75 percent black and 25 percent white. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because when I look at my class picture, you can almost see the difference. And then in fact the principal and the vice principal and most of the teachers were European Americans. Mr. Sampson [ph.], I'll never forget him. And the only foreign language I took was French, and I took it two years over there. Speaker 1: Okay. So, but you had a pretty good grade point average? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean--what? Speaker 2: I had about a 3.2, not a four point; about a 3.2 all the way through just about. Speaker 1: But you didn't take the higher math and that sort of thing-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --that prepared you for college? Speaker 2: I took just the bare minimum to prepare me for college. And then after--and so I went--I didn't have to take any college--any-- I took a--I'm sorry. I took a math course--and what did--there was something else I took. But I went to Otterbein and they say you needed--I went one summer and took a math course to get in at Otterbein College [Otterbein University, Westerville, Ohio]. Because I remember a guy by the name of Dr. Coulter [John Coulter] telling me that I probably would not make it in college, because East did not prepare me for college. And that stuck with me for a long time, because I was recruited to play football at Otterbein. And-- Speaker 1: This is--you graduated, what, in '58 [1958]? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958], right, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was so interesting, because that bothered me for a long time. And Otterbein at the time was, it was, I think at, the whole campus there may have been four African Americans on the campus maybe (simultaneous). Story_ID: 630596 Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit and just catch up. So, they recruited you to play football at Otterbein [Otterbein College; Otterbein University, Westerville, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when you were a senior then, did you--what were you focused on? Were you thinking about what college you were going to go to before they recruited you? Were you thinking about, like, "I want to go here or I want to go there?" Speaker 2: No, I was happy to get-- Speaker 1: Or were you thinking about going to college? Speaker 2: No. My parents [Lueatta Stewart Dodley and Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] wanted me to go to, quote, a--they didn't want me to go to Central State [Central State College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] because of the myth they heard about Central State at that particular time. Speaker 1: What did they say? Speaker 2: The myth was that you wouldn't learn nothing if you went to a black college [HBCU]. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a myth. I think I was telling somebody yesterday that the myth was that it's a party school, and that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you wouldn't learn anything. Speaker 2: I wouldn't learn nothing. Speaker 1: Black people would say that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, I went to Otterbein. And I had an Otterbein sweater and everything. I even went--when I found out--I started practicing football before I even went there. Speaker 1: Wait a minute. I don't want to get you too far. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was trying to figure out how you made the choice. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: So Central State, you put an X through that because you said--well, you're not going--it's a party school. So-- Speaker 2: They never approached me either. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They-- Speaker 1: But, so did any other school approach you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Just Otterbein? Speaker 2: I could have went to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], just to go, but not to play sports. Otterbein was the only one that called me to play sports. Speaker 1: How did that connection come about? Do you know? Speaker 2: My coach, high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] coach, Coaches Moore [Jack Moore] and Webster [Ralph Webster], they were white coaches, and they had a relationship with Otterbein College. And he told Mr. Agler, Coach Agler [Robert "Moe" Agler], "Come and watch one of the games." Here I got about four or five guys here that lived in Columbus [Ohio], that you might be interested in that would be good for you. Speaker 1: Now, what position did you play? Speaker 2: I played defensive end, both ways. Defensive and offensive end, that they called it. Speaker 1: Okay. Now this--you were in school with-- Speaker 2: Jim Marshall. Speaker 1: --and he'd be a year ahead of you, [HistoryMaker] Bernie Casey. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and Jim Marshall. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Al Long [ph.]. Now, these are heavyweights. Speaker 1: Yeah, they went on to become all pros. Speaker 2: That's right. And all--and one of the reasons I like the Minnesota Vikings today, is because of Jim Marshall. The Purple People Eaters, he was one of them. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean when I played with them guys, they were more or less using me for a tackling dummy, all of us. Because these were big, unusual guys. Now, how I won my spot was through Bernie Casey. Bernie Casey was a defensive end. He was about 6'5" about 250 [pounds]; muscle, all muscle, Bernie. He had a big old ring on his hand, I never will forget it. It was the last play of practice for this particular evening. And as a defensive end I was taught to take three steps over, plant my position, and make sure the flow is going in the opposite direction before you make a commitment to go after that person. You had to be real disciplined to do that. Okay, I take about three steps over. Bernie went around the opposite end. I said, "Okay, he's leaving, he's leaving." I counted that he'd come back, reversed it. Nobody there but just him and I. Nobody helped me with him. And I remember my father [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] saying that, "If somebody big comes after you, you got to go low." And I did. I never forget it. Because when Bernie got into his three point stance he always flashed his head up like that, so you could see it, just to kind of psychologically scare you. Like--a nice guy. I made the tackle, and he got up and said, "All right, Dodley [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley], that's all right," like that. And the coach said, "Yay." Now here I weighed 160 pounds, you know, soaking wet. But yet and still, that won me a spot on the team after we played schools like Arlington [Arlington High School, Arlington, Ohio] and all them big old boys--them farm fed boys, we called them, played those guys. And I played against a couple of guys who went to Ohio State at that time, too. But the point is that I was really strong for my size at that time. And they recruited me, then I went and I played at Otterbein for a while. And that's when I met (Unclear). Story_ID: 630597 Speaker 1: So they recruited you for Otterbein. And I don't want to get you out of East [East High School, Columbus, Ohio] too fast. Did you, now did you ever see Roland Kirk [Rahsaan Roland Kirk] in the neighborhood when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I didn't know Roland at that time. You know, I didn't know anything about jazz and music and things. I don't remember him per se, because you know, back in the day, if you lived on the South Side [Columbus, Ohio], you stayed on the south end. And I don't know exactly where he grew up, but I grew up on the East Side [Columbus, Ohio]. So, you just didn't--there were just certain barriers that you didn't go over. Speaker 1: Okay. I just asked, because there was a story that [HistoryMaker] Bernie Casey told about Roland Kirk playing at the prom. Now, he's a year ahead of you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --probably, if you were in-- Speaker 2: Well, actually Bernie might be two years, to tell you the truth. Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You're talking about Roland Kirk and the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, at the prom. Bernie said it was unbelievable. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I know, that one. Speaker 1: He was playing two or three horns at once. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, at any rate--so Otterbein College [Otterbein University]. Now, Otterbein is here--it's near Columbus [Ohio], right? Speaker 2: It's in Westerville [Ohio]. It's about ten or fifteen miles from here. In fact I used to ride my bicycle up there, just to stay in shape. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then come back. Speaker 1: So, about fifteen miles, okay. Speaker 2: Is Otterbein--Westerville--yeah. Sunbury Road, you take it all the way, straight there, still will. Speaker 1: Okay. There're a lot of little colleges around here that people really don't, you know, realize. And somebody was saying that there were twenty-one colleges around the Columbus area. Speaker 2: Around Columbus, yeah, okay. Yeah, smaller colleges. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh. Dominican [Ohio Dominican University, Columbus, Ohio] is a good example of it. It used to be--its St. Mary of the Springs [College of St. Mary of the Springs]; they changed their name. Aquinas [Aquinas College High School, Columbus, Ohio]--well, that was a high school, then it became a junior college. Now its Columbus State [Columbus State Community College, Columbus, Ohio] now. Speaker 1: And Ohio Wesleyan [Ohio Wesleyan University]. Speaker 2: Ohio Wesleyan, that's in Delaware [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Delaware, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But they say there's twenty-one. Speaker 2: Probably, yeah. Speaker 1: So, Otterbein College is in Westerville. So what was that like? Now, this was a mostly white school, right? Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Not only--well, I told you about Dr. Coulter [John Coulter], you know, not helping my morale by saying I probably wouldn't make it in college because of not having certain subjects. Speaker 1: Now, he was at Otterbein? Speaker 2: Yes, he was the English teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A professor, Dr. Coulter. Speaker 1: Now how do you spell his name, K--? Speaker 2: C-O-U-L-T-E-R. Speaker 1: Coulter, okay. Speaker 2: Coulter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember him so well because after I--when I went to Otterbein for a while, I had dropped out. My ex-wife [Constance Jenkins] got pregnant, you know, and I was up there about a year. Story_ID: 630598 Speaker 1: Now, you had a girlfriend back in Columbus [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Same- my ex-wife. That's the only person I--met her-- Speaker 1: Were you married then? Or-- Speaker 2: No. We, my last year of high school [East High School, Columbus, Ohio], she really didn't want me to leave. Puppy love stuff. Well, my first year of playing football I'd come back on weekends. I wasn't supposed to, and I snuck into town. And, you know, we got in trouble and she got pregnant. And of course, I'll always--my father [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] said, "If you have a child, that's yours. If you make your bed, you lay in it." You know, you got to man up. He didn't use that term, but I know what he meant. And we didn't know anything about abortion during the day. Back then, we weren't even thinking about it. I just remember my ex-wife taking some stuff called Humphrey's 11. And Humphrey's 11 really brought you on your cycle if you were going to have one. But we thought it would--I remember her going to Dr. Blunt [ph.], and she borrowed one of her friend's wedding rings. And we went in like we were married and said, "Doc, is she pregnant? So we can plan our family," like this. And he came right out and said, "Yes, she is." I said, "Oh, good." (Laughter) Then we left and we went--because I hadn't told her father. Speaker 1: Now in these days, in those days, now this was a big deal in those days-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --when girls were pregnant. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, now, were you an avid churchgoer in those days? Speaker 2: Yes. And her father was a pastor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I remember her going to the cotillion, and she was pregnant. Now, I'm saying all this; I know it's on--I don't care. Because kids have to know you can bounce back, that you can still get somebody to support you. You can still make it, you know, because you believe in a higher power, whoever you call it. You can make it. You know, one of the things we teach is imani; faith, you know. So anyway she--when I--one of the longest walks I ever took was going up the steps to my father in law's library, or study. He always got his work together, a very intelligent man. I walked up the steps. I said, "Rev. Jenkins [John Jenkins, Sr.], I got something I want to tell you." He liked me. He said, "Yes, Lewis [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley]?" I said, "Connie [Constance Jenkins] is pregnant." He looked up, "What y'all going to do?" I said, "Well, I, at Otterbein [Otterbein College; Otterbein University, Westerville, Ohio] they told me I can get a house up there, maybe an apartment. I can still play football and I can still stay in school," this that and the other. "And I don't have a lot of money right now, but we can work--I'm going to be working at the--." They were getting me a little grant and aid to help out, and I had a plan. He said, "I like your plan." He said, "That's good," like that. He said, "You know, it's going to be tough for a few years," like that. Well, her mother [Marian Dennis Jenkins], on the other hand, was just the opposite. Her mother blamed her for getting pregnant. She said, "You messed up that boy's career. It's crazy. He was doing well, and you--," da, da, da, da, da, da, da, like, made her feel real guilty, all right. Well, as it was, being pregnant, and we got married. Some people knew that she was, but she didn't show it. I've got a picture of her, of us, at seventeen. We were both seventeen, because her birthday's in December too. She was born the same year. But she was born December 7th, and I was born on the 25th. It, it just seemed like it took a toll on us, you know, trying to go to school. And I couldn't--I dropped out and then I started working at Timken's [Timken Roller Bearing Company; The Timken Company] where my father [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] worked for a while. So, and I'll never forget. I had a little bit of college, and this foreman was telling me that, "You know, you should consider being a foreman here." And it was the department where it was heat treat. And I told my father what he said, and he said, "I hope you don't consider that." He said, "I'm not working here for you to work behind me." He said, "You need to go back to school." And I was anyway; it was too hot in there for me. So, if nothing it taught me a lesson. And I worked there for a while. I actually worked at Timken's and Westinghouse [Westinghouse Electric Company], and places like that to make it. But my ex-wife and I, things didn't go well, we had some problems. And again, I think that some of the negativism had something to do with it, you know, some of the drinking on her side, and the guilt that she felt. She had a best friend that influenced her. And so things went kind of downhill. Then to make a long story short, I raised my kids. She actually gave me the kids. She said, "I can't handle this." And then after that, she felt guilty (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How many were there-- Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: --by this time? Speaker 2: Well, the first time we broke up, there were two. Story_ID: 630599 Speaker 1: And then we were back together again. And I tell Mark [Mark Dodley] all the time, "You are my makeup baby." (Laughter) And we made up a couple more times. So, a lot of makeups. So, all my kids are from the same lady, my ex-wife, period. And she felt, I know she felt guilty behind that. And she's still around. She didn't date. Living in a nursing home now. The kids still take care of her, help her out and go down to see her. And I never said one negative thing about her, never. When I was going to school, I took the kids with me. I'd give them coloring books while I was taking a lecture, you know, while I was getting--you know, being lectured to, whatever. And I'll never forget one professor, he saw me with my kids. He said, "Is she taking your notes for you?" (Laughter) I said--you know, it was at Arps Hall [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], I never will forget it. I said, "No, sir. She's taking her own notes," like that. But, so my kids have always been around me trying to study and work. I even took them to my jobs as well. Because even during that time, Connie [Constance Jenkins], my ex-wife, would come in the picture back and forth and different things. And so finally I said, "This is just not healthy to keep running in and out of my life," like that. And then she, she had a tough bout with alcoholism, you know. And I think again that's another reason why I'm motivated to do what I do, is because of that. She lost both her parents [Marian Dennis Jenkins and John Jenkins, Sr.]. And it's so crazy. She kept smoking, and was so addicted to that. Even when she was having trouble breathing and she was on oxygen, she still was sneaking and smoking cigarettes. Her parents did the same thing. I remember one time we were--were we married? No, we weren't married. But her mother, she went out in a blizzard one time to get some cigarettes. That one big blizzard we had that was real bad and we weren't allowed to go no place, Miss Jenkins wanted some cigarettes, so we went out to go get them. So, I'm just saying that she had some addictions that she had to work through herself. Story_ID: 630600 Speaker 1: So, kind of walk us through what happened. So you were--okay, we had you at Otterbein [Otterbein College; Otterbein University, Westerville, Ohio] and got your girlfriend [Constance Jenkins] pregnant, you all got married and had children. And you had to drop out of school and then work, and then started going to school again. Can you tell us like when you started going to school again? Speaker 2: Yes. I think--well, not think. I started going back to school after working for the Department of Youth Services [Ohio Department of Youth Services], places like the Buckeye Youth Center [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, maybe I should do this. Well, just kind of give us a chronology of what happened next after Otterbein. Speaker 2: Oh, after Otterbein? Speaker 1: After Otterbein you worked for-- Speaker 2: I dropped out and I worked at Timken's [Timken Roller Bearing Company; The Timken Company]. Speaker 1: And then you said you worked at Westinghouse [Westinghouse Electric Company]? Speaker 2: And I worked on a bread truck. I always worked two jobs. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I worked on a bread truck. I was one of the top salesmen for American Bakers [ph.], because I had a way with people. And then I worked at TICO in the evenings, the Training Institute of Central Ohio [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: So this gets us into, now we're in the mid-'60s [1960s] now. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: By this time. Speaker 2: Right, it was about '64 [1964] when I started with the Department of Youth Services. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If I'm not mistaken. Speaker 1: Now, did you, were you involved in any of the civil rights activities in those days leading up to the March on Washington? Speaker 2: No. Yes, recruiting. But me actually being there, no. I had the kids. I had--I couldn't get away. I had an old raggedy--a Comet [Mercury Comet], the more I think about it. I always felt kind of guilty about not actually being there. I remember one time we did have a rally here in Columbus [Ohio] to protest police--something they did, somebody here in Columbus. They had a little riot and wanted all of us to be there. Well, when the police showed up with them dogs and things like that, people in Columbus looked at it and they dispersed. (Laughter) We didn't do what they did in Watts [Los Angeles, California] and places like that. Columbus had never really been real assertive that way, physically. But I was ready to go, but I'm glad I didn't now, because I could have done something like Halroy Williams [Hal Williams] did. Halroy one time was involved in a riot and he--he from was Columbus, a movie star, a good friend of mine--hit the police officer. He really hit him. The officer was trying to break up a fight and he hit the officer, and that stuck with him for a long time. And I never will forget it. I say that's probably one of the reasons I never got involved. In fact, a lot of times a guy like Halroy or Odie Wester [ph.] would say, "Man, you got kids. Man, you better keep your butt home," or something like this. And they would say things like that to me. But I always felt kind of guilty about not actually being there, but I was doing what I needed to do with my family. Speaker 1: Okay. So the youth services job in '64 [1964], now how did you--now this is--is this your first kind of office job after all these other jobs? Speaker 2: Yes. The Department of Youth Services was the job that I had--I actually started out working directly with kids. Speaker 1: Okay, the Department of Youth Services. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, did your activities as a father lead indirectly to this kind of job? Because-- Speaker 2: Actually someone told me they needed somebody who was good working with boys, guys who had already worked there who knew me. And I actually was hired when I was, just turned eighteen at the time. Was it twenty-one? Yeah, I think it was eighteen years old, as a youth leader. Then, because I could swim and do all these other things, they needed somebody to work in the recreation department who was certified as a lifeguard. Well, rather than me just working on my cottage, I ran the swimming pool. There was a lady from the Jewish center [The Jewish Community Center of Greater Columbus, Columbus, Ohio] by the name of Peggy Pear [sic. Peggy Kaplan], I never will forget her, who used to teach swimming lessons, and I used to help her. She used to say, "Lewis [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley], this is not a racist statement." She said, "But African American--," she said, "black boys sometimes are hard to teach how to swim because of the structure, how they're--they're muscular. They don't displace water, so they don't float too well." And she was correct. I don't float. All of these people didn't float. So we formed a relationship with the Jewish Center, and she would come out and help teach, and I would teach. We got a lot of recognition for her doing that. Then, I went back to school and worked at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I would talk about my experiences in my classes, and then they made me a volunteer coordinator at the Department of Youth Services and I got recruited as a volunteer for Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]. And a lot of them would come out, then they'd go back and talk about their experiences. And I had, I got graded for that. Story_ID: 630601 Speaker 1: So now when you started going back, you went to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. That's--so this is-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: So, you actually started going back to school what year was it you think? Speaker 2: Okay, I graduated-- Speaker 1: This was before '64 [1964] then, right? Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961]? Speaker 2: Yes, but I was in and out. I didn't go straight through. In other words, when I got my undergrad it took me--I got the dates over there. I got to look to see when it was. It took me about seven years to get my undergrad, to finish up. It took me two years for my master's [degree], and about a year and a half or two years for my Ph.D. Speaker 1: So, next-- Speaker 2: So, I didn't stop. Speaker 1: In 1968 you get your B.A. around that time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: B.A., '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what did you major in? Speaker 2: Education and guidance counseling. Story_ID: 630602 Speaker 1: Now, that's the year [1968] that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the anniversary just passed a couple of days ago here. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, do you remember what you were doing? Speaker 2: Yep. I was at the Department of Youth Services [Ohio Department of Youth Services] working as a recreational leader. And when they said it, I was with a bunch of kids. And it came on the radio, and we stopped. And I remember some of the kids saying, "Are they going to be rioting and fighting?" I said, "I hope not, because that's not what Dr. King wanted," like that. "Well, they killed him. They ought to do something." And I remember that was my first time mediating, telling kids--processing kids after something like that happened. And I was in the basement of this rec area [recreation area] talking to kids. And I remember riding home that night. Oh, how was it? I remember looking over at a car, and it was a white person driving the car and they couldn't look at me in the eye. It seems like everybody was just devastated; they felt guilty about that at the time. I really didn't believe that it happened for a long time. I said, "They just did that for safety, to keep away from--and then they're going to, you know, say well, he's okay, but we want to say that he was killed so that we can get him to the hospital so they won't try to threaten his life again." That's just how bad I wanted him not to be dead, the same thing with Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. I said the same thing, "He's not really dead. They're just saying that to get him to the hospital so that nobody will--no more threats will be put on his life." That's denial, and I knew--I mean but I didn't know it at the time. I-- Speaker 1: So you said you felt the same way about Dr. King as you--similarly to the way you felt about, when John Kennedy was assassinated? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I know-- Speaker 2: Sure did. Speaker 1: --that was in '63 [1963], November of '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: My son, Mark [Mark Dodley], was born in '63 [1963], in January I think, yeah. And I remember associating that with Kennedy and my son, Mark, as well. That was a real--that time it just really made me fell lost. Who's going to pick up the gauntlet? Who's going to do it now, you know? Because really, all of us are leaders, you know. And it made me really focus on my future, what I wanted to do. Speaker 1: And had there--now this occurred to me. Had there been riots in Columbus [Ohio] prior to '68 [1968], prior to Dr. King's assassination? Or were there any riots in Columbus then? I don't know. Speaker 2: I didn't--there were--no. Nothing significant as far as I remember, to tell you the truth. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: They threatened one one time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it never transpired. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Like it--you know, I think they arrested some folks, but no one tore up nothing. And if anything, people out here took their own stuff. They didn't go in other neighborhoods and tear up anything. And I'm not even sure what that was about, to tell you truth. Speaker 1: Now, even in '68 [1968], now did they riot in '68 [1968] after Dr. King's death? Speaker 2: They had rallies. Speaker 1: Okay, but no riots? Speaker 2: No riots per se. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I don't remember no riots. Speaker 1: In Dayton [Ohio], there were two. One was a riot in '66 [1966] and in '68 [1968], you know, just down the road (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. I know--and like I said before, I was so--you know, as a young father and trying to raise these kids, I didn't--I don't--we didn't have no riots. They talked about it and threatened Dr. Ro--. I mean, rallies and things, but I don't remember no real riots, like what I think is a riot, when you tearing up the, burning up things and really tearing up things. We didn't have that here. Story_ID: 630603 Speaker 1: Who were the black leaders in Columbus [Ohio] back in '68 [1968]? Speaker 2: Well, you know, of course, Baba Kelsey [Moriba Kelsey] has always been consistently Afrocentric, and so forth. People always-- Speaker 1: Oh, so this is Dr. Richard-- Speaker 2: Oh, Richard Kelsey, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Moriba Kelsey? Speaker 2: Moriba Kelsey. Speaker 1: I just want to make sure we get his name, his full name in here. Speaker 2: I got you. Speaker 1: And he was a professor at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Ohio State. Speaker 1: And also-- Speaker 2: He had an agency in Columbus, the Africentric Professional Development Shop [sic. Africentric Personal Development Shop, Inc., Columbus, Ohio] it is now. It was called something else at the time. He's always had an agency that was African centered, and counseling and things of this nature. Charles, Dr. Ross-- Speaker 1: Dr.-- Speaker 2: Bill Moss. Speaker 1: Charles Ross [Charles O. Ross], yeah. Speaker 2: Charles Ross. And Bill Moss and Les Brown [HistoryMaker Les Brown], as far as I'm concerned, were strong advocates. And at the time, I was up on campus a lot. But let me see, who else do I think influenced me? Actually--and I--you know, on the outside, I liked Sam Gresham during that time. He was head of the Urban League [Columbus Urban League]. Speaker 1: And how do you spell his name? Speaker 2: Sam Gresham. Gresham, C-H-E-- Speaker 1: G-R-E-S-H-A-M? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Gresham, okay. And he was with the Urban League. Speaker 2: And I'll tell you another person. You know, I'm thinking about people who in a way still fought the fight, was Jack Gibbs [Jack G. Gibbs]. He started out working in the recreation department. I never will forget Jack Gibbs. In fact they have a center [sic. Jack Gibbs Boulevard] named after him up the street, over there at the arts complex, I mean at the Hayes Academy [Fort Hayes Metropolitan Education Center, Columbus, Ohio], Jack Gibbs. He played football at Ohio State, but also had a youth league. And a guy by the name of Howard Spiller, Howard had the very first Sandy's franchise, which would be equivalent to McDonald's back in the day. He also sold insurance and he also helped develop a group over at Beatty's recreation center [Beatty Community Center, Columbus, Ohio] called the Jolly Bs and Gs, (laughter), the Jolly Boys and Girls [ph.]. And we were all athletes, and the girls were--and so forth. And those guys all had college educations themselves. I remember Howard, and I'm not sure where he's at now, was trying to start a black airline back in the day, a long time ago, but it never transpired. But, and Howard Spiller, I have to say that. And Howard has his own nationwide franchise, you know, State Farm Insurance [sic. Metropolitan Life Insurance Company]. But he also was the manager of the very first Lawson's Store here years ago. And Howard-- Speaker 1: Lawson's Store was something like a Milken's [ph.]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --convenience store. Speaker 2: That's right, right. Oh, I guess I would say too, to me, was Arnett Mitchell [J. Arnett Mitchell]. He was the principal at Champion [Champion Junior High School; Champion Middle School, Columbus, Ohio], when Bernie [HistoryMaker Bernie Casey] and all the guys were there. And he had this, he would--he was the replica--well, someone must have known him a long time ago. When they made the movie, 'Lean on Me,' that's the way Mr. Mitchell was. And he didn't have that megaphone, but he had a frog like voice. He had a very distinctive voice, (imitates) "Like this." And that's just the way he was. Suit and tie every day. I never saw him casual at all. But he was one of the people who was real consistent as a principal in the school, but also involved in city affairs as well. And I hate to say it, not hate to say it, but another guy was Mr. William McNabb, who ran a funeral home. Mr. McNabb's funeral home [McNabb Funeral Home, Columbus, Ohio] was on Talmadge [Talmadge Street], and he sponsored a lot of kids to go to quote Brush Lake Camp [ph.]. It was quote, they said, the black camp. But we went camping during the summer months and stayed for two weeks. We'd go to Brush Lake, and Mr. William McNabb would sponsor so many kids to go to that. Story_ID: 630604 Speaker 1: Now, what about the women in Colum- Columbus? Any women leadership, I mean in the black community? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. When I think about women, Anna Bishop, I think about her, because she wrote something about 'The Blackberry Patch.' ['Beyond Poindexter Village: The Blackberry Patch'] And I remember that. Speaker 1: Is that the same teacher that wrote the song about Columbus, Ohio? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, Anna. Her son used to be a disc jockey. Bishop [Kirk Bishop]--oh, he'd be on the radio. I'm trying--there's another lady that stood out to me during that time. Um, Miss DeLoach [Kathryn DeLoach]. She was the principal, a black principal at Champion Middle School [Champion Junior High School; Champion Middle School, Columbus, Ohio], but she didn't take no stuff from nobody. And her brother was a science teacher, Mr. DeLoach. And I never will forget it. He left teaching one day and went to be a truant officer, what we used to call them. And I remember asking a question in science class. He said, "I want y'all guys, you guys, to name a building that this man built in honor of his wife. And they say that's one of the most beautiful buildings in the world," like this. And I said, "The Taj Mahal [Agra, India]," like that. "Good going, Dodley [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley]!" And all the guys, "How did you know that?" I said, "It was in the book, dummy," you know, and that kind of stuff. And I got a nickname, Taj Mahal (laughter) out of that when I was a kid. And Mr. DeLoach was one of those teachers--but it was interesting because he was very, he was very fair skinned, Miss DeLoach, too. And at one time he told us about slavery, how it happened. Because we wondered, "Are you really black?" He said, "What you mean?" He made us think. He talked about slavery and how the slave owners would have sex with our women, and so that's how it got melted down. He said, "Hardly anybody is really pure Africans." So, I got my first dose from him explaining it to us. And he went on to be a truant officer. I never will forget him. And if you're on the street after school hours, he knew everybody's parents. Oh, man, you didn't want Mr. DeLoach catch you on the street. Nowadays, we just don't care. We just don't--well, let me stop. I'm just saying that he was one of those folks, an unsung hero, as far as I'm concerned. And he motivated me. When I said, "Taj Mahal," he said, "That is smart." And I'm still fascinated with the Taj Mahal, you know, because of that. And so, Miss. DeLoach is one. Miss Arnold [ph.] was the music teacher over there. And she, we had to do--I was in the glee club, and Miss Arnold was the music teacher of course. And I had a solo with her, one of the songs. And I'll never forget, that gave me an opportunity to sing in a choir. But I had a solo, and she kept me interested in singing. And she was just one of those kind of people if you see on the street, if you weren't in school, she'd tell your parents. And everybody knew her, that sort of thing. Speaker 1: It sounds like a real tight community there. Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was. Story_ID: 630605 Speaker 1: As we approach the '60s [1960s] we get into--by time you came out of Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], black studies departments were springing up. And I think that you were at Ohio State I guess when the black studies department--I don't know if they called it African American studies or black studies-- Speaker 2: The black studies department. Speaker 1: Okay, got started-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --I guess? So you, you-- Speaker 2: I didn't take a lot of black studies courses. You know, you know, I wanted to stay in my field, counseling. And then I was working too at the same time. Speaker 1: And raising the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and raising my kids. I wasn't able to stay on campus. I wasn't able to go to the Union [Ohio Union, Columbus, Ohio]. I wasn't able to sit there and play cards and then go to a study hall, or something like that. I had to come on home and go to work and do stuff like that, and get on out of there as fast as I could. I remember reading Baldwin [James Baldwin], 'Black Like Me' [John Howard Griffin] the one where had the letter--'Black Boy' [Richard Wright], and how that influenced me too. It was just like I didn't know--I always felt like I had to really be good in order to get any kind of job, because of my blackness. And I always felt like I had to be twice as good. And my college professor even told me that. He said, "I don't care what degree you get," and he was white, his name was Dr. Joseph Coran [ph.]. He told me that "Dodley [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley], you're going to, you're not going to make as much money as a white counselor," like that. I said, "Dr. Coran, I'm not worried about the money per se. I like what I do." He kind of smiled. And that kind of goes into what I do right now, kind of. I mean, I really believe in this thing about internal assets. You got to have them in order to make it. And internally, I like what I do. I may not be a millionaire; I don't care about that. I got enough, and I have the potential to do a lot more if I want to. But, anyway-- Speaker 1: Now, did you go directly--in '68 [1968] did you move directly to a master's [degree] program? Speaker 2: Yes, straight--right, yes. I think I sat out one quarter, the summer quarter, and then I went that fall. I graduated that summer, and I was back in school the very first, the next semester at Ohio State. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And in fact, after I got my undergrad, Dr. Kelsey [Moriba Kelsey] and Dr. Coran and Dr. Peters [ph.], all of them, said, "Look, we want you to stay in," you know, and I worked for the department. Because here's a man raising kids, and I'm working and going to school too. And I think that's what they saw; the perseverance that I had in doing that, and raising kids at the same time. Speaker 1: Now, was Dr. Kelsey your mentor at the school? Speaker 2: Dr. Kelsey was one of the most important people I ever met in school. He was one of my advisors, and helped me along the way. Him and Greg- Greg [ph.], oh, he taught up here too. Greg, I can't think of Greg's last name, but I will pretty soon. There was about three or four of them. Dr. Wallace Chandler, all of us. I always felt good when I left Arps Hall [Columbus, Ohio] and would go to their office, because there'd be a bunch of them sitting around talking, you know. "We know now you're back in real world now," you know, that sort of thing, and get me pumped up and so forth. But I wasn't able to socialize all the time with them, but it was just nice to know there was a haven over there in the corner at Arps Hall where I could go and talk to other black professors. And at the time I was still an undergrad, you know. No, master's. I was working on that and worked on my dissertation. How I did that, how I set that up, they liked that and helped me out quite a bit with that piece. Story_ID: 630606 Speaker 1: But I will say that at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] I wouldn't even take advantage of all the extra things that they did. I didn't join a, I didn't pledge a fraternity. I didn't have time for that. Now, I did when I was at Otterbein [Otterbein College; Otterbein University, Westerville, Ohio]. It was almost like a prerequisite. And I'll never forget that experience. Do you want me to--? You don't? Well, that was an experience of being in an all-white fraternity that really kind of-- Speaker 2: Oh, so you pledged an all-white fraternity? Speaker 1: Yeah, at Otterbein. There were no other blacks there. Speaker 2: Did you make it? Did you get it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I made it, I made it. But I didn't particularly like it after a while, because I figured they took it to extremes, because you had to do things with different people. And I think the fact that I'm black, they made me do more than others. And I remember one time somebody said, I overheard somebody say, "There you go, acting like a nigger." It got real quiet. And then somebody said, "Man, Lou [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley] heard you." And I did. So, it was real quiet. So finally the guy who said it, we called him Frog [ph.], he said, "Man, I'm sorry for what I said." I said, "You can't help it." I said, "Because you learned from somebody. It just didn't jump in your mouth." And I said, "I hope it don't happen again. I hope it--I'm glad it was me, because if it had been somebody else, y'all might have been fighting." And I said, "So--," and we were on the football team together too. And Nick heard it, and Nick was Greek. And Nick and I got along real well. His name was Nicodamus [ph.], I'll never forget him. And we played football together, you know. But when I heard that, it made me even more tenacious on the football field, that sort of thing, even for my size, you know. And so that helped me out a lot, you know, to make the team at Otterbein. But then of course, you know, when Connie [Dodley's ex-wife, Constance Jenkins] got pregnant, things just didn't work out. Story_ID: 630607 Speaker 1: So now, now, back up to--now you're working on your master's degree, but you're working at the, you're working at the rec- at the youth center [Ohio Department of Youth Services]? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: So you're still working at the youth center. Now, did you bring any of the material you were working on at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] to the youth center, to inform them of what you were doing at the--? Speaker 2: Yeah, there and a place called Rosemont Center [Columbus, Ohio]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was the director of family services, too, okay, which meant that I did parenting classes. And I used the program called the Systematic Training for Effective Parenting [STEP], and it was a model, a behavior modification model that I used with this. And my sampling of my control group was built in. Because where I worked at I was able to do that, so I didn't have to go no place to have subjects. Speaker 1: About what year is this when you're at the Rosemont Center? Speaker 2: Um-- Speaker 1: You're working on your master's while this is going on. And you're-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, was it in the early--the late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: The late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it was like 1968, '69 [1969]? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: How long did you stay? Did you stay there a long time? Speaker 2: At Rosemont? I was at the Rosemont Center about eight years. Speaker 1: Okay. So, on up into the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Because I was working two jobs-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --by that time too, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, you were teaching parenting. And let me go back to your master's degree. Now, what was your--did you have a thesis to write? Speaker 2: Yes, my dissertation? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't do a thesis; I did my dissertation. Speaker 1: Okay. So you got the Ph.D.--I mean, you got the master's and Ph.D. at the same time? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh. I took a test for my master's. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't do a-- Speaker 1: Thesis, yeah. Speaker 2: Right, I didn't do a thesis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I did a research with parents at Rosemont. Rosemont Center was a place for troubled kids. And I did a pre-test on what they do, about parenting skills. And I used a thing called the justness behavioral checklist, where you checklist all these behaviors. And my hypothesis was that if I could change parents on how to deal with their kids; teach them da, da, da, da, da--and offered some changes. And the teachers also observed the kids, a particular kid or person. So, after completing the class, the only thing that was lacking was the fact that the book itself didn't use terms that were culturally specific. I mean, they were adaptable. They were all written with examples that African Americans don't use. Like, a good example was using reflective listening, about taking out the trash. Well, that's fine. But our kids sometimes--that wasn't a good example, is what I'm trying to say. We had to use examples like--when you use negative--"When you cuss, it makes me feel this way. And consequently," da, da, da. Well, who cusses at a young age like that? Well, in some cultures kids do cuss like that, and that sort of thing. So, in other words I had to--and I wrote back to the company and they actually employed some things that were different. They even shaded the kids for the examples that they used in the book. They still had the same noses, but they made them darker, you know. Because all the cartoon characters, the animated--I mean the caricatures that they used in the book were European Americans. It was an oversight, they said. You know, it's just like when--you know, like the intelligence test, with the mustache. "Which person looks more deviant? The person with the mustache or the person without one?" So, if you choose the one--the one with the mustache, "That one looks good to me." Oh, well, most people you're around have mustaches. So, anyway, it was that sort of stuff. And Dr. Kelsey [Moriba Kelsey] helped me out with that piece too, to look at my rebuttal to this particular book; I mean, curriculum. Like I said, it was called The STEP program [Systematic Training for Effective Parenting]. And the program itself was good. It's just the content of it is what I filled in, with role plays and things like this, that helped out. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you got your master's degree in what year? Speaker 2: I want to say '75 [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I finished up with my Ph.D. in '81 [1981], if I'm not mistaken. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I got all that paperwork over there (laughter), so you know where it's at. Story_ID: 630608 Speaker 1: Tell us about Youth to Youth [Youth to Youth International]. Speaker 2: Well, Youth to Youth is a program established, I want to say, about, oh, '90 [sic. 1982]. And it was a program that--a guy by the name of Mark Sweet [sic.] called the security people together to find out what can we do about these drugs and stuff, you know, the problems we were having in Columbus [Ohio], and alcoholism. And we felt like kids could talk to each other better than other kids, but the kids had to be trained. So they called people, and I was one of the folks they called in to--how do you do prevention efforts. Well, first of all, one of the things about prevention is that you have to inform people, and they want to work with kids. So, I trained staff people to work with kids on how to get at things like them looking at self esteem issues and things, and how advertisements affected kids in relation to drugs and alcohol and things like this. Well, when you talk about those kinds of topics with kids, it's painful sometimes, especially when you got kids who are quote, a scapegoat. And of course, a scapegoat is a person who gets blamed for stuff because somebody else is drinking. So, I helped establish some COA groups, Children of Alcoholics groups and so forth, to talk about the core issues, not just the drug itself, but why kids use it in the first place. So the very first conference they had, it was about three hundred kids there at Denison University [Granville, Ohio]. And for about four years in a row they had the Denison group, maybe about five of these kids. And every year, I did the keynotes for them. And then after doing the keynotes, I started training people on what we call TLC counseling. In other words when you have a conference like that, emotions get up, come up, and so they need somebody to help these kids process the things that they were going through. So, I helped train in that area. So Youth to Youth exposed me, got me exposed to going all over the country. I spent some time in Bermuda for about two years, not in a row, I mean not consecutively, but you know, I was there about three years. I kept going back and forth helping the Bermudians address this issue. Because a lot of it, they adopted from America. I think it was, I'm not sure who said it, but if America sneezes, everybody else gets a cold. So, that's where it was with this drug and alcohol thing in Bermuda. So I went down there and met some very nice people to work with. Speaker 1: Like, now who started Youth to Youth? Speaker 2: It was CompDrugs [sic. CompDrug Incoporated]. A guy by the name of Bob Sweet [Robert E. Sweet] was the executive director. Speaker 1: About when did Youth to Youth start? Speaker 2: I would say, I think it was in 19--wow, 1980. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980] or so? Speaker 2: About '80 [1980]. Speaker 1: About the same time you were getting your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Because we-- Speaker 1: It was started-- Speaker 2: It might have been before that; about '75 [1975], when I think about it. Because, you know, it started early. Because we had a thirty-fifth conference, if I'm not mistaken. So it's been about, it was about 1975 when we started Youth to Youth. Speaker 1: Well, were you with it from the very beginning? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: From the very first beginning. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And that coincided with other stuff I was doing too, talking to kids, doing workshops. And they would go to a lot of states to help out in a crisis situation. I remember going to--was it Denver [Colorado]? Denver one time, because they had a crisis. Little riots and things were going on, or some kind of racial diversity issue, and they asked for people from the United States, I mean from Ohio, from Youth to Youth. And they had a Speakers' Bureau, and I was part of the Speakers' Bureau and they sent me down there to do some work with them. I went to Guam a couple times and did some work, because we had--you know, it's part of the United States now, and there's a lot of drug and alcoholism in that area. And then back in the school itself I did a lot of work with training teachers on how to deal with COAs. And-- Speaker 1: The Children of Alcoholics? Speaker 2: Yes sir, Children of Alcoholics. Story_ID: 630609 Speaker 1: And then the ACOA, the Adult Children of Alcoholics, as well. I did some work on how to say no and really mean it and not just say no programs. I helped train D.A.R.E. [Drug Abuse Resistance Education] officers through Youth to Youth [Youth to Youth International]. So, Youth to Youth has been a platform for me to be exposed to a lot of different things, a lot of different venues, because of the way I would present the information. Most of the time, I would let the kids do it. I would facilitate a program whereas I would use the kids a lot, not just me talking to them. And I think that's one of the reasons why I was able to--I'm still doing work with Youth to Youth. I was in Oregon three weeks ago because of Youth to Youth, doing a program on Don't Defer Your Dreams [ph.] like this. That I was able to relate to Langston Hughes about dreams deferred, and they started looking up and researching that. I helped them develop a shirt down there that says, "Live your dream," and the clouds represent your dreams. And they wrote in there what their dreams are, and so forth. And so, we did a conference around that. So, Youth to Youth has always been part of what I do now. I think that our kids need--when they learn, it can't be painful, had to be fun at the same time. And this is how we got into the SIMBA [SIMBA Circle] program. Story_ID: 630610 Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit to 1981 when you got your Ph.D., now did you, did you immediately go after a different job? Or did you get hi- did you get offers for any other jobs? Speaker 2: I had a couple of offers. But I stayed with the Department of Youth Services [Ohio Department of Youth Services] for a while, because I wanted to, for one thing, to pay back the money, in order to not be bogged down with loans. They have what they call the Juvenile Justice Act [Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974], or the law enforcement act, LEAA [Law Enforcement Assistance Administration]. And whereas if you worked at an agency that paid your tuition, you'd pay it back by working there. This is why I liked that idea a lot. It keeps you in your field, you know. Yeah, so that was 1981. Okay, I became interested in--I got so tired of seeing our kids die. I met a young man from, he used to be a pastor at this church. Harvard Stephens [Harvard Stephens, Jr.] was his name. He had a program called Young Men with a Future, and he saw me working with kids at the detention center during the time I had my doctorate. I joined groups on Saturdays at the DH [ph.]. He said, "How about coming to my church and work with a group of boys on rites of passage programming?" I said, "Sure." So after that it branched off, and I met with people in Chicago [Illinois] through the Evangelical Lutheran [Evangelical Lutheran Church in America] headquarters on Higgins [Road]. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: Ninety [1990]. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990]? Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, because we started our first camp in '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: Now explain, what is the rites of passage program, and how do these programs get started? Were you aware of these in the past? Speaker 2: Yeah. Dr. Kelsey [Moriba Kelsey] had always said that he feels like the biggest problem our kids have is not knowing what a real man is, or what a real woman is. And how you get that, every culture has a rites of passage program, but it had to be retrieved. And rites of passage, of course, are those events that you go through physically, emotionally, and psychologically to make you, quote, a responsible person. And those steps sometimes get lost. And I think I have to remind kids sometimes--they know what a bar mitzvah is, but they don't equate it with what they're going through, okay. So, rites of passage are those agreed upon activities and events you have to have in order to maintain who you really are. You've got to know who you are. If you don't know who you are, you set yourself up for abuse. Because people will say anything about you, but when you know who you really are, then you don't have to worry about hating somebody else, because you know who you really are. Plus, it's just fascinating when kids understand. For example, little facts like pyramids. They still--I mean they don't--when I say, "Somebody built a pyramid that looked just like you," you know, and there's some questions. I said, "Have you ever seen a brick of a pyramid, guys? One is big as this room." Story_ID: 630611 Speaker 1: When you talk about identity, now young people today--I think I know my son- my son used to walk around singing the words to a song he heard when he was in high school. He said, "I thought I told ya, I'm a soldier" ['I'm A Soldier']. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: You know, so he was, he was, he knew bet- you know, he had been through the rites of passage himself. But he, but these are the messages kids are getting, you know, about who they're supposed to be. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: "I'm a gangster, I'm a macaroni," you know, all that kind of stuff. So how do you, how do you--how can--how can you disabuse somebody of the fact that that's what they are when that's what they are acting like, and that's what they're seeing as their role models? He said, "I'm a, I'm a soldier." 'Cause I'm like, you know, here's this gangster over here. And you're saying, you're telling him he's not like that? Or-- Speaker 2: I'm telling him not to be like it. But I also use people who thought that way, who are not that way anymore. We have--and we use--we do a lot of programs on our kids using rap, writing poetry, and so forth. We have a contest, for example, on using an (unclear) set of principles, and how can you make that positive. Tell me each one of the principles. How do you use it every day, for example? Speaker 1: Well, the fundamental question I'm asking is how do you convince the youth that--I mean, (unclear) what do they know about that? I mean, how are they convinced that that is something that even relates to them at all? I mean, how do you start? Speaker 2: Consistently, you have to keep on doing it yourself. It's just like--it's not a coincidence. I wear this a lot, okay (gestures). I think that--for example, we have a program now that's still alive called The Urban Warriors [ph.]. And all these boys have been to a camp, okay, where we concentrated on them for two weeks on those principles. We also talked about some of those Egyptian laws; there's actually forty-two laws. But we see the correlation with life today. For example, one of the laws of reciprocity, "What goes around, comes around fellas," this sort of thing. And so we talk about just that one, for example. We make these things come alive. We don't just say it; we make it come alive. Even in--like, we play sports with the boys. Use your kuumba to do this. And did that happen in the first place? What is kuumba? It's creativity. Somebody sat there and said--for example, I will never forget. One boy said, "You know what, Dr. Dodley [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley]?" He said, "I think kuumba--Magic Johnson had it." Not Magic Johnson. He meant--not Clyde Drexler, but the first person that dunked from the foul line. Speaker 1: Michael Jordan? Speaker 2: It wasn't Michael Jordan. It was-- Speaker 1: From the foul line, let's see. Speaker 2: Walt Frazier. Speaker 1: I don't think he did that. But that's-- Speaker 2: But, wait a minute. It was--anyway, the first person to dunk from the foul line. Now, he used a-- Speaker 1: I think Dr. J [Julius Erving] had that record. Speaker 2: It wasn't Michael Jordan? Speaker 1: Dr. J. Speaker 2: Dr. J, that's who I'm talking about. Yeah, I'm sorry. I'm thinking and listening at the same time. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I said, "How did he use his kuumba then?" He said, "Well, you have to bounce the ball to get to the basket." He said, "Well, I'm just going to jump to the basket." "Oh, good," like this. I said, "So, what principle did he use, you know?" So we stopped--everything they do, we try to relate it to one of those principles. That's just one example. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm just asking--okay, you're getting into the details of what you do, but I'm trying to figure out like, what is the--how do you get them to think that there's another thing to be, first of all? And then, what is the nature of this other thing that they're going to be? What is--how do you characterize it? And how do you--is there a single set of guidelines or rules that are created by somebody to make this a curriculum for manhood, you know? Because I--well, okay. Speaker 2: Well, I think I know. But I'm trying to answer this question. I think that-- Speaker 1: Because I don't want you to get into the details until we get to, like, what is the program-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that you're doing? Speaker 2: Okay. I guess I'm saying what I think helped motivate them, too, to continue--and I've seen some--now all of them don't, you know. When I say that, I mean like at the Afrocentric school here [Columbus Africentric Early College, Columbus, Ohio], a lot of times when the kids leave the Afrocentric school, they forget all the values that they learned. Some don't. I think it's a follow-up that they have to have, you know, not only at a setting where you meet once a week, but also at home. The parents also have to adopt and be saying, "Okay, I really believe in Afrocentricity." Where before, a lot of older adults didn't like that term. They didn't want to be called no African. I know my uncle told me that one time, he said, "I ain't no African." I said, "What are you talking about?" So, I'm thinking that when you show them that it's a process that you go through, that it's not going to happen overnight. And I'm trying to answer that question how you want it. Story_ID: 630612 Speaker 1: Well, okay, let me put it this way. How, who developed--where did Afrocentricity come from, or African centered thought come from? And then and when, who, or what different groups developed it? And then what part of all the different factions that went into it that you, like, teach? Speaker 2: Okay. I have to say that for me, Dr. Moriba Kelsey was the one that introduced me to it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, locally, here in Columbus [Ohio]. And then I started reading about people like Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright], who's a psychologist in Chicago [Illinois]. I never met him, I wish I had. He died at a young age. Speaker 1: Yeah, he actually died in '81 [sic. 1982], when you got your Ph.D. Speaker 2: Right. I never--and I had a book. I can't--it's a red book, and I don't know the name of it, I can't find it now. Okay, I'll just come back to that question again. I'm not quite sure how to answer that, other than the fact that when I asked them--when I explained to them that you need to know who you are, and that there are a lot of things that we--like when you think about Africa, we can dispel those myths about what Africa really is. Speaker 1: Okay. So, I--well, okay, let me, let me go say this then. So, so, I guess what you're telling me--and I don't know why it's so hard (laughter). But the black studies department at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], people who work in the black studies department, have over the years pulled together all these different strands of what it means to be African. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And they've formed a body of knowledge that you're using to inform what you're doing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That's what, I guess you would say that's what it is. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So out of that body of knowledge, you're pulling, you know, certain parts. Now, you can't pull all of it, because, but you're drawing from the things that have been developed over the years by the African studies department and other people trying to do that same thing. Speaker 2: Right, right, okay. Speaker 1: And then that's presented to youth as an African studies model. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, okay. Speaker 1: Is that-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's true. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm just trying to summarize it. So anybody watching this would say like, what is, what's your formula for what he's teaching? And see, you were giving the details, but-- Speaker 2: Where did it come from? Speaker 1: Where did it come from? Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Well, like I said--well, between--like I said, from Ohio State with Dr. Kelsey, and reading--I'm trying to think-- Speaker 1: We didn't have this kind of thought prior to 1960. I mean, nobody was talking about this. When you were growing up, there was nobody talking about African centered thought. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And I think that--I'm trying to think. I really believe that Dr. Na'im Akbar [HistoryMaker Na'im Akbar] really helped me out, especially reading some of his books, especially the one, 'The Psychological Chains of Slavery' [sic. 'Breaking the Chains of Psychological Slavery'] for example, and how we have to overcome that kind of stuff. We still think about that, and that whole notion too, is that we have to remember that we were enslaved instead of slaves. We don't have that kind of mentality. We have--it's a survival mode, okay. I think that Wade Nobles helped me out. He saw me present one time, I'll never forget it. In fact, I got this from him (gestures). I think it was in St. Louis [Missouri]. I'm not sure where it was at, but he had one on, and I told him I really loved that. He took it off his neck and gave it to me. I've had it ever since. And he said it represented a man who worked for children, its Benin, like that. I said, "Oh, fine." I lost it once and panicked, and found it. I think that the curriculum also--I mean, it was born out of all the tragedies that's happened to our kids, how they're dying right and left because they don't know who they really are. It's another reason why we did that. I think also this whole thing about black men, especially, not wanting to show their emotions was another way we developed this curriculum. Because even SIMBA [SIMBA Circle], it means Safe in My Brothers' Arms to talk and admit that I'm wrong, or to cry, or whatever. And it's a process to really know who you really, really are, so you have a frame of reference to draw on. Story_ID: 630613 Speaker 1: Now the brothers that you mentioned, the people you mentioned, Dr. Wade Nobles, [HistoryMaker] Na'im Albar, Bobby E. Wright, Dr. Kelsey [Moriba Kelsey]--these are all people who--correct me if I'm wrong--were like the founders or pioneers in the Association of Black Psychologists, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. And I like Linda Myers [Linda James Myers], too, she's a female. And Dr. Myers she's at Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio]. Now you know of her, probably. She's a brilliant woman. She's the one who dots her Is and crosses her Ts. And she has tenure at Ohio State. And I remember when she first came. I didn't choose to go that route. I rolled my sleeves up and got out in here in the community and started doing stuff. I think the curriculum-- Speaker 1: You said that real fast. But I just want to dwell on that for a second. So, you would rather work in the field than being in the university teaching this-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --information, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. It's interesting, because I did teach one quarter at Ohio State one time. They asked me if I would teach a class, and I did. I didn't particularly like it. It was just too much, and I couldn't really do what I wanted to do, and I always ran out of time. Because they enjoyed- Spielman was in one of my classes one time, an ex-football player at Ohio State. Speaker 1: Oh, you're talking about-- Speaker 2: Chris Spielman. Speaker 1: Chris Spielman, the linebacker? Speaker 2: The linebacker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I went up there for a while, and I was teaching a course. It's a summer course on doing volunteer work and how to relate, and diversity and all that kind of stuff like that. He was in it. And I'll never forget that. But I didn't--I don't--that part I don't particularly care for. Now, I don't say--it's needed, it's needed, you know. It's just like I haven't--the curriculum--in fact I'm doing more writing now than I did when I was in school. And a lot of it is based on the curriculum that I used to--that I work with now, but with re-entry folks. In other words, ex-felons. I have a curriculum now called the Eye of the Hurricane [ph.]. And that's born out of not knowing who you are, and rites of passage programming. And actually, Monday I'm going to present it to Mayor Coleman [HistoryMaker Michael B. Coleman] and some other folks. But anyway--so, again, I really--every culture should know their rites of passage. I was doing something, and there was a Hispanic boy there. We were talking about rites of passage and we were talking about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. And I mentioned Cesar Chavez, and he just lit up. I said, "What did Dr. Chavez and King have in common?" And he knew. He talked about the sit-ins and so forth, and things like that. And everybody's like, "How did he know that?" Well, we hadn't been talking about nothing that he related to, you know, that he knew about. He knew about that, and that kind of opened the door for him to get more involved. It was at Hilliard High School [ph.], I never will forget. So, every culture I think needs to know about their leaders and people in the past, and things like that. Because our kids sometimes--because Hollywood hasn't portrayed us, quote, not until recently in a positive manner. So they make up their own characters a lot of times, who they want to be. People are not even real. Story_ID: 630614 Speaker 1: Is there a basic outline of the steps that your rites of passage takes youth through to get them to a point where they're, they have crossed the threshold into, like a young manhood? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say that even an older person. Rites of passage is not just for kids. It's for old people, too. Where you are is who you are. And I think that the very first step that we use is making the kids feel relaxed, and talking and getting them to understand that you're meant to live, not die. You're talking about you'll die for your parents. We want you to live for them. And we want you to know who some of them folks were. There's a part there in our curriculum where we actually talk about the pain that you have, and where is it from. And a lot of pain is a derivative of a negativism, whether its racism, sexism, adultism, alcoholism. All these isms take away your power. And like I tell them--I ask them, "So, how many of you are persons who have went to AA [Alcoholics Anonymous] meetings?" And the very first thing you have to admit is that you're powerless over alcoholism, this sort of thing. So, we talk about the misuse of power a lot. But then for my boys, for my curriculum, I like to talk to these boys about how they got in this quote, act like a man box. It's a box that said a man is not supposed to cry. I can't, I can't show anger to be a man. I have to fight to prove who I am. And it's interesting, because "Hip Hop Versus my Aunt' [ph.], a book that a brother wrote out of Chicago [Illinois], talked about how we don't really know--to be popular, you have to be--you can't be smart and be popular at the same time. And we dispelled those myths. And then this box, we talked about how it gets developed. And I do role plays. How did you get put in that box in the first play? Through the media. For example, I ask boys to stand up here, and we do it at command. "Yeah, then when you cry, somebody tells you, 'Man, you're not supposed cry?'" "Yeah." "Have you ever felt like you have to have more than one girlfriend?" "Yeah." "And where do you get them from?" And then I ask them to name movie stars. And they watch so much TV. And they'll name people like Wesley Snipes, Steven Seagal, all these folks like this. And I show them how--even though you know right from wrong--how it's in your mind that you're somebody else. Like, one experiment I do with our kids a lot is ask them, I say, "Do you know right from wrong?" "Yeah." I say--well, I'll hold up a white piece of paper. And I'll ask them to repeat the color of the paper three times. Now, if I hold up a white piece of paper, what color is the paper? Speaker 1: White. Speaker 2: Again? Speaker 1: White. Speaker 2: Louder. Speaker 1: White. Speaker 2: Last time. Speaker 1: White. Speaker 2: What do cows drink? Speaker 1: Milk. Speaker 2: Cows drink? Speaker 1: Oh, they don't drink. (Laughter) Water, I guess. Speaker 2: Okay. Now when you get all the kids doing that sort of stuff, then you're showing them now, "Oh, now I understand how they trick me," this sort of thing. So, it's the subliminal messages that we get that makes you that way, this sort of thing. Then I ask, "Who's all in that box?" for example. "Now, tell me something. Who's not in the box?" "Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] isn't in that box." Or they'll start naming some, okay. Um, so the box is a real critical spot. And then I got a role play I'll do with the kids, and I'll have one boy to represent everybody. Now, this is after about the fourth day or something like that, when we were really into our session. And again, this is the missocialization, the Eye of the Hurricane [ph.] part of the rites of passage. And what I do, I pick a grown man or somebody older yelling at you, and you're ten years old. How would you feel if someone comes to your house, it's your dad, and tells you--comes in the house maybe and says, "Turn off the TV set," but he don't hear you, but you don't hear him. He yells at you, and tells you, "What do you mean, not listening to me?" Now, everybody in the room is ten. You can't laugh. You got to feel, don't laugh. And they look at him and say, "You're a dummy. You're not going to ever be, amount to nothing. You're just like your father. What is wrong with you, boy? You're trying to cry like some woman instead of acting like a man?" And I'll draw back, like I want to hit him. And most of the boys ducked and flinched. They were real quiet. And then I asked them, "Out of this process, how do you feel when you come back angry? Who do you take it out on?" Da, da, da, da, da like that. Well, after about two days of this, then we take them and let them release the pain. And we use a lot of the models from, believe it or not, from 'Lion King', "Circle of Life." That, you have to remember somebody, if you can, who can steer you in the right direction. And we have this thing called a pain fire, where they take a log and talk to this log about all the pain they have. And then they throw it into the fire, and all the embers go up in the sky. "And all those embers, all those stars you see up there, fellas, could represent your ancestors helping you with this." And not only are the boys kind of showing emotion, so are the staff members. Because we have provided a space and an area where they can talk and release their pain. Story_ID: 630615 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: You were walking us through (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And when they throw their pain in that fire, I'd tell them, "Look up, look at the stars. And write your name in the stars, connect the dots. And all the rest of the stars are ancestors, someone who died so that you could go on." And I remind them, "Your ancestors didn't bring you this far to let you down." Now, and I also tie that into another--it's about rituals, learning about rituals, and why we have rituals. We explained to them, why do we do libations or tambiko? Not to be just to be doing it, not worshipping. You're remembering. So for anybody who thinks that it's sacrilegious, it's not that we are worshipping. We're remembering, and honoring and understanding that there are people who came before us that allowed us to even be on this campus that we're all on here today, this sort of thing. And when you stand, you stand--like if you're playing football and you're a wide receiver, you don't stand on one foot, because then you standing on the ancestors' shoulders--heads. And we don't want that, so you stand firmly, like this. And then you--we had them--if you've never done libations or tambiko--I know you have. But it's a real teaching moment for kids to remember their ancestry. Because we first start out by asking them to remember someone before slavery, and then, "Where is Timbuktu [Mali]? I thought that was in Texas." Then we teach like that. So we always ask them to think about someone before slavery, and were talking about the first doctors, Imhotep you know. Of course you know all of that, but I'm saying that kids don't know it, you know. They say, "Well, maybe it's a mummy." I say, "Well, to mummify a body, you have to be a physician." I said. And they still are amazed at how they preserve those bodies. That sort of thing. So, that piqued their interest. And the more people they call out, you know, the better we are. And some of them don't know. Then now, they want to know. And then we ask them to answer the Moth [ph.], not the Middle Passage, and explain what that means. We don't use that term anymore, because it's a great tragedy, and it's not like we were able to ride back home and stuff like that. Slavery was one way. And so, you get a chance while you're doing libation to teach at the same time. And even when you get to the part where you have the boys to call up their own personal ancestors, like that, I say, "Somebody who makes you smile," and you ought to see the smiles on their faces. And sometimes they explain who it is. You don't have to. And then we always ask them to pour a libation for an event or something in your life that's meaningful to you. For example substance abuse, teenage mothers, people born with AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], and all kind of stuff like this. Bring their consciousness up about what's going on with us during the rites of passage ceremonies. And the whole curriculum [at SIMBA Circle], that's just the ten days. I mean we do this in ten days, and then we come back and expand on each one of those points in our school and afterschool programs. That's why we have the Urban Warriors [ph.]. We have boys now at a conference in Toledo [Ohio], I think that's where it's at. In fact, the guy who took them, is one of our nation builders, which is a rank in rites of passage. And the nation builders are the ones who work directly with the Warriors. I'm an elder, so the camp is designed, you got the elders--well, you got the watoto's [ph.], or the warriors, the kids that have the war spirit. Then they're surrounded by nation builders. And the nation builders are surrounded by the elders. And the elders are the ones who help, if we need to. Speaker 1: Providing overall guidance for them? Speaker 2: Right. We have a--and we always make the difference between an elder and an older, like that. Story_ID: 630616 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) An older is somebody that's old, but hasn't been through the training [at SIMBA Circle]? Speaker 2: That's right. And they have life experiences, but they don'tshare with anybody else. Our curriculum also consists of teaching them--see, if I had to break it down, I would say that one of the first things we have to know is the history, and why it's important. They have to know survival skills on how to maneuver in this society. We even go down as far as if you get stopped by the police, what do you do? You don't put your I over E, your intellect over your emotion. You put, you don't put--yeah, your emotion or your intellect. You put your--we got a formula. You keep your intellect over your emotions, okay, in order to survive and make it. Because you can be, you're a troublemaker, because of racism a lot of times. You don't go through Bexley [Ohio] with your music turned up real loud, bumping. You're not surviving that way. We need you, don't do that. Because of racism, you will be tracked, tagged, this sort of thing. We also teach them how your community can work for you or against you. We also think it's important they learn about their ancestors. Well, that's a part of history too. But see, survival, spirituality, community. Oh, and we also do a holistic program with the health, as well, as far as eating is concerned. At our camp for example, our salad bar is one of the most popular things around. Because we introduced them to salad, and they love it. But a lot of times they can't get the salad because where they come from, their parents can't buy, can't afford it a lot of time. Or, it spoils or whatever. But at our camp we serve, the salad bar is one of the most popular things. So we try to show them how to live holistically. Speaker 1: You know, in a lot of inner cities, stores don't sell fresh vegetables-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and fruits. Speaker 2: We also, we have a guy there by the name of Shedrick Sanders, who I also think would be excellent. He lived in Ghana for about five years in the Peace Corps. He could do more with algebra than a monkey could do with a peanut. And he was one of the elders too. He's also one of the drummers there. We teach drumming to the kids. We teach drumming as a way to release your anxiety, and as a tension reliever. And you're playing the drums, just like your heartbeat, and things like this. One way we deal with the conflict resolution, is we have a drumming circle. And one guy gets a beat, and I say, "Now, catch his beat." And they're all in rhythm with each other. I said, "That's the way we should be in life," this sort of thing. A lot of messages. We had, two years ago, a Buffalo Soldier [Buffalo Soldiers Motorcycle Club] ride his motorcycle to the camp, and stayed an entire week. He came all the way from Seattle [Washington] to be with us, because he'd heard about the program. We took our boys not so long ago to see 'The Tuskegee Airmen' [sic. 'Red Tails']. We went in for free, they let us come in and watch it. That was in Chicago [Illinois]. See, we have reunions, too every now and then. We do things locally, but we also do things regionally. But then our big camp that we do every year, lasts ten days in Muskegon [Michigan]. Our goal is to get our own camp year round, where we actually teach teachers how to work with these kids. Because most of our nation builders, or a lot of them, I would say 80 percent of them, are school teachers. They just take their summer and dedicate it to the camp. Story_ID: 630617 Speaker 1: Now, how long does it take to finish SIMBA Circle if you're a youth? Or are you ever finished? Speaker 2: Oh, you're never finished. You just go to different degrees. Now the summer camp itself, which is kind of a catalyst, that's ten days experience. And out of that, you got to come back and teach your little brother or your little sister things that you learned at our camp, like this. And I would say this, that we started in '93 [1993], so--what's that? Nineteen--the camp. Okay, and on average we have a hundred boys every year, so that's almost nineteen hundred boys that we touched. Now, there're some kids who come back, too. We have kids start out by eight years old. We got a couple boys there now who are men, who went and got a degree and they come back to the camp. So it's an organ, it's alive, and we keep perpetuating our own self. Speaker 1: Now, is there a ceremony to mark a passage? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, sir, we do. And in fact, we invite the community to come in for this. One of the crossover exercises we do is that we have a ship, a wooden ship on these campgrounds. And, I can't give away trade secrets. It's not a trade secret. But we grab the boys in the middle of the night, some of them. Some of the older boys have been there before, so we grab some of the younger boys. And we take them out of their beds and throw them in this ship. And it's an old, a big old boat that they use for recreation. But the camp is ours while we're there, so we make like a slave ship. And I got turned into a slave master. And we'd throw them and put them in there, and they'd be yelling. And we'd tell them, "Shut up," and call them the N word and so forth. And we say things like, "Pack 'em tight, now. Pack 'em tight, because you know, we got to take back at least fifty. You got to put seventy in there," like that. "Because you know what's going to happen. We got to take our baths, you know. And so, you know, you cut one of them and put 'em on the side, and while the shark eats that one, we can take our bath on the other side. So make sure--and them little ones, keep them, because they good belly warmers. Yeah, and that one boy there, he look pretty good." Some of them started crying, because it's dark when we do this. Yeah, and we'd be banging on the boat and so forth. And they can't talk. I mean, these nation builders that we use are very, some of them are ex-ath- ex-football players, but they're real gentle, too at the same time. And we know what we have to do with our boys, you know. We had a boy who tried to run away, but we held him. "We know what you're feeling. But think about our ancestors who tried to run away and couldn't. What would happen to them?" Oh, man, I'm still thinking about it, how this one boy started crying and said that his grandfather told him that he saw his father hung. And then we talked about Willie Lynch. We tied that in. We just don't only say it, when events come up we say, "What was Willie talking about?" You're losing profit. So, how do they divide us? See, y'all argue about good hair, bad hair, who's the lightest, who's the darkest? See, that's how they divide us, and we can't do that. See, this stuff naturally unfolds, so we just plug into it; that's our agenda. But they don't, they don't know exactly what it is. I mean we know what it is, and we have it written down. But it flows into--it just happens when we do this with these kids. And it's real intense. Now that's why, as a psychologist or a therapist, I'm there. Because every child, when they finish the pro- well, let me back up a little bit. Story_ID: 630618 Speaker 1: Another activity we do with them [at SIMBA Circle] is mask making. You take pieces, strips of mask--of plaster of paris like stuff. You need to wet it, and it's little strips. And we usually have something in the back- music in the background. And you have to lay there and pick a partner. And that guy is putting your mask on you, you know. And they make it three layers, two layers. But you got to sit there, and somebody is trusting you to touch their face like this. And you close your eyes, that's trust. And while they're making the mask, we have them think about an ancestor who, that, when you get depressed, you can just smile. That's your mask, of that person. And why do we wear masks in the first place? We're not scared about these masks. These masks are a reflection of you, and masks have always been something we use for ceremonies and so forth. But some of us wear masks to do the wrong things. Some of us cover our face, who we really are, with these masks. So, these masks represent some in you. And we have--and they're wonderful, they're beautiful. And when they make them, they put them out in the sun and let them dry. And then when you--now it's your turn to get your mask made. So, if you were a clown to this guy, you got to remember what you did. Because remember, what goes around, comes around. So, the real intention was about pushing the curriculum when things happened. And they'd decorate them and so forth. Then they had to make something, another craft they might want to do, beads and so forth. After all is said and done, then they have a book, a curriculum in there, they have to name so many--they pick out a celebrity, for example, and give his life story, like Langston Hughes. Well, we got some kids up here that are homophobic. I said, "What do y'all know about Langston Hughes?" "He was a great writer." And one boy said, "You know, he was gay," like this. "What?" "Yeah, but he's still cool," sort of like that. So we had those kinds of conversations. They, after all is said and done, they got to come before the council of elders, each individual child. After the pain part, the next day we have to decorate this place. The camp is up now, and we have Kente cloth all over the place and pictures of Africa all over the cafeteria. And the next morning when they come, they see this. Well, the Council of Elders is one room where we light some incense and the nation builder brings the boy in, and the room is kind of dark. And I have on something more elaborate than this perhaps, along with two other elders, one a female, and another person, and somebody in the back. And the kid is in the chair like you're sitting, and the nation builder is behind him. And we ask him questions about what principle do you like the best, and why, and how you can really use it, you know? I ask them about their grades, that sort of thing. What do you read about? You need somebody in your tribe who you consider a leader. Speaker 2: By tribe, you mean--? Speaker 1: Oh, we divide our boys up into tribes. And we name our tribes. There ain't no more than seven or eight boys in a tribe, and two nation builders. And we name them after one of the principles of Kwanzaa, one of the principles. If we have more than seven tribes, then we go to the elements. It might be the water tribe, the fire tribe, but you try to show the relationship with everything. And if we run out of that then we go to directions; the east tribe, the west tribe. And why do we do that? It's because one reason why we look different is because we went all different directions when these slave owners--they took us everywhere. Story_ID: 630619 Speaker 1: Well, what I hear you saying is that when they are sitting in a chair they're asked questions that really they can't fail to answer, you know. I guess maybe they could, but they-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: But we don't want them to fail-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --(laughter) to tell you the truth. In their workbook [for the SIMBA Circle], they're responsible for a lot of things. I do have a workbook here with me. They have to be able to--for example, if I read their book and I see where--"What did Thurgood Marshall do? What did he do?" For example. "Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], what did he do, who is he?" That sort of thing. "Oh, yeah, he was out of New York." "Okay, fine." But I'm saying that it's always not so real ancient. We don't want to go too ancient all the time. They need to know that it's still going on now. And then after the council of elders--it's so interesting. Because if you got eight boys in a tribe, the one boy is in the room, and the rest of them are out there trying to peek in to see what we're doing. You know, we don't let them do that. And so then we, after all is said and done that night, the following night we line them up in different little quadrants, about four boys from each tribe, and we have salt, vinegar, and honey. And we have each one, and they're blindfolded, to taste the salt first. Of course, then we tell them, you know, "Salt preserves. I hope you preserve what you've learned here and keep it," like that. And then we let them taste vinegar. It's bitter, you know. And then we talk about, explain that. "Life can be really sweet." You taste the honey, like this. And we ask them to make a commitment to keep on learning more and more about what you want to be, and find to somebody who's doing what you're doing, what you want to do, in your field. For example, I mean if you want to be a rapper--and you know, all rappers are not negative. They're trying now--in fact we had a guy, he was a Christian rapper, to come and talk to the boys about how when Lil Wayne really tried to do some raps about African history they told him, "No, because you make money doing this. And the promoters are saying you can't do this. We don't want you to do this." But now there's a group of people now saying that, "We're going to take back our own music and make it more positive." It's not as popular yet, but it's going to get there. There's a lot more people out here doing positive rap and this sort of thing, and teaching at the same time. And so, and they eat three meals a day, and they see us cooking the meals for them. Like I said, they stay in cabins. They learn a lot from each other. Story_ID: 630620 Speaker 1: And so I guess the upshot is that you, you replace a negative cultural model with a more positive one? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and, and give the message that this is a lifelong process. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Keep learning and keep improving on what you're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) On what you're doing. If I have to throw in--sometimes I throw in some Greek mythology. And they learned from us anyway. I ask them--there's a Greek god named Sisyphus. And the myth of Sisyphus is that you roll this rock up this hill. You get up there, and guess what happens? It rolls back down the other side. You roll it back up again. In other words, you don't ever give up. And then I ask them, "What principle would be that you never give up?" Or, we all do it. We're intentional about doing this, about anything that we do, you know. One night there's a bat in one of the cabins. (Laughter) We were scared of this bat. They had the light on him, and the bat just stood there. So, Shedrick [Shedrick Sanders] and I had to come see what was going on. The guy on the phone said, "Man, we got a bat in the cabin, and we don't know what to do with it," a grown man. We went in there, and it was really funny. Because here are two grown men with all these boys, and all of them looked like little boys to us at the time with this bat. So, I took my little old--I had a basket. I mean a fishing net, and let him fly in that. And what happens is that the bat got on the ground. See, if he's flat on the ground--they learned something--he can't fly. He had to take off from an angle or something like this. So, they learned some things about that. And--oh, keeping the light on him, he was just petrified, okay. He was on the floor but he couldn't--but he had to be on angle, but I don't know why. It's just like if you--we were telling them if you put a--well, I won't go into that one. It was some animal that Shedrick said if you put him in a cage, he'll go in, but he won't back back out; he don't know how to do it, that sort of thing. And we tie that into our own lessons sometimes, how you get into a situation and you know how you got in it, but now you got to get yourself--just turn around and get out. Speaker 1: You've been using all kinds of things, folk wisdom and-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --African history and culture. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, just a lot-- Speaker 2: A lot of different things. Speaker 1: --of elements of psychology. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so, well, do the participants stay in touch with each other after the program? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Do they keep a network going? Speaker 2: Here lately, since you said that, I'm the only one guilty of not doing it. All of them got websites, like that. And we have a SimbaCircle.org, and these kids are on it. Now, every now and then--Shedrick's on all the time. And what happens is if somebody says something wrong or inappropriate, or makes a wrong turn, or says the wrong kind of thing or some negative phrase, he'll say, "Nation builder," I mean, or Warrior, or So and So, you know, "don't do that," that sort of thing. But I'm not on there like he is, on Facebook. And-- Speaker 1: Now Cedric [sic.] is-- Speaker 2: His name is Shedrick. It's not Cedric, it's Shedrick. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: S-H-E-D-R-I-C-K. I recommended him. Speaker 1: What's his last name? Speaker 2: Sanders. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: S-A-N-D-E-R-S. Speaker 1: And he's the-- Speaker 2: He's one of the elders-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the SIMBA Circle. Speaker 1: Now, is there a staff? I mean, how big of a staff works with the project? Speaker 2: Okay. We have Yehiel, Yehiel Curry. He's actually a minister at a church [Shekinah Chapel, Riverdale, Illinois], too, and we recruit out of his church. Then Gaylord Thomas who--both of these guys are ELCA people. Speaker 1: What's ELCA? Speaker 2: The Evangelical Lutheran general church [Evangelical Lutheran Church in America]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of America. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, how we got started--now, we do our own funding, but they helped us out quite a bit with the funding of this. It costs about fifty thousand dollars a year to run a camp like this. So, they get sweatshirts--I'll show them to you--tee shirts. And we give them a bracelet and some other things, too, some books. We do get some donations every now and then too, to help out especially with clothing, toothbrush--you know, all the things they need. Story_ID: 630621 Speaker 1: Right now you're retired from the Youth [Ohio Department of Youth Services]--? Speaker 2: From the City of Columbus [Ohio]. Speaker 1: From the City of Columbus. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And is there any, is there any ideal project aside from this one [SIMBA Circle] that you're working on? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's all tied in, too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, they signed a mandate to start releasing nonviolent criminals. And there are people now who are starting re-entry programs all over the United States. And what they're saying is they want these guys to get jobs. Well, anybody can get a job. How do you keep it? If you been locked up for ten or twelve years, your missocialization skills are zonked. So, the program, the curriculum that I developed is part of the rites of passage program. And I ask the guys when they first come in and I meet with them--in fact, we're doing, Monday I'm doing a demonstration of it with Mayor Coleman [HistoryMaker Michael B. Coleman] and fifteen other folks who will be in the room, to show how this works. They've heard a lot about it. I've been doing it now for two years, and nothing but good things are coming out of this. And we look at the missocialization we got in the first place. And I use the Johari window as one of my tools with these guys. And the Johari window of course was developed by two guys, Joe and Harry; Joe Ingham [sic. Harrington Ingham] and Harry Lutz [sic. Joseph Luft]. And I changed it somewhat and altered it to make it more plausible for folks. In other words, we have these ex-offenders look at your personality through how open you are, secrets you keep, your subconscious, and the blind side of your personality. And your subconscious is defined--I mean openness is defined as how much you talk about yourself, not just because you talk a lot. Your secret is just what the word implies. And then your blind side is what you can't see, but that other people can see. Now, a lot of times people focus on that blind side--the good things that you don't believe. For example, somebody may have told you, "You're very smart." "No, no, not me. How many of you ever said that?" Hands just jump up. On the other hand the blind side could be something negative, like you talk too much. And somebody told you that, but you still don't want to believe it, okay. The subconscious is the part that really motivates who you really are. The subconscious is defined as these negative events that come back up through something that you hear, see, smell, taste, or touch. Now, it also may come out for some other reasons. That's that sixth sense that we don't know. Like I ask, "How many of you ever walked in a room and somebody had been arguing. And even though they're not saying a word, you can tell they've been arguing?" Hands go up. I said, "How many of you think about something sometimes that you see that brings back a bad memory, or something you taste?" And I'll tell them sometimes, even for me, for a long time I couldn't eat chicken noodle soup sometimes. Because the day my mother [Lueatta Stewart Dodley] died my father [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] fixed some chicken and dumplings, and the house smelled like chicken noodle soup, da, da, da, da, and I processed it. So when I tell them, when I disclose myself to them, then they started doing some self-disclosure. And when they do that, they draw their own window. Then we as a group will help them process what they put down there, because they may be blind to the fact that they're very intelligent. I've got some people now who come out of prison who are very smart, but they've been told so long that they wasn't. I got a young man now who was in prison with his father. And he said he learned more about himself when him and his father were in prison. Now they're out and they have bonded a lot better, because they really got a chance to really know and cry with each other. Speaker 1: They didn't have a chance to talk before, I guess? Speaker 2: No, they didn't, right. Speaker 1: Or take the time. Speaker 2: There we go, there we go. And so, and most of these guys are fathers. So, you can't pass down a bad habit that you got. So I tie in Father 2 Father programs and a lot of things with these guys. And I tell you--the evaluations--it's not just me. It's got be a higher power behind it, too. They really enjoy--I can't walk through this city unless somebody know me. I go in Kroger and fifteen guys--I mean, it's nice to feel that way. See, I received an award which to me was more precious than a Ph.D. And it was called The Father of the Village Award [ph.], given through the Urban League [Columbus Urban League]. And they used the name, Baba. And Baba means father of the village. When I think about Dr. Kelsey [Moriba Kelsey], he was my Baba. Now I feel like I'm a Baba to a lot of these kids. And so with this rites of passage program, it still means we don't only work with kids. Because sometimes the older men look like kids to me after a while when they start crying, or admit that they didn't have childhood. Or they realize that where they are is because of some scars. I got a young man now--of course I won't mention his name--who's been locked up about ten years, and he's got tattoos on his face. So when he goes to get a job, they look at that tattoo. And I say, "Well, you know, you got to overcome that. First of all, you got to get dressed right. And then, you know, smile through that tattoo." Because what he told us, that tattoo is because he saw his mother get raped. His father beat him. His uncle raped him. This is a grown man, to admit it for the first time in front of a bunch of other guys. The first time he ever done it. This man is thirty-five, thirty-eight years old. I want to help him get a suit. I said, "You put a suit on, and that smile of yours will come through all that pain." And sure enough, it did. Story_ID: 630622 Speaker 1: You mentioned an Urban League [Columbus Urban League] award, as Baba of the village [Father of the Village Award (ph.)]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you received awards from other organizations. And you speak all--you've been all over the wo- you've been to Guam. You've been to Bermuda and all up in the northwest and everywhere. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: Are there people trying to replicate the program [SIMBA Circle] in other states-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and territories? Speaker 2: Actually, in Rhode Island I do a lot of work there and teachers are saying ago and ame. Because ago, it goes a long way, because it's showing you, "I respectfully ask you for your attention." And what I'm saying is that we got to remember that respect is the key word for any kind of relationship. And I love hearing them white kids, even though the quote is Afrocentric. But so is shut up, that's American. But I'm saying, to listen to a different way of getting somebody's attention. And they agree with it. And you don't yell, and you wait until they say ame, and then you start talking. Speaker 1: Now, this is something I think I'd be remiss if I didn't bring up, that some of the cultural content is used in the Council of Independent Black Institutions and black independent, black schools counseling for independent black institutions and black schools. I was at a conference two weeks ago and some of the people were saying ago, and everybody responded ame. Everybody knew what it was. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This is something that didn't exist prior to say, the late '60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: No, right. Speaker 1: And it's something that started small, and its worked. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So, you're part of--it's not just your program, but your program is an important addition to all this cultural flow. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: I did it- Cosi [Columbus, Ohio], and it said that, you know, if I would say, "Au revior," you'd know what I'm talking about. Why not learn? The world is getting smaller. We've got to be able to communicate with each other. So, ago merely means I respectfully ask for your attention. And you can't yell it. Because you mean--because you have to respectfully say it. You can't say, "Ago!" That's an oxymoron. So, you've got to be patient and wait until they say, "Ame." And it helps you with your blood pressure, too. You can't do it that way. You're modeling something when you do it that way. There was a question. Speaker 1: Anyway, it wasn't a question? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, okay. Speaker 1: It was a confirmation of where we are with this, with the cultural things that you're doing. It's not just you and your group in isolation. I just wanted to make sure-- Speaker 2: Oh, right. Speaker 1: --that anybody watching that, knows that in 2012-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in Rhode Island, that's what I'm saying. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So maybe not all--everything I do has been replicated, but there's enough pieces in there. "Ago--" and for the white kids to say--and I just love it. Because even anybody who's not quote African American, when I see them doing it, it shows there's unity in it, and people feel better about it. I say, you know, we can say, "Clap three times if you hear me," yeah. Yeah, something like this, or, "Catch a bubble." That's how you get people's attention. But respect is the key word, you know, in, in working with these--with people, period. Story_ID: 630623 Speaker 1: Let me, we always ask this question. When you look back on everything you've done to this point--and I know you received recognition and awards and that sort of thing. But when you look back at it yourself, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: It's interesting you said that. Because I, well, I was gonna order me some tee shirts that say, "Leave a legacy," and that's all it's going to say. Or, "What will be your legacy?" I'm not sure how I'm going to phrase it yet. I want a black shirt like The HistoryMakers shirt, the same font on it and everything, just saying "Leave a legacy." I've already starting leaving a legacies, I know I have. I'd like to leave a legacy that your--I got influenced with the twenty or forty developmental assets through the Search Institute [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. Even though I think it's been about twelve years now that they've had the program, they identified forty assets that everybody needs in order to be successful in life. Nobody has all forty. The ones that are important to me are the internal assets. I feel good about me from the inside out. That for the young ladies, "I want a man. I don't need a man." I want people to be able to--the legacy is that you feel good from within, and nobody can take that from you. The legacy that there's more than one way to do something; the legacy that I never yell; the legacy that I am somebody, period, and no matter what. Money doesn't define me, external things do not define me. It's the internal things that define who I am. And I have, I'd like to have as a legacy a person who helped reflect feelings for people. I tell people all the time. I have a statue of this old man with a drum, I mean with a stool. And the reason why he carries that stool is so that if you meet somebody he wants to talk to, he sets down and talks to them on their level. And I want to always have a legacy of being easy to talk to. It's so interesting, because people call me and say, "Man, you didn't call me back." I get busy sometimes, and that sort of thing. And that's a legacy I don't want to keep. But the legacy that if you talk to Lou Dodley [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley], you're going to feel better, or if he don't make you feel better, he knows somebody who does. And that's what I've been doing; I've been passing the buck. I said, "Man, look, I don't have time for this." I was talking to Linda Myers the other day. She says, "Here's a lady who really needs your help." I said, "I don't have time right now." She said, "Lou, sure, but if you recommend her." Because a lot of the black psychologists, a lot of them don't want to take insurance no more, and I can see why, you know. So she tells them upfront she's not taking insurance, for example, or someone else. So, I'd like to leave a legacy of being--I don't want to say being a papi. My granddaughter, one of them calls me papi. And the reason why she calls me papi is because I have raised her since she was nine months old. She's eleven now. And throughout that time, I watched 'Dora the Explorer' with her in the mornings, and 'Sponge Bob,' all those crazy things, Bill ['Little Bill']--all that. I know all them characters. And she calls me papi. I was in Texas one time, and I was at the airport and someone said, "Papi!" I turned around and I said, "Fool, everybody speaks Spanish down here. There's a lot of papis here." (Laughter). But I like that term. That's a, that term papi (unclear). Speaker 1: So your legacy is as a father, as a baba? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 630624 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. Now if--when you look back at everything again that you've done, is there any major thing that you would go back and change? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Or wish you hadn't done? Speaker 2: Yes, and even though I know I always say that you're where you're supposed to be, yeah. There's a part of me that I wish I had intensified my skills on paper, so that it could be lifted up and given to someone. I get--I read sometimes--I said, "Man, I did that years ago. I did that, and I'm still doing that," da, da, da. But I haven't documented it. I'm doing more documentation now than I did before. Because I was doing it; I was in battle. Now that I've done it now, I feel like, but I wish I could have done more then. But I was raising families and had some crises come up, and things like this. I always worked two jobs seemed like. I never worked just one job. I worked two jobs. But I wish I could have been more intentional about dotting my Is and crossing my Ts, so that I could give it to someone. But it's been covered, though. I can see it in different programs that people are doing, even this thing about the Search Institute [Minneapolis, Minnesota], those internal assets they talked about. It's important to have a sense of purpose. Excuse me. It's important to be able to feel good about yourself. I mean it's important to value nature and to go fishing. It's important to know the difference between infatuation and love, for our kids, you know. And all that stuff has been written about now. There's a program called Love Notes [ph.], that I could have wrote the whole curriculum for it. And Love Notes is a curriculum that I use too, with Eye of the Hurricane [ph.]. The very first thing they say is you got to learn how to love yourself first, before anybody else can love you. I know that. I didn't write it down, though. Story_ID: 630625 Speaker 1: It just occurred to me, and I didn't ask you before now. Is there a female compliment to your program [SIMBA Circle]? Or-- Speaker 2: Yes, SIMSA [SIMSA Circle]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Safe in My Sisters' Arms. Now, they didn't get started though 'til two thousand th- '6 [2006]. But I tell you what. They have taken that and they've gone with it. We're under the same umbrella. In fact, the pastor's wife is the one who started it in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: And what was, who is the name? Speaker 2: Yehiel Curry. And Mrs. Curry [Lashonda Curry] is the pastor's wife. I can't recall her first name now. But Mr. Curry, Yehiel Curry. And she, when we were working with the boys she said, "Well, the girls need this, too." Well, we always knew that, but she pushed it. Then we trained the women to be nation builders too. And so, they worked with the girls. And so they've been doing the program--they're camps--at different times than we do. And we went in and trained them too, as well. And then we have different chapters. We're in about five different cities; DeKalb, Illinois; Muskegon [Michigan]; Chicago [Illinois]; Indianapolis, Indiana; and Columbus [Ohio]. Well, as the chapter leader, we don't have here in Columbus yet where I've quite got a female who I think can handle this yet. A long story. Because we got some stuff we got to do here in Columbus. We always start stuff, but we don't always have the best model of working together. Speaker 1: Okay. But there are, there are people doing things in Columbus? Speaker 2: Yes, but they're splintered. Speaker 1: But they're not necessarily involved with SIMSA right now you say, I mean the women? Speaker 2: Right, absolutely, absolutely. Of course Phyllis Ransom [ph.] always had, she used to do a rites of passage program for girls. She's not doing it anymore now. But I need a--I want a Phyllis to help out. Because we might get a young lady who says, "I want to work with these young girls," and she might be just as young as the girls are. When I say that, if you got a twenty-one year old woman working with a fourteen year old girl, there's not too much difference in their ages. We need some elders. And there are some here. And I want to take, not the blame, but I want to take the responsibility of retrieving and asking some females here about getting involved with SIMSA in our local chapter. Because the chapters at the other places, they're doing real well. But here in Columbus, we haven't quite grasped it yet like we should. Because--but the men I work with, these young men--Hottem [ph.] is one of my top nation builders. Hottem is forty, he might just have turned forty. And then there's Devin Shaw. Now, Devin works for the Urban League [Columbus Urban League] through the Urban Warrior [ph.] program, but SIMBA is the one that started it, and then Urban Warrior came out of SIMBA. We take the boys to camp, but we also do afterschool programs with them. Hottem is also a nation builder, but he is working at Millennium charter school [Millennium Community School, Columbus, Ohio]. And he uses the Afrocentric approach working over there with those boys, okay. But when we go to camp, we got about a hundred boys up there. We bring twenty from Columbus and they come from a lot of different places. Then he's the nation builder for the entire nation, like that. Story_ID: 630626 Speaker 1: So the participants [of SIMBA Circle] are recruited in the participating cities? Or say if there were youth or some, a parent or a teacher identifies a youth that they thought could benefit from this, how would they get there? Speaker 2: We have flyers and we advertise, and word of mouth. Speaker 1: Well, would it cost them any money? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Well, not initially. The camp--and we do give scholarships a lot of time--our camp runs around about four hundred dollars a season. But it actually costs us seven hundred dollars. But we, if we get four hundred dollars per child, then we can put on a successful camp. Speaker 1: Do most--does that four hundred dollars usually come from the individual families, or do institutions sponsor-- Speaker 2: Well, the institutional sponsors--we sponsor the other three hundred, for example. Speaker 1: I mean, I'm saying if another institution-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --wants to give something, or if the Boys Club [Boys and Girls Club of America] decides--I mean is that a general-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I mean generally--I mean generally speaking, do people, the individual families pay this money, or do the institutions that the youth are involved with pay? Speaker 2: We've done both. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If a person can pay, they will. Franklin County Children Services, for example. Do you know Greg Arnold? Greg Arnold is an advocate. Greg Arnold is very Afrocentric, very Afrocentric. He sent some boys to the camp about, oh, after about our fifth camp. He came and stayed the entire time himself. And he's in charge of black adoptions, or he used to be. Speaker 1: Where? Speaker 2: At Franklin County Children Services. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: In Columbus [Ohio], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, right here in Columbus. And he came and he sponsored one year for boys to go. And now those boys are grown men, okay. So we have--the only person, the only agency--no, they have too, Columbus public schools [Columbus City Schools]. I haven't had a teacher yet from Columbus Public. But Franklin County Children Services, I've had people and staff to go through the program. And I guess I say our reputation didn't come from public schools. Even though I worked--you know, I've done consulting work for years, but I'm not a teacher. I run the groups inside some of these schools. Like when I worked for the city [Ohio Department of Youth Services] I ran a program called YES, and it means You're Extra Special. And it's a drug and violence prevention program. But the things that I use, or the curriculum, is designed around Afrocentricity as well. We use a lot of movies and a lot of visual things with the program called YES, You're Extra Special. And we have to write down everything we do for the city; they need to know all this stuff. But I'm saying by me doing it, everybody knows what our goal is and (unclear). Everybody knows our handshake. For example, it's not on the curriculum, but everybody knows our check in procedure. In other words, I have kids to check in every time I eat with them. And your check in consists of telling how you feel on a scale from one to five. And five, physically and emotionally, if you have five fives you're great. You say, "I'm a five/one." "Why?" "I don't want to talk about it right now." "Okay, well at least you identify that there's something going on." And I'm going to tell the teacher, and say, "Be on the lookout, because Lewis says he's a five/one and I don't what that's all about," that sort of thing. And one time I did that. I asked the teacher--there was one boy sleeping in a bathtub, he was tired. He said, "I'm a one--a one/two." So, he didn't feel good physically or emotionally, because he had to sleep in the bathtub. And I asked the teachers. We had a little--I met with them. I said, "What do you think of this boy sleeping in the bathtub?" And they come up with stuff like--well, what do you think? Why would a kid sleep in the bathtub? Speaker 1: Why would a kid sleep in the bathtub? Because there's no bed available, I would think. Speaker 2: That's one reason. And they said that. And what it was, he said, "A bullet don't go through porcelain." Now, the teacher said, "Wow." So, this is the stuff our kids who come to school have think about. You know, they got to think about--and they can't sleep, some of them. They talk about gunshots. So, I'd rather--like when you come to school--I ask people, "When you come to school, what did you do before you got here?" You had a cup of coffee, maybe talked to your mate, did some things. "I'm going to school now." Some of our kids get up in the morning, maybe they don't eat breakfast. Or maybe they had an argument with their mother before they left, because sometimes dad's not around. And so, he's going to do some counter transference. He's going to take the anger and bring it to school. It's got to go somewhere. It ain't good to stay with him. I'm not saying every student. I said, "This is why we need to do a check in." Story_ID: 630627 Speaker 1: Is there much difference between say the students in--I mean the youth that you deal with that have come from Chicago [Illinois] and those that come from Columbus [Ohio] or Indianapolis [Indiana] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not hardly. In fact even when I go to Rhode Island, up there, it was quote, a lot of the inner city kids there who are white. And they all had the same sort of stuff in some ways, okay. It's a universal hurt for everybody, you know. And but when you got to be able to allow them to be able to express it. But we're so tied up with our curriculum. I still say that if you don't teach morality, you're raising a menace to society. Because they don't have it, and you got, you got to be--you know, I can't think of the, Jawanza Kunjufu, that's who I'm thinking about. I think he had mentioned about teaching. You know, you got to teach not just with your head, but with your heart, and with your feet, and this sort of thing, nowadays. And you got to teach morality. And you do it anyway. You got to teach those assets, I mean the ones that are internal assets. It don't mean you got to change your curriculum. It's how you approach a person is the bottom line. We use the term like, you always should assume good intentions. But we don't, you know. Is it half full or half empty? You can say it's half full, and it's half empty anytime. Now, how does that translate into teaching, for example? I did a program one time on how you keep the music playing. And my ex, not ex, but one of my professors was at the conference. And he saw the title. And [HistoryMaker] James Ingram and Patti Austin, he loves them. He didn't know. He said, "What you going to do with that, Dodley [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley]?" "Use it in literature." How do you lose yourself to someone without losing your way? The whole song represents teaching and the relationship that we have with each other, you know. And I remind them that, "I am, because we are. And we are, because I am." Story_ID: 630628 Speaker 1: Now, one question we always ask is about family. Now, who--you've got four children, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I don't know if there's a woman in your life right now or not. But tell us about your family, where they, what's going on with them. Speaker 2: Well, that's another four hours. But let me say this to you. I love where I'm at now. I have my biological children, I raised them. I have a son in New York [New York] who was voted the number one broadcaster one year in Variety magazine, Newsweek, one of them--The New York Times. His name is Lewis Dodley. And during 9/11 [September 11, 2001] it really bothered me, because I didn't hear from him. He lives in New York. But he was in Morocco playing golf. He comes back here. This boy started at East High School [Columbus, Ohio], picked up French and went to France. He came back here speaking three different languages. He was on Channel 10 [WBNS-TV, Columbus, Ohio] for a minute and left and went to New York and didn't come back at all, all right. Now-- Speaker 1: Is he a radio broadcaster? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, TV, TV. He was voted (unclear), had an awards ceremony this past year, and I got the pamphlet over there to show you his picture when he won the Broadcaster of the Year [Broadcaster of the Year Award], okay. He-- Speaker 1: Is he an anchor on the news show? Or-- Speaker 2: He don't like to be called an anchorman. He said that, "I host the whole show, Daddy." That's the way he enunciates. He says, "I'm not just an anchorman. I have a program that comes on, and it's on for two hours," or something like that. And he does it. New York One [NY1], that's where he's at. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And he had a program on one time called--you know, he did a program on different ethnicities and different cultures in New York City. He speaks four languages; English of course, French, Spanish, and Mandarin, none of them fluently. His fiancee he met was from Belgium, and I have a grandson named Dominique, he's my oldest. No, he's not my oldest, he's second to the oldest. He now writes for CNN news. He did a special when they passed that gun law, that you could carry a gun to a bar. He did interviews and it was on CNN, and it was Dominique Dodley. When I saw that, I said, "Man, here's my grandson doing big time stuff." He actually--and his mom is in New York City, a social worker. And my son didn't make it. This particular son wound up marrying a lady from South Korea, and she--he met her at the station, and they had a little girl named Jawan [ph.]. That's my granddaughter in New York. Then I have a daughter [Kimberly Dodley] who's a pastor in Rochester, New York, in the Lutheran church. And then I have a son [Mark Dodley] here who's a social worker kind of person. He works for the Father 2 Father program; he does fathering things. And I have a daughter who retired from the [U.S.] military who is in charge of the volunteers through the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs], the VA hospital. It's so interesting, because those guys will see her sometimes and then they come to my program and they say, "Are you any kin to Traci Washington? She said her daddy--." "Yes, that's my daughter." Her name is Washington now, you know, Dominique Washington. When I got divorced, I met a lady who had kids of her own. And she was a survivor of domestic violence. She's actually writing a book about it, and is a big advocate here in Columbus [Ohio], Yvette Brown [HistoryMaker The Honorable Yvette McGee Brown]. She really uses Marcia a lot and (unclear) to talk about survival skills and so forth. She's big in that. So, she's a real advocate. She was actually interviewed by Dan Rather one time in this house, talking about her book called 'Justified' [ph.] because she had to--she justified something she had to do. The book is not done yet. Well, in the process of us being together, she had kids. And then her cousin had kids. And her cousin had some problems with drugs and alcohol, and we took the kids in. And when we broke up not emotionally, but physically, because she didn't want to get married and I did. And so, we didn't. Story_ID: 630629 Speaker 1: But I kept the kids, anyway. That's why this house looks like this, because I got two granddaughters who are very smart. They're with their biological parents now, and that relationship is getting together now. Because I've had Chloe [ph.] and Summer [ph.] both for about nine years now, and they stay right. So, between them two and my brother downstairs here, yeah. Now I guess I'm saying that Chloe and Summer--I asked God if he'd let me raise a kid with some more attention--that I could put more attention to the child. You don't, they say don't--if you pray for something, you're going to get it. And I got it. So, she goes to Columbus preparatory school for girls [Columbus City Preparatory School For Girls, Columbus, Ohio]. And I like the approach. The principal can't say it's Afrocentric, but she says things like, "It's important that my teachers establish a positive relationship with these students." Dr. Patton [Stephanie Patton] is her name, and I like her a lot. Because the school my granddaughter went to was a private school before, and I did counseling over there. And I had to--so we just did some bartering for her to go there. I did some work over there with her teacher. So, I have--well, Traci [Traci Washington] has two boys. There's two grandboys there. Lewis [Lewis Dodley] has two kids. That's four. Amani [Kimberly Dodley], or Kim, has two. That's six. And Mark [Mark Dodley] has three. That's nine. Marcia [HistoryMaker The Honorable Yvette McGee Brown], my--I call her my life partner. We call each other life partners, even when we do stuff together. People don't understand how we can still be together but not romantically, you know. Because the relationship started on the inside out, and we were raising these kids, because their parents couldn't do it at the time. So, even though we work together in the same building when we're doing things, she does the curriculum on Love Notes [ph.]. I do the one on missocialization. And there's also one called Think About a Change [ph.]. And all three of those mesh together. The point I'm trying to make is that Marcia and I are raising and sharing joint custody of these two granddaughters right now. Even though she has her own biological grandkids, too. So, altogether I have about twelve grandkids that I'm responsible for. And of course in some African societies the grandparents raise the kids anyway. Story_ID: 630630 Speaker 1: So, now is there anything I have not asked about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I just want to say that as a hobby, I try to blend my hobby with what I do with my passion. And a passion is something that you do that you could do for the rest of your life without getting paid for it. And my hobby is fishing. And every time I take a kid fishing, I learn something new about them, every time. And to make a long story very, very short, I had one of the biggest gangbangers, or wannabes. And about four years ago, I took him fishing on my boat. And when we were there, he saw another--a whole bunch of other black men with boats. And they were teasing him. They would say, "What's he going to do with that chain on his neck? Use it as a lure?" Ha, ha, ha. I said, "Leave him alone." Catching fish, and he had--he was sagging, had his hat on backwards. Now I'm catching fish, he wasn't. He said, "How come you can and I can't?" I said, "Because the bill on your hat is meant to reflect the sunlight, so you can see the fish. You got it turned around backwards. That's not why the hat was made. It was made to put in the front," like that. He turned it around and sure enough, he--oh, he could see. But then when he caught one, he tried to pull his pants up at the same time, and he couldn't do it. So then he asked me, he said, "Do you have a rope or something I can put on?" I said, "That's for your belt?" I said, "That's what a belt is for, isn't it?" (Laughter) Anyway, he had never really fished before. That boy, that day he caught about thirty white bass. I had brought him and showed him how to clean them. I gave them some--this is like a commercial. I gave him some Zatarain's some olive oil and showed him how to cook it. Today, that boy is a pharmacist. Because when I say that, I mean that he never--now, he has two boats from what I understand. And I'd like to think that part of my legacy was showing him how to fish. And like I tell people, I saw a marquee on a church that said, "God said--," or, "Jesus said--if you would be a fisherman of men, you bring them in, I'll clean them." Story_ID: 630631 Speaker 1: Well, our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Pause) I'd like to be remembered--that I made you think, really think. I remember my [paternal] grandmother [Susie Dodley] used to say I had smiling eyes. I'd like to be remembered for my smile, and that you felt that I would empower you. I'd like to be remembered as a person who made you feel good. I don't make you feel good, but give you the ability to make your own self feel worthwhile, period. And I saw some of this teasing going on with people, and I don't like--I don't like the underdog. I mean, I like--I don't like people to pick on the underdog. And you see that a lot. I'd just like--they said, "He always made me feel good." My granddaughter now, she tells me she loves me fifteen times a day. It's interesting. And hugs, and in this little house, you know. And even though Marcia [HistoryMaker The Honorable Yvette McGee Brown] says I'm crazy for letting Stan [ph.]--that's--well, letting the dad in the picture, it's grown; the relationship has grown. I think every child should know their father, and their mother. But they can and he's trying at least. He's not using. He's been clean now for a long time. Now, his behavior is catching up, you know. And Chloe [ph.] and Summer [ph.] both, they're getting closer to their father and their mother, because both of them were strung out there for a while. And that's where they are this weekend. But they've been clean now for a long time. Well, when I say long time, I think about three or four years. And they're not fighting to keep them back. They're not fighting to get them back. And it's not quote, biologically my child, but that don't mean nothing to me. But I just love them to death, love them, all of them. I love my grandchildren. I like the idea of taking my grandkids someplace and letting them swim. And as long as they're safe, I can sit back and fish if I want to and watch television, and just not do nothing. And I don't have that, those opportunities too often. But I like the idea of not having to do nothing at all. Story_ID: 630632 Speaker 1: That's a picture of Eugene Smith [ph.], my cousin. He was about a year old, and he grew up and got a college education without his mother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's a picture of Blossie [Blossie Dodley], the man with the hat. Blossie, he's the patriarch. He's my father's father, my grandfather. And next to him is Robert Dodley and Eugene again, the boy. He was about five years old. And the lady in the back is my mother, in the kitchen. Speaker 2: Which one is-- Speaker 1: This here is Eugene. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: This is my brother. And this shows that there's a bed that they're on, because our bedroom and dining room was all the same. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my father [Gilbert Dodley, Sr.] after my mother passed. After about three years, he started dating. And he's holding a little girl by the name of Elaine [ph.], who was the granddaughter of the woman he met after my mother passed. My medical doctor--his medical doctor introduced him to her. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me with my cousins, and nephews and Aaron hugging me. This is Waymon right here. This is Zack he's, my fishing buddy. And the other guy who just got a little gathering we had at a family reunion. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Is this you right here? Speaker 2: This is me right here, Lewis Dodley [HistoryMaker Lewis E. Dodley]. This is Aaron Romine [ph.]. This is Waymon Brown [ph.], and this is Zacky Mookmen [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Again, that's Gilbert Dodley, my father. I was always impressed with the pens he has in his pocket, because that was a sign of pres- prestige, to wear pencils. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This here is a picture of me. I always liked to wear hats. I had it all designed with these little trickles on it. That's my brother Robert. And the three girls in the back are my cousins. This is Weezy Dodley [ph.]. This is Helena Dodley [ph.], and that's Merl Dodley [ph.]. This is Gilbert Dodley [Gilbert Dodley, Jr.], my brother. And back in the back is my [paternal] grandmother Sweetcake. Her real name was Susie Mae [Susie Dodley]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: that's a picture of my mother, Lueatta Dodley [Lueatta Stewart Dodley]. Again, the living room and the dining room was all the same. She was preparing a meal. At that time she had lost some weight, because I think she was sick. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my uncle. His name was Rufus [Rufus Dodley], and his brother and a friend, his name was Eugene. Rufus was in the [U.S.] military, and I have another picture later on that you'll see of him in the military. Speaker 1: Rufus is on the left? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father back in the days, and Mr. and Mrs. Henderson [ph.] are their names. They were best friends. That picture was taken back in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Again, it's kind of faint, but it's a picture of my mother. She was sitting in the living room, which was our bedroom as well. You can see the clothes hanging on the door, like that. But she looked so elegant that day. I never will forget it. It was her smile, I just love it. Her name was Lueatta [Lueatta Stewart Dodley], L-U-E-A-T-T-A. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Here's a recent picture of--we had a family reunion. And this here is the oldest female in our family, Alise Dodley [ph.]. This is my Aunt Jean [Alta Jean Dodley]. This is my father's sister. She's deceased now, an ancestor. This is Norma [ph.]. This is Marilyn [ph.]. These are cousins, Dodleys. This is Robert Dodley, my brother. Back in the back is my grandson Hakim [ph.]. Back there in the back is Stanley [ph.]. This here is my brother Gilbert [Gilbert Dodley, Jr.], who's trying to hide. This man over here is a friend of my Aunt Jean's. And that's my Uncle Lawrence [Lawrence Dodley] back there with his wife. Uncle Lawrence is eighty-five. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a recent picture of some young men. We call them Urban Warriors [ph.]. This is me right here. This is Hottem [ph.]. Okay, I'll go this way. This young man's name is George [ph.]. This little boy here is named Cleveland [ph.]. This is me right here. This young man, his name is Damon [ph.]. This is Roger [ph.], George [ph.], Devan [ph.], Kareem [ph.], and Dalen [ph.] again. Speaker 2: Okay. Are they part of the rites of passage group? Speaker 1: Yes, part of the Urban Warriors. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is me in New York City [New York, New York] with my granddaughter, Jawan [ph.]. She's South Korean, part South Korean. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is my oldest son, Lewis [Lewis Dodley, Jr.] and my grandson--his son, Dominique [Dominique Dodley], the one who writes for CNN, and this is myself in the middle. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture of course of [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover. I was at a conference. Danny Glover is affiliated with SIMBA Circle. He supported us, and has been part of our board. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: That's Rufus, Rufus Dodley. He's, we used to call him Sandyman, because he used to put sand on the floor and shuffle his feet around and make music with his feet, with sand on the ground. He was also in the [U.S.] military. Speaker 2: Okay. This looks like World War II [WWII]. Speaker 1: World War II. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture, a graduation picture from my high school. Here I am right here. You see I had my East High School [Columbus, Ohio] sweater on. And now my ex-wife [Constance Jenkins] is not in that picture. Here's a young man here. His name is Dr. Fulani [ph.]. He's also part of rites of passage programming...