 Story_ID: 99059 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Willis Hoke Davis, W-I-L-L-I-S, H-O-K-E, D-A-V-I-S, and I go by the name of Bing, which is a nickname, B-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Now how did you acquire the nickname Bing? Speaker 2: You know what? I'm still trying to find that out. You know I'll tell you the number one story that I get from my siblings, my brothers and sisters. It seems that when I was a little kid and came along, we had a, a family dog by the name of Bingo. But for some reason they called me Bingo too, maybe 'cause we were both about the same size. And according to my sister, that as I became a toddler and would go out beyond the gate to play, and they'd say "Hey Bingo, time to come home." We both would come running, the dog and me. And the dog got embarrassed, so they cut my short to Bing. That's the best story I've been able get and it stuck all the way through. Every time I--family reunion I said come on now, how did I get this name? They come up with this I don't know. But it stuck, it's just been amazing. I was marked absent the first three days in first grade 'cause they were calling for Willis Davis and I looked around see who Willis Davis was 'cause I'd never heard that. Unless my mother [Verona Hargro Davis Buffington] was mad or the police. Yeah, Bing just stuck all the way through. But no one-- Speaker 1: (unclear) the dog got-- Speaker 2: Yeah, no one's given me a real answer yet for something that's just stuck all the way through. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now is there a story behind Hoke? Now-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--I was named for my uncle. I had a, a--I was born in Greer, South Carolina and came to Dayton [Ohio] when I was just two weeks old. But I had several uncles who were ministers in the South. And I was named after my Uncle Hope. His name was Hope, H-O-P-E, and they named me after him, but they named--spelled it Hoke, H-O-K-E. And that was in honor of my one uncle, one of three of my uncles who were ministers. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is your date of birth and you already told us your place of birth was Greer, South Carolina. Speaker 2: Greer, South Carolina, June 30th, 1937. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired art educator, artist. I, I taught for forty-some years and, and now I'm producing art full time. And operating the gallery and a studio and I still interface with youth and community through workshops in my studio, or either going out. So I say I'm retired, but I'm working harder now than when I was supposedly working. But educator, art educator has been my, my career over the years. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now what is today's date? Today's date. Speaker 2: Today's date is March the 20th, 19--2006. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're in the EbonNia Gallery. This is my gallery, next door is my studio and underneath is a studio. And, and this is my place of operation the last four years since I retired. I, I'm remodeling this, this facility. We're sitting in the middle of the, the, the gallery, EbonNia, which is named for my two children. My son is Derek Ebon and my daughter is Nia. And Ebony and purpose. So this is the gallery. Story_ID: 99060 Speaker 1: Okay. All right now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, "People" Magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask by management and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Fried chicken. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Rust. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Vacation, what's that? No I don't. If I did, it would have to be Accra, Ghana. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: With my fav--which is also my favorite place in the world. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I think so, I have several that almost (unclear) to me. There's two phrases that I, that sort of governs my work and my life that, that came from what my mother [Verona Hargro Davis Buffington] imparted to all six of her children. "Reach high and reach back." She insisted that we reach high and reach back. And the other phrase which goes along with that is "always walk with dust on our shoes." And the first one she meant for us to go as far as we can go with the gifts we've been given and education we've attained, but to realize we're nowhere if we can't reach back and help somebody else. And always walking with dust on our shoes maybe came from her being a sharecropper in South Carolina and those country roads. 'Cause it took me a while to understood what she meant by that one, but I use it all the time and repeat it to young people as I encounter them. "Always walk with dust on your shoes." And she reminded us as we were growing up there in east Dayton that we may, we may have an opportunity to meet presidents of countries, dine with kings and queens and, and dignitaries, but keep our feet on the ground, walking with dust on your shoes. And, and always recognize what that meant, that what good things are happening to you and flowing through you and, and you don't have as much to do with it as being more so than just being a vessel by which it, it travels. And so there's no need to get a big head or feel puffed up. Just keep your feet on the ground. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 99061 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family of the family first, then your father's side. So can you give us your mother's side first and I'll, I'll--can you give us her full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Verona, V-E-R-O-N-A, Hargro, H-A-R-G-R-O, Davis, (unclear) Buffington, B-U-F-F-I-N-G-T-O-N. And she's still alive. She's 98, or we think, 98 or 97. And we think she was born near Commerce, Georgia, but moved early on to Greer, South Carolina where I was born, where she met my father. Don't have a lot of--just in the process now. One of my sisters is doing some genealogy now. We're just now starting to gather some information that we have not had over the years. But we know she's from around that part of Georgia, and was born either 1910, 1911, someplace, one of those two. And was from a big family, about nine or ten. And she was next to the youngest. Don't know too, know too much about grandparents. Did have a chance to see one photograph of, of both her mother and her father. But she also had a stepmother who was I think mostly Cherokee. She and my aunt are the two remaining members on her side that we're aware of. And my aunt is a year, two years younger than she is, so she's about 96 or 95, and they both are still living here in, in east Dayton, Ohio. She was a, a--she, she shared with us braggingly about her ability to out-pick most men in terms of cotton. So she had worked in the fields and was a sharecropper. And my parents were sharecropping when my father, Levonia Davis, decided to come north where he had a brother in Cincinnati [Ohio] who had come--migrated north to come up and get a better lot for their family. And it was four kids, I was the fourth. And so he came up and got a job driving a coal truck and then came back when my mother could travel in weeks and brought the family to Dayton. I remember two of her sisters, three of her sisters very, very well. My Aunt Dalt [ph.] Jamie White, who lived in Springfield. And the other two aunts that lived here in Dayton, Arizona and Adabell [ph.]. Speaker 1: Arizona? Speaker 2: Arizona was, yeah Arizona was her name, and Adabell. And she had four or five brothers who I only knew, that was S.T. and, and two, J.B. who would come up from the south. And one came to live with us, S.T., so I knew him a lot better. Speaker 1: Now did their, their initials stand for names or were they just initials? Speaker 2: Most of 'em, they was just initials. J.B. Speaker 1: Now that's, that's something you--I heard a lot of when I was in school around here in Dayton and it's something that happened in the black community. I don't know if it happens anywhere else. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not as much, no. Speaker 1: Just have the initials and it stands for the initials. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. And I think they like the sound, 'cause I looked at how our kids would make up things for their kids today. But S.T. and J.B., but that's all I never knew them, was S.T. and J.B. Story_ID: 99062 Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any stories from your mother's [Verona Hargro Davis Buffington] side of the family growing--I mean how far back can you trace your, your mother's side? Speaker 2: Not, not very far, not very far. We, we're just identifying some Hargros 'cause we found that as they migrated to other areas out of Commerce, Georgia and out of South Carolina, is that sometimes they would spell their name a little bit differently. Hargro to Hargrove, G-R-O-V-E, and we just now starting to piece some of those together and find some other relatives. But we didn't have much on my, on my mother's side. And since she was probably around 14 or 15 when they got married, since that was about the norm for farmers and, and people, she was--I know she's maybe 15 when she got married. But didn't know much about her family at all. I know her dad left--or went to a grocery store one day and didn't come back when she was young and that's when the family sort of split up and, and some came to South Carolina and other parts of the South. Speaker 1: Is there any, any explanation for that that anybody's been able to offer that he-- Speaker 2: There was a couple. A lot--there were several members of the family that had to leave or be lynched. Sometime running into difficulty with, with, with the establishment in those areas. But from what I've heard and we've talked about it a couple of times is that he--one day and just supposedly going to town to the store and never came back and no one's ever, ever, ever heard from him since. But it certainly did add to the difficulty of the family situation from the point that it sort of split up and move into different areas. I've heard talk about getting a wagon from Georgia to South Carolina and, and packing and riding. But didn't hear much about the other, other reasons behind it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so did your mother talk about growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, but usually, usually quite fun. She, she talked about the life around us--the church that was there, which I had a chance to visit when I was there. Piney Grove Baptist Church. And so much of the life in the community is, and the social and, and the camaraderie and the family was around that community. But working, working in the fields and planting the little side gardens and, and making ends meet, making ends meet. But it sounded fun. I mean as hard as it was, she talked about the good times mostly. Speaker 1: Did she--was your mother like part of the Gullah culture at all? Or was that-- Speaker 2: She--I had relatives that were, but moving from Georgia to Commerce and then to that Gullah region, we had other relatives who were even more so than probably she was. And so it would have been closer to my father's side who was from South Carolina. So the Spartanburg [South Carolina] and the Lyman [South Carolina] and the Greenville [South Carolina] area, right in that area there. And which is close to Asheville, North Carolina. So the, the Gullah I think would have been closer to my father's side. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So your, your mother came here when she was about how old? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty seven [1937]. Speaker 1: So she was grown when she-- Speaker 2: Yeah she was married and had four kids. Speaker 1: Four kids. Speaker 2: Yeah, they were married there at Piney Grove and in that little small community of Greer, South Carolina. And my two older sisters and my older brother and I were born there. And then we came to Dayton with four kids, mother and a father. Then they had two more, my younger brother and my younger sister were born here in Dayton. Matter of fact, I was just there yesterday. She still lives on that same plot of land that they bought or began to buy in 1937 when they moved from sharecropping on someone else's land to come to Dayton to sort of improve the lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 99063 Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, Levonia is his full name, L-E-V-O-N-I-A, Levonia Davis. And he went by the name of Lee. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a name, is there a name, is there a story behind Levonia as a-- Speaker 2: I'm sure there is and it comes out of that South Carolina structure, but I didn't get a chance to know him very much until he was close to death. My parents [Levonia Davis and Verona Hargro Davis Buffington] separated when I was in the first grade so five years after, six years after we got here, they separated. And up until that time like most migrated families in the North, was spending summers or parts of the year going back South to see family. But ours abruptly stopped once my parents were separated. So my older brothers and sisters had a lot more experience going back to--that they could remember. I may have gone, but I wasn't as conscious at five and six as they would have been at 13 and 12. So I didn't get a chance to know his side very much at all until--till recently. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your father go back to South-- Speaker 2: No he didn't. He stayed here in Dayton [Ohio]. Matter of fact, he was--I found--well I did know at the time, even during the growing up as a teenager, that he was a gospel singer. He was a, a worker, a day worker. He, he was a coal driving man. He drove a coal truck for General Jacksons [General Jackson Fuel Co.] here in east state until he got on with the city. Speaker 1: I remember those trucks, General Jackson. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. And, and three other men from South Carolina that moved up here too, they formed a, a gospel group and was traveling the Midwest. I, I got one--my favorite photograph of him is with his other two, three singers and a, and a poster, billboard of his singing at a church. But he was one of those early pilgrim travelers, Mighty Clouds of Joy. I, I had--both of them had very limited formal education. But he had this group that was barnstorming around the Midwest which is I think was a part of the reason they sort of drifted apart. Speaker 1: Now, now what church was he affiliated with? Speaker 2: Mount Pisgah out in East Dayton, Mount Pisgah Baptist Church, which, which I'm still a member of and most of my family is still a member since 1937. But when they branched out from there, then they were just barnstorming around singing. But I, I, I found he had been a good (unclear) singing and also a good athlete too which I wasn't aware of growing up from when he was in the South. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about his side of the family that, you know, back to the early ancestors? Speaker 2: The biggest story, the biggest story is that his side of the family, particularly the men are known as, as preachers. Matter of fact, I was raised to be a preacher until I was 15 or 16. But I have at least one time two or three ministers in the family who are in the higher ups of the Pentecostal church. I know they used to come up here for some of the conventions over on, on Broadway. But at least three and then my, my dad was--I always thought he was gonna end up preaching as well, ended up being a deacon. Others are a deacon--his other brothers are either deacons or very involved in their, in their, in their church. So, so his side was, was, was known for, for their religions experience in terms of that. Baptist and Pentecostal involvement. Story_ID: 99064 Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I think my dad [Levonia Davis] may have been just a couple years older than she [Verona Hargro Davis Buffington], but they, they met at church socials and gatherings, attending Piney Grove [Baptist Church in Greer South Carolina]. Yeah that, that, that's how they, how they met, you know, going to Sunday school, choir, socials, and it was in that context that they, that they met. Speaker 1: Okay. So now do you have--do you have any idea of who you take after the most, your mother or your father? Speaker 2: That's a good question, it's a good question--that's a very good--nobody's ever asked me that. You know it's, it's hard to know in one context 'cause I wasn't around him growing up. But as I look and reflect back on, on what I've done, I know there is a good mixture of both 'cause my mother was always very, very supportive of others. And what I mean by that is that even though we grew up poor in terms of material goods and money, she always was able to have something for somebody if they needed something. And, and that, that helping and nurturing concept that I'm sure he may have had too, but I can see that in her and I saw that in her from--when other people move up, although it wasn't uniquely ours. She was always opened up the house and so on a couple occasions there may be in this little four room house, two, two different families or three different families, or cousins or nieces who were moving up needing a place to stay until they can get their own place. And she had that kind of attitude of always willing to help. But even as we got older, if a kid in the neighborhood was there when it was time to eat, they ate too. Even though we were--may be skimping. And also my brother was in school, you know, at Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio] just thirteen miles away and kids couldn't get home between breaks or on holidays, then my mom said "Bring 'em on here" and she'd feed 'em. So that aspect of--which I call that nurturing and sharing and, and, and maybe nurturing, that a teacher does which I have enjoyed teaching, I think I got from him. But I don't know about my, my dad 'cause I, I would only see him maybe Father's Day, Christmas, Easter, just stop by his house. He lived on the west side of town [Dayton, Ohio] now with another family and so we didn't see him as much or wanna be around and interfere. So I didn't get a chance to know him, but I heard a lot of people that did know him, talk about some of his outstanding qualities and characteristics. And I could see some of that in me as well. He was, he was a helper, a nurturer too. It was really interesting that I saw a lady the other day that said "Who do you say you--what's your name? What did you say your dad's name was? I couldn't have made it without your day. Your dad was deacon at my church and he just helped me so much, and he helped everybody." And so I said "Well that's interesting, he's--they got a whole different perspective of my dad than I have." But they saw him at a different time of his life and, and, and he evidently was very, very nurturing and supportive of them. Speaker 1: Okay so when, when he separated, you know, when your parents separated, you, you didn't see him much. He didn't come around that much, or-- Speaker 2: He didn't come around that much. I remember he would stop by every so often, but not really--it really was not a--where he'd come and stay; be around for a long period of time. He may stop by, even driving a coal truck, sometime he'd drive the coal truck by and pause and throw a couple of lumps off. On the next load he'd throw a couple lumps off, which was just helping the family. But I think he was, he was giving his financial support through the court so he didn't have to come, come there. And I don't know what the situation was between he and my mom. Although it's really strange. She would never let us talk mean about him no matter how--"No that's still your daddy, that's still your--no you don't, you don't, you don't do that." Until I got older and being an adult and then she said "That old dog," you know. But we would see him mostly--and she would even encourage us. She would say "Now, now this is Father's Day, go by and see your dad, take him the card." You know this is--"It's Easter, it's Christmas, be sure and stop by. Did you get something for your dad?" And which was teaching us respect and, and be respectful. But and Dad--didn't get to, didn't get to see him. When he got sick, I think when he was in the hospital last--we had--I was out of college, working and teaching. We, we had gotten a little more back together and he'd always say "Why don't you come on by?" I just didn't feel as comfortable and so I just didn't go, but I wish I had. But when he was sick, we talked about going back down South together. He said "Boy I can't wait to get out of this hospital. I wanna take you back down South. There's some things I wanna show you and people I want you to meet." And he didn't make it out of the hospital. But yeah, I think about those things. But no one ever--I wonder. I, I do wonder. I still wonder what he, what he was like and still think about him as dad, yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay. Story_ID: 99065 Speaker 1: Now do, do you have--you grew up on the east side of Dayton [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Sure did. Speaker 1: And this is--a lot of people don't realize that you know 'cause Dayton's black populations been long associated with the west side. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So much so when they say a west side man got shot today, everybody knows who it is, they don't explain that he's black. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: But the east side was the first I think enclave of blacks (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: Exactly. And to this day a lot of people don't realize that. And we were right in that pocket. If you've ever talked to historians like Dr. [HM] Margaret Peters who have a history of all the blacks in Dayton, she's the first to tell you, there's small enclave. There was four streets there in East Dayton, Springfield Street, Diamond [Avenue], Irwin [Street] and Pruden [Avenue]. There was this enclave that always been a black enclave. And all around it is our Appalachian brothers and sisters from, from the hills of Kentucky coming up to work at NCR [National Cash Register] and Standard Register and Right Path. But it, it proved to be a, a blessing in disguise. Also when you lived in East Dayton, the school board was fully aware of us 'cause we had Washington Elementary [School] and, and our--the high school in our district was Wilbur Wright [High School]. But if you were African Americans during those times, you could either go to Roosevelt [High School] or Dunbar [High School], or the school in your neighborhood, which is Wilbur Wright. And it was almost three fourths of the people automatically went to Dunbar. And my older brothers and sisters, I'm being the fourth. But my oldest sister and my second oldest sister and my older brother all above me, all went to Dunbar and I just happened to be the one to go to, to Wilbur Wright which came as a result of some contact with the basketball coach up there while I was in junior high. But there was always that cadre of people and when I look back historically, there was always that, that dual possibility. We had people from the community, from the neighborhood, from the street, who would go to Dunbar or Roosevelt. Then we had some who elected to go to Wilbur Wright. And, and this was, this was a hardship in a way 'cause you go to Dunbar or Roosevelt from East Dayton, you'd have to take three buses, three city buses to get there. But you always had that. Speaker 1: 'Bout a ten mile trip to-- Speaker 2: About a ten mile trip. And it's about a mile and a half trip to walk to Wilbur Wright, you know, out of our immediate neighborhood right into--up, up north, south, southeast. Speaker 1: That's a fairly long commute. Actually to go to (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was. You took it as a matter of stride 'cause you know when we would come here to West Dayton for our, our, our parties and going to Lakeside Ballroom and going to Palisade and the Classic. Well if we are to the parties, you would have here in West Dayton, well if we--if the party was good and we wanna stay longer than 10:15, we knew that the last bus line up and we would just get in a group and walk the--it was nothing to walk to East Dayton. We'd just get in the middle of the street and sing and dance all the way home. And we, we'd come to the party--you make your little signals, okay, you staying, you staying, you staying. Yeah, man I'm staying. And says okay, then we meet here at 11:00 or meet here at 12 or meet here at one and then we just walk as a group right through, right through the city back home. Never a problem. Speaker 1: Yeah that's funny when you're a teenager, you can do that. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: People would do that, will walk across town. Speaker 2: Yeah. And was actually fun, actually fun. But you'd always also be checking to make sure you got everybody accounted for that's supposed to be. Story_ID: 99066 Speaker 1: Yeah, I wanna take, take you back to the very beginning. Now can, can you give me your first childhood memory? Very first. Speaker 2: You know, it seems to anchor around--wow. You just took me all the way back to, to my, my brother's tricycle. And made me think of one photograph I hadn't seen in a long time, that was my, my brother, we were very close, all of us. My older brother and me and my baby brother on his tricycle and him taking my hand off of his tricycle 'cause I wanted to ride his--but most of my early childhood is, is just the fun of playing and family and have enjoyment. That way--I may have been five or six about that time. But most of my, my, my, my childhood memories seem to be around fourth and fifth grade. I don't remember a lot in first grade, third grade. And I, I think--I don't know if that's that I just sort of blocked it out 'cause it was a (unclear) period of time. But early on, I recall talking, being asked and being--making a commitment to, to the fact that when I grew up I wanna be an artist. And, and being able to say that in the fourth and fifth grade and, and, and with conviction, even with sweat rolling down 'cause I was gonna be teased by my peers. But the, the wonderful childhood. I wish I could have provided my childhood experiences for my children, 'cause now it's hard for them to envision when we go out in East End [of Dayton, Ohio]. This is great, I enjoyed growing up out here 'cause it was a tremendous extended family concept because of the structural makeup. And, and was just a small enough enclave with those four streets adjacent to each other, that it was really rich in terms of extended family and, and a lot of those African continuums, those taking a village to raise a child. Anyone can chastise anybody's kids if you catch 'em doing wrong. Bring 'em home, they'll get some more punishment. But also nurturing, you know adults and "your mama wouldn't like you doing that boy, don't you be doing that." You know that, that kind of overriding umbrella that, that gives you a comfort. But a lot of fun playing, enjoying the church. There was a--on the block I lived on, lived in the fifth house. The first house was my church and five houses away is another church. So we had in a so small area a Baptist and a Pentecostal church. We had a community center less than a block, we had a, a playground all within those four blocks that serviced primarily the African American community and a few of the whites that came over. But it was a really rich experience that I think had a lot to do with my, my vision, my commitment and also my, my choice of career. 'Cause the--everybody in the neighborhood knew I was gonna be an artist. The, the people outside the neighborhood got to know me as a, as an athlete. But people that really knew me, knew that "Hey this boy gone be an artist. He's always doing this stuff. He's always drawing his crazy cartoons and superheroes." But yeah wonderful memory. I, I, feel blessed. I, I say a lot of times when I'm speaking with young people that I've had many blessings. And two of my many blessings was being born black and growing up in East Dayton. Those things have a lot to do with what I do right now and how--and, and why I do things the way I do all came from that nurturing environment that I grew up in. Story_ID: 99067 Speaker 1: Now can you remember the first art you ever created? Speaker 2: No, No I can't remember the first one, I've tried and, and I get asked those questions. When you're, when you're young and particularly a young artist, when we usually get recognized is usually for just one part of our--which we call eye/hand coordination. Being able to look at Bugs Bunny and draw Bugs Bunny. Being able to look at superheroes and draw superheroes. Being able to looking at the athletes that you admire and draw them, or draw a shoe or a football or a basketball. So I had that, that, that dexterity early on. And so what I was drawing was what most people draw, you know, looking at the comic strips. Seeing--look on the back of those matches that say draw me and send it in. So I, I was drawing, but it was recognized early on. But you know it was not foreign to me because my oldest sister who was maybe ten years my senior or older, she drew and painted when she was at Dunbar High School [Dayton, Ohio]. Matter of fact--she was born in 1921. She could have gone to--been one of the early students, African Americans, to go to Cleveland School of Art [Cleveland School of the Arts in Cleveland, Ohio] with a scholarship back in the '40s [1940s], but she chose to be a cos--cosmetologist. And so she went to Cleveland to study cosmetology and became a beautician. But she could draw. My older brother--I still--my mother [Verona Hargro Davis Buffington] gave me one of her water colors when I was in high school 'cause I liked it so much. And I need to find that. It was a, it was a, a farm scene that she may have made up or copied. But there was this red barn and this rolling hills and this fence and, and cows down that way and trees over--it was like magic to me. And it was folded up into four parts, into four little sections and I found in my mother's bag once. I said "Mama, who did this"? She said "your sister did that." Said "can I have it?" I would just look at it when I was young. I mean I couldn't do it, but I could just look at it. Then my older brother Fred was very good at art and I didn't know that until he was in the sanitariums with tuberculosis. We would go to visit him on Sunday after church. I remember going out there to Stillwater Sanitarium on North Main early, but it seemed like miles away. I remember my dad [Levonia Davis] taking us up to see him--may have been--I may not have been six yet if my dad was still--unless he came to get us and take us over. Yeah I think he did because Fred was older. I'm just four years younger than he. But I remember walking in his hospital room once and here he was confined and, and to fill his time, someone had given him some drawing paper. And he had looked out the window and drew the roof of the hospital with these sort of Spanish round rooftops. And I looked at that and it was like magic. It was all shaded, it was all pencil, so but he had it rendered, you know lights and darks. I didn't know that--how, how you did it, but it was magic. So art's been, been around. And so it (unclear). When he got out of the hospital, he didn't draw. But when he was confined and you know couldn't go anywhere, he'd, he would, he would draw. So, so it was really then--and my mother was a quilter and a shape note singer coming up from South Carolina, so she made quilts. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She, she, she quilted. Most women did. Speaker 1: Now did you, did you ever you know, there's a book written a few years ago called "Hidden in Plain Sight." Speaker 2: "Hidden in Plain View" [by Jacqueline Tobin and Raymond Dobard]. Speaker 1: Yeah, about the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear). Speaker 1: View, yeah, about the quilts--yeah. Did you--did any of your mother's designs-- Speaker 2: Look like those? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It would because they used similar kinds of symbols and forms. I still--I lecture and do workshops on that "Hidden in Plain View." Yeah, there's a--she, she made traditional quilts. So the wagon the wheel, the star, using those squares and geometric shapes. And did what most quilters did, you know, incorporating old jeans and shirts and things. As a matter of fact, she would never have said she was an artist, and most quilters did not at that time. This is just what we do while we were waiting for the harvest, while we waiting. You had a season for making quilts. But also was functional, which is very African. You know you needed some quilts 'cause you couldn't go down and buy blankets for the bed. And I remember when we had relatives coming up and those that stayed with us is that we didn't always have enough beds in those little four, four rooms. And she slept on a pallet, which was a quilt that someone had made just rolled up in the closet. And you put that pallet out and that's called a pallet. And you slept on those quilts. But I, I, I loved her, her quilting. Story_ID: 99068 Speaker 1: I don't--still don't totally understand how she [Verona Hargro Davis Buffington] did the shape note singing, you know what I'm saying, but it was a way of learning how to sing when you couldn't read music. And it was-- Speaker 2: Now what is shape note, now what is-- Speaker 1: It's a technique for learning how to sing music. Matter of fact it was pop--re-popularized two years ago in that, in that film "O Brother, Where Art Thou?" It was singers in there were shape note singers. You know there's a way of learning--look like you can--the traditional way of do re me fa so la ti do, the, the standard. Well if you can't read music, how--people there--which a lot of people were illiterate in terms of formalized reading. But they could find a way to do it. She taught her--eventually taught herself to read with the help of neighbors and friends. But there was a technique and one of her favorite things that she misses today, there's two things she misses that she can no longer see well enough to do her quilts and there's no shape note singing group around here she could, she could practice her, her shape note singing with. But it's a technique for learning how to, how to, how to read a score that someone developed that was very popular in the South. But when you can understand that when many people in the community may not be able to read, so how do you get by? You know you can get by with your X for signing your name, but how did you deal with other aspects of life? Speaker 2: So they actually could read the musical notes without-- Speaker 1: You, you, you assign another symbol to, to the note other than what, what would be the, the scale. Speaker 2: The music, okay. Speaker 1: Whether it was a drawing or a mark or--you know when you see this mark, you go hit this tune. When you see this mark, you hit the--and so it's another way of learning. But it was--now I think they did it orally in a group. But I've had her try to explain it to me and I said "Well Mama I'm not smart enough to understand that stuff." Yeah, but that was her, her art form. Speaker 2: What, what, what particular group in, in that movie sings--I mean singing shape note, do you know? Speaker 1: I think--they use a lot in the background. I think they had a, a, a old southern Baptist church choir. A, a lot of--'cause you know the reason the Bible was so illustrated and, and even the sculptures in the cathedrals was 'cause so many people could not read, but they could read images. You see the stations to the cross and you see Christ on the donkey and you can see Christ in the manger. And so art was used as another form of communicating that way. And, and, and every day people use that. Story_ID: 99069 Speaker 1: Okay. Now we always ask this que--question. Now you, you've covered some of it already, but what, what were some of the sights and smells and sounds of growing up? Speaker 2: Lot of sights and sounds and smells. As you were talking--usually around this time of the year I couldn't wait for this time of the year 'cause when the Spring rains came and hit that playground and hit that dirt and that smell comes up, it just reminds you that it's a whole 'nother new cycle of life. But the, the smells also was coming from the kitchen. Man, Mother [Verona Hargro Davis Buffington] could cook, Mother could cook. And then so those smells in the kitchen and, and in the garden are, are remembered smells that are juts--brings up--conjures up good memories. But the sounds were, were, were children playing. I, I love the sound of just fun and gay in the playground, the community center and, and the church. So the sounds were, were always there and then on Friday night someone's having a fish fry in the neighborhood. So some rent party someplace in the neighborhood that you can hear smell and sounds. Yeah, yeah that that's--yeah. Good, good memory--make me think about some good times that I don't usually get to think about too often. But yeah, yeah, I, I en--I feel fortunate to have grown up where I grew up and I learned an awful lot about life and people just being in that east side neighborhood [of Dayton, Ohio]. Story_ID: 99070 Speaker 1: Now how did you--now you're tall, you're about, what, six three? Speaker 2: Six three and a half, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, six three and a half. Seems like a natural for basketball. And, and you played basketball and I, I got a chance to see you play years ago. And I mean--but the skill level, I mean you were considered tall in those days playing ball. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: But nowadays, you know, people are so much bigger now. Speaker 2: Average, yeah. Speaker 1: But--or as tall as you and bigger, so I would be a midget today. But--so how did you--when you did start first playing ball? Speaker 2: You know what? Playing just like most kids all the time, just starting early. But also, which well not--'course and I thought you might have asked about how do you develop to a certain level. In an extended family and an east side neighborhood [Dayton, Ohio] that was very community oriented, all the athletes that ended up excelling, played above their age group. So my first organized ball was in the fifth and sixth grade at the community center, just like Linden [Community] Center (unclear), at the community center through the park recreation leaders going, playing other parks and recreation. So that was there, but I-- Speaker 1: What was the name of the center that you-- Speaker 2: Irwin Community Center, Irwin Community Center on Irwin Avenue [sic, Irwin Street] right there in East Dayton [Ohio]. And there was a--which I only learned a few weeks ago at a funeral for someone else who knew the gentleman who came to East Dayton to work at the community center was Jack Reynolds. And I said yeah, yeah, he was the guy that taught us our athletics when I was coming along in fifth, sixth, seventh grade. And I said yeah he was one of Dayton's first star athletes at old Steele High School. Well he never told us that, you know, but he was outstanding. But what he--my first organized ball was under him. And we played our Saturday league just like you have the little soccer leagues at, at the Fort-- Wayne Avenue Market House. And it was very memorable because we didn't win one game, but we played every Saturday and he worked with us every day after school. And I remember two things about that. Number one, I was sort of skilled at that time. That he came to my house to pick me up. I was usually--he'd walked from one house to the other picking the ball players on the way to the center and walked us back home. Make sure we all got back home. 'Cause the center wasn't usually open on Saturday. And, and I remember not having my, my dishes washed, and it was my turn to wash dishes. And my mother [Verona Hargro Davis Buffington] decided she wasn't gonna let me go to this ball game 'cause I hadn't finished my, my, my task. And I remember him coming into the house and standing beside me at the kitchen sink drying the dishes while I washed them, and talking to me about responsibility. You know I'm in, I'm in sixth grade, sixth grade. That, that stood out as, as how much he supported and nurtured us. But the, the, the other thing was that at the end of the second year, which was my sixth grade, I'm--we haven't won a game. He says--I says we look--but he always taught us sportsmanship and worked with us and "Next game we're gonna get better and better and get better." And we were getting better and better. But we were a rag-tag outfit and so we, we would--got beat ev--got beat every game. And he told me "You can't play for me next year." And I'm his star. And I couldn't under--and he said, he said no, he said "We want you to go out for the school team. You, you have to go out for the school team," so that would be the seventh grade. And I'm six feet. And so I went out to the school which again, I went into that experience from playing with my neighbors and friends to being the only black on the team 'cause it wasn't that many in my age group there. And--not a lot that we're playing athletic. But his nurturing and encouragement, which I didn't understand at first, "Well I'm enjoying playing out here. We ain't winning but I'm enjoying playing." He said, "No, we want you to go out" 'cause he saw something and some potential that I didn't see in, in myself. And after all that ruckus of playing and losing, first game on the school team with a, a real uniform and real shoes, scored forty points. Story_ID: 99071 Speaker 1: The coaches around Dayton [Ohio] started to take notice and the one coach that was most positive was the coach from Wilbur Wright [High School] 'cause they would come down to the school, watch and see you on the playground and talk with you and he ended up befriending me. Matter of fact, we stayed friends until he died a couple of years ago. But it was a, a unique experience, unique experience and-- Speaker 2: Now who, who was the coach at Wilbur Wright? Speaker 1: Coach Dean Dooley. Speaker 2: Dean Dooley. Speaker 1: That's how--Coach Dean Dooley. Matter of fact, I've written about him and talked about him on occasion 'cause he was a special teacher. And befriended a lot. I mean he was Tony's coach and Ricky Lewis's coach, Archie Lewis's coach in basketball. He does basketball and track. Lived in Oakwood [Ohio] and was as frequent a visitor into East Dayton as any coach in the area. And most of the ci--he would, he would leave Oakwood, come over there and was just as comfortable; knew most of the families. Speaker 2: Oakwood for those who are not from Dayton is a ritzy, exclusive-- Speaker 1: Oakland is sort of exclusive neighborhood outside the area. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's separated from the Dayton. Speaker 1: We say homes for CEOs. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the home for CEOs, that's where the Wright brothers lived and the David Rike and all people that had big money-- Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly, exactly. But he was real, he was real. Graduated from DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana], that's how I got to DePauw. His father had graduated from DePauw. But he was a real sincere coach that was concerned above, beyond just the athletics, and that's what appealed to me. Even ask--I mean he may be at the playground, we'd be playing out there and he, he said "Got any new sketches?" And he'd be just as interested in my drawing as he was in my jump shot. You know, "How things going at home? I know your mother's struggling, how are things going?" It couldn't even happen now. Wow. When I was sixteen we didn't have a car, nobody had the driver's license. But I--everybody else got a car and he even let me borrow his car to take my driver's license. We didn't have car, but real--but he also drove five of us to DePauw and convinced them to give us a, a scholarship and a chance to compete. And we did, we stayed friends all the way through my life, and, and his family. They would send me care packages while I'm off at school and I got to be in college. I come home, I'd see all the neighbors. My mother [Verona Hargro Davis Buffington] would have a list of--you gotta stop by Aunt Suzie's house, you gotta stop by Mr. Joby's [ph.] house. And, and I knew what that meant. That they would have a little chicken, a little piece of money, some soap, some toothpaste, something for me to take back to school. The same way with Coach and his family. They say "Okay, stop by on your way back to DePauw." And, and you know they would--they, they'd greet me and wish me well, ask about the courses and, and I wouldn't ask, but he said, "But here take this with you, you might find a use for it." Story_ID: 99072 Speaker 1: Yeah I, I enjoyed growing up and I was, I was fortunate to be around a lot of nurturing people. But we got--they made sure anybody who had some athletic talent or art talent, that they'd put you above age group. And so when I was the peewee age, that's 11 and under, then I was playing with the midgets. And when I was above 11, I would compete and practice against the juniors, which means 16, 17 and 18. And when I was 15, then the men in the neighborhood who were still competitive, would work with us. That means the men who at 19, 20, 21, out of school, they would get us on the court, they'd get us on the track. They'd get us wrestling and they would toughen us, they would toughen it. And that's how when we got with our own age group, then we were able to, to excel. Plus we went around the neighborhood, we would get, nickel up, you know in the old car for gas and come over to Burkham [Center Park], come over McCabe Park, go to, go to, go to Middletown, go out in Oakwood [Ohio] to Shafor Park and, and three on three, five on five, "Choose up, who ready?" But yeah it was a great experience growing up. I, I hated to, hated to become an adult. I, I could stay a teenager all day, all my life in East Dayton. It was good, it was, it was good, it was really good. Speaker 2: Okay now did you, did you get involved in other activities at, at Wilbur Wright [High School] when you were-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, not at Wilbur Wright, but also Washington [Elementary School] too because the art--the teachers recognized my art ability and so I had a lot of extra opportunities. If someone's putting on a play, needed a poster, needed a flyer. Need a, a science thing drawn, whether it was an eye or a frog or--then they would come to me. Or some of the other people who, who liked to do art and that's, that's how we developed there as well. But at the church, at the community center and at school, I had opportunities to, to develop both my art and my athletic ability because of the people wanting to, to nurture me. Mm hm. Story_ID: 99073 Speaker 1: Okay. So now as a basketball player, now I--how well did Wilbur Wright [High School] do? I know that you as having watched you play, you are a highly skilled basketball player. You could handle the ball like a-- Speaker 2: We were, we, we, we were good. Matter of fact, when you're in a smaller neighborhood and a smaller part of town like where Wilbur Wright, where East Dayton [Ohio] is, where I grew up, you put a lot of time and energy on it and you can, you can develop to a high degree. We had--athletics goes in cycles in high schools. You know you--every four or five years your team gets good. That usually means staying together and, and working. But we had some outstanding athletes out there. I, I alluded to the fact that we probably still talk about the athletic powers that came out of East Dayton from such a small gathering number of people. That at one time it was not uncommon to go to (unclear) Welcome Stadium where we had the football and track, and you look up on the record board and you start to be able to pull out people and say East End, I didn't know anybody was out there. But we had--held some records even though we came from just a small cadre, 'cause we took pride in it. We took pride and then that what we called cross-practicing, you know, playing with the older guys. You sometimes needed to in order to make up a team. You'd pull one of the younger guys off and you'd work with them. But you also could toughen 'em up 'cause you could put 'em in a circle and make them break out of the circle. But by the older boys and you can get 'em rough and you don't-get used to this, rebound, get used to this. But no it was, it was a very, very, very, very special area for athletics at one time. It's no longer 'cause the community center and the playground is gone for the practicing area. But it real--it really was quite, quite good. I know from my sophomore year, junior and senior year, you had the high jump record for the city. And that--and people would come out to (unclear) Welcome and cheer me on from Roth [High School] and Dunbar [High School] and other schools. But they were always surprised, but we, we pride our self on, on, on, on practicing. And our goal was to be as good as the athletes were on the west side, 'cause that's where most of 'em were, but to be competitive, be competitive. We, we, we worked at it. But in the Summer we were over here anyway practicing 'cause sometimes the competition wasn't as good there and you can't get good if you don't get good competition. So we, we, we, we branch out of the neighborhood for the competition, but we'd bring back the pride that was here. So I--we had a couple good teams. I, I still--my senior year we had an exceptionally good team. So from my sophomore to junior year I was fortunate enough to make All-City as a basketball player. And we had three All City ballplayers and had some rinky-dink team beat us in the tournament, but we, we, we--it went in cycles. It was-- Speaker 1: Who were the other players on, on your team then? Speaker 2: Dick Bitzer, Bob Maclewane [ph.], and the other All-City player was Ray Spears. But we had some good, good ball players. And then even after, I, I left because my brother was behind me. And all my records were broken by the guy, the son of the man that mentored me. A Reverend [David] Gilbert with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. People don't know that Reverend Gilbert was an outstanding athlete in East Dayton. And then his son Reverend Gil--Gilbert, Reverend [David] Gilbert, Jr. who's now a minister also, came right behind me in two years and shattered all my records. And he was one of the ones we mentored when I was out there. So we would bring him along and that's, and that's just how we did it. Story_ID: 99074 Speaker 1: You alluded to the fact that it was Mr. Richardson's connection with DePauw. Speaker 2: Yeah my coach. Speaker 1: Yeah, coach-- Speaker 2: Dooley, Dean Dooley. Speaker 1: --Oh Dooley, okay. Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Yeah, Coach Dean Dooley, yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay not--I got the wrong one, but Doo--Doo--Dean Dooley, yeah. His connection with DePauw that brought you to DePauw University, D, capital D-- Speaker 2: D-E, capital P-A-U-W. Speaker 1: P-A-U-W, right. Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous)--Going and Methodist affiliated school. Speaker 1: It's in Indiana. Speaker 2: In Indiana, Greencastle, Indiana. Yeah it was. Matter of fact, I had--I just got through making a statement to the university at their request about my experience there. And so I've had some time to reflect over the last couple of weeks as I prepared this, this paper. I had a--my life and my art has been uniquely interwoven with this small Methodist school in Indiana, private school called DePauw University. Because when I was in the seventh grade is when I, I met Dean Dooley, his first name was Dean, Dean Dooley, who was the coach at Wilbur Wright High School in basketball and track. Now when I was identified early as potentially an outstanding athlete from the Dayton [Ohio] area, he was one of the coaches that I got to know as they sort of subtlety and quietly sort of suggest "Well why don't you come to our high school," you know. This gentleman certainly was interested in me as an athlete, but he also was interested in me as an individual. Our conversations dealt with art, dealt with community, dealt with my responsibility as a male and as a, as a productive citizen. He was very concerned with me, as he was with many other athletes, as he had been in our neighborhood. We were a feeder school, Washington [Elementary School] was a feeder school. So the coaches, the school, the community was fully aware. And many athletes had gone before me. But Dean Dooley took a particular interest me and also helped me quite a bit all through high school, all through high school. Both with trying to get part time jobs, trying to stay in school. Even when I wanted to drop out of school at sixteen when you can get a work permit like most of the other boys in the neighborhood. Go to school to till they can get their work permit, then work at Kroger's, Focke's Meat Packing Company [William Focke's Son's Company]. But usually the, the, the did the route for black males in the neighborhood. He saw some potential in me, worked with me. Even in junior high I was invited to the high school to accompany them on track meets that had junior high events. And, and, and, and in that I met some other DePauw graduates like Paul Wagner at D.L. Barnes [School] out in Kettering [Ohio] who is a colleague, friend of his. And, and [Earl B.] "Red" Gardner [Jr.] who was a coach at Oakwood [High School] who'd also gone to DePauw. So my, my awareness of DePauw came through these gentlemen. And then when I met my coach's parents oftentimes would have meals at their home and it was really funny 'cause they, they did, a did a soft sell on the school. They never did push it. But when I'd go to eat and at my place would be the DePauw alumni magazine conveniently turned to the sport section. So I'm eating and looking and it say I could do that. I could do--and so they did a soft sell, but they would be talking about how good college was and what it did for them. They didn't say--wasn't speaking always directly to me, but trying to plant the seed in me of maybe I ought to consider going to college. And then my senior year after having set the school high jump record, the coach says, I mean he didn't ask. He said, "Hey next Sunday, what are you doing?" I said, "Nothing." He says, "Okay I'll be down to pick you up" and told me the time. And he told four other guys in the school, "I'm picking you up at this time and I'm taking you up to DePauw to look at the school." As we drove over one Sunday in, in my senior year in 1955, and it wasn't one of the normal kind of school visits 'cause I--even though people were expecting us to come. We, we didn't go to no frat parties 'cause it was all Greek and sorority system. Weren't very many blacks there, 'cause it was myself in his car and four of my white friends. All of us either African American or poor white in need of an education. And he drove us over, contacted the admissions director at his home, woke him up. And said, "I wanna, want you to meet four young men here. I'm just driving through the campus. Want them to see a campus and give some thought--and they have some potential. And I'd like to see if you can sort of work with them and give 'em a chance that they can do college work." And then from that initial contact and those short, couple hour visits, and we got an application, filled it out, sent it back over, and all five us were given scholarship to attend, and three of us graduated. Two of my colleagues dropped out 'cause it was a very difficult school environment if you're coming from East Dayton, black or white, 'cause it was a rich school. Lot of social dynamics going on. And it was--you, you, you know you could see by the dress and the cars and, and, and the decorum that hey boy, we're sort of out of our element. But we needed an education. And the two that dropped out went on--transferred to other schools in Ohio and finished. Story_ID: 99075 Speaker 1: But three of us graduated from there and it was through, through [Coach] Dean Dooley that I got that opportunity and the rest just--this gave me a good foundation, good founda--and the experience there at DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana] was unique. It's a lot better looking back now than some of the experiences I went through, but it was a wonderful, unique experience as well. Speaker 2: Well, well one thing that had to concern you. We talked a, a little bit about this off camera. When you get to DePauw, there's only one black female and she gave you a message you were telling us. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah you know coming from East Dayton, I was going to get an education. It didn't really matter who I was gonna see, but I was hoping it was gonna be a little bit better than what it was. I had not really thought about that. I just assumed I was gonna see more folks that looked like me. There was about six in the entire school, including the great [HM] Vernon Jordan who we know through Urban League and, and working at the White House, and the great Lenny York who was an outstanding athlete, outstanding scholar who I learned about how to study from. And Fred Cravens who's in pre-med and, and then this one young lady in the freshman class when I got there in 1955 as a freshman. I'm getting ready to go, make art and play basketball. But I did know that there was one other black person in that freshman, a young lady from Kansas City. And I remember the first time I saw her. I went over to her and introduced myself, wanna make this big impression. "Hi, I'm Bing Davis, I'm from Dayton, Ohio and I'm gonna be an artist." And, and she just wanted to let me know "Now don't you think 'cause I'm the only black female on here that I gotta date you." I don't know why we never quite hit it off. She was always defensive. But I, I'd like to see her again. I--but it was a unique experience. But I come to learn too that it been so few at that time, African Americans that graduate from this small private institution that, that the saving grace was the African American community. That they befriended us and nurtured us 'cause we had great people go there like, like--the great scientist from Chicago, Percy Julian was a student there. And we'd heard about how, how tough time he and his family had there and other great scientists and scholars and athletes had gone there. But it was the African American community sort of embraced and nurtured the athletes and students that came to DePauw. So it was a saving grace. And so just like growing up in East Dayton, coming to West Dayton to get my hair cut and to shop and to go to movies, well I had to do the same thing going to Indianapolis [Indiana] if I wanted to encounter a larger community of blacks than--Indianapolis was forty minutes away or, or less. Speaker 2: Could you get a haircut at, at DePauw? Speaker 1: Not--I could by the time I got there, but I understand it'd only been recently that Vernon Jordan and some of the others had picketed downtown Greencastle, which as only about three blocks, three streets, because of, of that disparity. And had gotten it opened. But hey, hey they was still charging too much. So we did most of our haircutting in, in the dorm, in the dorm. And whoever had the razor, even ended up getting one of them combs with the razorblade in it that you comb it and trim it down. But we ended up surviving and once I got hook up with the black community, then we found a way to, to suffice and make, and make those, those needed cuts when needed. Story_ID: 99076 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what was [HM] Vernon Jordan like? Now you, you say he was your boss in the cafeteria. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was the head waiter. And part of my scholarship was to--almost like work-study. And so I was assigned to work under Vernon as, as one of his waiters in, in Longdon Hall. And it was a great experience. I was somewhat aware of him once I started hearing about the campus and who I was gonna be seeing. But he was a, a very special individual. Matter of fact, he was one of the few people I knew that got a scholarship on debating, you know. He was, he was a great orator. And, and a lot of fun. Vernon was a lot of fun. He had an unusual sense of humor, but he had a great sense of humor. And had a pretty good hook shot for a while. But yeah I, I enjoyed being around. It was a, a good experience to go there and have upperclassmen like Vernon and Fred Cravens and, and particularly Lenny York in terms of the African American upperclassmen. They really--I could watch them and see how I should conduct myself and how to, how to get along with people that may be a little different than I, although I had great experience in East Dayton [Ohio], but this was a whole 'nother avenue. So I did a lot of watching that first year, just observing and seeing how they carried themselves, you know in, in different situations. But it was, it was, it was good. And Vernon was a, a good role model. Story_ID: 99077 Speaker 1: Now were there any teachers that were particularly good mentors for you or, or models? Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Oh, oh Yeah, oh yeah. As a matter of fact, one remained a close mentor of mine till he passed just a few years ago. And that was Richard Peeler. Richard Peeler was from Indianapolis [Indiana], and he was my primary advisor from my first year on in art education. But he also was my ceramics teacher and ceramics was my, my, my first love. And, and as I said, advisor. So I was very much impressed by him as a man, as an artist and as a teacher. And matter of fact I patterned some things that I do right to today from that mentor and, and he knew he was my mentor. Matter of fact, I had a chance to go back as the first full time African American professor at DePauw University in 1970. And part of my decision, besides having that experience after Living Arts [Center in Dayton, Ohio], was to also be back around Richard Peeler 'cause he was still on the faculty there. And--but I had a couple of others too, A. [Alexander] Reid Winsey, the head of the department was a, was, was a outstanding draftsman and outstanding artist and, and mentor as well. I had some good--and then--but I had some mentors who were not in the department too, of art. But there were some good scholars on campus that had their heads and, and hearts in the right place, that, that mentored. Yeah, and some in the science, some in religion, some in sociology. But yeah I was, I was fortunate to, to have around me some people that, that nurtured me, put my head in the right direction. And luckily, which I, I count very important now, is that I never felt as an artist compelled to follow one sense of direction, or to follow only the western aesthetics that I had been exposed to and, and educated in. That I, I felt that my teachers encouraged me to find my own voice. So even though I was educated in, in, in the western tradition, is that they wanted me looking for my own voice artistically. And then that led me to where I, I, I've come to, and that is using African art and culture as a base for my art and for my aesthetics. Story_ID: 99078 Speaker 1: Now did you, did you know very much about black artists or what their, their work when you first went to DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana]? Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) No, no, not at all, not at all. As a matter of fact, what little I could see in, in high school was looking in Ebony Magazine at the art section or, or looking in National Geographic or, or some--every now and then running across them. But not much at all. As a matter of fact, my freshman year, I remember my mentor Mr. Peeler [Richard Peeler] asked me a question in, in a session once. And he paused. He says, "I got a piece of art I want you to see from a friend of mine." And he brought back to the class. He went to his office and brought this piece of ceramic back to the class and talked about how beautiful it was and how well-crafted it was. And, and how important it was as a piece of art for the state of Indiana. And I could tell as he talked to the entire class and I'm the only black in the class, only black in the department, that that must be done by an African American artist. I can just see the pride that he was sharing with me. He said, "Bing, I know you would appreciate this." And it was done by an artist friend of his, an African America clay artist from Gary, Indiana. And he, he told me how much he liked it and he was responsible for making sure it was purchased by the university for their permanent collection. But that was my, my--one of the early, initial introductions. Although there was people in the neighborhood who I knew did, did art and a few people in Dayton [Ohio] that had been role models. But yeah that was-- Speaker 1: Now who in Dayton? I mean did, did, did you know the Neals in Dayton? Speaker 2: Robert Neal? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I didn't know Robert Neal at the time, but I knew Bob McGuire. Bob McGuire out on Dayton Liberty Road was, was an artist. And there was a lady by the name of Martha Drew Shields. And growing up we, we'd call 'em the big three. And the other person was, was Pat Patterson on LaSalle Drive. But in my own neighborhood, I, I, I still wanna get as good as, as, as the hero in my own neighborhood. His name was Maurice Robinson [ph.]. And Maurice didn't go on to, to school. But when we were coming up, he was the best artist in the world, and he was the only artist I knew who could draw and talk at the same time. I mean he could do--he was so darn good. We had to concentrate and stick our tongue out and get down there and, and pull out that drawing when he can just flow it. Yeah, Maurice--I was joking--I wasn't joking when I said that we had drawing competitions just like we had athletic competition. And so art was not--didn't have a negative stigma in my neighborhood. Whether you wanted to dance, play an instrument, box, whatever you wanted to do, there was somebody in the neighborhood who would nurture that. So Maurice is still, is still the best to come out of my neighborhood. We had, had Fletcher Robinson. David Harris could draw, Booty Harris could draw. Yeah it was--Mrs. Helen, Mrs.--my best friend's mother and Maurice's mother could draw and paint. And so I never had that stigma about being sensitive to the arts because of my exposure early on. Even, even dance. We had people didn't know we were--didn't always have a lot of money, but still people going down to, to take in dance lessons, ballet, tap, and bringing the information back to the neighborhood. Story_ID: 99079 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so at De--DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana], now you, you were there until-- Speaker 2: Fifty five [1955] to '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: Fifty five [1955] to '59 [1959]. Speaker 2: Fifty five [1955] to '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you get any special recognition at DePauw when you were-- Speaker 2: Yeah, both artistically and athletically 'cause I continued to play. I dropped--I didn't play football and I played track a couple of years, but we ended up going to the big dance twice only to be ousted in the first round. Speaker 1: Big dance, NC-NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. But really for the big dance for a small school, 'cause we were really a--like a Division II. Speaker 1: Was like-- Speaker 2: Kentucky Wesleyan [Owensboro, Kentucky]. Speaker 1: NIT [National Invitational Tournament] or the NAIA [National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics]. Speaker 2: Yeah, NCAA, but it was for Division II. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Matter of fact, we were ousted both years by Kentucky Wesleyan which had some guys who went on to play pro. But yeah I would making All-Conference and, and, and honorable mention All-American. I still was quite active athlet--athletically, particularly in basketball. And then we won the conference one year and won the conference in track one year. But the basketball kept, kept going. And then, and then the art kept developing, kept developing. Story_ID: 99080 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were on the verge of graduation, I mean did you--did you have any--was any professional teams after you or-- Speaker 2: You know I had--I thought at one time and I had already said in my mind that I knew I was an artist; knew I was gonna always be involved in art. But if the opportunity presented itself, I would not pass it, pass it up to have a chance to try out, to play some pro ball. And as God would have it, it wasn't to be. Had two major injuries at two different years. One year I tore my left Achilles tendon off, and that's the lift tendon; just snapped in half from all the athletic and the wear and tear. Just frayed and came loose once with no one around, just backpedaling on, going on back on defense and just snapped like a--that took some rehabbing. At the time you used to have operate within twenty-four hours or the muscle would shrink so much you couldn't stretch it back out. So I, I had that cut and reattached. And then took about a year to rehab it back. And got it pretty well stretched back, only to do the other, the right one. That cut down my speed to about a step. I, I could always leap well, but that took about ten inches off of the vertical leap. And so playing pro ball being a half step slower, and being not able to jump as I did when I was setting high jump record, it was just a sobering effect. That I said "Well hey, still got my art." And so I ended up playing AAU [Amateur Athletic Union] ball when I got back. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where I first saw you, AAU ball. Speaker 2: Yeah, AAU ball and gave another second thought too because we had a tremendous core of athletes. Matter of fact, when I go around the country and talk about my development and I show students my high school team, my elementary [Washington Elementary School] team, my high school [Wilbur Wright High School] team, my college [DePauw University in Greencastle, Indiana] team, and I'm the only dark speck on there. But I end up with my AAU team 'cause there were the guys that made me good. These were the guys I practiced with in the Summer and, and during the holidays. So when I got out of school and came back to teach art at Colonel White High School [now Thurgood Marshall High School in Dayton, Ohio], I was still fresh out of school, just turned twenty-one and still active. And joined the AAU team. And it just happened to be a good, great time because we had some of the best athletes available at that time. Speaker 1: Who were some of these? Speaker 2: Ike Thornton, Charlie Taylor and the great Oham, Oscar Dominick, Curtis Oham, Ronny McKnight. A, a lot of good ath--as a matter of fact, we practiced two days a week and we'd play at the fairgrounds, Coliseum on the weekends or travel to other cities. And it was harder to make the starting team on my AAU team than it was at my college team who went to NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association]. As a matter of fact, I say I don't know that my AAU team that I had a chance to play with when I got out of college, would win three out of five against my college team. I just felt that. They were that good. And I talk about--I feel blessed because I had the opportunity to go to college. But I didn't know from week-to-week if I had practiced well enough to start on Sunday. It was, it was that good a talent and that much talent here. As a matter of fact when we were able to get Sweet Roger Brown, originally from Brooklyn [New York City, New York] who lived on Shoop Avenue with the coach, and had, had spent one year at the University of Dayton, then that just solidified us into one of the best AAU teams in the last 25, 30 years 'cause with Roger and Ike and some of the others, and Curtis and the rebounding of, of Oscar Dominick and shooting of Ronny Taylor, hey we went to the nationals and was playing out there at Denver [Colorado] against all these big AAU teams who were made up of graduates from Yale [University in New Haven, Connecticut] and UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles] and Providence [College in Providence, Rhode Island] and Stanford [University in Stanford, California], and held our own. That next year, the Indiana Pacers ABA [American Basketball Association] team started. And three of us gave consideration. I said well maybe I'm 35, 36, maybe I could play a couple of years. They started that new--but one of our members was the first one picked, that was Roger Brown. So that spoke of the team that he just left and went to the Pacers, and now he hangs in the rafters of the Pacers' at, at Conseco [Fieldhouse, now Bankers Life Fieldhouse] now. But yeah it was a, a tremendous experience and I learned a lot playing with, with them as well. And I, I, I honor that, those four or five years I had a chance to play with my, my growing up buddies in that AAU team. So I haven't--I just count it as one whole experience and having to look back and, and feel blessed to have had the experiences I've had athletically. Story_ID: 99081 Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I had a chance to see you play AAU [Amateur Athletic Union] ball, then I saw you play the Fairview [High School in Dayton, Ohio] faculty when I was in high school. I mean now you, you didn't even have to shoot the ball. I mean you were so good you were--your passes and defense were dominating the game. Speaker 2: It was fun, it was fun and we used to enjoy those. That's when I did--that, that's the period--that was my, my last hoorah. Speaker 1: But I thought it was interesting that you didn't, you didn't really attempt to shoot that much. I mean you were so good at what you were doing, and I guess there's some humility here too 'cause you did not--I think you could have ate 'em up, but if you, you had shot the ball. Speaker 2: But you, you don't-- Speaker 1: But you didn't even try to shoot. Speaker 2: You, you--that plus the fact that there's a lot of enjoyment; there's so many facets of the game that, that, that you don't have to get the enjoyment only from the point of scoring. And plus it, it, it's just like if you go out with your, your niece and your nephew, if, if you use all of your power, you take the joy out of it for everybody around. And so just like--which is another way I learned from my older peers is how you get good. Because what they would do when we were first coming up, they says "Okay I'm only gonna shoot left hand. Come on." And this be a 20, 20 year old. I'm ten or 12 and he's playing me, I mean hard. "But I'm only gonna shoot with my left hand, or I'm only gonna shoot from ten feet out," you know. Or either you, you spot 'em. Okay we're playing to 12, I'm giving you ten. Okay. And that's how, that's how we, you know, where I see some people go out and they just want to, want to dominate somebody. You're not, you're not learning anything, you're not learning. And so we were, we were taught to always put an, put an initiative on. Okay what am I gone work on today? Okay, well I'm gone, I'm gone try to take him to the left. No matter what he do, I'm gonna take my--I'm gone work on my left hand today. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's a more generous concept than you hear today. I mean a lot of kids get in there and just beating each other--drumming, drumming each other, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then talking about the person after you beat 'em. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Even if they're, they're--you know you can beat 'em. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: You whoop 'em and then you talk about them. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Yeah, that, that's--I, I, I know what you're saying, it's true. 'Cause I did a little, little part time coaching while I was teaching and, and that bothered me when I'd run into that. I'd say hey, set--I used to--they say how, "How you get your hands and, and feet working so good?" I said, "Well you know what I do?" We would take galoshes, you know what galoshes--I don't know what galoshes are. You know galoshes, those rubber soles you put on your--put some galoshes on and run through your drills. Those big plump, plump, plump. And so when you take 'em off, then your feet are lots faster and a lot more nimble. And we used to practice dribbling with, with gloves on. I mean gloves that you wear outdoors. So if you get that touch with the gloves on--we couldn't go out and afford and buy some weights. We didn't have all the--and so you just find ways to excel and to push yourself or, or you, or you, or you give someone, you spot someone up for 'em. "Okay this is my spot, so I ain't shooting on my spot today, you know. I'm gonna shoot someplace else. I know I can make it from here." And, and get that kind of mind thing. 'Cause I mean--you do with, with your art. How do you get good? If you practice only what you already know, but if you challenge yourself and you can do a-self-impose that challenge, then you--yeah it was fun, it was fun. 'Course I was telling people how similar developing an art and developing an athletics was, 'cause people are still surprised when the--you remember, but some people say, "Davis used to play sports? I just know him as an artist." But what it took to develop in sports is the same thing it takes to develop, as you know, you, you put the practice in, the repetition, setting high goals, personal goals. And not giving up easy. It's just the same thing. I can't imagine you--every now and then it'll sneak out. Someone will say, "Well I remember you used to play ball"--"he used to play ball? He's an artist" (laughs). They're always surprised and shocked. But it's very similar, very similar. Story_ID: 99082 Speaker 1: So when you graduated [from DePauw University in Greencastle, Indiana] in 195-- Speaker 2: Fifty nine [1959]. Speaker 1: Yeah, you immediately went to Colonel White [High School, now Thurgood Marshall High School in Dayton, Ohio] to teach? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Matter of fact, I wasn't gonna teach for a couple of years, even though being the first graduate from the family from college, my mother [Verona Hargro Davis Buffington] was a little made at me, my sister's, "What you mean you're not gonna teach? " 'Cause people didn't realize it, when I graduated from high school [Wilbur Wright High School], I had a rock and roll group here in Dayton [Ohio]. And-- Speaker 1: Now I didn't know that. Now this is stuff, this is stuff I didn't know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I had a group called the El Vieros in East Dayton. Speaker 1: El Vieros, how do you spell-- Speaker 2: The El Vieros. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: Capital E-L, Capital V-I-E-R-O-S. Had a, had a rock and roll group. Had five singers and a three piece combo. And we started my senior year and got serious. And then when I went off to college, they wanted to stay together, so they would come to Greencastle on the weekends I didn't have games and we would practice and sing and then go 'round to fraternities and pick up some money at the parties. And-- Speaker 1: Now were you a doo-wop (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay so now that--in aspect, you're a lot like your father [Levonia Davis]. Speaker 2: Exactly, that's what I found out. Speaker 1: He was doing a little barnstorming as a gospel singer. Speaker 2: That's what I found out. And I was gonna barnstorm for a couple of years just to have fun 'cause I'd been in school all that time. And my senior year at DePauw, we sang for Mother's Day and Don Revello [sic, Revell] from Revello Records was in the audience. And he came back stage afterwards and says "Hey, you know I like what I heard you guys, are you guys interested in recording?" And I said, "yeah I think so." And so we went through the--we getting our, our songs copyright. And signed a contract in Louisville, [Kentucky] and went down my senior year and recorded two songs ["Silly Willie" and "First Kiss"] and released them that Spring that I was gonna graduate. And so I told my parents, I told my mother and my relatives that I think I'll just take it easy for a couple of years; I'm just gone go around and barnstorm with the group. And they were pretty upset, but I was gonna do it. And what happened is I had to replace two people. One guy joined the service. Larry the bass singer joined the service, and one guy had to get married. Speaker 1: He had to. Speaker 2: Yeah, or die (laughs). And so I was putting--I said I'm just gone put the group back together and just have some fun for maybe a year or so. Story_ID: 99083 Speaker 1: And when I was a sophomore in high school, my principal who'd also had been nurturing me by the name of J. Willy Holmes [Jay William Holmes], who had been assistant principal at the old Steele High School and came to Wilbur Wright [High School in Dayton, Ohio] when it became a high school, he had called me in as a sophomore and by then I was starting to get some notoriety through athletics and, and he just talked to me one day. He said "Bing," pulled out my yellow record. He'd always pull your record out and make little notes of what he says to the people. He said, "I was looking at your record here. You know if you straighten up and stop cutting class and maybe just get on your P's and Q's a little bit, he said you can go to college and you'd probably graduate in 1959. And I want you to come back to Wilbur Wright and coach basketball and teach art." And I said okay Mr. Holmes. I said he just want me to work hard. And, and I did. And ended up on the honor roll, although I was only taking general courses. When I graduated in '59 [1959], my art teacher Mr. Beekman [ph.] who was also the athletic director and had been working with me all through and, and my art teacher in high school for all four years, had taken off the year before, health-wise, built the health back up and didn't retire as he said in '59 [1959]. What Mr. Holmes did, he had promised me that and so he called Colonel White [High School, now Thurgood Marshall High School in Dayton, Ohio] and says, "I promised Bing when he was a sophomore in high school that if he graduated, I'd have a job for him. And Mr. Beekman decided not to retire. And I understand you have an opening. You need a, another art teacher. I want you to pick him up." And, and he called the Board of Education and they sent Mr. (unclear) over to East Dayton. I got home from playing basketball full of sweat and just had shorts on and gym shoes and walk in and there's this man in this three piece suit in my living room saying "how would you like to teach art for a year? We need a sub at, at Wilbur Wright [sic, Colonel White High School]. They got more classes than they anticipated, and Mr. Mr. Braderick [ph.] is the senior art teacher and it's the number one art program in the city. And Mr. Holmes said that he had promised you a job." I said, "This is great 'cause I'm gonna have to take a year to rebuild my, my group and yeah that sounds good, okay." And came down, fill out the paperwork, went over there, fell in love with teaching and didn't look back. Now the records never did take off. It got a little hot around Dayton [Ohio], never did pick up. I think I bought more than anybody else. And the group never did get, get totally back together. But by then I, I fell in love with teaching and enjoyed it and became just history. Speaker 2: Now what was your [The El Vieros], your record? What was your, your hit song? Speaker 1: "Silly Willie". Speaker 2: Can you sing a little bit of it? Speaker 1: Yeah, "Silly Willie". Speaker 2: "Silly Willie". Speaker 1: "Silly Willie", "Silly Willie" and "First Kiss" was back the first--that was the B side. It was a song that we had written as a group about this guy who 'bout to have his girlfriend stolen from somebody he knew. And even had a falsetto in it. And, and had a little rap in it and, and, and the-"Yeah, yeah, Silly Willie, he's a real gone Billie. The guy's crazy, tryin' to steal my baby." But yeah it--matter of fact, about two years ago, 'cause I used to tell my son about it. He's--Don Revello [sic, Revell] was going through Dayton and had a layover and looked in the yellow pages and saw my name and called me. Couple years-says, "excuse me is this Willis Bing Davis?" Says, "Yeah." He says, "Is this the same Bing Davis that used to sing?" I said, "Man, you go way back." "This is Don Revello." I said, "I can't believe it." He says, "I just thought I'd just take a chance and call." He says, "I was thinking about you guys the other day. Somebody had called from Boston and wanted a copy of the record, I still had some in the basement, as a sample of that period's rock and roll." And I said, "Don, do you have another record?" He says, "yeah." He sent me one and only then did my son believed that I'd ever recorded a record. Yeah, it was, it was, it was--it had three white guys that were in our combo from our school, and these five singers. One, one guy was good. I was the only one couldn't read music, but I could organize. So it was my group 'cause I would pull them together, rehearsal, and then had the--had, had that kind of leadership ability. But Frank our lead singer, could sing. He could have made it, Frank Williams. He was from Stebbins High School. Matter of fact, you probably remember him. He, he died in Lakeside--that same year he died in the Lakeside pool. He, he was a champion swimmer and tennis player from Stebbins. His folks were in the service. And, which is close to East End, and we were out there at a party once, at Lakeside, and he decided he's gonna swim after he'd been drinking, to that little island, used to be a little island out there. He made it out there and was coming back and, and started yelling help and nobody believed him. "Help, I need some help." 'Cause he was the best swimmer in Dayton. And he, he was exhausted, a little drunk, and, and tired and, and, and cramped up and didn't make it back to shore before anybody could get out there to him. Yeah Frank, he, he could sing. He could have made it. Rest of us was sort of fillers to him, fillers to him. That was--and next year you guys started buying Sugar and Ohio Players. (Laughs). Story_ID: 99084 Speaker 1: So, okay. So, so Colonel White [High School, now Thurgood Marshall High School in Dayton, Ohio], so you--now at this time had you--did you know anything about the NCA [National Conference of Artists] or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't learn about that until I got back to, to DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana] to teach in '70 [1970]. When I came here in '59 [1959], what I would do if I saw in a magazine African American artists, I'd always cut it out and take it into school and, and use it for my own nurturing too. But I just got involved with teaching and I really enjoyed it. And, and fell into a wonderful art program that was very challenging. Students did very, very well. What I did do that was important for me, and actually changed my whole, whole life. When I talked about coming back from DePauw and having that western aesthetic background, the training of, of the western art. Wanted to be--know myself and wanted to be better prepared for my students who were coming from diverse areas. I started going to the library, researching Native American, Inuit up in Canada, Maya, Inca, Australian Aboriginal, and African art. And, and that sort of completed my education. I just started learning on my own and just studying and bringing that into the classroom. And as a result--and I started doing my own reading of African American art in every source I could find. And also African art. African art. I started to research and, and, and have that be a part of it. But, no yeah, that--I enjoyed that. I was only there six years, and that's when they started Living Arts in '67 [1967]. So I was there from '60 [1960] to '67 [1967]. Well in '66 [1966] is when the city [Dayton, Ohio] wrote that major proposal to get the million dollars from the U.S. Office of Education to start the Living Arts Program, which was an experimental program using art, music, dance, drama and humanities to develop human development. It really focused on adolescents' creativity using the arts. Speaker 1: So, so that started in 1967, the Living Arts Center. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty seven [1967], we wrote the proposal in '66 [1966], it was awarded and then Jack DeVilbiss, who'd also been a music professor at--instructor at, at Colonel White, took that job of writing that proposal for the city, and then being on the committee when we had sent it in and got funded, and six months later it was funded. He said, "Hey Bing, why don't you consider applying for the art directorship for this job?" 'Cause I was still at Colonel White and it was appealing enough to me that I, I took a gamble, 'cause I would lose my benefits and insurance, but it was a great opportunity. And so I, I resigned from Colonel White and I accepted the directorship of the art program for Living Arts in '67 [1967]. Story_ID: 99085 Speaker 1: And that [the Living Arts Center in Dayton, Ohio] was a tremendous experience because we had a set of funds to not only do our quality arts programming, but also visiting artists and actually in 1968, 1967 on my first--each of us had money to bring in artists from outside, anyplace in the world. So Edgar Tafur was brought to my attention as a Hispanic artist from Columbia, South America. So he came in, he was based in Cincinnati [Ohio]. But I also during that time saw a magazine article from Ebony that [HM] Lerone Bennett had done on Charles White. So I wrote Charles White, "I'm a high school teacher in Dayton, Ohio, would you be willing to come to Dayton for a week and interact and work with our students under a, a federal grant?" And so I wrote Charles White. He said, "Of course." So in '68 [1968], I'm communicating back and forth to Charles White and his agent as a high school instructor, and he came here for a week, and that opened my head and gave me more sense of direction. Speaker 2: Is that when I--there are a couple of people I know that have nice Charles White prints. Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 2: And that's where they came from. Speaker 1: Yes, indeed. 'Cause he brought his show in from the Heritage Gal [Heritage Gallery in Los Angeles, California]--exactly, exactly. And then he just fed me more information, invited me out to his studio and home in Altadena, California, and got me in touch with other artists around. Yeah, it was, it was tremendous, and so-- Speaker 2: Now he's somebody that came out of South Side Community Arts Program in Chicago. Speaker 1: Exactly, yes indeed, yes indeed. Speaker 2: Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs and all of them. Speaker 1: That's what he shared with--I found a eight minute tape of him talking about that when he was at, at Dunbar High School in '68 [1968]. About his--he came and shared-- Speaker 2: Do you still have it? Do you still-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I have to get out--I'll get you a copy of it, yeah. Yeah, and that just opened me up, and it just really opened me up. And then Joe Overstreet was another artist we brought in. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: [HM] Richard Hunt came in from Chicago [Illinois] for us through Living Arts, and came here for the week and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Overstreet exhibited at Wright State [University in Dayton, Ohio] too. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: Richard, Richard Hunt, he makes all the public art money. Speaker 1: Yeah, Richard, Richard' a giant. Speaker 2: Or a lot of it anyway. Speaker 1: A giant, he's a giant. But that program was very, very special 'cause it took me all over world aesthetically, but it also took me around the country looking at other programs and, and what was quality teaching of art and, and, and what was going on around the country. Story_ID: 99086 Speaker 1: But when I talked about it changing my life while I was still at high school [teaching at Colonel White High School, now Thurgood Marshall High School, in Dayton, Ohio] in '66 [1966] just before that started, I made a statement to an art critic in Dayton [Ohio] that I still get questioned about today. I said, "In 1966 I stop, stopped teaching art and I began to teach people." And that was a direct result of my self-education after I got out of college, a look at art in all these cultures and finding that art was really about spiritual, cultural and social values in people, and not just about hanging in a museum. That was really about reflecting those aspects of people's lives. And that helped me to realize that what was important was not my art, was not the artists I was teaching, but the young people that were coming into my class. And so I just changed my focus. No matter who you are, where you are or where you're starting from, when you come in here, I'm about developing you. I'm using art as a tool, but you are the important thing. And that just changed my whole thrust. And I've kept that, and that's been my mantra since that time, is that, is that, is that the students that you encounter who give up their day or part of their day to be in your class or studio, is the most important thing in the world. So you always operate from that standpoint. "What can I do, what do I have and what have I've experienced that will help you be all you can be?" And, and, and this-"Art is what I do. Is it something about what I'm doing that can help you find out who you are and what you can do?" And it just changed my whole philosophy. And, and, and it came right out of that looking, broadening my, my knowledge and experience base, and recognizing that art is a, is a communicational tool. Story_ID: 99087 Speaker 1: Okay. So the Living Arts Center [Dayton, Ohio] lasted until-- Speaker 2: It lasted five years, but it lasted as Living Arts three years. So in 1970 if you recall, we had a major Board of Education election. And we had been told at Living Arts that by the conservative facets, which--if you remember the group called SOS? Save Our Schools. Speaker 1: Yeah, Save Our Schools. Speaker 2: And it was very conservative. They said that if they get--win the majority seat in the Board of Education, the first thing they were gonna do is close the Living Arts. 'Cause they viewed the Living Arts as sensitivity training, not human development. 'Cause they saw students coming from all sides of town, all colors, all sizes, coming to this warehouse to study and explore the arts. And they just resented that. Speaker 1: Now that's--you just wonder what kind of mentality-- Speaker 2: You do, you do. Speaker 1: Would be against that. Speaker 2: But we were told, and it happened. And when that happened, then our senior director released us of our commitment. We made a bond that we're gonna stay together, all five of us, music, dance, drama and, and, and develop this program. And then after they won the majority seat and they changed the rules, changed the philosophy, changed--started charging people to come, that it no longer was Living Arts, and he says, "This is no longer what we, what we built, so feel free to go to your next stage of your life." At that time, for the second time, DePauw University [Greencastle, Indiana] re-approached me about coming to be a full time professor there at DePauw in 1970. And it was at that time I accepted their appointment where I went as assistant dean of the art, to teach art, and half-time director--coordinator of black studies, to build up--to help them build their first black studies program. So that got me back, back to DePauw and also back in touch with my primary mentor Richard Peeler who was still on the faculty there at DePauw at that time. Story_ID: 99088 Speaker 1: Okay, now, now did you--did--well it seemed like you would have really enjoyed going back to DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana] I guess after having-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know yeah, yeah I looked forward to it 'cause it was a challenge for one thing, but it was the first. 'Cause I had taught in six--in '66 [1966] I was teaching part time at Wright State [University in Dayton, Ohio] when they had just the three buildings. And I'd done a lot of work with the universities in terms of visiting artists. So this gave me a, a challenge and a chance, and plus I'm gonna get back to DePauw too who had, who had helped to nurture me. By this time there were forty-seven black students there, which is a lot for me. And since there's--instead of six over that period of time. But I was in the recruitment of me. Part of that recruitment that "Bing if you come back to DePauw, we're going to increase our black faculty every year you're there, and our black students." And I just finished writing something about this, so it's very fresh in my mind. But when it came time for tenure, 1976, and tenure normally is assembled where you're going to get tenure, job security and you're gonna retire there. I had a--I was having a difficult time. "How can I accept tenure? It's--I been there six years, I'm working with all the departments. There's 47 black students when I came and there's still 47 and I'm still the only black faculty member." If I accept tenure, then to me it was like condoning their insensitivity to their commitment to diversity. And that I'd be almost blessing, blessing them for, for not doing what they said, or what they should do. And so I left on a sad note 'cause I resigned rather than accept tenure. And it wasn't on anything other than the fact that integrity of what I felt should be doing. The money was good. The working conditions were great. I was sent in '73 [1973] to my first NCA [National Conference of Artists] meeting and, and all--every meeting I went to, they supported it. I was, I was giving grants to, to go to Africa and study art and come back and develop courses there. My salary was good. My benefits were great. Speaker 1: But you--and so if you developed the courses, you were the teacher too, then I guess if you were the only, the faculty. Speaker 2: I was one of the teachers, but how you start black studies is that you, you, you look at where courses are in--all the departments and you pull 'em together. That's how most of 'em started. That way you don't have to bring in ten new faculty. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had other faculty members, but you were still the only black faculty member. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, there's staff--there's a few black staff, but there was no, no faculty, full time faculty. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is where the commitment comes in. Speaker 1: So there were some black instructors, but not, not full time. Speaker 2: One, part time, you know the part time person come in, you know, from campus. But it's hard for them to make impact on the campus when they're just driving to teach and then going back home. But in terms of the residential campus and commit--university and tenure and all that that takes up, then if you really are committed, then your, your diversity should also be reflected in all aspects of your university, particularly the faculty. And so, so I just had a difficult time accepting a good kudos for me and saying "I'm safe," but then it's no better than when I came. And so I just had to bite the bullet and just step away from a wonderful school and a wonderful teaching situation that had not really embraced what they said they were gonna do. And it's doing great now. I mean there's almost 300 African American students there now and probably 25, 30 black faculty. So over the years we've made amends and I've gone back and worked on committees and I'm on some committees now. And, and interacting with, with students as people interacted with me as, as alumni. Story_ID: 99089 Speaker 1: But yeah, it was a great experience and, and, and I've talked about the part--I talked about two very major things for me that came out of that DePauw experience. Number one, in '76 [1976] I had my first one man show in New York at the Studio Museum in Harlem, which came right through DePauw. And in '73 [1973], DePauw, even though I had exhausted my professional development money when I heard about NCA [National Conference of Artists], the school retract and found additional funds to get me to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to, to, to meet, interact and become involved with NCA. And that was, man that's one of the best things that ever happened to me as an artist 'cause you walk in a room and you'd see [HM] Samella Lewis and [HM] David Driskell and [Ernest] Ernie Crichlow and [Jacob] Jake Lawrence, [HM] Elizabeth Catlett, Lois Mailou Jones, Murry DePillars. I was in heaven. Speaker 2: Had you ever met any of these people before? Speaker 1: No. I'd seen them in magazines. But to walk in the room and, and then to have someone come over and tap you on the shoulder and says "Can you come outside for a minute? Who are you?" I said, "I'm Bing Davis, I'm from Dayton, Ohio but I'm in Indiana teaching." "This is the last day of the conference and we've been talking. And we'd like for you to run for vice president. You and, and, and Murry DePillars. And we want you to replace some of--Lois Jones, she's gonna step down. And Floyd Coleman, and we'd like to run you." It was C.J. Montgomery. And I said, "Well I've never been a part of an organization." "We'll help you. We just think you've got some leadership." And they did. Embraced me. You're not supposed to be elected unless you've been there for a few years. This my first meeting. I made my comments, I voiced my opinions and, and cheered, but I was there to learn. And that last day--and, and they did, they nurtured me. Lois Jones, Elizabeth Catlett had kind things and nurturing things to say. I, I was already familiar with Charles White from years before. The AFRICOBRA members I'd never met. Yeah, and so I owe the school a lot. You know I said well hey--and they knew what I was going to--I was, I was being baptized, I was being baptized. And yeah it was a, a, a wonderful period for me 'cause what it did, it just put a confirming stamp on the direction I wanted to go and was going. And that there was other people who also used a heavy and strong African foundation for their creativity and their life. And it just gave me affirmation, you know. So I thank 'em. I thank, I thank DePauw to this day. Yeah, and then that's really how the chapter started at DePauw. So, so it was, it was difficult to leave, but I had to out of integrity. And I was glad that things had smoothed over and gotten better and that things were--with the new president we have there now doing some outstanding things in terms of diversity, both in, in African American, Asian, Hispanic. But yeah the DePauw experience was, was, was very, very special that once I got away and some of the pain of some of the difficulties fell away, you remember--you know you leave--"Well, I ain't never coming back to this place." But after you've left there, you mellow a little bit and you realize that hey, it wasn't so bad, it made you strong. It made you strong. But now it's very strong, positive relationship with the university now and they're still involved in my life. But it's been a, a unique experience. Once I had to sit down a few weeks ago and, and spell it out, that started in the seventh grade. Story_ID: 99090 Speaker 1: Hm. Tell, tell me this now. You mentioned your first trip to Africa. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now this is a big deal. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So talk about that. How, how was that set up and what was it like? Speaker 2: Well you know it, it's as vivid as yesterday. While teaching African art at De--at DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana], I, I was picking up from my advisor A. [Alexander] Reid Winsey, who had been my head of the department when I was there and I was replacing him who had just beginning in 1969 to develop a course at university level. So I was teaching the course, and had taught it two or three years, but had never been to Africa. And there's also another professor, white professor by the name of Dr. Robert Sedlack who was teaching Af--African American lit. And then there was a gentleman by the name of Brown, Dr. [Walter T.] Brown who had been to Africa on several field studies, who was heading the African Studies Program at DePauw. So the three of us met often and did a lot of collaboration and networking. And we just decided that we wanted to do a project that would put us on the continent. One gentleman had been there many, many times. So what we did, we wrote a proposal to the U.S. Office of Education, and what it was designed to do is to take seventeen teachers from the Indianapolis [Indiana] public schools working through DePauw, to Africa and all they had to do is find a way to incorporate what they've experienced and learned into their curriculum in whatever level they were teaching. And so what we did, we had a few African students, particularly we were gonna be in, in, in Senegal and Ghana. So we had a few African students who spoke Wolof, and so we brought through the orientation. We gave them--we had Chinua Achebe and some other authors to read. We did a slide presentation on, on the, on the art. We brought these applicants to the campus and we gave them some basic Wolof communicational skills, vocabulary. And some things to study. And then we selected these sixteen individuals, teachers, some teaching home ec [home economics], some teaching language, geography, history, and what we did, we had a study tour. And so Walter Brown went over and set up the tours. And so it gave us a chance to go to, to Dakar and to Senegal and to go to Goree Island [Ile de Goree] and experience the, the slave castle. And, and we had scholars on, on, on, on ground who would, who would interfaced with the group we brought over. So we were learning while we were bringing these teachers with us who were gonna infiltrate their knowledge into their public school situation. And--but it gave us a direct chance to go to the continent to study, to research, to collect data and resource materials, to come back to enrich our own courses. And then we also had funds in there to pay for their whole experiences, plus we met once a year for about four years after that, just to come back from these communities in Indiana and, and share how they'd been able to incorporate it in. Story_ID: 99091 Speaker 1: Now we're on our way to Africa (laughs). Now we got--let's, let's talk about the experience now. We talked about how it was done, now how-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah the experience, yeah the experience was one of the most meaningful things in my life. Matter of fact, going to Dakar, Senegal and having a chance to go, go, go to Goree Island [Ile de Goree] and, and sit in the slave castle and in the dungeons where our ancestors were held, was the most cleansing and inspiring experience I've ever had. To sit in that dungeon and feel the musk, and feel the residue of remains on, on my feet, under my feet. And just the cold darkness, it helped me to realize the evident, if not stark fear, the stark unknowing as to what's going to happen next. And not even able to imagine the voyage of the Middle Passage. And then stand in the doorway, what was the called "The Door of No Return," where the plank was placed onto the ship with the guns on the side to make sure you went. And to look across and know that I can't see land. If I could go straight, I'd probably go right to Atlanta [Georgia], or Geor-- South Carolina or Providence [Rhode Island]. It was, it was a, a, an experience that was cleansing too 'cause I wasn't making sounds, but tears were rolling down my cheek. And I never felt so close to Africa than when I was sitting in that room. And it just reaffirms my commitment and, and to not only serving and helping, but being the best I could be, but also to, to reaffirm the strength that I know we have as a people because I said I can't know which one of these doors of no return my ancestor came through. But somebody must have made it, or I would not be here. And to know what they've gone through for me to be standing, then I'm a strong person from strong people. And so it just gives me something I carry with me every place I go. I don't even have to talk about it now. I, I know I'm from greatness. Great architects, weavers, crafters, clay workers, builders of great sculptures and structures. So that trip for me just reaffirmed my whole existence to the point that I don't have to be boastful about it. But I now can walk and--down any street in any city in the world and hold my head high and have a sense of who I am. It, it was just phenomenal. Story_ID: 99092 Speaker 1: And then to get to Accra, Ghana after that, trip to Senegal where certainly speaking mostly in Ga and Twi. But was really English colonizing area. I met--and Accra is my favorite city in the world. I met the warmest people. The most considerate and loving people I've ever met in the world, of, of the Akan people that I met there in, in Accra, Ghana. And I, I say that I met the source of southern hospitality because the first day I was there, I wondered away from the group and got lost. And I said the next man I see, I'm not gonna ask a lady and say he, I'm lost, show me from--not, not anything other than the fact that I did not want to appear to be flirting. But I said next gentleman I see, I'm gonna ask him--just tell him I'm lost. 'Cause I kept trying to look for a landmark. And I remember stopping the next gentleman and "Excuse me sir, I just got here from the states, U.S.A., and I'm with a, a study group from DePauw University [in Greencastle, Indiana], and I've lost track of my group and I walked away and I got lost and got my bearings unclear. But we're staying at the Novotel Hotel. If you can direct me back that way." He said "Well yeah, you just go down here about a couple blocks and you're turn right here and go down, then turn left here. And he said never mind, I'll take you." And he just turned opposite from the way he was going to make sure I got back to my group. And I got back to the hotel and there's my group there looking, "Well we're wondering what happened to you. Getting ready to send out an all-points bulletin." And he said "By the way Mr. Davis," he says, "I was on my way to a party of one of my play mother's kids. Would you like to come?" Speaker 2: Play mother's kids. Speaker 1: Yeah, it wasn't his real mother, but he called her mom, and he was a neighborhood guy who had been over Germany and recording on the radio station. He was a, a musician. And he was home, and-- Speaker 2: That's an interesting, interesting concept 'cause he--you know play brothers, play mothers and all that sort of thing. That's, that's something that comes from the South (unclear). Speaker 1: Right, right, right and as far as that extended family concept too. That's what I said, that Southern hospitality. But I, I, I said, "Oh, I would love that, it would give me a chance to see, see a real family in a real home." And I remember going to the, to the birthday party for the kid, which also at that time adults and kids were there together. Were not just a couple of parents and then kids, but they're--but it turned out to be a wonderful day and experience 'cause I had a chance to meet youth of different ages, young people, teenagers, then observe how these families were working. So it was just a rich--and then hey, I was just right at home and was made to feel at home. Now we stayed in contact for years, communicating by, by letter. But yeah it was a unique experience and I'd had, been fortunate to had, had ten trips to Africa since that initial one in '73 [1973]. And, and I, I say I would go at the drop of a hat. Every time I've gone, I've come back richer and more knowledgeable and more committed. And more in love with the continent and its people and its potential, not only from, from the present, but also for the future. Speaker 2: Now what year did you first go? Speaker 1: In 1973. Speaker 2: Seventy three [1973], okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah so that was a, a, a heck of a year. 'Cause I, I encountered NCA [National Conference of Artists] in April of '73 [1973]. So in, in June and July of '73 [1973] was my first trip to Africa. So that was a rich--and all coming from that affiliation and contact with DePauw University in Greencastle, Indiana. Story_ID: 99093 Speaker 1: Okay. So in '76 [1976], you, you resigned from DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana] and what did you do next? Speaker 2: You know what? I was going to--I wasn't sure, and that was a part of it too, is that it wasn't that I had something definitely in mind. I did--was approached by two institutions who happened to either be looking or hearing that I was willing to make a move. I was contacted first by Howard University [Washington, D.C.] who was looking for a new chair of their Art Department in 1976, and I went-- Speaker 1: Is that when, when [HM] Jeff Donaldson became the dean of, of-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Dean of liberal arts [sic, College of Fine Arts], yeah. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I was--went there for several interviews and then actually accepted the position. I had some trepidations there too, and I hadn't--there was--there was a couple of structures not in place that would have made it easy to, to, to navigate at, at Howard. And it didn't seem like the right time to go there. There was some, some undercurrents of some things happening that I stepped back away and talked with Dean [Vada E.] Butcher after I had agreed to come, and got a release from that. And I said well I don't wanna leave one situation that's bad from one standpoint, and step into another situation that wasn't quite ready, wasn't quite what, what it should be. And that I would either been adding to a problem or either be a problem. So I wasn't sure what I was gonna do, I just knew that I had to out of good conscience and integrity, not accept the, the position--retain the position at DePauw. Story_ID: 99094 Speaker 1: Then I was taking also some summer work with--in ceramics at the Indiana State [University] at Terre Haute [Indiana] with Dick Hay, a nationally known potter. So I'd been spending some summers working in his classes, and taking classes from him. When Miami University at Oxford, Ohio had just finished their yearlong self-study on minorities and women. And under the president at that time [Phillip R. Shriver], who was--I forget his name, (unclear) hate me. I forget his name slips my mind, but they had just finished a self-study and was looking for someone to come in to increase their minority participation in their university, particularly their graduate programs. And so they had a position as assistant dean of the graduate school, with a half time position in the Art Department. And they flew me over and, and talked and I liked what was going on. And so I accepted their position and, and came to Oxford in '76 [1976] as assistant dean of the graduate school, and associate professor of art. That meant I could continue to teach African art, African American art and design and ceramics, not all at the same time, but those were the courses that I enjoyed teaching that they allowed me to rotate from semester, from semester to semester. And in the--what was very appealing to me was the position as assistant dean of the graduate school, I was working under Dr. Spiro Peterson, a great scholar who is the dean of the graduate school. And they allowed me, and I told 'em, I said "You know I'm an artist. Now you want me to do administrative work, but I'm--" said "Yeah, do it the way an artist would do it. You're the assistant dean, but we're not gonna sabot--you, you use your way of working. Do it. But what we wanna do is increase minority participation throughout the university and the graduate program." So they had some teeth in it that I did not quite have the same teeth at DePauw. 'Course I was--had the capability of identifying outstanding students, minorities, particularly minorities, but women also, for any of the programs from psychology to business to geography. And I had from the president's-sorry, his name escapes me. I had from the president's office 34 fellowships, graduate fellowships. And a program I had written is still operating called DAP, Developing Academic Potential. So I had these 34 fellowships that any graduate program, any university who would recruit, interview and award a grad--a qualified, certified, highly-skilled graduate student minority, I could give them a second scholarship so they would almost get two for one. If they used their department funds, then they could come to me for a second minority fellowship. Or I can bring them a minority fellowship that I have gone out and recruit--that's how I got to Central [State University in Wilberforce, Ohio]. I was going to HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] and other schools, undergraduate schools, on career days and recruiting students to come to, to, to Miami's grad program. And having been a graduate of their graduate program, I had that working knowledge that hey, this is a good place to go. But or either I could--if I identified someone, if I identified someone walking down the street, I go through the school, get his resume, get his transcript, get his paperwork, give him a fellowship, fill it out, take it in, and they could walk into the department and says, "I've just found a student with these potentials and these, these qualifications. Do you have any scholarships left?" "No, we don't have any." "This is a great student. Then I'll give you a scholarship and here's the student." So it was a great, it was a great program and it's still operating there at, at Oxford in Miami. Story_ID: 99095 Speaker 1: Now, now we missed something. Now did you get, get a MFA [Master of Fine Arts] at Miami? Speaker 2: I got M.Ed., I got my master's in education. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) M.Ed. Okay. Speaker 2: That's when I was at Colonel, at Colonel White [High School, now Thurgood Marshall High School in Dayton, Ohio] teaching. Speaker 1: While you were at Colonel White, okay. Speaker 2: I, I did it at, at night and in the summer. Speaker 1: So what year was it, was it? Speaker 2: I got the degree in 1967. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty seven. Speaker 1: M.Ed. Speaker 2: Master's in education. Speaker 1: Okay, all right (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah that was, that was a, a nice experience too 'cause I never did stop teaching. I, I taught from '59 [1959] to '98 [1998] without ever taking a break from teaching. I--even my master's work I did in the summer and on weekends. And I put my residency in two summers, so I never did have to stop teaching, just kept right on going. But I--it, it--the degree was (unclear) in '67 [1967]. Story_ID: 99096 Speaker 1: Okay, so, so in '76 [1976] you're at Miami [University in Oxford, Ohio] and how, how long did you stay at Miami? Speaker 2: Two years. I was down there for two years when I got a call from a friend of mine by the name of Dr. Arthur E. Thomas, who's vice president of Central State University [Wilberforce, Ohio]. I had met him through my brother who had attended Central State and a gentleman by the name of Clay Dixon. So Art called me on the phone one evening in April of, of '78 [1978], of '77 [1977], maybe '78 [1978]. Anyway, he called me after I'd been there and that was going on the second year. He called me and said "Bing we're considering--we just opened up a new building called the Paul Robeson Cultural and Performing Arts Center [sic, Paul Robeson Center for Music and the Performing Arts] that houses drama, music and art and our main auditorium. And we have a gentleman whose been chair of the Art Department for years retiring, and we don't know whether to phase out the art or to build it up. Would you come up and do a, a curriculum revision for us. Look at our program, give us some advice and maybe suggest what we should do." I said "Man, that sounds great. I'd love to have--I've never done anything like that, I'd love to do that. But I just signed a contract last week." And he said, "Well let me put you on hold." I didn't know that he and the president of Miami [Phillip R. Shriver] were friends as well. So I--his name is still escaping me. He says, "Let me call my buddy." And fifteen minutes later he called and said, "Bing, pack your bags. Miami's going to loan you to Central State for one year to do a consulting curriculum revision for us." So for a year I commuted every day to Central and worked with their faculty and with their department and, and the faculty 'cause we had to first do an assessment, and then determine what--and I brought in some other consultants, what course-- Speaker 1: So were you living in Dayton [Ohio] during all this time? Speaker 2: No, I was living in Oxford. Speaker 1: You were living in Oxford, okay. Speaker 2: I was living Oxford, living in Oxford. And, and driving up every day and back, 66 miles, what I did for a year. But it was a, a good experience and at the end of the year, we had gone through and revised the program, made recommendations of courses to--new courses to add on, new programs to add on, which included a computer graphics course, suggestions of faculty members. And was ready to go back to Oxford when the president [Lionel] Newsom and Dr. Thomas said, "would you take the position as chair of the department to implement the design that you've just given us?" And so then I resigned at Miami to come to, to Central State in 1978, which I thought would be a couple of years of implementation. And at the most, three. And it ended up being the longest and the best job I ever had. I stayed there twenty years from '78 [1978] to '98 [1998] and it's from Central State University that I decided to retire and move into this space full time. Story_ID: 99097 Speaker 1: Now that's--so what are some of the highlights of Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Well you know it's quite a few highlights -- Speaker 1: 'Cause they built this--the Paul Robeson Dunbar Center, the Dunbar Arts Center [sic, the Paul Robeson Center for Music and the Performing Arts] and I know there's a big mural there by [HM] Jon [Onye] Lockard in the front. Speaker 2: Yes indeed, yes indeed. Yeah that's a--there's, there's quite a few highlights. Number one, for a period of time we had such an outstanding art and music program, and a little bit of a drama thrust was started there because of the nature and the structure of the facility. But some of the highlights was, was being able to bring in some outstanding faculty. During that period of time there was just two people on the faculty when I got there. The gentleman who I replaced was Mr. Dinsmore, Hayward Dinsmore, a great artist and scholar and art historian retired. So I was replacing him. But there was two faculty members there who had been there for over like ten, 15, 20 years. But I knew one of the things that was gonna be needed was to bring in some new blood and some vitality. And so Dr. [Arthur E.] Thomas and Dr. [Lionel] Newsome supported my, my effort to bring in outstanding artists like Abner Cope and Leroy Porter, and then eventually Dewayne Daniels [sic, Dwayne Daniel] and at one point in time when it was at its, at its most recent peak, a young man out of New York and Ohio State [University in Columbus, Ohio] by the name of Andrew Scott, who was a computer graphics whiz that we collaborated with Ohio State to get. So those were some of the highlights, being able to get that program through. 'Cause it took going through and totally revising the program, and restructuring it to make it a quality art program that can produce young visual artists. So that was the biggest highlight, 'cause as I go back now and I still look at the catalog and see "Hey, we did this." You know it's just good to see the--saw the program there. And then being able to get some funds and some equipment in to equip that computer graphics program was another highlight. But then to see our students start to be able to get accepted into graduate programs was another highlight. There was a lot, I really enjoyed that experience which I thought was just gonna be a couple of years. And it was the longest job I ever had. And it was really strange because I went through my career of teaching without ever applying for a job 'cause the Colonel White [High School, now Thurgood Marshall High School in Dayton, Ohio] job was there. The Living Arts [Center in Dayton, Ohio] job was there, DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana] and then Miami [University in Oxford, Ohio] and then Central, just being--doing something that I enjoyed when someone saw it and asked me would I come. And if it felt right, I went. If it didn't felt right, I didn't go. And, and when I left Miami [1978], it was in the paper and one of my colleagues on the faculty came into my office at, at the administration building and says, "Excuse me, can I close your door a minute?" I said, "Yeah, yeah, what's up?" I always had my door open--open door. "No man, I got to talk to you." Closed the door and came in and whispered to me. "Someone said you were going to Central State." I said, "Yeah, isn't that great?" "Man what you going there for? You have to work twice as hard." I said, "I know." "You have to take a cut in pay." I said, "I know it, but I'm gonna love it." It was the best job I ever had 'cause I could see it made a difference. What we did made a difference that you could measurably see. So I, I, I count that as one of the best teaching experiences I ever had. I loved DePauw, I loved Miami, I loved Colonel White, loved the Living Arts. But working at Central State at an HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] 'cause that was one of my dreams. Before I leave, I wanna have a chance to work at an HBCU. And a lot of it had to do with that at Miami and DePauw, I was lucky if I had a black student in the class, but yet I taught the same information. But I had to go out there and find some students that I thought needed to know it. And said "Man you gotta take my class, man. I know you're majoring in psychology, but you gotta take this class on black art 'cause you need to know." But I wanted that opportunity to have a chance to, to share some of that experience and knowledge I had at an HBCU. And I thought Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] was gonna be it, but I knew before I retired, I was gonna spend a period of time there. 'Cause just as my career had fallen, it just had not been that opportunity as yet. So I enjoyed and still look back with memories, even the difficult time that we went through. Matter of fact, I was considering leaving a little early, but I wouldn't leave while it was still struggling with this restructuring. And so I didn't really leave until it got back on its feet, 'cause I wouldn't wanna-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Central State went through some sort of a-- Speaker 2: Yeah, some financial crisis, yeah. Speaker 1: Crisis in the mid-'90s [1990s] was it? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, an important time when the state may have wanted to close it or, or the community wasn't giving it it's full support. But yeah, but it, it's survived. Come to find out it wasn't in bad a shape as people thought, or as the media had led it--led the community to believe. And it was no suits down or anyone taking any funds that were not theirs. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But yeah it did, it went through a struggle. And still--it's, it's, it's coming back now and will be another couple of years they're gonna be right there (unclear) and even better than ever. Yeah I'm really, really encouraged by that and their new, new dorms, new facilities. And really encouraged by the, the new Center for Education that they're building on the campus right as we speak. Yeah, I, I, I'm not an alumnus of Central State, but I'm the adopted alumnus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I really, I really, really enjoyed that experience. Story_ID: 99098 Speaker 1: All right now, now throughout all of these positions, you're producing fine art. And I want you to talk a bit about you know, your--how you conceptualize your art, what your philosophy of art is and, and you know what are some of your favorite pieces? Speaker 2: Let me start with--and I'm glad you mentioned that because it was important to me that I, I continue making art, even though I know that some people when they start teaching, maybe even more so at the public school level when there's such a demand on your time and energy that, that they may stop making and art once they start teaching because of various reasons besides being overworked with other tasks they have to do around the school. But also that there's some time as long as you keep your class in order and no one's swinging off the chandeliers, that no one's really forcing you to make your art long as you get your grades in on time. But it was important to me that all through my teaching that I continued to produce 'cause I wanted to grow and develop. That was a commitment I made to myself. So even starting to teach at, at the high school level in 1960, my first job [at Colonel White High School, now Thurgood Marshall High School, in Dayton, Ohio], I drew a 500 mile circle around Dayton [Ohio]. And that's where I could drive to on any weekend to enter a competition or set my artwork up at a craft fair and still get back to my 8:00 class on time. And so to build my reputation, I was seeking opportunities. I'd run to Cleveland [Ohio], to Canton [Ohio], Toledo [Ohio], Louisville [Kentucky], Ann Arbor [Michigan], any place that I could get my work in. And sometime I would be--have maybe just one piece in a show. It was also important to go to that opening and see my colleagues and my peers and my friends and see their work and ask questions. And so it was difficult, but that was necessary to do. I had to pay some dues. So that's, that's, that's what I did, but I, but I also said that when I would demonstrate in the classroom, or I'd start a, a, a mock piece to teach with, that it was not uncommon for me to set that aside and so when the kids leave at four, 3:30, I'd pull the stuff back out and keep on working. Sometimes it was bad and, and not well structured. I may destroy or take it back--if it's clay I'll re--re-soften it. Or if it's a painting, I'll just throw it out if it's not working or if it's not what I wanna do. But I made a point to, to keep working, keep working. I encouraged my kids to enter competitions and, and loved it when we can enter competitions together. Like some of the ceramic fairs we'd go to, they'd have the high school division, professional division. But I just, just took that on my own and, and sometimes it was lonely driving by yourself, sleep, and getting some coffee to stay awake and get back, you know. I was putting toothpicks to keep your eyes open to get back to--but that was just part of my commitment to my craft; that I really wanted to see how good I could get. I needed to develop this. I'm not gonna just be content with just making a living teaching. I wanted to see how far I could develop my art. Story_ID: 99099 Speaker 1: So it was important to me and at the same time developing my approach, my philosophy. And I, I, I speak about at the end of my artistic statement where my work comes from is that I consciously select traditional African art as a aesthetic and historical link. And that, that incorporating social commentary into my work is the first step towards speaking to a universal condition that I, that I find all peoples of color and no matter where you happen to be, uniquely different but same kind of struggle. And so it's that reading and studying that helped me forge that. And that undergirds my, my, my work. And so, so I, I want my work to look ancient, but feel today. It had that appearance as if it may have been made in the olden days, but when you look at it and examine it, you can see I'm using ordinary, common, everyday things. And that I use the concept of masking that I find in traditional society, but I'm speaking about our community today. And so this is what I, I've been attempting to do over these forty-some years, is how do I blend the past with the present, knowing that I'm in the present? How do I, I reflect and, and celebrate the past, yet I'm in the present? And how do I speak to the pride I have with my heritage and I'm in the present? So that's, that's what I've been--when I say I'm synthesizing my love and appreciation for African art and culture with my urban existence. So even with that, I'm, I'm, I'm conscience of the jazz improvisation, intuition that we use when we play music and we dance. But yet I try to have a flavor of Africa and of the Third World in, in that. Now it's been, it's been fun and it gives me unlimited possibilities, and I can't live long enough to get all the ideas completed that, that keep coming into my head just because of this, this fusion of traditional African art and culture and my urban experience. Story_ID: 99100 Speaker 1: As an informed observer of your work and stuff, I was just making a comment that your work is--well the way you were explaining it is very similar to the way [HM] Oscar Brown, Jr. explained the black aesthetic in terms of being--having to do with harmony and swing and, and movement. And that your, your work actually, you know, a lot of your works have, have a, a--the symbology of movement in the, in the work. Speaker 2: Exactly right. You know what we call that in art? Implied motion, implied motion. That motion and movement very important. Matter of fact, I understand my work more succinctly through dance and music than I do through the visual language. The visual language is (unclear) line, form, design, texture, balance, rhythm, icons or motifs, or units of design. All that repetition, discipline, medium, all that, you know, but how I really understand my work is I'm looking at polyrhythm. There's always a polyrhythmic quality in my work no matter if it's clay, drawing or, or painting. And there's always these, these motifs or units of design that I pull out of African textile, they become melodies. So there's always three, five or seven melodies in the work. Some off number. And then what people look at as being abstract and it's not abstraction, it's improvisation and intuition. So I'm taking these melodies that I'm already playing and just like when it gets to a certain point in the work, I step out and do a solo. And that looks like abstract. But when you look at it, I'm taking those same tunes and melodies that they have been playing. (singing "Mary Had A Little Lamb") De-de-de-de de, de, de. And then down here I go de, de, de dededede dit, dit, dit, dedededede, dit, dit, dit, dededede, de-de-de. And so I'm just blending this, I'm just having that fun. And what I'm tapping in this through the, the African-ness, the urban-ness, and even the things that I, I don't touch, the negative spaces. Those are the rests, those are the rest spaces for the visuals and the optic nerve of the eye. All these doo-doo-doo-doo, doo, doo, doo. And so it's not abstract to me at all. It's, it's, it appears abstract to someone, but it's just coming from, from feelings and thoughts. And I, and I trust my, my, my intuitive judgment when I'm, when I'm working. To get to working, it flows, it flows. Story_ID: 99101 Speaker 1: Now do you, you remember the debate back in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] about the Black Aesthetic. Whether there was, there was one or not, I mean-- Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: How, how do you feel about that? Speaker 2: Yeah, well there, there's, there's, there's a, there's a black world view. So, so the aesthetic falls within that. There is a--you can, you can learn or you can do things from intuition. You see a brother walking down the street, you at the red light. You see him walking, you will swear, which can happen today, he's listening to music. Just 'cause he's carrying a different rhythm in each joint of the body are moving. He's moving, he's moving. Well we know that someone can emulate that 'cause we know about New Kids on the Block and Eminem, and, and, and, and all of that. So we can emulate that or it can come naturally out of the experience, our way of expressing. But, but our concept of the black aesthetic was sometimes too, too rigid 'cause we also want to have a tendency to think that it's only a black aesthetic if it has a black subject matter, you know, a fist raised or a foot on someone's head, or, or, or--but that's just a narrow part. That, that propagandized part. It, it, it can go the full, full, full gamut because what a voice of Paul Robeson. What a voice of [HM] Nancy Wilson. And I give you a lot of examples of, of using two divas who had common experience, common nurturing curriculum, same university [Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio]. One coming from Holly Springs, Mississippi, one coming from (unclear) and they come and get the same courses and it's how it's applied. One goes off and we call her Leontyne Price, and the other goes off and we call her Nancy Wilson. But they come out of the same ethos. It's just how, how it's applied. But you can still see-- Speaker 1: Both came out of Central State. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, same exposure. So that we have that whole range of possibility. Whole range of possibility. But there--I, I think there's something to--there's a lot to the black aesthetic as long as we look at it in, in, in the most positive way and don't, don't restrict as terms of subject matter and content. That it's a way of knowing, a way of seeing the world. [W.E.B.] DuBois spoke of it, the double-ness, the two-ness. But yeah it's, it's, it's, it's a way of, way of knowing, way of seeing, way of expressing that, that, that comes out of a unique experience of, of being that I, that I think speaks to that. Story_ID: 99102 Speaker 1: Now I can't help but ask you about Dr. [William Komla] Amoaku, now he was at Central State the same time you were in charge of the Music Department. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Now he's in Ghana in charge of the program-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes he is. I, I almost mentioned him because in 1976 when Dr., Dr. [Arthur E.] Thomas called me at, at Miami [University in Oxford, Ohio] to say "we want you to head up the art program. If you come, Amoaku will come." "Dr. Amoaku, if you come, Bing's coming." You know Art. Speaker 1: Yeah that's Art Thomas. Speaker 2: But yeah--tremendous. And a lot of what I've learned about music and musical tradition has come from him and I still count him as one of my best friends. And he through the government was encouraged to return to head up the National Dance Theater there at--in Ghana. Yeah, yeah, tremendous musician and jazz musician, musicologist. Yeah. I didn't know you remembered him. Speaker 1: Yeah, the polyrhythms, I mean he would start with a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then build it to, then you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes indeed. Speaker 1: I mean he had that band--what do they call him? Speaker 2: Sankofa. Speaker 1: Sankofa, yeah. Speaker 2: Sankofa. Speaker 1: Yeah, they were really a-- Speaker 2: Yes indeed. Speaker 1: Really good. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he's, he's a great scholar, great scholar. Got his, got his Ph.D. here at I think Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], but he studied also in Germany and Africa, but he's a brilliant man. Matter of fact, at one point in time there was whole districts in here playing--having a whole music curriculum based around his writing. Tremendous scholar. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, (unclear) he have--teach highlife to, you know, our West Dayton [Ohio] funk pe--people. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And, and did they play it, you know, as good as the West Africans play highlife. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Really, really something. But--so it was a creative and kind of explosion going on at Central State. Speaker 2: It, it was and that was really--that was one of the highlights. Speaker 1: I think Bill Cosby and his wife [Camille Cosby] came to campus and donated some money. Speaker 2: Yes indeed, yes indeed. Quite a bit. And there was a lot of scholars. And one of the highlights too for me every Tuesday for a long period of time, several years consecutively were the annual Tuesday assemblies if you would. Where visiting artists, scholars, musicians would come to campus and the entire school would stop and you could go to the Robeson Center [Paul Robeson Center for Music and the Performing Arts] to experience outstanding people. Yeah it, it was phenomenal. It was a--matter of fact, they did it for incoming freshman for a time, they got a grade by attending a certain number of those sessions. They were that powerful. And if you attended so many of these speakers, then you'd have the equivalent to almost a seminar. So they got like a one hour credit as a freshman orientation. Story_ID: 99103 Speaker 1: Do you have any reflections you wanna share, share with us about Dr. [Arthur E.] Thomas? Because he was the initiator of a lot of these activities. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah he was one of the-- Yes he was. And I still count him as one of the most--one of the best administrators I ever had a chance to work for. And that's counting all the schools. And I say that consciously. He, he was a visionary, he was a visionary. He had a lot of great ideas and accomplished an awful lot. And, and supportive of, of the arts too. He was supportive of anyone who would support students. But yeah he was--I enjoyed working for him because he, he was structured, but he also had some flexibility. If you had a good idea that was gonna benefit the students and the school, even if he didn't fully understand it, you could get support for it. "He's okay now this gotta work now, this gotta work. You said it's gonna be--" yeah, but, yeah, I, I enjoyed working for him and count him as one of the best administrators I ever worked for because it was great to have an administrator who was open to new ideas and new ways of achieving positive results that go beyond their, their frame of reference. And he was that kind of person 'cause several things that I wanted to do, he didn't totally always understand or see how it was gonna benefit the school or student. But he would nurture it and support it. And he would take risks. I mean a couple things--"man, this had better work. You sure this is gonna be good?" And, and he was always pleased when it happened and, and would acknowledge, would acknowledge. But he also--I liked him cause he--if you worked hard and believed in what you were doing and, and gave your best, he would find some way to support you. But he, he, he was very impatient with someone who was lazy or didn't wanna work hard or didn't really care about kids. You know, may be working there, but you, you know, I question your really commitment to, to kids. You, you, you just want a job. But no, I, I, I enjoyed the experience and I didn't always get everything I wanted, all the support I needed. But it was enough to make me feel very positive about working for him and count him as one of the best administrators I've had a chance to work for. And I worked for some great--I've learned from some great people, Dr. Peterson, Spiro Peterson, Miami [University in Oxford, Ohio] was another exceptional administrator I had a chance to work for. I worked for-- under Ray French at, at DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana]. But yeah Dr. Thomas was special, he was special. And had vision way beyond his time. Had vision way beyond his time. I think he still would be a great university administrator now, and I think that's what he's train, he's training future administrators now. He's working that, but he, he was good. Speaker 1: Right, I think he was in a program--I mean he was with [HM] Dr. [Frederick] Humphries family with some of (unclear). Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: I was glad to hear that. Speaker 2: I am too, I am too 'cause he does-- Speaker 1: I know he's always had a protracted struggle with state officials and the media. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Here in Dayton [Ohio]. Speaker 2: You, you, you're right, you're right. And, and, and it's un--unfortunate because he could have done--so much more he could have accomplished had he had the support that he needed and deserved. And the university [Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio] too deserved a lot more support from the state and from the community than, than it received. Speaker 1: You really kind of feel that Central State is kind of like a stepchild of the Ohio educational system? Speaker 2: It probably still is, yeah, yeah, and that--but that was the nature of-- most HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] received the crumbs and the, and, and, and the leftovers and not all the support that they needed. And, and that's unfortunate 'cause it could be a, a wonderful model for the entire state and, and point of pride. And I hope it'll get to that point. I know Dr. [John] Garland's working towards that now. And I, I, I believe in HBCUs, historically black colleges and universities, for our system even though I didn't have a chance to attend one. I've been on the campuses enough and seen enough great people at these schools, and know their value and their need for--in, in, in education. Yeah, I, I really do. Yeah he was, he was, he was, he was good to work for. He was, he was funny, but he was good to work for. No, not funny offensive, but he was enjoyable. I mean he could be humorous. He had a great sense of humor; people didn't realize it. Speaker 1: Well a pro--very strong personality. Speaker 2: Very, very strong, yeah very strong, very strong. Sometime strong to a fault. But, but you know, but he'd hold his gun. But he had a lot of integrity, though. I mean he had a lot of integrity. Story_ID: 99104 Speaker 1: Um, I, I always laugh 'cause even during the Civil Rights disturbances in the area here and before he [Arthur E. Thomas] and I either was at Central State [University in Wilberforce, Ohio], I mean I, I, I grew to honor and, and respect him highly from something he didn't even know about. Matter of fact, that's probably the reason I, I went there when he asked me and did a lot of things for him. Is that when I was teaching high school, my first job there at Colonel White [High School, now Thurgood Marshall High School, in Dayton, Ohio] back in '59 [1959], '60 [1960], I lived on Euclid Avenue. And he was vice principal at, at a--at [F.C.] MacFarlane [Middle] School. So I would have to drive through his neighborhood to and from my job as a twenty-one year old. And I used to see him do things that made me commit myself to an administrator like that. I'd see him on the cold days, rainy days, snowy days out there checking his traffic patrol kids, boys and girls. And if someone didn't have on enough clothing, he'd go to probably the Lost and Found or find a coat someplace and take it out there to 'em. If they didn't look like they had something to eat that day, he'd get 'em some hot chocolate or something to snack on. Raining, he'd, he'd, he'd, he'd put 'em in his car and take 'em in. But yah I saw him do some things that the public didn't see that let me know he was real committed educator, real committed educator. And I, I saw him operate at Roth Middle School as a coach, volunteer coach on the football team, and embrace those young kids and bring 'em to his--I've gone to his house and the football team would be there laying in the floor watching the game on TV. And he'd be getting 'em food. Black kids, the white kids. So when people were talking about him being a racist and not appreciating--I, I saw people in the white community around him all the time, nurturing, writing his proposals, helping him, collecting data and research. I saw him interact in a positive and respectful way with them. So even before I had a chance to work for him, I had already peeped his hold card. I said, "Man this cat's committed to kids." I mean he, he really believes 'em. I was sitting in my classroom when there was a disturbance at integration here. And while we're worried about blacks going into the high school where they were bused to-- Speaker 2: That's Stivers [High School, now Stivers School for the Arts, in Dayton, Ohio] I think it was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Way back in '69 [1969], yeah. Speaker 1: And here is a man who's committed, who leaves his position on the other side of town to drive across town and walk in a building where there's bikers and motorcycle people, not to mention the school. Speaker 2: Chains and tire irons and I (unclear) that. Speaker 1: And chains outside, and walk those kids through. And then was criticized for leaving his post and entering a school building without permission. And was actually taken to court. But who among us had enough nerve to see kids in the first day of school now trapped in the schools that they were just bused to with gangs waiting outside to attack them, and he walks past the gang, inside, gets the kids and walks 'em out. You know, he said "come and work for me." I said "Man, hey yeah I like working for strong people." (Laughs). Story_ID: 99105 Speaker 1: All right now, now tell us about--now since '98 [1998], now this, this project [EbonNia Gallery] didn't start then. But in '98 [1998] you retired from Central State. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well what did you do next leading up to the development of this? Speaker 2: That's what, you know, I had been interfacing with the city [Dayton, Ohio] development office for maybe eight, nine years before that. And it started gradually and they said okay, you need to write a proposal, what you wanna do. But I was looking for the city to help me identify one of their empty buildings that I could lease a portion of for our studio. And so I would--knowing which were the empty buildings and which ones were coming up for, for auction, for sale, or things of that nature. And so the--in the background waiting for the city to say "Hey, here's some space." 'Cause what I'd asked also if they would help me by leasing that space to me for a studio for a dollar a year. Good faith. And that in return I would continue to work and develop programming for kids in the community wherever the building was. So I had written a little plan of what I hoped to do and what I hoped to do with it. But I could never find that building the city could nev--and in, in the meantime the city would bump that person up, move 'em to another job and I'd have to start over with somebody else in the development office, this is what I'm doing--what I wanna--so, and it really originally had been designed for the East Dayton in an old fire station that I had seen when I first got back to, to Dayton back in '78 [1978]. When I--what happened was that as I was thinking of making a major change by retiring early and throwing myself full time into my art production, and then switching around so that I could still teach or do workshops, a small percent, but have most of it be creating art. Now I said if I'm really gonna do it, then I need to bite the bullet and, and, and make a commitment. So when I retired [from Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio], I took some of those funds and said, "I'm gonna buy a building, that's a commitment. I'm not asking the city to give me anything. I'm really serious." So purchased a building not knowing if the neighborhood was gonna come back, but I'm only two blocks from, three blocks from home, so I'm close to home and I got some space now to, to work. And so I, I was informed that I would be eligible for a, a community development grant for West Dayton. And so with--and a proposal--after going through a, a, a business plan writing thing, I submitted a proposal, was re--was not funded, but I did get input on how I can make my proposal better. Story_ID: 99106 Speaker 1: So the next year I revised it, cleaned it up, got it a little more polished, resubmit it and as a result I got a start-up grant from the West Dayton Development Fund for this area. And then this next year I got one. So I had two small grants that would allow me get started with the funds that I had from retirement. And so we began to refurbish the building, and I wanted the whole thing to be an experience that is in keeping with my way of working. So what we did, we hired minority contractors in this neighborhood, plumbers, dry wallers, electricians, all (unclear) we need. And then had a young lady who's gonna be the foreman. And then someone helped me identify--a friend of mine, [Thomas] Tom Clemonts retired art dealer, he says "Hey, I retired but I'm working with kids up at Grace A. Greene (unclear) Academy." And these were young people who were at-risk teenagers coming back into school system to learn building trades to get a job. So there's a core of young people a few blocks away that we were able to employ on a minimum wage to study under these minority contractors to learn the trade. And so this initial thrust was done by these teenagers that people says cannot achieve, cannot do something positive. And so we were able to build this and then halfway through running close to out of money, a community based funding agency--the Mathile Family Foundation heard what I was doing. Sent their program director over. We talked. She took the message back that there's something positive going on in West Dayton in this studio complex. And I was invited to submit a proposal that would give me the funds to complete my vision and my dream. And so this community-based family foundation that was new to the city, in about its second year of operation, awarded me a fellowship that totally completed the building and paid me an operational starting point through this Mathile Family Foundation. So when we cut the ribbons four years ago, there was no longer a mortgage, only just utilities to pay by the month. But I had a, a space. And their concept was if they could help me, then they know that I will help someone by reaching high, reaching back, and not--and walking with dust on my shoes. So it's been a, a wonderful journey of getting this space. It's certainly sufficient for me, more than sufficient for me--what I'm doing. And adequate space that I can engage the young people and some of the community organizations in this facility on, on occasions and various activities and events. But it's been great 'cause it's also nurtured my art. I'm producing more. I, I've been able to get into more of the series and develop things on, on a more advanced scale by having more concentrated time. So it's been, it's been good and, and I, I just feel blessed to, to have this space and have this opportunity and have this community that has, has nurtured me since a toddler in terms of my art, in terms of my athletic, and now in terms of my professionalism as an entrepreneur trying to make this art thing be, be my life. Story_ID: 99107 Speaker 1: Okay. So the name of your gallery is EbonNia. Speaker 2: E--EbonNia, a Willis Bing Davis Art Studio and EbonNia Gallery. And we have a 501(c)(3) component that is called Shango. Shango, the Center for the Study of African American Art and Cultures. And that gives me the latitude to do research, to bring in other artists, to, to have seminars, lectures, workshops, and as well as to also generate funds that I can develop some of my own programming for the kids and the community. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now it started in--you started this in 19--was it in two. Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000], 2000, 2001. Speaker 1: Okay, 2001, all right. Now what are your future plans for--I mean you, you-- Speaker 2: Got some, very much, 'cause we're just getting started. My, my, my future plans is to expand on the programming and staff. And right now, I can only afford a part time staff person for twenty hours a week. And that is a person skilled in, in office management, and, and computer and programming the bills and the taxes. And then my wife [Audrey Davis] was kind enough to take an early retirement from teaching first grade and she's here with me a couple hours a day, who is a, a, a jeweler as well. She's a bead artist. But she also gives me support and services to help run the program. But I'm hoping to be able to get a full time person that would run the gallery and operate the gallery so, so that I don't have to make that one of the multi-taskings that I do. They can just run it. And when that happens, I'll also be able to engage more outside exhibits besides my own. Right now the gallery serves as an outlet for my work. And then special events once or twice a year. We had a pho--photographic exhibit. We had--there's a local arts group that once a year they exhibit here. And then on special occasions. But I, I can't run it as a--I don't have the staffing yet to run it continually as a space. But it does serve as the outlet for, for my work. So production is one side, and display and sales is another. And underneath is work space for youth and community. Story_ID: 99108 Speaker 1: Okay. Now we didn't talk about--you became the--didn't you become president of NCA [National Conference of Artists]? Speaker 2: Yeah I had a chance to serve. Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) National Conference of Artists. Speaker 2: --Serve, serve two different terms as national president back--it started with that first, that first one I was vice president under Murry DePillars in '73 [1973] when I joined. And then I--after he--his term went out, then, then Charlene [ph.] Clay came in and about five years after being a member, I was elected as the national president and served for two different terms. And then about five years ago I went on the board, and I served for five years as chair of the board of directors of NCA. And now we have two new co-chairs, Dr. Murry DePillars from Old VCU [Virginia Commonwealth University], and, and Dr. Herbert Charles from Morehead College [sic, Morehouse College] in Atlanta [Georgia]. And I have moved back down to serve as treasurer for this year and allow the new leadership to, to take us into the future. Speaker 1: Okay. The NCA is the National Conference of Artists. Speaker 2: National Conference of Artists. Speaker 1: Founded by [HM] Margaret Burroughs many years ago. Speaker 2: Yes indeed, in 1959. Speaker 1: The largest black arts organization. Speaker 2: Yes indeed. Oldest and largest. And also has a network and affiliation in, in several West African countries and two South American countries. So it, it really has its wings out there and about ready to, to move into a new area of, of excellence I think under our new leadership. Story_ID: 99109 Speaker 1: Now years ago we brought you to Chicago [Illinois] to speak at a Midwest Conference of the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA] and, and what has your relationship been with the National Endowment? Speaker 2: It's been, it's been good. It's also been a learning experience around that same time they began to utilize me even more in terms of some of the panels, minority arts panels and the craft panels. And then also to serve on their advisory team for developing some policies and procedures for the future. So that experience has been good and, and like NCA [National Conference of Artists], it puts you in touch with people in the field. And, and matter of fact I just heard from an old colleague from N, from NCA, not from NCA, from NEA [National Education Association] just two days ago, who I hadn't been in touch with for ten years, but I had a chance to write a recommendation for this person who'll be hired to teach in California. And that came as a networking with NEA, serving on a panel and she remembered me and, and called and we were able to give her enough information that she's able to, to tap and hire this, this rather--as a result of that contact. So it's been, just been great. Story_ID: 99110 Speaker 1: One thing I wanted to ask you about is probably--you probably think it's unusual, but your own persona, you, you, you are like a work of art. I mean you, you--the way you dress and the way you--every time we see you, you're, you know, you're in the same mo--motif but you know, current, you know. So do you have anything to say about that? Speaker 2: You make me think about something that an old scribe once said to me. "Eventually the artist should be his best piece of work." He wasn't speaking about that in terms of physical appearance, but in terms of that, that, that the art--your art, if you really get into, it should also help you be a better person. It should help refine you, and in a sense it does influence me in terms of my responses, shapes and colors and patterns and, and cloth. So in that context, but I always think about it in the bigger sense and said, say, "If you're gonna do this, it should make you better." When you start here, you shouldn't be the same person when you finish; you should be better. So in that context, it's how I, how, how, how, how I, how I look at that. But I also--I just believe in being comfortable and I remember when I first started teaching, the principal 'cause I was so young, says, "Now Bing I want you to grow a moustache, wear a tie every day. Don't let the students see you smile, then they'll know you're weak." And I said "No. That can't be right." But now I like the other one. The artist should be his best piece of work eventually. And you should let your work--art work on you. But no, I, I, I just enjoy, I enjoy getting away from having to wear a tie all the time and, and even so, if you're got to wear some, why don't you, why don't you, why don't you enjoy it? If you're gonna have to cover your body, enjoy it, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah I remember when you spoke for NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] in Chicago [Illinois], you came, you had like a tie on, but it was a kente tie and it matched your belt, something, something and it was the, the whole presentation was, was, was-- Speaker 2: It's just fun, it's fun. Speaker 1: Contemporary, yet African and it was like the way you describe your art. Speaker 2: When was that, that was St. Patrick's Day, "Where's your green?" I said, "I got a green kente, I forgot to wear it today." They said, "You don't have anything African on today." I said, "Well you didn't see me get dressed." He said, "What do you mean?" It's a lady, I says, "Fruit of the Loom makes kente underwear." Yeah. I said, I said I, I usually--I can say a prayer, I can do something, but I--something every day reminds me of home. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's never far from my mind. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now I may as well ask this 'cause nobody else is gonna ask it. But where'd you get the idea for the whiskers? Speaker 2: You know just one of them happenstance things. Matter of fact, your city of Chicago [Illinois]--when I was at Living Arts [Center in Dayton, Ohio], I used to have a full beard, was in Chicago and got stranded there two days in a snowstorm. Read everything I could read, used up all the money in the concession stands, and had a razor blade, single edge razor blade in my bag. And just went in the bathroom and had fun waiting for my plane to come and left, left it like that. Had nothing else to do; couldn't leave out, couldn't, couldn't even go down the city, couldn't get to Midway [Chicago Midway International Airport]. But just stranded. I, I was out recruiting for Living Arts and was in there and just played around and just left it. You know I had the full beard, the side beard. Happen to have this little single razor blade and some soap. You know how you put the soap and you don't have the lotion? And just having fun. They said your plane's here. And I just left it just like that. (Laughs). Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: --I never-- Now I know. Story_ID: 99111 Speaker 1: But we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I have a lot of hopes and concerns for the African American community because of the number of people that are continually getting sensitized to their, their value, their importance and importance of the community. And I think we, we've been able to build a--we've got a lot of skilled scholars out here and skilled individuals. I think for our, our community and the African American community to continue to improve and enhance itself, it's a matter of enough of us coming together with our skills and resources, and lending it to the development of something in our community that have of interest to you. And if not, then something somewhere that's other--someone can benefit from. So we're, we're--I remember I was talking to a group of Africans once on the continent, and they said "Well you know you're there for a reason. All things happen for a reason." And there was a period of time that Africa with its great kingdoms of Songhai and Mali and Marawi [Maravi] and Kush, was, was here. Now our continent is, is sort of down right now, but we haven't always been there. And maybe some of our brothers and sisters have had an opportunity as a result of this devastating experience called the slave trade, to be exposed to a whole body of knowledge and skills and expertise and technology. We put those together, there's nothing we cannot achieve. So here on our land of America and in our communities, and our people haven't had opportunities to go to this school, that school, this technical service, it's all a matter of just realizing that it, "Hey, why don't we use some of this together to do this and make this little piece a little bit better than what it is." So I think we're coming to that consciousness in a variety of ways. Sometimes it takes devastating experiences for us to--jolting experiences, be it [Hurricane] Katrina [2005], be it tsunami, or be it Iraq, to come to that--hey, we need to do more and we have more and wish to do more with. So I feel very positive. 'Course I'm a, a, opt--I, I always see the glass half full. We have some tremendous skills and ability. And I say, "Well hey, if I can do this with what little I had, just think what, what you could do with all you've got." And, and I, I tell my students and, and mentees that I'm working with, "Hey you have got to find some way to give some back. You cannot just take from society; you've got to give some back in some form. Don't have to be the same way I do. But you, you, you've got to give some back." And, and if we can continue to do that--because we're trained and educated from another concept, "I got mine, you get yours." But that is not our natural way; that is not our natural way. That's not the communal way, that's not the collective way. And so, "Well this is what I learned in school." Yeah, okay. Recognize where that education's coming from. It does not always embrace the concern for others. So if we can get--put back what we used to do and how we used to think with what we now have, we can make a difference. And so I feel very positive 'cause I see examples of that happening and pockets of that happening in different places, different people. I had two colleagues, one in Atlanta, one in, in New Orleans who we've been talking about replicating this [EbonNia Gallery] in Stone Mountain and replicating this in, in West New Orleans. That means opening up the studio; more accessible for the community, and, and more structured. Now it's not just a place where we make our art, but we also bring young people in too. And then get to the point where we can either trade off activities and experiences with all three sites. I says, "That's, that's great thinking; I like that." I said, "Yeah man, I'm, I'm for that. Let's do that. I'll tell you what I did and how I worked, how I got this and you share with me what you're doing." Yeah so I see some pockets of things like that happening. Story_ID: 99112 Speaker 1: And I know with, with NCA [National Conference of Artists] not all of the members, but there's certain members of the--continually made input into my life. And, and I'm continually interfacing with someone, putting on a program here. So that little networking is there and that was one of the, one of the spinoffs and the benefits of being connected with NCA, is what it's opened me up to, exposed me to and, and, and provided opportunities that I wouldn't otherwise not have been even aware of, been aware of. So yeah, I, I feel very positive. And the same thing happen in music, in, in medicine and politics and community service organizations, then we can continue to improve. Someone told me that--and it helps me 'cause I get concerned with what's happening around the world and what's happening around this country and what's happening around the city [Dayton, Ohio], that we really are like a pebble dropped into the water. And those ripples--we can only affect those that we have contact over. So if I sat here and worry about what's happening in Chad, I'm concerned and think globally, but I must act locally; this is where I'm at. So I may not be able to help the children and the young people there that I see having trouble, but I can see some young people right here that could use a nurturing and encouraging word. So let me drop my anchor where I'm at and hoping that they will then ripple out and affect and help somebody else. 'Cause I tell 'em all the time, I say hey, "Hey Bing we really appreciate being able--" I said "Man, I'm just giving back what's been given to me. I can't live long enough to give all back to the support that I've received." And, name of my exhibit's "On the shoulders of ancestors." I would want to never forget that. I haven't done anything by myself. Someone's paved the way and someone has lifted me up. And so for me to work or to walk around here or, or carry myself as if it's me, is the worst thing I could do. If I--24 hours a day, if I was helping students 24 hours a day, I still could not have enough time or resources to give all back. 'Cause you more than most people would know, man, it's been help all along the way. You know it, it's almost by divine order. I, 'cause I look back and say "Now how in the world did I get through this?" "How did this happen?" It's been amaze--I can't explain it, other than the fact that--well I just can't explain it. I can't explain all the positive things that's happened for me and to me through art. And since I can't explain it, then I--only way I can justify it or explain it is the fact that "Okay, this has happened for you; now what are you gonna do to help somebody else? How are you gonna give back? How you're gonna share it? Is, is, is this building all just for you?" "No. I asked for help and I asked for space and look what he gave me. Way beyond what I asked for." You know, so, so what is it for? I gotta find some way to share this. If I sat up in here by myself and look out and, and see opportunities to help someone else and do it, this is for nothing. Yeah, so it, it, it's been a great journey and, and all that philosophy time. I don't get a chance to talk about it much, but it, it undergirds what I, what I do. Story_ID: 99113 Speaker 1: Now, now when you look back on everything you've done to this point, and you still got a lot to do more, than likely. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: A whole lot of things I'd do differently with hindsight. But I've been, I've been fortunate and pleased with what was happened and, and grateful for what has happened. But I, I would, I would have started sooner. I'm, I'm young, sixty-eight, and I think a couple of years when I was first starting to plan, what was holding me back from really stepping out there is, is wasn't sure if I could do it entrepreneurially, if I could do it as a small business. I knew art. I knew how to teach. I knew how to--I knew all that part, but I hadn't had much business experience. 'Cause schools already run, you just go in there and teach. You know you got the accounting office handle all the supplies and you don't--you, you, you don't even see money or, or, or checks at school; you see vouches and POs [purchase orders]. So you don't have that working business knowledge unless you're in the school of business. So I, I was hesitant to step out there, even though I knew. But, but I, but what I learned as I was beginning to explore, is that well either you have the skills or you find people with skills that you don't have to surround yourself with. So hence, I find people who can do what I can't do to help me, allow me to be able to do what I can do. You know but I, I would have had more confidence and started a little sooner had I really realized that hey, it's new and it's foreign to me, but it's not out of my reach. But other than that, I don't have too many re--regrets 'cause I, I've, I've flowed through life following my heart; what feels right, what feels right or does it feel like the thing to do. And it, and it's been a wonderful journey. Story_ID: 99114 Speaker 1: And in that regard, what would you consider at this juncture to be your legacy? Speaker 2: You know I don't even have to hesitate, teaching. Man, the, the young people who I've had a chance to be around still inspire me and, and they inspire me as to what they've done. Some--saw I kid I hadn't seen since 1950, 1976, and I was standing beside him at a conference Sat--Friday. And he said "You don't recognize me, do you?" I said "No," not in full beard and face gray, "Who, who are you, you look familiar, but I don't know." He said, "I'm Don Stackhouse." And that name came back 'cause I only had one Don Stackhouse. And he's living out on a farm up near Lima and he restores old musical instruments and plays the dulcimer and he was at this Appalachian studies conference performing. "Wow, man I'm just glad to see what you're doing, you know, you're doing a prod--I'm just glad." But looked in the paper the other day and a kid, former student was highlighted at the University of Dayton [Ohio] in the women's center. She'd just written a book on women and Civil Rights from Dayton, Ohio, and, and teaching in the Sorbonne in Paris, France. One of the best students I, I, I had as a high school student is, is vice president of Bank One here in town. The brother that's just doing great. So, so I think teaching, I think teaching--some people get mad at me when I says, "You know I'm a better teacher than I am artist." Because I've done teaching more, but I've seen the results better and more frequently. But I, but I've enjoyed the teaching, you know I, I--it's--I, I think that's--I, I think for me what's been very, very important is that along the way I've been able to, to direct or to inform or to inspire or encourage other people to do what it is they, they wanna do with their life. Speaker 1: And the community seems to really embrace you and your, and your work. Speaker 2: They have, they really have. Speaker 1: I remember back in the old days I saw your work at Shirley Parker's house, an art's house. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, they really have- Speaker 1: Gordon Lewis had a (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --of your work. Speaker 2: You, and you know--interesting you say that and, and you and I do an interview 'cause you know that. Those were so important to have young professional scholars like that, like, like Gordon and Shirley early on. And there's a couple 'round here now. They're just, just almost peers who, who nurture. Guy came in here with these big overalls, just a worker, just ordinary worker, and brought his little twenty dollar check to pay on his piece of art, his first piece of original art. I mean those kind of things just inspire me, just ordinary people. You know and sometimes you expect the, the institutes and the corporations to come in and make the purchases. But people don't realize that every day folks since I started have been behind me. Yeah, everyday folks. Story_ID: 99115 Speaker 1: Now tell us about your family, now. When, when, when did you meet your wife [Audrey Davis]? Now I met her a little while ago, but when-- Speaker 2: Well you know what? I, I, I was blessed in that meeting. But I met her in 1974, '75 [1975]. She was a first grade teacher in Indianapolis [Indiana], and was coming to DePauw [University in Greencastle, Indiana] to get her master's in education and decided to take an art class for fun while she was driving to Indian--to Greencastle. And a friend of mine who was teaching the class, a colleague in the department, met her in, in his class and happened to tell me "Man, there's this really nice lady, sister from Indianapolis who's taking my painting class. I'd love for you to come by and meet her sometime in the evening class, 6:00 on Wednesday. If you can just happen to be there, I'll introduce you to her." And, and it's really, really funny because I thought she really was interested in me. And she asked all these questions. "How tall are you?" "How--where'd you go to school?" "Well what do you like?" "What, what's your favorite food?" I said, "She's interested." And she's collecting the information for her best friend who needed a date. But yeah, I, I met her in, in, in the early '70s [1970s], and became friends and acquaintances and then very close. And now one of my best friends and best supporters because she knew I was an artist. When we got together at the time I also had a five year old son I was raising by myself as a single father, single parent. And yet with a dream to become an artist. And she nurtured, supported it and gave me the kind of encouragement that only a close friend can do, that follow my dream. And "If I can be of help to you, I'm in your corner." And, and she, she has been, even to stepping out on this great journey of developing a, a fully operated studio and gallery. And, and any place I need to go in the world to learn, to grow and to be an artist, she supports it and without question. Let's say, "I need to be in Japan, I need to go to South America, I gotta go back to Africa." "Go. What can I do to help you?" It's always been very, very helpful, very, very helpful. Speaker 1: Okay. And your, you have one son? Speaker 2: Yeah, a son. I--my son from a previous marriage. He's 37, and the daughter that is 21 that's of, of my current wife, my second wife. Second marriage, I don't have two wives. Speaker 1: You gotta clear it up these days. Speaker 2: You gotta clear that out, yeah clear that out, yeah. But yeah, it's, it's, it's been good and, and, and very--the kind of support, it's almost hard to believe. Particularly if you're, you're an entertainer, you gotta travel, you're in art--it's a different kind of lifestyle and, and sometime the mode of living is not always compatible with, with contemporary society. But she has really been a, a nurturing and support for the unusual life of an artist. I mean being able to be receptive to people coming in, artists coming in from all over the country, stopping by. Sometimes the time is needed to do the work. If the work is going good and it's time to go home at five, I may take another three or four hours and keep working while it's going good and, and that understanding has to be there or, or it could be, be, be a lot of friction. But it's a--so it's good. I'm very, very encouraged and very appreciative of, of, of that. But this entire community--I've been fortunate all along the way 'cause even when I've lived in other places, that immediate community. Just like here [Dayton, Ohio], sometimes my neighbors will cut the grass if it grows too far, shovel the snow if I haven't gotten to it. Watch the house if I'm out of town. And that happened in, in the other cities I've lived in too. I've been very blessed to be around people that, that care and believe in what I'm doing and nurture it. Story_ID: 99116 Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything I have not asked that I--that you need to address, that we need to address before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No, you did cover that. I can't think of anything. 'Cause you've, you've, you've asked some--more questions than I could even--more questions than I can even think, think about. And you take me back further than I've, I've gone in, in years. Speaker 1: Well there's one thing I didn't talk about was the location of this gallery, being in the Wright-Dunbar neighborhood [Dayton, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I should have covered that. Speaker 1: The Wright brothers [Orville and Wilbur Wright] lived around here at one time. Speaker 2: Yes they did. Matter of fact-- Speaker 1: Paul Laurence Dunbar. Speaker 2: The, the location. I was aware of this neighborhood. As a matter of fact, Paul Laurence Dunbar was the first hero of mine outside my neighborhood. When I was in high school [Wilbur Wright High School], we'd come over to the west side of Dayton to get a haircut, to shop, to go to movies, go to bowling alley, go to skating rink, go to (unclear). But I also would sometimes go up to the Dunbar house and just sit on the porch. And just wanted to be in that space and just feel his presence. I don't even remember exactly, but I thought that one of those times when I was young and I looked up and I could just see Paul Laurence Dunbar in his upstairs window just looking down on me, blessing me 'cause I wanted to be an artist. But so this neighborhood has always been important to me. It had its down period after the assassination of [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and it's now being resurrected. When I made the choice of the building, it was for the geographical location and closeness to my home, not knowing that the neighborhood would come back, but I knew I was gonna be here. This, this neighborhood is coming back and is a historical, sacred place because of this is where Orville and Wilbur Wright walked and talked and created. And this is where Paul Laurence Dunbar walked and talked and created. And so I can still feel some of that here. I can see it sort of been cleared with the brush and debris so it can re--re-grow that creativity, ingenuity that this whole neighborhood is so significantly known for. And so the fact that the city and the community and the state has seen the value of bringing--making it a historical--a national park and a historical neighborhood is significant. And it's a good place to work. Can't get tired working here. If you get tired, you say "Hey, hey, how can you get tired, how can you get tired? How can you get tired? A, an airplane was built right here. How long it take to build the airplane and look what it's done. How can you get tired? Paul Laurence Dunbar wrote 'We Wear the Mask' right along here someplace, so how can we get tired?" So it's, it's, it's a great, great neighborhood. I'm encouraged by it, it's a revitalization and hope it will continue to grow. Story_ID: 99117 Speaker 1: Okay. Now my last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know I'd like to be remembered as someone who loved life, just, just loved being alive. Love people because to me I can only--I only know I'm alive in terms of how--basically in terms of my reaction to the people around me. And then someone who enjoyed in a variety of ways of creating, art that comes from the fact that for this brief moment in time, I lived, I existed. This is what I saw, felt, and this is how I expressed it in my own personal and unique way. Couldn't ask for more than that, couldn't ask for more than that. That someone who, who, who thought the greatest thing on earth are people. Just, just the joy of being alive and interacting and experiencing. It's--I'd like to start all over now. It's been so much fun. Start all over. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you sir. Speaker 2: My pleasure man, thank you. Speaker 1: --Okay...