 Story_ID: 495180 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Michael Reed is the videographer and Scott Stearns is observing. Would you please state your name and spell it for me, including your middle name? Speaker 2: My name is Stephanie, S-T-E-P-H-A-N-I-E, Cecile, C-E-C-I-L-E, Davis, D-A-V-I-S [HistoryMaker Stephanie Davis]. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: May 22nd, 1958. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a magistrate judge for Fulton County [Georgia]. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: It is in my home in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today is Thursday, September 13th, ni- 2007. Story_ID: 495181 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay? Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color is green. Speaker 1: And what about food. What do you like to eat? What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Barbeque ribs and shrimp. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Springtime, when everything is blooming. Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, is--do you have a favorite destination? Speaker 2: San Francisco [California]. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Tomorrow is another day. Story_ID: 495182 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother and her family. Tell me your mother's name, spell it for me and tell me when she was born and where she was born. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Myrtle Reid, M-Y-R-T-L-E, Reid, R-E-I-D, Davis [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis]. She was born on October 9th, 1931 in Rock Hill, South Carolina. Speaker 1: Now tell me about your mother. Did she share any stories about her growing up in North Carolina--in South Carolina? Speaker 2: Well my mother was the youngest of three girls. She was raised by a mother who was a schoolteacher, and her father [Carl Reid] worked in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] as the kind of handyman, jack of all trades person who could do anything at the post office. He only went to about the sixth grade. He was very intelligent, could do all of her schoolwork to help her and my grandmother had been, was a teacher and had gone to South Carolina State College at the time [sic. Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], and was very, very well known in Rock Hill, as a teacher, and also for taking care of girls who were in need of mothering in South Carolina. So, by the time she raised her three girls, her, two--my mother's two older sisters [Ruby Reid Smith and Willie Carl Reid], somebody, another girl was placed with her, my, my Aunt Dot [ph.], who was a year younger than my mother. And so they were raised together as sisters just a year apart. So, you know, Rock Hill's a small town. She went to the same school from first grade through the twelfth grade. She was an excellent student. I don't believe she ever made a B in her life, was very driven but it's a small town, everybody knew everybody, it was a very small town and, of course, it was segregated so they didn't know very many white people. They knew the black people in town and, of course, most people knew them because my grandmother had been a teacher, not at the school she went, but had been a teacher at another school and everybody knew Mrs. Reid [Emmalee Williams Reid]. Story_ID: 495183 Speaker 1: So they were well, well known in the town and she was just a good student, they were raised, they went to a Presbyterian church, but at some point, mother, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] was exposed to the Catholic church in Rock Hill [South Carolina] and as she met the Catholic priest in Rock Hill, she, when she was trying to decide where, what she was going to do after high school, she, my whole family had gone to South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], everybody. My grandmother [Emmalee Williams Reid] went there, my mother's older sister went there and other relatives went there because my grandmother's family is from Swansea, South Carolina, which is near Orangeburg [South Carolina] and, of course, during that time, it was during segregation and if you had aspirations of going to college, South Carolina State was the, the school that everybody went to. It was a state school and so that's where they all went. Well, my mother did not want to go to Orangeburg, she had aspirations of getting out of South Carolina and so she was introduced to the idea of going to Xavier University in Louisiana [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] through the priest that she came into contact with in Rock Hill. And, of course, Xavier offered pharmacy as a major and the State of South Carolina would pay for you to go to a school outside of state if you selected a field that you could not get at the state school. And, I don't know that she really was that serious about being a pharmacist but she took the opportunity to study pharmacy to get out of South Carolina. So, she enrolled in Xavier and, of course, went to Xavier University, still was an excellent student. I think she majored in pharmacy and, of course, was a, it may either have been pharmacy or chemistry, that she majored in. I don't think she made more than one or two Bs the whole time she was there. She pledged Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] while she was there and she was the homecoming queen and, of course, when she finished Xavier, she tried to go back home and there were not many jobs for black pharmacists. She did find a job in Charlotte, North Carolina. And Rock Hill is in the northern part of the state, just on the other side of the North Carolina, South Carolina border from Charlotte. So she was hired at a drugstore in Charlotte, North Carolina and that's where she worked when she finished college. Subsequently, she met, there was a doctor who was from Atlanta [Georgia] who had a drugstore here, in Atlanta, and was recruiting to try to find a pharmacist and happened to meet some friends in Charlotte and met her and thought that he had a friend in Atlanta who was recently divorced and thought that she might be somebody that he could match make and put together and, of course, that ended up being my father [Albert Miles Davis]. He recruited her to come and work in the drugstore, in his building, and the drugstore was on Auburn Avenue in Atlanta, which was very prominent street, prominent businesses at the time, and so she was hired to come to Atlanta to work at the drugstore. Story_ID: 495184 Speaker 1: All right, we were talking about your mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis]. Let's go back a little bit in her life before she actually comes to Atlanta [Georgia]. So, you can tell me more about your mother. Speaker 2: Well, you know, as a, as a child, as I said, in, in Rock Hill [South Carolina], it was a very slow pace, at the time since she was born in '31 [1931], it was during the Depression [Great Depression] and, of course, like most black people were, didn't have a lot of resources. Her parents both worked. Her, her mother [Emmalee Williams Reid], of course, was, was making money as a schoolteacher and her dad [Carl Reid] made a minimum wage but they didn't know that they were really going through a depression because the family had what they needed, they were comfortable. You know, they, they didn't go on trips; vacations were not things that they did at the time. They celebrated, you know, occasions, birthdays and things like that, but they weren't the kind of family that would go out of town. I don't think my grandfather ever left Rock Hill. He, he actually was born in York, South Carolina which is up the road from Rock Hill, South Carolina but I don't think he ever left South Carolina. And during that time, she would spend her summer vacations in Macon, Georgia with her aunt and that was a highlight for her to be able to come to Macon and spend time with actually my grandmother's aunt, Aunt Willie [ph.], and she would get on the train and she met our other relatives who lived in Georgia at the time, was exposed to them on those trips. So, I think those were some of the happy times for her as a child. What she used to like to do is play with, what she called, paper dolls, and what she would do is, then she did this up to high school, was even, even when she went to, to college, my grandmother used to joke with her and say, "Are you going to take these paper dolls with you to college?" And what she would do is she would cut out pictures of people from catalogs and she would create families with these pictures of people and she would have, you know, dozens of pictures of people and would put them together just like you would do with dolls at the time and she played with those in her spare time, all the time. I, I joke with her, the other thing she would do is--everybody, I think, in South Carolina at the time, took piano lessons. So she played piano, everybody in my family played the piano. My grandmother--we used to sing at church, and used to sing for occasions, and my mother has a great voice, but she was never a singer but she played the piano very well and so that was a part of her life growing up. And they were very religious and attended church regularly and it was just a, a life of doing what she was supposed to do, go to church, go to church, go to school, come home and get your work done. You know, we'd laugh but I think she grew up in the late '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s] when she was a teenager and a young adult and during that time, in America, people reminisce about sock hops and going to drugstores and drive-throughs and, of course, they didn't have any of that in Rock Hill and so that was not her experience in the '50s [1950s]. It was still pretty limited to spending time with your family and going, do what she had to do and coming home and having activities with your family at home and her two older sisters, one of them [Willie Carl Reid] moved to Orangeburg, South Carolina after college and the other one [Ruby Reid Smith] became a nurse and moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And so she and my Aunt Dot [ph.] were there and did everything together. They were inseparable and, of course, then she went away to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and then Aunt Dot the next year went to South Carolina State [Colored Normal Industrial Agricultural and Mechanical College of South Carolina; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], but they have remained, of course, extremely close and eventually after both got married, they, now both are still here in Atlanta today and share everything together; they're very, very close. Story_ID: 495185 Speaker 1: What was your, your grandmother and grandfather's name? Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Carl, C-A-R-L, Cecil, C-E-C-I-L, Reid [Carl Reid], and my grandmother's name was Emmalee, E-M-M-A-L-E-E, Amanda Williams was her maiden name [Emmalee Williams Reid]. Speaker 1: And where they lived, was it in the city or was it in the country? Speaker 2: It was in the city. It was in, the house is still there, it's 519 Hampton Street in Rock Hill, South Carolina. Right now, it is down the street from where the city hall, and Rock Hill at the time, I said, was a mill town. It was a mill and, I think, the mill industry, textiles was really big and was the main industry in South Carolina at, northern part of South Carolina at the time. And so Rock Hill was a mill town and it has grown now. It's a suburb, really, of Charlotte [North Carolina] now, but it was just a small town. They lived in the same house until my grandmother decided later in life, almost in her late seventies, to move back to Orangeburg [South Carolina] but it was just a street, kind of an idyllic American, All-American street, you know, the sidewalks on both sides, you could walk where you wanted to go, and they knew all their neighbors and everybody was close, and it was, of course, the town was segregated so everybody on the street was, was black at the--and I think that part of town is still predominantly African American. Speaker 1: Did you know your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: No I didn't. They were, they were all deceased by the time I came around. As a matter of fact, my grandfather, my mother's father died in 1960, I was two years old when he died so I never knew him. So I just heard, you know, stories about, about him and his ideas about the help he was able to give my mom [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] with her school work even though he hadn't been to school and, of course, they talk about what his attitudes were like when they were dating and, the, you know, the funny things he would say about predicting whether or not boyfriends would be good prospects. As a matter of fact, he did meet my, my Aunt Dot's [ph.] husband, my Uncle George [ph.], and thought a lot of him at the time but, you know, he was never far away when boys would come over and would, would be in the next room when a boy might come over to try to see them, and was just a very kind of, had a dry sense of humor, was not a very jovial person but was loving in a kind of stern, just a very strong, strong man with a kind of stern disposition, not really a funny person. Speaker 1: And, and what did you say he did for a living? Speaker 2: He worked at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. He was a postal worker. He didn't, he didn't, he wasn't a mailman but he did everything, anything that needed to be fixed or anything that needed to be worked on, he did it at the post office. My mother used to joke, her best friend, their family had a pharmacy and, you know, they used to joke and say that this girl's father owned the drugstore and my mom used to joke and say that her father owned a post office because he was ev- he was Mr. Everything at the post office, not knowing that he had only had a sixth grade education but he, he was a very important person to the post office there in Rock Hill. Speaker 1: Do you know anything about whether they owned the land that they lived on? Speaker 2: They did their own. They owned their home. Speaker 1: Do you know how they acquired the land? Speaker 2: Well, they, they purchased their house. They both had saved and they were able to buy their house. My, my grandfather was older, a little bit older than my grandmother at the time and I think, I don't know what, how they met, what the circumstances were, but they, I know my mother was born in that house in 1931 and it was their house. Story_ID: 495186 Speaker 1: Your [maternal] grandmother [Emmalee Williams Reid], because you, you knew her well-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --did she ever tell any stories about her parents or about slave- anyone being in slavery or interracial marriages in the family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, not about that 'cause she didn't go back that far. She was born in 1901 and so her, her, her mother was born, I think, around the 1870s. Her mother was a very interesting woman. Her name was Georgia, G-E-O-R-G-I-A, Williams, and she, well, her maiden name was Holley, H-O-L-L-E-Y, Georgia Holley Williams, and I don't know the circumstances under which she met her husband, who was George Williams, but they were married and had five children. They had, my grandmother was the oldest and then she had three brothers and then a younger sister and my great-grandfather was an insurance salesman. He didn't make a whole lot of money doing that. When he died, there was not enough money for the family and so she moved to New York [New York] and became a domestic for a family that was in New York that used to spend half the year in New York and the other half of the year in San Francisco [California]. And so my grandmother was really left at a very, very early age to raise her brothers and sister and, you know, she really, I think, was, was her childhood was pretty much cut short. I'm sure she was a teenager. So she really was making sure that they got on and did what they were supposed to do because her father was gone and really she, her mother would send money home for them, but she pretty much raised her brothers and sister. And they did very well. Everybody went to college. She ended up going to college herself and--. But her mother was a very eccentric person. She was, she was very beautiful, she used, but she had dark, straight hair and when she would come, she dressed very stylishly and she had been, of course, in New York and San Francisco so my mother and my aunt just thought it was fabulous whenever she would come to visit. She changed her name to Claudia "C.B." Williams. We don't know where that came from. Her name was Georgia Williams, but she became Claudia in her other life, and the family would spend part of the year, as I said, in New York and so she was a friend, a, a fan of the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], but they spent the other part of the year in San Francisco. I think they must have spent the winters in San Francisco and then the summers in New York because she was following the Dodgers, but they would go back and forth and really, later in life, we, I asked, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] always thought there was some resentment between my mother--my grandmother and her mother because, you know, they didn't have a close relationship because she was gone and so she, my mother always had the impression that my grandmother resented her mother because of the life she lived and we talked about it just before my grandmother died and she said, no, she said, she never had any resent--she had resentment, she understood why her mother did that. She said, she was only upset because she never spent enough time, she just never had enough time to be close to her and so she would come, and she did eventually remarry a man who was also, worked for a family in California and we met him a couple of times after she died, and his name was Robert Williams [ph.], I believe, his la- name was Williams too. And he kept in touch with us until his death, but we were never close to him but all I can, all I know from her is that she was just a real source of curiosity when she would come, my mother and my aunt just thought she was fabulous because she was not like anybody else that they would see in Rock Hill [South Carolina], certainly by the way she dressed and, and the way she was having been in those kind of sophisticated cities and you just didn't see people like that in Calif- in South Carolina. Story_ID: 495187 Speaker 1: Tell me your father's name and spell it for me, and tell me where he was born? Speaker 2: Okay, his name is Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T, Miles, M-I-L-E-S, Davis [Albert Miles Davis], and he was born in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: He was born in 1918. Speaker 1: All right, tell me about your father. Speaker 2: Well, my father was born, he had an older brother, Edward [Edward Langston Davis, Jr.]. They are, I think, it's a five year difference in their ages. He was, his brother, Edward, was the overachiever in school. He did well in school, but he was not a great student. He went to school, was, he went to school, the Atlanta public school system. He went to Atlanta Lab High [Atlanta University Laboratory School, Atlanta, Georgia], which was a school under the Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], under Atlanta University at the time, and he finished Atlanta Lab High School. He was interested in sports, although he was not that big so he was not a great athlete, but my grandmother had been a teacher and became--his mother and her name was Lena Miles Davis, had been a teacher and a principal, Blandtown School, which is here in, was here in Atlanta, and so he grew up--she was very strict and did not, could not, did not have the ability to stray very far from whatever rules she imposed. She was very strong-willed. So he was just kind of plodding along, growing up, and, of course, in segregated Atlanta. He was a Boy Scout and that was a big activity for him and it's funny because he would talk about the places that they would go and hike. He grew up on Fair Street in Atlanta, which is a block down the street from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and they used to have Boy Scout meetings at places that appeared to be very remote. Of course, when we talk about it now, they were a block from where we ended up living and we moved about, maybe five miles from the location where he grew up and so, of course, it was--Atlanta's grown since then. But Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] were a big activity for him growing up. And, as I said, he finished public schools in Atlanta Lab High School and he went to Morehouse College and tried to be, wanted to be an athlete at Morehouse, was very interested in sports his whole life. He played tennis and was a tennis champion. He used to say he was the ham champion, and I didn't understand what that meant. A ham just meant amateur champion but with my, the younger years, I didn't know what he meant, I just knew he was the ham champion but it meant that he was some, an amateur tennis champion. He tried to play basketball, of course, he was not tall. He was 5'9" so he wasn't big enough to play basketball but when he tried, they gave him the nickname Duck Davis 'cause he was so short, they thought he looked like a duck. He was not on a team at Morehouse 'cause he wasn't good enough to do that, but I think he thought in his mind that he wanted to be a coach and that was really what he thought he might be able to do after graduating from Morehouse. Story_ID: 495188 Speaker 1: Of course, I said my [paternal] grandmother [Lena Miles Davis] was strong-willed and had something totally different in mind and she thought that he should be an undertaker. She thought that, she had one son, my, my Uncle Dave, that, the Edward [Edward Langston Davis, Jr.] that I spoke of, his name was Dave, who she had on a path to be a doctor and, and he had the aptitude, did well in school, just was a great student and went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] as well, several years before my dad [Albert Miles Davis]. So he was on the path to being a doctor. She didn't see that in my dad but she thought that he would make a good living 'cause at the time, black people, there were several, several careers that you could have where you were guaranteed to make a good bit of money and, of course, being a doctor was one. There were not very many lawyers, of course, and black lawyers in Atlanta [Georgia] at the time, but there would always be a need for an undertaker and she thought that he would make a good living doing that. He was exposed to some people at Morehouse, though, who put him on a path to being pre-med and, of course, he did well enough at Morehouse to get, to major in biology and graduated from Morehouse with a B.S. in biology and eventually went to Howard medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and, of course he got to Howard and was struggling again, just did not--had to travel to the North, you know, he had, had not had a lot of exposure in traveling as well and there were times when my grandmother would go and visit, she had relatives in Yonkers, New York. And he always, she would leave him at home and wouldn't take him in the car. They would travel in their car and drive to Yonkers and, you know, the roads were not good then, I don't know what kind of car they had because this had to be in the '20s [1920s] and really, I think, it was difficult for them to take a child on a long visit, a car ride like that, and I believe that's pretty much why they left him at home but he took it as a personal insult that he could never go on the long trips. And so, when he went to Howard, which was really his first trip out of town, so he was in that environment, thrust into medical school and did not know how in the world he was going to make it and, fortunately, he befriended some people who seemed to float through Morehouse effortlessly--through Howard effortlessly and they helped pull him through and, of course, he would like to minimize how smart he was but, you know, he had the aptitude to do it. He finished More- Howard medical school and did very well. Speaker 2: What did your grandmother feel about him not becoming an undertaker? Speaker 1: Well, you know, she, she thought, she didn't have, I think, the vision to think that he could do that. Of course, when she saw he was on that path, she was-- Speaker 2: It didn't matter? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, she was, she was very happy. She had the idea though that, and I don't know where she got this from, there was a McGill University in, I think it's in Montreal, it's in Canada, and that was, she had thought that the two of them would, that her, both of her sons would go to McGill. McGill is a, I think, it's not a school that anybody would, would see as a path from Fair Street to even to Morehouse to McGill, but she had in her mind that they would be going to McGill once they were on that path, and I don't know if they didn't get into McGill, but I know that was where she thought they should go but she was very happy that he was able to go to medical school (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, both, both him and his brother went to Howard? Speaker 1: They both went to Howard, to medical school. Story_ID: 495189 Speaker 1: He had to give up his, his real aspiration of being a coach, which is something he really still wanted to do. But he, he has, my dad [Albert Miles Davis] really has the kind of, had the kind of personality and feeling for people that really made him perfect to be a physician. He, at the time, you know as I said, he made it through, he did very well in medical school and graduated in 1938, '38 [1938] from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and then '42 [1942] from Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and then he enlisted in the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 2: What was his specialty? Speaker 1: He was in internal medicine. Speaker 2: Internal medicine. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And then he enlisted in the Army? Speaker 1: He was in the Army during World War II [WWII] and he was in the Army from, I think, 1942 to 1945. Speaker 2: And was he a medic? Speaker 1: He was, he was a medic and the troops were segregated at the time. So he was a doctor for the black troops that served in World War II and he was in, stationed in Italy, in Turin, Italy, and also in Germany and, you know, that was the, of course, the first time he'd been that far away from home and you know he--of course my grandmother [Lena Miles Davis], he took pictures and documented everything. She made a scrapbook of his experience and he, it was a, just a horrible experience because you're going through a war and you're being exposed to all of that but it was an op- eye-opening experience just to be in Europe and to see all these sights and to be exposed to that kind of, another kind of lifestyle. But he was, he was a doctor in the Army and did serve overseas. There was a time when he was stationed in Arizona, and he spent, I guess his basic training in Arizona before he went there, and that was another experience where he was, of course, trained with black troops in Phoenix, Arizona before he went to Europe. Story_ID: 495190 Speaker 1: So you were talking about your father [Albert Miles Davis] in, in Arizona, in the [U.S.] military (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think they did their basic training in Arizona and at one point I think Lena Horne and Ethel Waters came to en- to entertain the troops and, of course, they stayed beyond the time when they should have stayed and they had to help them get back to California. It was some clandestine trip to, and effort to try to get them back to California. They were left there by whoever brought them there and, of course, later in life, some fifty years later, when Lena Horne comes to visit Atlanta [Georgia], my dad is called upon to be her doctor and she, when she has health concerns and he is so, of course during that era, most black men were enamored with Lena Horne. But he met her later in life and was too proud and too--. He knew that she would be embarrassed if somebody reminded her of the story when she was left in Arizona and couldn't get back and even later in life, he was just kind of so, felt so, such empathy for her that he didn't want to embarrass her by telling, he was one of the ones that helped her get back to California. He, he admired her so much even, even later in life. Story_ID: 495191 Speaker 1: Now, before we go forward with the rest of the story about how your mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] and father [Albert Miles Davis] met, we missed your [paternal] grandfather's name. Lena Miles Davis was your grandmother and what was your grandfather's name? You told me that he worked at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --but what was his name? Speaker 2: He was a letter carrier. His name was Edward Davis [Edward Langston Davis, Sr.]. His name was Eddie Davis on most forms that we see, but at some point he got this full name, Edward Langston Davis, and I suspect that the Langston and the Edward came from my grandmother. She was, as I said, very strong-willed. Her mother, Lena, Anna Lena Harris [Anna Miles] was her maiden name, was very sophisticated even though she was probably born into slavery. We're not sure because my grandmother di- would not give us the proper dates to be able to tell how old she was and how old her mother was but if you calculate back, my grandmother was born in 18--Anna Lena Miles was born in, in 1886. My grandfather was born in 1883, that's Edward Davis. If you go back, then her mother had to have been when she was about twenty, may have been about twenty years old, she was born at some point towards the end of slavery, or either in slavery. Speaker 1: And what was her mother's name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then--her name was Anna Lena Harris and she married a Miles [Albert Miles]. On the other side, my grandfather, Edward Davis, we think he was Eddie Davis, but his mother's name was Susan Morgan [ph.] and she was in, at some point, was in Sparta, Georgia, 'cause my grandfather was born in Sparta, Georgia. His father's name was Franklin Little [Franklin Lightfoot Little]. Franklin Little was a white judge in Hancock County [Georgia], that's Sparta, Georgia, and Susan Morgan, or Suzie Davis [ph.], pictures of her indicate that she was African American, had not been the product of any biracial relationships. She appeared to be an African. Her parents, I know their names, but I really don't know where they were. I don't know where she was born, but at some point she found herself in Hancock County, in Sparta, and was involved in some way with this judge and had two children by this judge and I have researched his family. He was married and had many children with his wife, but he did see to it that Suzie Morgan was cared for, and eventually, when my grandfather was about six years old, moved Suzie and my grandfather, who was Eddie, and his brother, Charlie [ph.], to Atlanta [Georgia] and they came to Atlanta somewhere between 1890 and 1900 and they were living in an area of town that's very close to the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. She was a laundress, it's what it says, how it's listed in the census records and so she used to wash clothes but she, he, Judge Little, was very close to Mr. Rich, who was the founder of Rich's Department Store [M. Rich and Co.; Rich's Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia], who was a very prominent person at the time. And all through my grandfather's life, if they ever needed anything or needed any help, there were always instructions to call Mr. Rich and he would take care of it. And for a while, I think, they did live, when they first came to Atlanta, they lived in this--Morris Rich is, is the person that they spoke to who founded Rich's. They may have lived in the Riches' home on Pryor Street, which is downtown, very close to where Rich's Department Store was in downtown Atlanta and then eventually they moved to the area near the Atlanta University Center, which is where she lived until she got too old to live on her own and she moved in with the family. And so my grandfather also, he went to the sixth grade in school. He went to, at the time, it was Spring Street School [Spring Street Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], and then he became a mailman and worked as a mailman all of his adult life until he retired and I think he must have retired at some point in the '50s [1950s], having had a full career as a mailman, very soft-spoken man, never, my father said, never raised his voice. The only time he ever got angry was one morning when my grandmother changed his cereal and he didn't speak to her as a result of that but my dad said he never remembered my, my grandfather being angry. He was just a very mild-mannered, very sweet man, very, would get up every morning, go to work; never missed a day at work. My grandmother was the strong-willed, very driven person who saw, saw great things in her children and also expected a lot of the students that she taught and he, he lived and died in 1975, lived a very long life. Story_ID: 495192 Speaker 1: Let's continue the story about how your mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] and father [Albert Miles Davis] met. Speaker 2: Okay. Of course after my dad got out of the [U.S.] Army, he moved back to Atlanta [Georgia] and his best friend was a physician, Dr. Richard Hackney [Richard C. Hackney], kind of took him under his wings and he opened up his medical practice in a building on Auburn Avenue. And he was married shortly after he was released from the Army and that marriage ended after several years. They had two children [Julia-Ellen Davis and Vicki Davis], and his first wife [Bernice Craft DeCosta Davis] moved to Charleston [South Carolina]. So he was in Atlanta by himself and was an eligible bachelor. I've heard from, from women that I've met since then that he was very eligible and that everybody was inquiring about him. But Dr. Hackney met my mother in Charlotte [North Carolina] just by chance and thought that she would be a pick for him. And so he hired her and had her to come and work in the drugstore, which was downstairs from my father's office. And so, of course, when he met her, he was immediately attracted to her and could not stay out of the drugstore. He was there all the time, could barely, could see his patients for always running down to spend time with her. And they dated. At, in Atlanta at the time, there were not a lot of places to go. There were a few drive-ins so they would go to the drive-in and, but that was, there was not a whole lot of things to see and do at the time but, you know, eventually they fell in love and got married and they got married in 1957. Speaker 1: Now where did they set up house in 1957 after they got married (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, well, they, on Fair Street, my grandparents [Lena Miles Davis and Edward Langston Davis, Sr.] and my father had grown up on, on Fair Street, one block down from Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and actually my grandfather built that house and then also built the house next door and that's the house where my dad had lived with his first wife and that's where, when his first wife moved to Charleston, my dad stayed there and that's where my mother moved when they got married. Story_ID: 495193 Speaker 1: You were born in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-eight [1958]. I was born the following year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A year? A year. And how many siblings do you have? Speaker 2: I have, of course, two half-sisters from my dad's [Albert Miles Davis] first marriage [to Bernice Craft DeCosta Davis], and I have a younger sister, Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart], who was born in 1964. Speaker 1: And what are, what are your two half-sisters names? Speaker 2: They are Julia-Ellen Craft Davis [Julia-Ellen Davis], she was born in 1949, and then my sister Vicki Lorraine Davis [Vicki Davis] was born in 1950. So there's a nine year and eight year age difference between us. Speaker 1: Your mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] and father are about thirteen years apart. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did her mother [Emmalee Williams Reid] have anything to say about her dating an older man? Speaker 2: Oh, well, my grandfather [Carl Reid] had been older than she was and so she was very concerned and, of course, at the time, as I said, my grandfather died in 1960. And so about the time they got married, my grandfather had been getting, was ill and she was a younger woman and was taking care of her ill husband. So she saw that fate for my mother and was very concerned about it but, you know, you can't tell people who to love, and despite her warning, you know, my mother didn't see that at the time. And so she went ahead despite my grandmother's concerns, but my dad was very charming and when she met him, I think her, maybe her reservations were kind of set aside. I mean, she always had that concern throughout their marriage, but my dad was very charming and was very attentive to her and they loved each other. And so, she didn't have those concerns as she expressed after they were married. Story_ID: 495194 Speaker 1: You're born in, in 1958 and moving ahead a little bit, I want you to think about what your earliest childhood memory would be? Speaker 2: Well, I was born, my dad [Albert Miles Davis] was a physician, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] was a housewife and I guess my earliest memories were of birthday parties, significant events like that. I, I remember, my first memory, of course, was going, birthday party and I think going to see 'Mary Poppins' with a group of friends. The first movie I ever saw, I don't, of course I'm a, I'm a movie buff, I think the first movie I ever saw was 'Bye Bye Birdie,' and I think that may have been 1965 [sic. 1963]. So, it's of events like the birthday parties and having friends around and we lived on, at the house on Fair Street [Atlanta, Georgia] for two years, and then my parents built a house in Collier Heights, which is an area of Atlanta [Georgia] that was settled primarily by people who had been veterans of World War II [WWII] and it was the first neighborhood that was planned and developed by black people in Atlanta. It was an area that had never been developed before so the houses were all brand new, a very modern community and that's where we moved, I think, in 1960. And so, everybody that moved to the neighborhood had been friends and everybody had, at that point, had a child my age. So we were all very close, we did ever- played every day together, it was a very close community and we stayed close and we're still close even now. So I, I have great memories of, of summers, outside playing with my friends in the neighborhood and of, of just having a good time ever- every day outside playing with them. Story_ID: 495195 Speaker 1: Collier Heights, tell me where is it located? Speaker 2: Collier Heights is in northwest Atlanta [Georgia]. It's in the area between what would be Bankhead Highway, which is Donald Lee Hollowell [Parkway] and Hightower Road and near, and I-20 [Interstate 20] and it's an area, northwest Atlanta--it's often mistaken for southwest Atlanta but it isn't, an area northwest Atlanta that was developed in the late '50s [1950s] and early '60s [1960s] by black people. Speaker 1: Okay, so give me a description of your neighborhood. Who lived in the neighborhood? Did you have, who were the merchants and your friends and what did their parents do? Can you tell us about that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my neighbor across the street was a dentist, [HistoryMaker] Dr. Harvey Smith. He had three children, Jane [Jane Smith] and Harvey [Harvey Smith, III; Ahmid Karim] were much older, and they had a son, Homer [Homer Smith], who was two years older than I was and he was one of my best friends. His wife [Lavada Johnson Smith] was a teacher at the time and then across, next door to them, my very best friend, was Patricia Shropshire, her father [William Bruce Shropshire] was a dentist, her mother [Miriam Chivers] was a pediatrician. So we had people who were contemporaries of my parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis] who lived around us. Another neighbor was Georgia Nelle Dickens [HistoryMaker Georgia Dickens] who was a teacher and her husband [Robert D. Dickens], I'm not sure what his occupation was, they had a son who was older. Next to, on one side of us there was an architect, Charles Bryant at Lockheed [Lockheed Aircraft Company; Lockheed Martin Corporation], his wife [Elizabeth Bryant] was a teacher and they had a daughter, Michelle [ph.]. And so, Mickey, Michelle, was about three years older than I was, Homer was two years older and Patricia was a year older and we were inseparable, and we did, we were the The Supremes. Every day when we'd come home and sing, I was Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Wilson] and Mickey was Diana [Diana Ross] and Tricia was Florence [HistoryMaker Florence LaRue] and Homer was [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy and we performed at home and, and just played together all through until we got, we all started going to high school and, you know, every- as you get older, you start getting involved in your own activities. Story_ID: 495196 Speaker 1: About the neighborhood [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia], where did you shop and who owned the grocery stores and the candy stores in the neighborhood (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's a totally, I don't know if you unders- Atlanta [Georgia] is, the way that Atlanta's planned, there are large residential communities but not a lot of commercial development. So we would still, we would have to travel some distance to go to the store. Of course, we shopped, at that point, we shopped downtown. There was a Rich's [Rich's Department Store] downtown which was the main store in Atlanta, and in the early '60s [1960s], Rich's was segregated. It wasn't until, during the area, the era of time when there were sit-ins at lunch counters that Rich's was desegregated and, of course, my father [Albert Miles Davis] was president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in the mid-'60s [1960s] but had been involved in the desegregation of Rich's as a physician. There were a group of physicians who got together and they were involved in all the protests that were happening at the time. The real impetus was, of course, the efforts of students at the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] who were sitting in at public lunch counters and then the activities spread to Rich's, which was the major department store, it had a restaurant, the Magnolia Room, and there was, the minister [Samuel Woodrow Williams] of my dad's church, Friendship Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], was involved in the NAACP and they, they organized sit-ins at Rich's, and picketed Rich's and my dad was a part of the group that picketed outside and protested at Rich's until they finally (background noise) had enough pressure. Black people stopped shopping there. There was one Christmas where black, black people boycotted Rich's and it crippled them. We didn't shop at Rich's even, you know, when you take pictures, normally everybody would, at that era, would take pictures with Santa Claus at Rich's. Well, we didn't take pictures with Santa Claus at Rich's. We really boycotted Rich's during that time, and it, it brought enough pressure on Rich's that they finally succumbed and decided to desegregate and then, you know, every- Rich's was the place where everybody shopped. Story_ID: 495197 Speaker 1: The grocery store was some distance away, of course that was Kroger [The Kroger Company] and we, we always had to travel at least, there was nothing in the neighborhood [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia] 'cause it was a purely residential area (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Residential-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and it was a professional neighborhood, of professionals? Speaker 1: Yes, it was, it was. It was middle, but a middle class neighborhood, you know. At that time, I mean, I guess my parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis] were successful and there was some degree of success because my dad was a doctor and was very successful as a physician but pretty much everybody in the neighborhood had two parents working so there was a good amount of, of income in everybody's household and everybody's yard was always well kept. It was a matter of pride in, in our neighborhood that the whole area was like that, that everybody worked. And at the time, you know, in, you know, of course, our society did not see homeless people like we see them now until the '80s [1980s]. So, it was a period of time in Atlanta [Georgia] where everybody--Atlanta's always been a place where people can do well, can come to Atlanta and, and make something of themselves, and so that community had a lot of people who did well. Around the corner from us, [HistoryMaker] Herman Russell lived who started out as a, with a construction company [H.J. Russell and Company, Atlanta, Georgia] and, of course, has been Atlanta's probably most pre-eminent black, multimillionaire. He was a neighbor of ours. There were other doctors who lived on our street and around the area and then, of course, there were, there was a professor from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] who lived around the corner, and on another street, Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] lived with his family, but it was just a neighborhood of, of working people and people who had done well in their careers, and were raising their families. Story_ID: 495198 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend? Speaker 2: Well I went to St. Paul of the Cross [St. Paul of the Cross Catholic School, Atlanta, Georgia], which is a Catholic school. It was the school that was associated with the, with our church. My mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] converted to Catholicism when she went to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], and so I was raised Catholic and when my dad [Albert Miles Davis] maintained his membership at Friendship Baptist Church, which was probably the oldest, I think it is the oldest black church in Atlanta [Georgia], it was the church where Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] was founded and it's still near the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. But we attended St. Paul of the Cross [St. Paul of the Cross Catholic Church, Atlanta, Georgia], and that's where I went to elementary school, from first grade to seventh grade. And it was, we were taught by nuns and by lay teachers that were recruited to teach there. Speaker 1: All the nuns were white? Speaker 2: They were. Speaker 1: What about the lay teachers? Speaker 2: They were all black, except one year we had a, a white woman who came from Massachusetts to teach us in the sixth grade, but pretty much all the teachers were, were black. Speaker 1: What type of student were you? Speaker 2: I got good grades. I was expected to get good grades and, of course, when my grandmother [Emmalee Williams Reid], being a teacher, you know, she expected out of me and, and I was a good student in school, mostly A's. Speaker 1: And tell me about any organizations that you belonged to or student government or anything in the elementary school realm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at that time, you know, we didn't have the first and seventh grade, you were just going, doing your schoolwork. I used to take, of course, following mother's footsteps and took piano lessons, was taking ballet at the time, so she had other activities for us to participate in at school. I used to be a member of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]. Of course I had those activities to do once a month that was separate and apart from school, and, of course, that was kind of an enrichment program for us because there were other activities. We would go to plays and have social gatherings and there was always some activity planned once a month. Going out to dinner, of course it was charm school and all kinds of things that happened in Jack and Jill and, of course, I did that from, you know, as a young child all the way through to when I graduated from high school [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. But, you know, it was during the time in the, in our country when it was during desegregation. So, it was interesting that during the time, I guess when I started elementary school in 1964, it was during the period of time where, in Alabama, particularly when all of the sit-ins were occurring and Freedom Riders were coming down to protest in Mississippi and, you know, during those periods of time, whenever you would come to watch the news, you would see all the stories of, you know, children in Alabama. We were very affected by that at the time, and I can recall going to school after seeing documentaries on television about, you know, children being hosed and being extremely angry when I come back to school and we would have white teachers that I just knew could not understand what was going on and that we felt empathy with them, and even though I lived in a totally black environment, those were the only white people I was ever exposed to. The priests were white and the nuns were white. I kind of felt that they embodied the same values as the people that were in Alabama not knowing that these people had come and were working amongst us and empathized with everything we were feeling. Of course they wouldn't have been there if they were not the kind of people who understood the context of all of that and were people who were extraordinary to come and work in the South. They most, most of all the nuns and the priests were from the North, and they come down here specifically to work amongst black people, but I just didn't see that at the time. And I can recall when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died, and that was in '68 [1968], I think I was, I was ten years old, and my mother took me, his body was in state at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] and we, it rained the day we stood in line all day long to see Dr. King's body and I had one of Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] light bulb moments. As we were leaving the chapel having seen his body, the principal of our school, Sister Mary [ph.], was in the chapel and she had been kneeling there and her face was red but she had been crying and it was at that moment that I realized that, you know, Sister Mary wasn't like the other white people that I saw on television. I mean, she was somebody who could understand and was as sad as I was and that was really a moment for me because I just had not been around a lot of white people and had not known that they were not all the same. And from that, that really changed seeing Sister Mary in that state, really changed my perception of things because we grew up in, around black people all the time. I never saw white people except for on television. So that that was really a, a big moment for me to see her in that state. Story_ID: 495199 Speaker 1: Now your father [Albert Miles Davis] was very much involved also. Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What else was he involved in? Speaker 2: Well he always had a meeting to go to. He was always organizing something. At some point during the '60s [1960s], he was president of the Atlanta chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and it was during a period of time after desegregation, the laws that passed or the, the [U.S.] Supreme Court had ordered that hotels and all public accommodations be desegregated. And so the NAACP was not involved in sit-ins at the time, but they, the big thing was registering to vote because the voting rights bill [Voting Rights Act of 1965] had been passed. And by and large, black people had been voting in Atlanta [Georgia], but there had been impediments to their voting. So their big thing was registering people to vote and also getting the NAACP on good financial footing so that they could move forward to do those type of voter registration activities. So his big thing was raising money and re- and making sure that people were registering to vote. At the time too, though, there was an effort, and hospitals were still desegregated; public accommodations were, were, were not to be segregated anymore, that's hotels and restaurants and bus stations, but hospitals were still segregated. So he was involved in a group with other physicians called the Doctors' Committee on Implementation [sic. Doctors' Committee for Implementation], and the group of them got together and documented the, the differences, deficiencies between what was being offered in black hospitals and white hospitals and there was a study done just of the local hospitals first and then across the country and they presented their findings, this group, presented their findings to the secretary of health, education and welfare, and it led to the desegregation of all hospitals in America. And he was chair of that committee at one point in time, at the time in which they presented their findings and it was a great victory for them and for everybody because, you know, of course that led to open healthcare. The other side of that, though, was Atlanta had some very well-established black hospitals at the time, and, of course, when, when the hospitals were desegregated, people went away from those hospitals and then they were not able to exist anymore. So-- Speaker 1: What were some of the black hospitals in Atlanta? Speaker 2: Well, there was Harris Hospital [William A. Harris Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia], it's a small hospital on Martin Luther King [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive]. McLendon Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia] was--and both of those hospitals are named for the doctors, I think, that were instrumental in their founding. There was a Dr. J.B. Harris, it was Harris Hospital. McLendon Hospital was the hospital where they worked and that was founded by a Dr. F. Earl McLendon [Frederick Earl McLendon], he was a prominent physician here at the time. That was further down, it's actually the hospital where I was born. And then Hughes Spalding [Hughes Spalding Children's Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia], at the time, was a hospital, though it was not named for an African American, it was the, the black hospital. If you could pay, if you had insurance and it was a pay hospital, of course, Grady [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] was still there for indigent care. But those where the hospitals that he, where he, my dad practiced at the time. He never practiced at Grady. It was primarily those three hospitals. And then in the '60s [1960s], Holy Family Hospital [Atlanta, Georgia] opened up by a group of nuns, and eventually that hospital became the hospital for southwest Atlanta and it was Southwest Hospital [Southwest Atlanta Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia], and that was the, pretty much the major hospital at that point for black people in town and, of course, you know, Southwest just ceased to exist maybe about ten years ago, yeah, well, it really started kind of falling apart maybe about ten years ago when it was very difficult to stay open and-- Speaker 1: It actually closed and then opened again with a group of doctors. Speaker 2: Very, very briefly-- Speaker 1: Briefly. Speaker 2: --but it never, you know, returned to the-- Speaker 1: Full capacity. Speaker 2: --having the population that it had at, at the time and, of course, it had at its heyday but those were the hospitals, between Hughes Spalding and Southwest, those were the hospitals where my dad practiced. Story_ID: 495200 Speaker 1: In Catholic school, were there any nuns or lay teachers who might have influenced you or encouraged you during that time? Speaker 2: Well in first grade, there was a Sister Stephen [ph.]. Let, let me say, before we went to, it just occurred to me before I went to--. I started in the first grade at St. Paul of the Cross [St. Paul of the Cross Catholic School, Atlanta, Georgia], but before that I had gone to preschool and there was a lady named Annie Lou Hendricks who had a preschool in her home. She had taught my father [Albert Miles Davis] in high school [Atlanta University Laboratory School, Atlanta, Georgia] forty years before that and had, had been a teacher in the high school. I think she was a new teacher when she taught him in high school and when she retired from teaching, she opened up a preschool in her home and she taught a lot of my friends, a lot of my parents' friends, we all went to her school. We learned how to read from Ms. Hendricks. We were prepared for first grade and I was probably ahead of the students in school, having been prepared by Ms. Hendricks. We would go to school in the morning at her house and, of course, she taught us to read, she taught us how to write, she taught us to read, reading bible stories. We had art class. We went on field trips, we did everything. Our mothers were the ones, most of our mothers, I guess, were housewives at the time and the mothers who were working sent their kids there and the mothers who were housewives were the ones who were the carpool drivers and also the parents who took us on fieldtrips. So, I was really prepared to go to St. Paul even though I had not been to kindergarten. And when I got there, my first teacher was Sister Stephen who was very pretty. Now at the time, you know, nuns would wear habits and so they were covered and you only saw their faces, but Sister Stephen was very young, had to be in her early thirties, had been very, very attractive and was just young and fun-loving, but she was extremely strict and she expected a lot out of me and for those types of teachers, I always wanted to do well. And so she made a lasting impression on me. And then when I got to the sixth grade, of course, we're, we're talking about the period after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and I had a teacher, a black male teacher, an older man, Mr. Thomas [ph.], and at that point in Atlanta [Georgia], the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] had moved into various areas of town and what I thought was important at the time was, was directing my rage somewhere that Black Panthers at the time spoke to me. And so we spent most of the year with Mr. Thomas every day in math class, talking about the Black Panthers. I was sulking, we never learned fractions, the whole, we would start out talking about math and somebody would get us off the subject and we talked about the Black Panthers every day, and I had such a concern about this even though I was interested in what we talked about and we talked about what they were doing, what they had done, what was in the news. At the time, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] were here in town, and there was a big incident where they had been flushed out of a house in an area northwest Atlanta called Dixie Hills, and the police had flushed them out of a house and there was a shooting and, of course, we were hearing about Black Panther activities and what spoke to us was the fact that they were proud and they would stand up to the police and that they, it felt like there was a way to direct our rage in feeling that Dr. King had been killed and, you know, there was nobody who was responding to it who was young other than the Black Panthers at the time. So we, we discussed that the whole year until finally I guess Mr. Thomas realized we had to get on with the curriculum but it seemed to me that we spent most of that year, my seventh grade year, talking about Black Panthers, so much so that that was my last year in elementary school. I went to high school at Northside High School [North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia] the next year and I was terrified that I would start math in eighth grade and would be asked to do fractions and would not know, would not know how to, how to deal with fractions. Story_ID: 495201 Speaker 1: Well, I want to ask you about your, your concern, you know, talking about the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] and Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death. What were your, your feelings? Why did you have so much, because you were so young, so much anger about Dr. King and his death? Was it things that were talked about at home and you really understood what was going on and what it meant? Speaker 2: Well I understood what nonviolence meant and I understood that the people who were protesting at that time were pledged to being nonviolent, and they stood there and sacrificed themselves and were in that arena to show the world that they were standing up, they were right and they were willing to put their selves, themselves on the line for what they believed in and I, you know, that night when we saw Dr. King's last speech and he said he'd been to the mountaintop [I've Been to the Mountaintop], I mean it was, the fact that he had put himself out there for garbage workers and had had a vision, we thought that he was not going to make it. And the fact that he would be shot down and had put himself at such risk really meant a lot to me and for that to happen and, you know, that were riots all over America, everybody was angry, didn't know where to channel their anger and it just so happened that I just learned about the Black Panthers, knew what they were doing, knew that they really ascribed more to what they thought was Malcolm X's philosophy, rather than Dr. King's philosophy because they didn't necessarily believe in nonviolence, they believed in protecting themselves and arming themselves and showing that they could stand up to authority, and that's was what appealed to me at the time. Little did I know though that my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis], and I was in--the Catholic school [St. Paul of the Cross Catholic School, Atlanta, Georgia] that I was in was all black, our church [St. Paul of the Cross Catholic Church, Atlanta, Georgia] was all black, I thought that since I was going to go to public schools in Atlanta [Georgia], public high school started in the eighth grade, and so she had decided that I was going to go to a public high school. And she did not put me in the public high school in my neighborhood, which would have been an all-black school. She decided that I was going to be one of the people who was going to integrate Northside High School [North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia], which was predominantly white. And at the time, Atlanta did not, only had the four white high schools, and they had a program, their program for integration was a voluntary program, it was M-to-M [Majority-to-Minority] program so that you could transfer to a school where you would be in the minority and they would provide transportation for you to go to those schools, and they encouraged integration that way. We didn't have mandatory busing in the City of Atlanta, that's how schools were desegregated. So, she decided that I was going to go to Northside High School, which was in northwest Atlanta but it was some, maybe fifteen miles away from my home, in Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia], which is the prominent, predominantly white area of town, you know, upper middle class, upper class income level and so that's where she put me and at the time when I started going to Northside, it still was not, it wasn't like the, the pictures you see on television where these few children are getting and going in and they're the minority at--. We had a whole, my whole neighborhood ended up going to Northside. All my neighbors went to Northside so we had buses from there at Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia] where I was, we had enough to fill a bus. And so we all went to Northside. There were, there were a few people, quite a few people who were left to go to Douglass High School [Frederick Douglass High School, Atlanta, Georgia], which was the school in my area but there were a great number of us who traveled on the bus in the morning to Northside, in southwest Atlanta was enough to fill two or three buses. So when we got to Northside, we were probably, maybe 30 to 40 percent of the student body. So it was not a total culture shock, but it was much different. Story_ID: 495202 Speaker 1: The high school's a public high school, it had resources that my school [St. Paul of the Cross Catholic School, Atlanta, Georgia] didn't have. I mean, to go into a school and everybody's got books and construction paper and just all the supplies, was just amazing to me and although our school was, it was a private school, but they were very thrifty with their resources in elementary school so Northside [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia] was a big time school for me. And at the time, of course, I, I had known some of the kids prior to going to school so those were my first friends at Northside, but then I had my first white friends at, at Northside. I had had the experience in, during the summers, of going to camp, going to YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] camp. So it wasn't that I had, was totally secluded from, from white kids at the time. For about four summers, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] had me to go for, to YWCA camp and the camp was called Camp Highland and I thought I had really gone away to camp. It ended up being maybe about five miles from my house, in an area, Cobb County [Georgia], which is really nowhere from my house now, but it felt like we had gone some distance. And, of course, I was in those situations, I was possibly the only black person in my, in my cabin, and I would be there for a week. The first time I went I think I was probably eight or nine years old, and, you know, that was, it just seemed to me that it was a situation she threw me into. I kind of befriended the people, but kind of stayed to myself because I just--it was a new experience, being away from home. That was the first time I'd been away from home and it was only a week. One of the major concerns was being away from home and, you know, figuring out what to do with your hair 'cause you're going to go swimming every day and, and, of course, there was nobody there in the cabin who could help you with that. So by the end of the week, I was a mess, you know, had, trying to wash my own hair and get it done and, and looking presentable the next day, but it was, it was a good experience. I always liked going back, and I did that for about three or four years. So, by the time I got to Northside it wasn't as if I had never been exposed to white kids before. I had those experiences at camp, but I had never been, been friendly with white kids before because I'd never been around that length of time, you know, during school year, and there were--I did well in school and there were a group of girls who were with me who were from an area of town near West Wesley Drive, it's in an area close to Northside. There's an area where a lot of Jewish families live and they all did well in school and I befriended one of the girls, Robyn Firestone, and as a result, I became friends with all the Jewish girls and those were my first white friends at Northside. And then I was pretty much open to all kinds of activities. I just, I really, I don't know if you remember the, the show, 'Room 222.' Northside was a lot like that. It was all kinds of different people, all kinds of different personalities, you could do, you were encouraged to participate in all kinds of activities. I had taken piano lessons, but I had never played an instrument, and this was my first exposure to a marching band, so I decided I wanted to play the flute and became a part of the marching band. I ran for student government and won a position on the student council. So, I kind of started getting a reputation of running for everything. So every time there was an election, I ran for something. So it started out in the eighth grade, running for student council, and then, you know, I, I kind of became a social butterfly; I got to know everybody and I really enjoyed that experience. It was totally different from anything I envisioned going to high school and it was a great experience. Story_ID: 495203 Speaker 1: So you entered Northside [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1972? Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971]-- Speaker 1: In '71 [1971] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in eighth grade, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. And you mentioned one of your friends, Firestone [Robyn Firestone]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and is there a story behind her family? Speaker 2: Well, Robyn's family, her mother was a native Atlantan. She had a younger sister and a younger brother and she was just going to the school in her neighborhood, and Robyn is a very open-minded person. You know, she would always tell me she admired me and I never understood what that meant, but Robyn was very, very spiritual, very quiet person and as mu- as outgoing as I was, Robyn was reserved and I think she kind of liked the fact that I was more outgoing. But she was very smart and we saw, I guess the same kind of, I guess dedication to doing well in school and each other and just befriended each other, just because she was open and I was open at the time and I admire Robyn even to this day. We don't see each other very often, we're still friends. Speaker 1: What is the Atlanta Journal Cup [Atlanta Journal-Constitution Cup]? Speaker 2: That is the distinction, I think, the faculty votes you and you are the, if you are the top student, best all-around student in your senior class, and you know, at the time, I told you I had run for everything. All the teachers knew who I was. I had done well in school. I was in the band. I was student, had been, had run for student council president, did not win but had been the treasure--the secretary of my class every year. Been the president one year, was in just about every activity, so the teachers knew me. I'd done well in school and so they elected me the winner of the Journal Cup. Speaker 1: Was there a teacher or counselor who you remember as being influential to, to you or encouraging? Speaker 2: There was a teacher, Mr. Barnhart [ph.], who taught human biology. He taught the class like a college class. It was very difficult, very challenging and he had textbooks that he had used that were being used at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] to teach human biology. He posted our grades so that everybody knew where you were. If you were in the top ten in, not top 10 percent but one through ten, then you didn't have to take exams 'cause you, and so I was always struggling to do well in his class and he, if you didn't do well, if you didn't do as well as he thought you would do, he would call your parents and he would, you know, be checking back with your parents all the time. There was a period of time during--it was a year long class, so there was, the first semester I did really well, stayed in the top 10 percent. Because he was so demanding and I, it was a college, college level class and I wanted to do well because he just expected that of us and there was a point in the second semester where we were in a particularly difficult, I think it was circulatory system, where I slipped down. Of course, he called my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] and that was the last thing I wanted him to do and, you know, I worked hard, he helped me and, you know, I made it back up and he was, he is somebody that I, that I'll always remember as somebody who expected a lot. Had a very demanding class and at the time, I was, I thought I was interested in being a doctor. So, it was important for me to do well in human biology and it was something I was, we, that was the class where you got to dissect an animal and he had gotten these fetal pigs from some place so that was our animal that we would come and dissect. So it was a really good class. Story_ID: 495204 Speaker 1: Now how did you decide, because you knew you were on track to go to college, that was not a thought that you would go but who helped you to decide what school you would go to? Speaker 2: Well my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] had, I think, the feeling that I should go to school somewhere in the Northeast and she wanted me to go to a school where, a prestigious school, I think, she was thinking about Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]. She had encouraged me to apply to Radcliffe [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] which, at the time, it was a part of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] but Radcliffe was still a separate women's college and Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts] was a Catholic school in the Boston [Massachusetts] area and I think that was her idea of where I should go to school. I wanted to go to California and I did not have the same goal in mind at the time. I wanted to be on 'Soul Train.' And so I needed to get to California some kind of way and I knew that they would not let me just apply. I wanted to go to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] so badly. I was a sports fan. I inherited that from my dad [Albert Miles Davis]. You know, my dad was very dedicated to his profession. If we wanted to spend time with him, we had to do the things that he liked to do and the only thing he was really interested in is sports. So if it was in the summertime and we spent time with him, we were at a baseball game. If it was winter, we were at a football game or at a basketball game. So I inherited his love of sports. And during that time, the University of Southern California was, was one of the prominent schools in sports. So I really wanted to go to USC, it was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and, of course, that's where 'Soul Train' was taped, but I knew USC was not that great a school and I knew to justify to going to California, I had to find a school that would, would be on par with the schools that she had in mind for me, so that's why I picked Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. And that--I applied to Stanford, I applied to Boston College, as she encouraged, I applied to Harvard, to Radcliffe College, to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana], to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I got into all the schools, but I knew in my mind that I wanted to go to Stanford. And they were pushing for me to go to Harvard and wanted me to go someplace on the East Coast and really knew, and I didn't want to tell them for the longest time 'cause I didn't think they were going to let me go. I just, my dad would ask me every now, "Where you going to school?" And I just didn't want to say 'cause I didn't think they would let me go and one night I told them that I really wanted to go to Stanford, had not seen Stanford, had not seen any of these schools at that point, but I just had in my mind that I needed to be in California. And we had a family friend who lived in California and they called, did not know a lot about Stanford but that person, you know, just glowed about Stanford, it was a great school, you know, great environment, "She will be fine there, she'll be able to do whatever she wants to do. If she finishes Stanford, she can go anyplace." And they knew that that was where I wanted to be. So, you know, they finally decided that, you know, that's where I would go and so that's how I ended up at Stanford. Speaker 1: Why wasn't there any talk about Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] or any of the historically black colleges [HBCUs]? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had, I had really gone to, I had been in that environment my, my whole life. I had been in and around the Atlanta Univers- University Center [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], and I just knew that I wanted to get away from Atlanta [Georgia]. And I did not think about even, I knew, well there were no historically black colleges in California so, you know, that wasn't in my thinking (laughter) at the time, Stanford was it. That was the only thing that I was thinking about. Story_ID: 495205 Speaker 1: As a teenager, tell me more, before we go onto college, more about your high school days. What were some of the activities that you were involved in as a teenager? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: I mean, what music did you like to listen to? Speaker 2: Well, I, music is one of my loves, and during that period of time, during the '70s [1970s], you know, that was during the area of, of funk and a whole lot of, what's old school music, right now. So, of course at the time, it was the beginning of Parliament and Ohio Players and The Whispers and that was when I began my love of The Whispers and used to see The Whispers everywhere we went. One, even one night we found out that Whisp- we went on a family vacation to New York [New York], and I found out The Whispers were at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], and I had to be about fourteen or fifteen, and had my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] take me, my sister [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart], who was probably about six or seven, and my grandmother on the train from Manhattan [New York] up to Harlem [New York, New York] at eight o'clock at night to see The Whispers at the Apollo. I mean, I, I've had, I've always loved music even as a child, as I said earlier, The Supremes were my first love and I used to love James Brown and through the years music was, you know, was always a part of our lives and we would always go to concerts but, you know, The Whispers and then Parliament and, and Funkadelic was what I enjoyed (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you go to dances? Were you in a cotillion? Did you go to the prom? Speaker 2: Well we, at the time, you know, we didn't, I think the, I don't know who the group was that had a cotillion, but my mother didn't believe in being presented to Atlanta [Georgia]. She, she thought that, you know, that was kind of frivolous so, she didn't go for anything like that. You know, her, her whole goal was for me to do well in what I was doing. She had me in activities. She had me taking flute lessons. At that time, I still had a lot of activities at school [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia], student council activities, band practice all the time. She became the president of the band parents' association and we had band practice at night, even during football season we had it and then during the fall we would have fall concerts and then we would always go on a trip once a year that she would always chaperone. So I had those activities. At the time I was playing the flute, I played the flute in church. We used to have folk Mass on, I think one Sunday a month, we had a priest who was kind of different in that we had never had a priest who would come and encourage everybody to hug and speak to each other and sing every verse of every song. Our church was very regimented. I don't know if you know about the Catholic service, it's very organized, it's very predictable, you do this after this and you, you get out and everybody goes home. Well this priest that came in, we had several who would come in and encourage people to stay after church. If he was talking to one parishioner, he would grab another and say, "Do you know her?" And then people started kind of lingering behind church and getting to know each other and, you know, it was much different at St. Paul of the Cross [St. Paul of the Cross Catholic Church, Atlanta, Georgia] after, this is after Father Gregory [ph.] got there and started encouraging people to know each other. Well, he decided--he was very musical and decided that he wanted to have a folk mass and he found out I played the flute. So he used to have me come and play the flute and our church was very quiet and when you play this flute, it just seemed to just be extremely loud. If I made a mistake, you could just hear it glaring all over the church, and I felt like I was under a lot of pressure. Every Sunday I used to hate to do folk Mass but everybody told me they enjoyed it. So I guess afterwards, you know, I felt some sense of pride in having done it but we had me playing the flute, another friend of mine played the organ and several people played guitars and so we had music that we would prepare for each Mass, was ten o'clock on, I think one Sunday a month. So that was another thing. On, on Saturdays, I had to rehearse for folk Mass. Story_ID: 495206 Speaker 1: And then at the same time, there was a call out, there were several black radio stations in town. It was WAOK [WAOK Radio, Atlanta, Georgia], which was the big station everybody listened to and WIGO [WIGO Radio, Morrow, Georgia] was another black station. And WIGO had a high school reporter program and every school would have a high school reporter and for my junior and senior year, I became the high school reporter for Northside [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia], and that was a program that really got me thinking that, that maybe a medical career was not what I was interested in. And what we would do is we would have to do a report on our high school football games the Monday after the weekend. So you would prepare a report to, and you would tape it, a thirty minute spot to air on a broadcast on Monday night, and then on Saturday mornings we would go to the station and we would be involved in producing our own show for about two hours. And so we would pick the music, we would write the, the news program and we were in charge of all the technical things that had to be done to get the program on the air. We had some guidance from some people at the station, but they really turned the station over to us for about two hours. And then that expanded to us going over to Clark College [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time and going over to the mass communications program and learning how to do some television production and photography and learning how to develop pictures. So I really started thinking at that point that I really was not interested in a medical career, that I really wanted a career in broadcasting and I really became interested in that from my exposure with the high school reporter program, and that was, that was one of the fondest memories I have of activities in high school. Story_ID: 495207 Speaker 1: So you graduate what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-six [1976], which was the bicentennial year. Speaker 1: And, now had you been away from h- well, you did go to camp [Camp Highland, Georgia] for a week so you had been away from home before. But the experience going from a loving, nurturing black community [in Atlanta, Georgia] to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], what was that experience like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I, I had been on trips before. My mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] encouraged me to go on field trips from school. So there had been trips from school to go to Washington [D.C.]. It was a close up program and you go for a week and, and be exposed to meetings on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]. You'd meet your congressman and I had an experience. The hotel where we were staying was the Shoreham Hotel [Omni Shoreham Hotel, Washington, D.C.] and at the time, Vice President Agnew [Spiro Agnew], who was the vice president under President Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], actually lived, there was no residence for the vice president, he lived in the hotel and I knew he lived in, he lived in one wing of the hotel by himself and one night I waited until he came home and I was just sitting there, and he's a Republican, had no, no attraction to me politically at all, there's nothing we had in common, but I sat there and waited until he came home and when he came in, I walked right up to him and took a picture of him, which I have today. And so I, I got to meet the vice president on that trip, everybody else, we met our senator at the time and, of course, we met our congressman at the time, but, you know, that was a real coup. I, and I became exposed to Washington and, and loved Washington, loved being around Capitol Hill, so I really had, had that experience of going to Washington. There was also an experience, one summer, there was a teacher in our neighborhood [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia] who took a group of us to Europe for two weeks, and we went to London [England], Paris [France] and Rome [Italy] and traveled. We, of course, we flew there and then we traveled by bus and boat. We took a boat across the English Channel and that was a great experience. So I had been away from home. It wasn't one of my first time going away when I went to Stanford but having going there sight unseen, was a real revelation to me. My mom and I went together and we had directions to go down University Drive [sic. Palm Drive], which is the main thoroughfare to Stanford and, of course, it's bordered by palm trees down this half-mile long drive and it was a beautiful, sunny day, really warm and we drove down the driveway, and with these palm trees and I said, I am in the right place, I am where I am supposed to be (laughter). Story_ID: 495208 Speaker 1: So you just ha- you were happy with the first sight of seeing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], yeah. Speaker 1: --Stanford. Speaker 2: And we drove down Palm Drive with all the palm trees and at the end of Palm Drive is the Memorial Church at Stanford [Stanford Memorial Church] and it, the facade of the church is a mo- mosaic design and, you know, very colorful tiles and it's very beautiful. It's very scenic and, of course, behind the chapel you see the hills, the rolling hills behind the school. All the buildings are the same archi- Spanish architecture with the red clay tile roofs so, and it's, you know, it's a beautiful campus and, of course, we rode around to my dorm and everybody was, was busy moving in, everybody was happy, happy to be there and, you know, you were just kind of coming in the room just experiencing everything, just wanting to do everything, wanting to meet everybody and I had--they had several housing options at Stanford. You could request to be in a dorm with all kinds of class levels or you could be in a dorm just with freshmen classmates. There were several minority housing options. You could either be in the, there was a black themed house called Ujamaa and the theme house was 50 percent black and so you knew that--but it was a multiyear dorm so you could be in, in the dorm with freshmen through seniors. And most of the activities of black students occurred from Ujamaa but that dorm was, it was the center of activity but my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] did not want me to be in the black dorm because she thought that I would be too social and I wouldn't get anything done, I wouldn't branch out and wouldn't experience the campus. So, her idea for me was just to be in a freshmen dorm where everybody would be on the same footing and it would be an environment where we would all kind of struggle together and, you know, I didn't, I was just so happy to go to Stanford that I was willing to accept whatever conditions they were going to put on it but Stanford had the black themed house, we also had an Asian themed house and a Hispanic themed house. And so, you know, if you were applying--and those houses actually were there to create really a good environment for people who, maybe who'd been away for the first time who didn't, who needed the comfort and shelter and just the sense of security you would get from living around people that you were comfortable with that you had been with in the culture that you had grown up in and really that was what those houses encouraged. Speaker 1: You said, Ujamaa. Can you spell that? Speaker 2: U-J-A-M-A-A. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And it means family in Swahili. Story_ID: 495209 Speaker 1: So the dorm I moved into was Wilbur Hall, it was Arroyo House, A-R-R-O-Y-O, it was a totally freshmen dorm, it was three floors, there were boys on the top floor and boys on the bottom floor and all girls on the second floor where we were. And there were about ten rooms and everybody had a roommate and I did request to have an African American roommate so my roommate was Serene Charles and she was from Dorchester, Massachusetts and had a family, came from a family of about ten people and her, both of her parents were ministers and Serene was fluent in French and knew a lot of Sp- a great deal of Spanish too and had gone to a private school named Milton Academy in Boston [sic. Milton, Massachusetts] and had already been exposed to a kind of integrated existence and we were the only black girls in our dorm, the two of us. And, but it was, it was a great experience for us because we were all girls on our floor, we all, there were of about twenty of us, we became very close, we were all eating together all the time and did all of our activities together. Our bathroom was set up so that everybody had cubby holes in the bathroom but the shower was open. So you had to just, there were no shower curtains in there, you had to kind of sneak in there and get your shower when nobody else was there, but eventually you were in there a short period of time, you get out and leave and so we were all--knew- everybody knew each other and we would come and go in that year and everybody came. We all were very close and there, a group of about ten of us right now that is still very close, we keep in touch with each other. At reunions, we make sure we see each other and at least do something to, to come together at our reunion, so every five years. It's at least a nucleus of us that stays together and keeps tabs on the other ones that are not there but Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] was the best decision I could have made. I was extremely happy there. The, my second year, I moved into, what they had were apartments, was an apartment building and it was, I was still a roommate with Serene during that year and, but we were able to, there was furniture in the room but we were able to cook for ourselves and, you know, you felt a little bit more grown up and we got along well together, but Serene was kind of, not very outgoing and depended on me for most of her social activities. She would want to tag along with whatever I did. So by my junior year, I split up with Serene and got another roommate who was kind of more independent, like me. Story_ID: 495210 Speaker 1: And Serene [Serene Charles] majored in, in languages. I wasn't sure what I was going to major in my freshman year because I was still torn between thinking that I was going to be a doctor but knew, knowing that I was not interested in starting a pre-med curriculum and did not do that when I first started, and still kind of toying with the idea of some kind of career in broadcasting. So I took, really, political science classes when I first started at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. But there was a call for auditions for 'Carmen Jones' [Oscar Hammerstein II] my freshman year, and they had auditioned people from the community, the auditions were open to people in the community. So many of the, the main roles had been taken by people who were in the, the Stanford community, East Palo Alto [California] area and they had been, are people who are recognized as, you know, singers and actresses, but the chorus was open to students and I kept going to chorus rehearsals and was the only one who was really showing up. There were about three of us who were showing up, and the person who was to play the part of Myrt, who was a friend of Carmen in the play, backed out and by default they put me in the role of Myrt. So I had my first experience of being in the big time play at Stanford end of my freshman year, and there was a School of Performing Arts at Northside [Northside High School; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia] that I never participated in. I was kind of on the academic track and, but always, as I said, and thought I was a Supreme, always sang to myself and so it was my first opportunity to kind of shine on my own and had to sing two or three solos in the play and I had never done anything like that before but, you know, that acting bug kind of bit me. And eventually was in another play, 'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope' [Micki Grant] had a part in that, a solo, and had to sing and dance in. Stanford had a very active black theatre project so those were the only two musicals that were put on. There were several dramatic plays that were put on during that time, but I, I enjoyed the musical theater and those were the two plays that were put on at the time that I was there. I tried to be in the band. Stanford has a very unorthodox band. They don't have arrangements for all the sections. So I was playing the flute. The flute players would have to try to figure out what their parts were from the saxophone players and the band does not, it's not a conventional band. They do not have conventional uniforms. The basic uniform is black pants and a red jacket, but beyond that, you could wear any kind of shirt you want. The halftime shows were planned at the end of the week before the game on, on Saturday and they were all very political and sometimes embarrassed the school. The school was, the band was banned from television a lot because they would embarrass, they may start, embarrass the school, they may start out with one formation and then make a political commentary on the president of the school [Richard W. Lyman], or the president and, of course, then they would be in trouble constantly, but the music was always very good. And at that time, the Doobie Brothers were very popular in the San Francisco Bay Area [California], so they played a lot of Doobie Brothers music and, as well as some other songs that I had not been familiar with but, but it was very difficult to, to try to, to--made the--the flute section was not a priority for them and I kind of dropped out after a while because it was just not what I was exposed to in a band situation and actually I thought probably I'd better devote myself to my freshman year to try to figure out what I was doing in school. And so, I, I pretty much, you know, that theater group was the only thing that I kind of spent extra time doing. Story_ID: 495211 Speaker 1: Who was the president of Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] at the time you were there? Speaker 2: At the time his- the president was Richard Lyman [Richard W. Lyman]. Speaker 1: And what about any professors that stand out that you remember, you have a great memory of? Speaker 2: Well, you, you know, at Stanford, it was a huge school and at the time all of our classes had maybe two or three hundred people in 'em and you would break into sections, smaller sections of maybe fifteen or twenty for study groups and then those would be led by graduate students. So during my freshman year, the only person I had any close contact with was my freshman writing professor, and it wasn't really until my senior year that I had taken a class called the Black Aesthetic that I became really good friends with a professor. There was a--Kofi Lomotey, who is now the president of Albany State University [sic.]. He was a graduate student at the time and he was just, used to extend his home to us. He would, would invite us over and his wife would cook for us and he would play Richard Pryor albums that we would listen to them. There was always a, and, and, we would always talk about things in the class that we could all relate to. And so he was really one of the professors that really, but that wasn't until my senior year. Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell his name for me? Speaker 2: Kofi, K-O-F-I, Lomotey, L-O-M-O-T-E-Y. Story_ID: 495212 Speaker 1: But I will say my, one, one of the things that, that was a big event my freshman year, that was the time which students were encouraging the administrations to divest from South Africa. And we had a big protest my freshman year against Stanford's [Stanford University, Stanford, California] holdings in South Africa. And there was a sit-in in our administration building and we knew at a certain time you had to get out or you were going to be arrested. And so I was torn as to whether or not, I went in and sat in in the building as to whether or not I needed to be arrested out there or whether or not I needed to get out. And I stayed in there as long as I could 'til the absolute last moment when they decided they were going to arrest people and I knew my dad [Albert Miles Davis] would probably understand but I knew my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] would not understand. So what we did was the ones of us, there were a great number of people, there were only about, maybe about fifteen to twenty people that actually stayed inside. Ironically, one of the, when the black people, and mostly the protest was mostly white students. There were very few black students who participated in that protest because they were all there to be in school, and everybody knew that their parents--. At that time, you know, the whole cause of South Africa, this is in the mid-'70s [1970s], was not, I don't think black people felt, had just gotten out of the Civil Rights Movement and there was not as much publicity or empathy at that time because we had our own struggle, and I don't think that we were as educated at that point in time about South Africa. So our parents knew that they had sent us to school, and we were not supposed to be worrying about what holdings the school had in South Africa and, and I think that my dad would have understood. Ironically, one of the guys that stayed in was a black guy, his name was Dave Hereford [ph.], and he was arrested and taken away, and I found out later that Dave Hereford's father had gone to medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] with my dad and he was one of the ones that pulled my dad through medical school, and Dave was brilliant at Stanford as well and he was arrested. Of course, there was a fight for the next couple of years while he was there to see that that arrest record got off his, that arrest got off of his record so that it wouldn't hinder him from, you know, whatever else he wanted to do in life. That was a struggle for all of the ones. There was only one black woman that was arrested, and I don't remember her name and Dave Hereford was the only black guy that was arrested of about twenty people. But we stayed with them all night and they, they tried to break our spirits by bringing them out one by one and thinking that the crowd would disperse, but every time they brought somebody out, everybody cheered for, you know, the people being brought out and led, led away to jail. And Stanford didn't divest the whole time I was there but eventually, after I left, they did, as, as most schools did at that point. Story_ID: 495213 Speaker 1: What was the racial makeup at that time? Speaker 2: It was, I think, about 10 percent black at the time. There were, there were about eleven thousand students total. Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] pretty much a city, a school unto itself. It is midway between San Francisco [California] and San Jose [California] and Stanford was actually founded by a man [Leland Stanford, Sr.], who was the governor of Stanford [sic. California]. He moved from New York. He was one of the, there were, there were four men, four or five men who settled in San Francisco who built the railroad across country and he was one of the men who was responsible for building the railroad. I think he owned the Central Pacific Railroad. So he had a lot of money from, from having been a railroad man and he bought a horse farm in this part of California, it was many, many acres. They had a son [Leland Stanford, Jr.] and their son died at the age of which he was about to go to college, and that was all, the only child they had. So they decided to open a school in his memory and so Stanford is really Leland Stanford Junior University, it's named for their son, and they opened the school there and the school, of course, was all-male at first and it is in, in an area that's a farm and it's still referred to as the farm. And they had so much land that, that a great portion of it has been donated to the State of California and Stanford was where, actually the Silicon Valley [California] began, where the great computer industry began and that happened actually during the time when I was at Stanford and that's when Apple computers was first founded, kind of towards the end of my, my time there, and that was really the beginning of the boom of this whole age of computers (simultaneous). Story_ID: 495214 Speaker 1: Is there anything else that sticks out in your mind about Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]? Speaker 2: Well, you know, at Stanford at the time had fraternities, but they had no sororities. They had had a suicide in the '40s [1940s] and so, with a girl who was not able to get into a sorority. And there was some feelings on our campus among black students that there were not enough of us there to be involved in sororities but having grown up in Atlanta [Georgia] and my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] was a member of Delta Sigma Theta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], all my relatives were, I wanted to have that experience but we didn't have sororities on campus. And so, there was a chapter at San Jose State [San Jose State University, San Jose, California], I had gone, they had several Greek shows, I guess, during my jun- my sophomore year and I had been exposed to them but we didn't have a chapter on campus and they were not going to allow us to have sororities. So we tried to find out how we could pledge through their chapter. It was not going to be possible because you could only pledge a chapter if you were going to San Jose State. But San- the City of San Francisco [California] had a citywide chapter, and there were several schools that had girls who were going to colleges in San Francisco had formed a citywide chapter and so they would meet on the various campuses in San Francisco, and since Stanford was some- it wasn't that close, it was about forty miles away, but it was the next best thing for us. So there were a group of about, there were six of us who decided to pledge the San Francisco chapter. And so we used to meet on Friday evenings and pretty much spent weekends--this was during my junior year--from November until April, going up on the weekends and we would have, usually have a meeting on Friday night and come back on Saturday, usually had an activity Saturday night, had something Sunday; and one or two days during the week, we would usually have an activity but it was challenged because we were coming from, you know, all kinds of schools all over the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] to come together and meet. And we had an extraordinarily long pledge period, from November to April, and I don't think that my classmates at Stanford really understood. Some of them had been exposed to black Greek life, but a lot of them had not. A lot of people that was their first, they were the first people to go to college in their families and had not been around historically black colleges [HBCUs] to even know what that was all about, but they could see where it was potentially pulling us away from the Stanford community, so some of my really good friends didn't understand my need. They still, to this day, think that it was not a good idea for us to do that, but we persevered and there were six of us that were initiated into Delta in 1979 in the San Francisco chapter. And one of them graduated and you had to have, I think, seven on campus to start a chapter. The next year we tried to, to get a line so we would have enough to, to have a chapter at Stanford and only one made it going through all that traveling and, so there wasn't enough that year and the year after I left, they finally had a group and there was an alumni chapter in, that was closer to Stanford that sponsored them and they finally established a chapter at Stanford. And, of course, now there are black fraternities and sororities at, at Stanford, and it's still a debate that there's not enough of us to kind of segregate ourselves like that, but, you know, people who've been exposed to it understand what it means to be associated with a sorority and to be associated with Deltas across the country was important to me, and also to follow in the footsteps of all of my relatives who had been Deltas. Story_ID: 495215 Speaker 1: So you graduate with, in 1980-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --with a degree in--? Speaker 2: In, it was in communication. I took mostly film and broadcasting classes and thought that I would want to work in a television station. My father--and, and, of course, you would, you would have to do that, and you would get a job where you wouldn't be making much. My parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis], at the time, did not see that that was a viable option for me because they thought I needed to go to grad school. They thought, if you don't go now, you're not going to go and so thought that I should apply to grad schools. Well, I took all the, the different tests that I got--I took the GMAT [Graduate Management Admission Test], I took the GRE [Graduate Record Examination], I took all the class--all the tests that I needed for whatever grad school I might apply to. I applied to UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], just to apply to some place, but I had in mind that I was going to work and trying to get a job in, at a television station and do some kind of a job where I'd be doing grunt work just to learn, you know, how to do everything. You don't learn that in your classwork, but maybe how to write, how to produce shows, the, some kind of entry level job at a television station. I found that was very difficult and San Francisco's [San Francisco, California] a very--I was not going to come home; I decided I was going to stay in California, but San Francisco is very expensive and it's very difficult. I didn't have any relatives in California so if I was going to stay in California, I was going to have to support myself. So I, I quickly learned that I was going to have to get a job that would allow me to have an apartment and support myself. So I ended up getting a job through some friends that I met with Pacific Telephone [Pacific Telephone and Telegraph Company; Pacific Bell Telephone Company]. And so, at graduation, when my parents came and we thought we were packing up to go back to Atlanta [Georgia] and I hadn't packed a thing, I decided I was going to get an apartment and eventually let them know that I was staying with a friend at first and then eventually got an apartment in Oakland [California], San Francisco. Went to several apartments in San Francisco. There was a movie, 'Foul Play,' with Goldie Hawn and she lived in a house, a Victorian home, and the movie was out at the time, and she lived in a house that the actor, Burgess Meredith, had and it was a really bright and sunny room that opened up to the San Francisco Bay and that's what I had in mind. I looked for rooms like that. I went to two rooms like that and they did not open the door when they saw me come to the room. You know, I called them and told them I had just graduated from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and I was looking for an apartment and, of course, when I got there, they didn't open the door for me. So I quickly learned that the apartments in my price range were not in San Francisco. I found an apartment in Oakland, lived near the BART [Bay Area Rapid Transit] station, which is like, it's a rapid transit system for the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], and so I started my job in July of 1980, after graduation, at Pacific Telephone. Speaker 1: In July, 1980. Speaker 2: In July, 1980, and worked in the public telephone section, which is the, the section of public, of Pacific Telephone that handles payphones. And at the time, the big thing was converting from a system of using coins to using credit cards. So I was put in charge of a project to investigate the feasibility of placing telephones where you could use credit cards all over California, and that was my project this summer, researching all the places where the phones needed to be. Story_ID: 495216 Speaker 1: But the, the best thing about that summer, though, was just being in Oakland [California] and being free from school and being able to enjoy San Francisco [California], and San Francisco's a great city and, of course, that, I was where I thought I needed to be that summer, had a great time. Speaker 2: And, and living in Oakland, I mean that's an old neighborhood, well, area also, and they have a, well at that time, had a very active black community, very close-knit community, but did you spend most of your time in San Francisco and not in Oakland (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I had a boyfriend who was from Oakland. His family was in Oakland. So, you know, I worked during the week and I spent time with them, but for the most part, when I had free time, we were out exploring. We were spending time doing, traveling around San Francisco, going, we used to just like to hang, didn't have a lot of money, so Sausalito [California] was one of my favorite places. We would just go and sit in Sausalito and just people watch or go in Union Square [San Francisco, California], and people watch and, you know, had a new apartment so I was decorating the apartment and, you know, at that point it was during the summer so most of our--my friends had gone home, others had graduated and were going to grad school in other parts of the country. So I was just enjoying, exploring San Francisco. I, you know, at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], you were forty miles away and you had to depend on other people for transportation so San Francisco was as far a place that you would go from time to time for activities but there's a lot to do so I really, it is my favorite place to go so I just explored the city every, every moment that I had. Story_ID: 495217 Speaker 1: Did you have any--you applied to grad school, didn't you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. I just let that go. I didn't follow up on it because I knew I was going to get that job [with Pacific Telephone and Telegraph Company; Pacific Bell Telephone Company] and stay in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. I was not interested in, in school at that point. I was going to, my intention was to work. I had a couple of friends who were also working. So I was going to work for a year and then apply to grad school to go to law school and actually I had started taking the LSAT prep course that summer so that I could take the LSAT and apply for law school that fall and then possibly go to law school. I had decided to go to law school and had kind of abandoned the broadcasting career because I knew that, that I could, I had to work in a field that supported me and, you know, at that point, you know, I had to take a path that I thought would at least produce some income and I had the aptitude to be a lawyer and I think somebody in my family may have planted that seed in me that they thought that I ought to be a lawyer. And so, that was kind of in the back of my mind when I was thinking about going to law school, but there had been a movie, 'The Paper Chase' with John Houseman where he really abused students, and I thought if law school is like that, that's not some place that I want to voluntarily place myself, but I knew that eventually that if I went to law school, I still would have the option of doing other things, and that would be something that my parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis] would appreciate, seeing me on an academic path. And so I started taking this LSAT prep course with the professor from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. So on Saturday mornings, I would leave, we would, there were three of us who would go down to Stanford every Saturday morning for this prep course, which is what I was doing probably the, during the August of 1980 on Saturday mornings. Story_ID: 495218 Speaker 1: So you continue to work [for Pacific Telephone and Telegraph Company; Pacific Bell Telephone Company], and had you applied to law school? Did you know what school you wanted to go to (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what, what ended up happening in September of 1980, I had gone to an anniversary party for the boyfriend that I had, and there was a guy who was, well, his sister had a boyfriend who actually was a chef and had cooked dinner at the party and my boyfriend and the chef decided they wanted to go to Lake Tahoe one night after the gradu- after the anniversary party. And so, the, his sister, Jenny [ph.] and I decided to go and so we went in his parents' car to, we were driving up to Lake Tahoe and that was only, it wasn't that far away from Oakland [California], about, maybe a two- or three hour drive, and people would go routinely, on gambling trips to Lake Tahoe and that's what people would do to go and play blackjack and they had been talking about, you know, how good they were. So we decided to go along for the ride. And, of course, I had been to Lake Tahoe one time over the summer, on one of the bus trips. On Friday afternoons, you could go up there and then come back at any time of the day so I had gone for a day. So I knew that, you know, you could go to the casinos, and I think at the time, you only had to be eighteen years, you could be eighteen and gamble and we went and played blackjack then. So, the three of us decided to go on this trip to Lake Tahoe and of course on the way up there, Marty [Marty Bennett (ph.)] fell asleep, and I was injured in a car accident. Story_ID: 495219 Speaker 1: So tell me about the, the accident. Speaker 2: Well, we were, it was about maybe eleven o'clock, twelve o'clock at night and we had decided to go to Lake Tahoe. And, I think the highway to Lake Tahoe is highway 80 [Interstate 80], so you'd go from Oakland [California] to San Francis- to Sacramento [California], the Sacramento area and at some point you, you go on highway 50 [U.S. Route 50]. Well, Marty Bennett [ph.], the guy who was driving the car, who had been a chef who had cooked the food at the party, I don't think was that familiar with getting to Lake Tahoe. And at some point we did not, we never made it to highway 50. He stayed on 80 and during this, in this part of California, it's near the California, Nevada border where the accident was, it's in Truckee, California, and it's in the mountains. And at the time we were really on our way to Reno [Nevada], rather than Lake Tahoe because he missed the turn for 50. At some point on the way up there, we stopped for gas and I got out and went to the restroom and got something to drink and then got back in the car and we were in a Toyota station wagon and had the--I had worked all week and was tired and the, in the station wagon, we had pushed the backseat down, and so I really was asleep. When I got back in the car, I was asleep in the back, and my boyfriend was asleep in the back and then Jenny [ph.], his sister, was in the passenger seat and Marty was driving. And at some point, I, I was awakened by the fact that the car was moving around, but wasn't sure what was going on because I was still kind of waking up out of a sleep and I just heard somebody say, "Oh no, oh no," and then the car stopped. And, I don't have a real concept of the time that elapsed in, in leaving the road, but we did flip over several times. We hit a guardrail and the guardrail had a fan at the end of it that ordinarily would keep a car from going off the road, but this one was bent in a certain way and the way the car hit it, it caused the car to flip over the guardrail and it flipped over several times and went down an embankment. And in the course of flipping over one of the times, when the car was on, was upside down, the latch on the back of the station wagon opened up and I was ejected from the car, wasn't in the seatbelt because I was lying down and so, I was out on the ground. At some point I woke up and people were around me saying, "It'll be all right." And I just was conscious that I was lying down but, and that had been in an accident, was really not aware of what had happened, was feeling a pain in my neck but was kind of in and out of consciousness. And so there was a period of time where I heard people around me saying everything was going to be okay, and then at one point I woke up again and I was in a hospital and they were asking me what my name was, and then I lost consciousness again, and I woke up again, I was in a hospital. Later found out that I had been taken to a small hospital in Truckee, California and I was, at that point, with Ralph [ph.], my boyfriend had had injury to his foot, and Jenny, who was in the front seat, had had, had her seatbelt on and had some abrasions on her chest from the seatbelt. I think it hit her chin on the dashboard. And Marty had not been injured. He said that there was a light from a truck that came by that caught him and he was temporarily unable to see, and that's why he lost control of the vehicle, but the three of us were asleep in the car, and I tend to think that maybe he was tired and fell asleep, too. He was not charged with anything. Story_ID: 495220 Speaker 1: But eventually, after I was in the hospital briefly and they did some x-rays and decided I needed to go to a larger hospital. And so, over the course of the night, I was sent to a hospital in Reno [Nevada], which was the big county hospital in Reno that could handle the kind of injury I had. And I had a fracture in the seventh, the sixth, in the seventh vertebrae in my neck, which caused the spinal cord injury and caused me to have paralysis. At that point, the paralysis was really from my neck down and I couldn't move anything. And what they did was they put me on a device called the Stryker frame in which they put weights to your head and you lie on a, what's a metal frame and you have a piece of fabric canvas on the fabric and so you lie on it and it helps to pull to, add some tension to your neck to help straighten it out if you have a misplaced fracture or something of that nature, it would help to straighten it out and they flip you over periodically so that you don't lie on your back, on your stomach. So you're kind of disorient- I was in and out of consciousness. I think I had a concussion and was not really aware of, of time over several days, but I do know that the boyfriend I had had to call my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] in Atlanta [Georgia] about four o'clock in the morning, Atlanta time, to tell her that I had been in this accident. And, of course, my dad [Albert Miles Davis] had been out of town so she was by herself and she had no frame of reference to understand what had happened but--. And to find out that I was in Reno, Nevada, she had no idea that I was going anywhere, that, you know, I didn't talk to her every day like I would have and she didn't, I didn't touch base with her so she didn't know what my daily activities were, to find out that now she's got to get on a plane by herself and try to get to Reno. My dad was in Washington [D.C.] visiting relatives, he got the word, he flew back to Atlanta and then he had to figure out how to get to Reno. And so, fortunately we had a friend that worked at Delta [Delta Airlines]. I think they kind of helped them get a flight there and they both arrived and I can just remember--they got there later that Sunday. I think my mother got there and I just remember her coming in and I had had a pair of diamond earrings that I realized were gone. Now I probably looked like I had been in a war some place. I think my, my feet were scarred, bruises and my legs had abrasions 'cause I didn't--I had taken my shoes off so I had scratches on my feet, on my legs, on my arms. I had a gash in my head. My nose, I think, my nose had been bleeding and there was some blood outside of my nose that nobody, people thought my nose was broken so they didn't bother it. And so, the first thing I said when I saw her was that, "Mom, my earrings are gone." (Laughter) And she looked at me and the expression on her face was that she just felt totally helpless. She, I mean, she was just at a loss. She could not understand, we didn't know anybody who had a spinal cord injury. We just could not understand that this could happen in life, particularly when the other people in the car had minor injuries, and it was just unthinkable that I could have this severe an injury. And everything was new to us and, you know, they had to rely on the doctors, whom they did not know, to tell them what should happen and my dad came there and this was totally out of his frame of experience. He had never been exposed to anybody who had had a spinal cord injury. I mean, you see people who are in wheelchairs who are paralyzed, but we didn't know anybody who had had this kind of injury, and so we didn't know what to expect. And at the time, we had learned that there were several regional spinal care, (unclear) spinal care centers and there was one in Atlanta, Shepherd Center, but the Shepherd Center, this is 1980, and the Shepherd Center had just started. It was not a full-fledged spinal cord hospital. It was a small unit in Atlanta in West Paces Ferry Hospital, was founded by Alana Shepherd [Alana Smith Shepherd] when her son [James Shepherd] was injured. And he--the pre-eminent hospital at the time was Craig Hospital in Denver, Colorado [sic. Englewood, Colorado], and because they lived in Atlanta, she saw a need for the creation of a hospital that treated spinal cord injuries in Atlanta. So they started the hospital at the time and there was some thought that they would transfer me to Atlanta, but the trip was just too far to go from Reno to Atlanta, and my, my father and my sister [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] actually, when they flew back to Atlanta and we're still trying to figure out what to do, went to Shepherd, and at the time, the patients in the hospital were mostly male, they were mostly from, injured from car accidents and gunshot wounds and the atmosphere was not one that they thought would be compatible for my successful rehabilitation. And we learned about the Santa Clara Valley Medical Center, which was in San Jose [California], which was just about thirty miles from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], it was in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], it was a place that, an area that I was familiar with and it wasn't, it was the closest one, hospital to Reno. Story_ID: 495221 Speaker 1: So they arranged to fly me from--I spent a week in Reno [Nevada], in the hospital and they made a decision to fly me to Valley Medical Center [Santa Clara Valley Medical Center, San Jose, California] and thought, and there was a great doctor there, Dr. Wilmot [Conal Brian Wilmot], who was from Ireland, who was very unconventional, very inspirational, did not take excuses from anybody as to what you couldn't do. He knew what was possible with people with spinal cord injuries that made sure you were on the path to getting out of the hospital and, you know, doing everything you needed to do to get you back on the path where you could be productive. So, I had never met, he was Irish, had a very outgoing, unconventional type personality, just never met an enemy, just everybody, he was, but he was very domineering to the staff, everybody was afraid of him, but he was absolutely just in love with all of his patients. So, you know, when I arrived at the hospital, I was just kind of stunned by the fact that he was such a whirlwind but you could tell that he cared about all of us, so you believed whatever he said would happen, you know, would be possible. But when I got there, you know, if you, when you're going through a rehab program, there are various components of it. I mean, they deal with, first you have to learn about your injury, what the physical, I guess, all of the physical aspects of your injury, what caused it, what your limitations are going to be and with me, there's an aspect of a spinal cord injury where you could have a complete injury, that means that the spinal cord is bruised all the way around the spinal cord which means that you will not get back any return and function or you could have incomplete injury which means that there may be only a partial bruising of your spinal cord and mine was a complete injury because of the displacement of the vertebrae, there so, we knew early on that there was not going to be any return. Initially I said I was paralyzed in my neck and as the swelling goes down from your injury, you start settling into the level of injury that you're going to have, that is, that corresponds to the level of where your injury is to your spinal cord. And my injury, eventually, as the swelling went down, and I was there for a period of six months, settled into paralysis from about the chest level down. You had function in your arms and limited function in your hands and then you're paralyzed from that point down. Story_ID: 495222 Speaker 1: When I first got to the hospital [Santa Clara Valley Medical Center, San Jose, California], I had not learned anything about spinal cord injuries at all. And so you learn, as I said, the physical aspect of it and then they start socializing you into activities that you will be able to participate in, but first you're just learning how to, to deal with what's going on. And there were classes that they had at the center that showed you involved in sports activities and it just so happened, when I came to the hospital, they were at the end of about a sixteen-week course. So everybody had been exposed to the very beginning and then by the time you got to the end of the sixteen weeks, you were ready to accept the fact that, well I can do this, I can, you know, do wheelchair sports. Well, when I got there, they were in the sixteenth class, and they sent me into that, that class, and I wasn't even identifying with anything that they were trying to sell in that tape. I mean, I was not interested in, I was not, had not ever been that athletic, so I was not interested in wheelchair sports. And it just, it was the first week I was there and it just really, I had been going along with what everybody was saying, just waiting to see what was going to happen, nobody said at that point that you're not going to get everything back. So I had in the back of my mind that, you know, I would get over this, you know, I'd been through, you know, you've had injuries, I had broken my wrist and broken my arm as a child, and that was something you got over. Speaker 2: So you just really didn't believe that you would not get total-- Speaker 1: I thought, yeah, I thought, in the back of my mind, I thought that, you know, I would recover but when my first week there, when I saw people in wheelchairs doing all this activities and accepting it and it said to me, well, this is not going to be a temporary thing; this is something I'm going to have to get used to and it just, it just really upset me to no end. I went back to my room and I just thought, I can't do this. I, you know, it just, and that was the first time I cried about it. I was just so upset and, of course, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] had, was staying with me the whole time and, you know, her mind was, we're moving ahead, we're going to deal with this, we're going to, and whatever you have to do, you're going to do. She could not understand that this was my first, I guess, realization as to what I was facing and tried to talk me out of this, like you can't cry, you've got to keep going. And the nurses came to me later and said, "You know, she just doesn't understand. This is, you're going through a grieving period, just like you would do if somebody had died and you've got to have a chance to do that." She stayed with me the whole, just pretty much the whole time I was there. She was, she would be there. She moved out there. She stayed with me. This was the beginning of my sister's [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] senior year in s- in high school [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia]. She got an apartment there. Somebody drove her car there and she was with me every day, going through therapy from that day in September, she may have gone home a couple of days, but it was during a very difficult time for my sister during her senior year and my dad [Albert Miles Davis] was there still working, trying to keep everything under control, and she was with me up to Christmas. Of course my sister and my dad would come and visit from time to time but we were really separated during that time and she was focused on making sure that I was taking advantage and doing everything that I, should have been doing in my therapy and you know that consisted of getting up in the morning, you know, doing some exercise first thing in the morning. After lunch, we would have activities teaching you how to do things that you would have to do in life, you know, dressing and, you know, brushing your teeth, figuring out how you're going to do your hair and then talking about what activities you were going to participate in, how you were going to support yourself and what you were going to do when you're eventually released from the hospital. Story_ID: 495223 Speaker 1: Well, I had been taking that LSAT class so it was decided that I would resume with that class because eventually I'm, you know, I'm still supposed to be going to law school. So the, the teacher started coming to the hospital [Santa Clara Valley Medical Center, San Jose, California], but at this point, I was just regaining some function in my arms. I couldn't even write at this point. My--I did not have good control over writing implements or anything. They had fitted a brace for me to hold a pen, but I hadn't mastered that yet but this is in October. The, the LSAT was in October, I'd just been injured on September 7th, and he was coming to do these classes. So, you know, we attempted to, I attempted to sit with him. I really couldn't, couldn't study. I, you know, there was a lot of activity around me, there was no quiet place to study for the LSAT. I app- I sent in the application, decided to go ahead and take it, one of my friends came and got me one Saturday morning, it was, I think a weekend when my mom [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] had gone home. Speaker 2: Well how long did you stay in, in the hospital? Speaker 1: I was actually, I was still in the hospital when she came and picked me up from the hospital, we went up to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], and I took the LSAT with other people who were taking it for law school. They gave me extra time because they knew, you know, that I needed, they don't give you any extra help but they give you extra time because they know that, you know, you need extra time in trying to do (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, did, so you were able to write by this time, by the time you took it? Speaker 1: No, I had a person who sat with me-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I attempted to answer the questions and told her what answers to put. That's why it took extra time, what answers to put on the, on the test. I don't remember what my score was. I eventually got, that's probably the lowest score in the history of the LSAT (laughter). But nonetheless, our plan was for me to go to law school that I was going to--when I finished my rehabilitation there, I still wanted to stay in California. California at that time was far in advance, far advanced in independent living centers and I was still close to Stanford, still had a lot of friends there, although they were eventually moving on but all the time when I was in the hospital, everybody was visiting me from school, still all my, my friends were coming. And so I still had in mind that I would be able to stay in California. Of course my family didn't think that that would be possible and were planning for me to come home and had had people to come in to look at renovating our house to make it accessible for me when I came home. We had a split level house and my bedroom was upstairs, and we had actually a flight of stairs from the entry level up to about maybe ten stairs up to the level where my room was, and really experts came and told us that they didn't think anything could be done. All of the experts said that, supposedly knew about making houses accessible said there was nothing that could be done but we had a close friend who was an architect who was very practical and said, "Well, you know, we could put an elevator here, we can renovate this bathroom downstairs and get her upstairs." And he really came up with a plan with some contractors that my parents knew and they made the house accessible. So, the decision was made that I would come home and so I needed to apply to law schools and the only law school in Atlanta [Georgia], the only accredited law school in Atlanta was at Emory University [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia] and with my low LSAT score, I applied to Emory and, you know, filled the application, I had pretty good grades from Stanford but they didn't really balance out, the LSAT score, and I believe, I don't know, my mother and I have never talked about this in any detail but I believe she went and pleaded for them to let me in law school, that I needed to have some activity, that I was moving forward with my life and that, you know, I wanted to be a lawyer and this was the option that they, and they had to do this. And I was accepted at Emory law school that year and that was in the spring of 1981. Story_ID: 495224 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So how long were you at, in the hospital? Speaker 2: Well, I was in the hospital from, in that, well from September 7th, that injury, came to the Valley Medical Center [Santa Clara Valley Medical Center, San Jose, California], probably on the 19th of September, of 1980, and then I was released in March, so I would say six months. Speaker 1: In, in March of 19-? Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981]. Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981]. Speaker 2: Came home to Atlanta [Georgia], you know, had been getting letters and cards and all kinds of encouragement from everybody at home. Had a great welcoming at the airport, in a room, and everybody came to welcome me home, but it was a shock. You know, I talk to people on the phone and my cousins would say, "Well you sound the same." "Well, you know, well, so my voice is still the same, I'm still the same person." But it was an adjustment for everybody because when you have a spinal cord injury like this, such a catastrophic injury, it affects everybody and, of course, then everybody had to learn how to take care of me, was much different than, you know, being independent because I was not able to bathe myself or dress myself. I had, I had gotten to the point where I could, once I got in my chair, I could dress myself from the waist up, but, you know, any, any bathing or dressing from the waist down, I had to have assistance. And so we, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] had learned how to do it, and one of the reasons for staying in California was she'd gotten an apartment and on weekends they encouraged you to have a residence to go to so that you would learn, your family members could learn, independently, how to take care of you. And so that was her goal in staying and also in, in supporting me. But, of course, she still had to go back to see about my sister during this time because Stacey [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] actually had started school a year early because she was prepared for school a year earlier than other people in her age group and so she started a year early so by her senior year, she was actually sixteen turning seventeen and a senior in high school, and there were, you know, all kinds of things that seniors could do who would turn eighteen, so there was a lot of pressure on her to grow up and do things that, you know, my parents were ready for her to do and age-wise, she couldn't do. And her senior year was a real challenge because she was applying for colleges. She didn't have the benefit of my mom there all the time 'cause we were so torn. She applied to schools and made it through. She had gone to Westminster Schools [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia], which was a very exclusive private school that Atlanta had, had done really well, whereas school was easy for me and I was very social and it was a very easy existence, Westminster was a serious, hardnosed school. And so she is a much, much better student than I am and so she, she had some of the nurturing at school and people at Westmin- everybody was on a college track at Westminster and everybody was going to the best school they could get into. So at least she had that push from them but, you know, she didn't have the guidance of my mom at home the way she should have. So finally, my mother and I got to a point where we just really got on each other's nerves. She was always pushing me to do more and finally there was a point, I guess, after Christmas when she really just needed to go home and see about things and so she left me in California. And so I was there for two months without--she would come back from time to time but I was there for two months without her and my friends and, I had befriended just about every nurse on the unit. They were bringing me food and it was after six months of eating the same food again, you know, it's, it's kind of tough. So I had gotten close to several of the nurses. They would bring me dinner at night and my friends would come and take me out and so I was actually having a good time and was in denial about having to go home but eventually the time came, the insurance company told them that I was ready to leave and so one day they said that "We are putting you out as of Sunday." Well, the renovations were not ready at home, but nonetheless I had to go. So, I got home, we had this big party, and then here I am, we've got to figure out how to make it work in the house. They decided to put in the elevator, the elevator was not ready. So my parents turned the basement into really an apartment for me. That was the only level I could get, I could get into so they, they made, we had a sofa and stereo and there was an entertainment--pretty much for entertaining, and there was a bathroom on that level. Well they renovated the bathroom. They took out the shower that was there and made it, enlarged the shower and so I had a roll-in shower. They replaced the sink, had a sink that I could roll under. The bathroom was perfectly accessible. It was a dream bathroom, and then I had, they moved my bed downstairs so I lived downstairs until the renovations were done. And then eventually they put in an elevator so I could get up to the next level of our house and there were three steps up to my bedroom, they installed a ramp up to the bedroom so I was back in my old bedroom. And I was back at home trying to figure out you know how to be, after being independent and being on my own in California trying to figure out what was I going to do living at home back in my room and not having the freedom that I was accustomed to having. Story_ID: 495225 Speaker 1: So now that you're back in Atlanta [Georgia] and you are accepted into Emory law school [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia], talk to me about the experience of going to law school. Speaker 2: Well, you know, at this point, you know, I got home in March, of course my sister [HistoryMaker Stacey Stewart] graduated from high school [The Westminster Schools, Atlanta, Georgia]. She's preparing to go to college. At some point during this summer, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] decides to run for city council [Atlanta City Council], and then I'm entering Emory law school in August. So we had a whirlwind of activity in our house. I went to law school and at this point I told you I had been fitted for a brace that I was supposed to be using to write with. Well, I had never really practiced with this brace, had not, had not gotten used to it 'cause there was really no, no occasion to, to write a whole lot. I didn't, didn't really even try to master it during this time, but I needed it once I got to law school. At first I experimented with the idea of using tapes, and one of the professors said that, you know, you don't have time to tape a lecture and go home and listen to it again. You, you will have to read when you go home and they'll be other things that you need to do and you just won't have time to do that. So, for the first semester, it was very difficult for me to figure out what--I didn't have the benefit of being around other students because I was at school, taking classes and then I would have to go home at 3:30; I couldn't stay at school the rest of the day. When I got home, and I'd have those hours to study, and I didn't know how people were studying at school. I didn't know that they were, you know, reading and having study groups, I was just having to read through and try to be prepared for the next day. I don't know if you know the teaching in law school is much different. It's not lectures and tests; you read and then a professor will call on you and you will talk about a particular case. But they extract out of you all kinds of concepts that you don't even know exist in a particular set of facts that you might read and they stretch you in your analysis to the point where you don't even know what the point is by the time you finished any given class on any given day. And then at the end of the semester, you don't know what you have gained. Everybody does an outline of what they think they have learned, and you share outlines with each other, and you try to do them based on what you think you've covered, but the, the, it's called a Socratic Method. That method is not something that you are accustomed to when you first go to law school and it takes some adjusting and that's why people have such a hard time their first year in law school, is adjusting to the Socratic Method and you have one exam at the end of the semester and that's your only chance to make your, make a good grade. Story_ID: 495226 Speaker 1: Well, when I would get home in the afternoons, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] was running for city council [Atlanta City Council] so there was activity in the house, there were activities to go to, there was always something going on. And at the time, I did not have, I think she was my, she and our housekeeper, who was like a second mother to me, were the only two people who really were trained to take care of me. So, I don't know, she, I don't know how she did this, she would do- was doing all her campaign activities and then she was also dealing with me and we went through this every night. She was the one who was getting me up in the morning to go to law school [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia], and we did this day after day, and it took a great deal of effort from her. I don't know how in the world she did it but she stuck with me through that whole experience. Speaker 2: What was the outcome of her running for city council? Speaker 1: Well, she was running against a person who had been an incumbent, the oldest serving city council member at the time, and she had been supported by Maynard Jackson. He was an enemy of Maynard's. And he supported her and she had been known in the city because she'd been president of the League of Women Voters [League of Women Voters of Atlanta Fulton County], had a good support structure through Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia] as well as contacts and people that she had known being in Atlanta [Georgia] all the years that she lived here, so she won. She won the race (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who, who did she run against? Speaker 1: Q.V. Williamson, who actually had been a neighbor of ours, but who had had some scrapes with the law and, as I said, had been an enemy of Maynard and Maynard thought it was time for him to go and so he ran my mother against Q.V. and she won. Story_ID: 495227 Speaker 1: Do you go all the way through and graduate from Emory [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well, that, that first year, I went through the first semester and the second semester, towards the end of the semester, in April, I started having back pains and was under a lot of, felt like I was under a lot of pressure and a relative was very close to me, my, my mother's [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] first cousin, had a massive heart attack, he was forty years old, and he died and it just really devastated me. He was, he had been my gynecologist and was really, I felt like a soul mate to me. And when that happened, and my back was bothering me, it just, I just had to stop everything. And so I stopped in, towards the end of the second semester and realized that, you know, everything had been moving on a track, it was not at my pace, it was too fast and I would just have to stop and get healthy and, you know, get over my feelings about my injury and try to figure out what my feelings were so that I could move on from there. And so, I stopped and, and did not continue with law school that semester and then started back again in the fall and then that was the fall of '82 [1982] and then I finished, went straight through at that point and finished in '85 [1985]. And it was still a struggle the whole time because I did not have the time to devote to my studies. I was halfway on probation every semester, trying to fight to get back up. So I did not finish very well at Emory, but I did finish and graduation was a great day. My classmates had seen me struggle and, of course, at that point, I was not using the power chair that I use now, I was using a manual chair and did not use it very much, did not push myself a whole lot. I usually had people pushing me because I used to have to go a great distance. And so, at graduation, there was a ramp and I had my cousin, who was in college at the time, come and push me up the ramp and, of course, when I got to the top of the ramp, I got a standing ovation from all my classmates, did not realize that they appreciated the effort that it took me to, to get through school, but they did. And, you know, when I talk to them now, everybody's just amazed that, that I was able to even get through school because they didn't have the obstacles I had in trying to go back and forth and not being exposed to being around my classmates to enjoy the support that they would have, we all give each other, although I was out of a lot of the kind of cutthroat activity that takes place in law school, so that was a blessing, but I think everybody understood what a challenge it was for me so that was a great day to finally graduate from Emory. Speaker 1: Who was the president of Emory at the time? Speaker 2: The president was James Laney [James T. Laney], and the dean of the law school was Tom Morgan [Thomas D. Morgan], at the time. Story_ID: 495228 Speaker 1: Did you participate in moot court? Speaker 2: I didn't do mu- many activities. My whole, I, the energy that it took me to get to school and get back--. Now we had to do a mandatory reading and advocacy workshop and, and I did do that and did very well in the moot court activity that we had to do at the time. I did get involved in a couple of activities. There was, of course, a group of students who were involved in disability-type issues at Emory [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia], and I joined that group. It didn't require a whole, whole lot of time, and we also had a line where people would call and ask for legal advice from law students and after class I would man that line. Sometimes, sometimes it would involve you taking a call from somebody and then doing some research and then coming back and, you know, giving them an answer to their question but those were pretty much my activities. Everything was so exhausting trying to get up, go out to Emory every day and come home and study until I--I really did not have the energy to do much else. Speaker 1: Was the school prepared to deal with students with disabilities? Speaker 2: Well, the, the physical layout of the school was fine and so that, that was not a problem for me. But it's just the nature of law school can't, that machine can't stop. So what they did do was allow me to have extra time. I would take my exams in a different room to allow me extra time. At that point, I had, it was funny, when I started using that brace, my handwriting came right back; it was the same handwriting I had before. It's funny that you, you don't realize your handwriting is kind of an innate part of you and so it came back and so I became able to take notes. I was having to juggle books and my classmates helped me with that but really a law school machine can't stop to accommodate one person. So, I just had to get on board and try to do what I could but the layout of the law school, I was fortunate, it was a relatively new building so everything in the law school was pretty much accessible except there was a level on the third level where there were classrooms that were down long hallways and I was using a manual chair and it was carpet and a chair, a manual chair does not go well over carpet. So, I would be worn out in the mornings if I had a nine o'clock class and would often be late but they would know. Nobody ever came and pushed me. What happens normally with people with disabilities, a lot of people will try to help you at first, but if they find that you're somewhat independent, they'll leave you alone until you ask for help, and that's kind of been my, the way I operate. I really don't require a lot of help but I'll let you know if I need for you to help me. So, I did everything I could. You know, sometimes they would help me with my books, getting out of the locker we had but the, the, I was pretty much on my own, and the school layout was accommodating that way. Speaker 1: Were there any other students with disabilities? Speaker 2: There were two others at the time, and they had been injured much longer than I had. So they were much more--they found it much easier. They had been in school before, so this was not a new experience for them being in school and, you know, I used to hear stories about them driving. I was not--they used to drive vans at the time, I hadn't even gotten to that point or even thought about driving. And so they would tell me about all the things that they were doing. I couldn't even fathom the things that they did. They lived on their own at the time, and, you know, that wasn't even a scenario for me at that point. I was just trying to figure out who I was and how I was going to make it through school every day, but it was good to have people like that around me 'cause I knew that that was something that I could aspire to. Story_ID: 495229 Speaker 1: So, in '85 [1985], you get your degree, your law degree, and do you take the bar right away? Speaker 2: I didn't take the bar that, that summer. I was just kind of taking it easy that summer. I did take, start taking the bar prep course in the fall. So I took the bar exam in February of '86 [1986] and, you know, everybody takes the bar preparation course so I did that on Saturdays and, and studied for the bar and took it in February and then just knew there was no way in the world I passed the bar exam (laughter), that studying for the bar exam and learning what you need to know for the bar is much different than going to law school 'cause you actually learn the law and, and you apply it to, to facts which you've not done in, in another, in the other setting. So, my dad [Albert Miles Davis] actually took and drove me down the two mornings when I took the bar and after the second day, after the first day when he took me back the second day, I said, "You know, Dad, there is no way in the world I passed the bar exam." Now, I had taken a class, there's one part of the bar where you have to write essays and the other is a standardized test where you have multiple choice questions and I had really studied that well and had gotten to the point where I knew how many questions I needed to answer at a certain period of time given the test period. So I felt pretty confident about that part of the exam but when it came to the essay part, it's on specific subjects and there were two sub- there were ten questions for the day and there were two about two areas about trusts and wills that I had not covered and I just merely wrote, "I have no idea," and, and the question was, "How would you advise somebody?" and I would just say, "I would have to refer them to somebody else because I would not know what to say." So I knew I was, I was doomed and there was a period of time between February and May when you get your results that it was bliss for me because I couldn't, didn't have to tell anybody I failed. I could just say, I'm waiting for the bar results. Well that Saturday came, it's usually the Saturday of Memorial [Memorial Day] weekend and I was dreading the mail coming 'cause I just knew there was no way. We had gone out to Lenox Square, ran into some people who--the mall here in Atlanta [Georgia]--who had gotten their bar results and, you could actually find out early if you went down to the courthouse, at the Fulton County Courthouse [Atlanta, Georgia], they post the bar results for everybody in the state but, and people who are really eager to find out had gone down there to find out and apparently these people had done that but I was waiting to see what was in the mail. So we got home and the envelope was there 'cause everybody, every- there's never a failure to get your bar results and it always happens. So, we get this envelope, and it's pretty thick and so the theory is it's thick because it's going to give you materials on how to reapply for the bar exam, but the other thing is you can get a thick envelope and it tells you, you know, where you're going to go for the swearing in, the bar associations that you will be applying to and all these other things. So, you know, I didn't know what to expect. I didn't want to open it. We were still in the, in the car coming up the driveway, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] opened it and I was just prepared for the worst. And when she said, I passed, you know, having done the worst I could possibly do on the LSAT, just barely making it through Emory [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia] the way I did, I was just totally floored that I had passed the bar exam. I didn't think there was any way in the world I could take it again given the struggle I had, so somebody, and there was no way that anybody could have gone and said, please let this girl pass the bar exam (laughter). I mean, I did it so I was just so relieved and so pleased that I had passed the bar and then that was something I would not have to worry about. So, in June of 1986, I was sworn in as a member of the Georgia State bar. Story_ID: 495230 Speaker 1: And I had been speaking with the judge who was a judge in Superior Court of Fulton County who, whose name was Clarence Cooper who was very well known in Atlanta [Georgia]. He had presided over, while I was in law school [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia], he presided over the murder trial involving Wayne Williams, who was the person accused in the missing, Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children's cases [Atlanta Child Murders]. And he had only been on the ben- that was his first case that he had been appointed to the Georgia, the Fulton County Superior Court probably in '82 [1982] and so he had only had one law clerk at that point and had another young man you, you would clerk for one or two years. So by the time I approached, it had been '86 [1986], I think he had known my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis], and he had known that I was in law school, it was somebody that my family knew, and he agreed that I could be his law clerk, his third law clerk. And the problem was the young man who was already there, did not have another job and the job that he was waiting on was not open yet, and I was ready to start working. So, I just started coming in the office for half a day and volunteering, kind of get my feet wet. So that summer, I started--after I was sworn in, I started just going to the office for half a day until finally the previous clerk was ready to leave in November and then that was my first full-time job working as a law clerk for Judge Cooper. And Judge Cooper is a very unconventional judge. He is a people person. He attracts people, he knows he's a, he is, was born in Atlanta and he knows a lot of people and he is a problem solver, not just from the bench but anybody who would have come to Judge Cooper's office for help, regardless of whatever kind of help it was, he would attempt to help them. And so we had a full stream of people. We were on the main level, or the level up from the main level in the courthouse, but the level where the cafeteria was. So we had constant traffic in our office all the time, and whatever Judge Cooper agreed to do for people, the law clerk handled. So, if somebody came in and needed something filed, then I drafted the papers for it to be filed. If there was a dispute between attorneys that needed to be resolved, I resolved the dispute. The first week I worked for Judge Cooper, he was presiding which means, in superior court, that any emergency matters that come forth that are outside of your normal caseload, a judge is assigned, a particular judge is assigned to handle those matters exclusively that week. And as it happened, a reporter from Channel 2 [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] had gone to interview the sheriff in Douglas County [Georgia]. He had been a sheriff for a long time and he did not want to be interviewed and when the camera was in his face, he pushed the cameraman over and knocked him down. And they came to Judge Cooper to get a warrant for this Sheriff Lee's [Earl D. Lee], it was a Sheriff Lee in Douglas County for his arrest. And Judge Cooper was a black judge, a young black judge in, and this was presiding week, it was my first week, and I did the research and we determined that he could grant a warrant for Judge Lee's arrest in Douglas County. Speaker 2: For the sheriff, sheriff-- Speaker 1: For the sheriff, and he was a very powerful sheriff. So, and of course it involved the media so everybody was interested in it because the camera had been damaged and the cameraman had been, had been hurt. And there was a reporter who used to come to our office all the, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution reporter who was in our office all the time looking for stories in the courthouse and, of course, I told him what we were doing and so the warrant was issued on Friday, and Saturday morning, I was quoted in the paper as Judge Cooper's law clerk. Well I knew that was not appropriate for me to be quoted in, I just knew I was going to be fired my first week. I was so afraid to come back to work on Monday, I didn't know what to do. And Judge Cooper just laughed. He, you know, he was a very easygoing guy, he didn't have any problem with it, of course, it was not accurate. I just said what we did but I, I did not think it was proper for me to speak for him and I thought the reporter should have known better but, you know, he said it was fine. We had a great time. Judge, Judge Cooper's a great personality and so it was a great experience working for him. Story_ID: 495231 Speaker 1: So how long did you clerk for him? Speaker 2: I was there from November of '86 [1986] until 1990, and there was a position open on the Georgia Court of Appeals [Court of Appeals of Georgia]. At the time, Robert Benham was a black judge who was the only black judge on the Georgia Court of Appeals and the governor, Joe Frank Harris, had, had decided to elevate him to the Georgia Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Georgia]. He was the first black person to serve on the Georgia Supreme Court. And so, there was, his position became available and Judge Cooper [Clarence Cooper] was encouraged to apply and I think was pretty much told that if he applied, he would be appointed. And so he applied and was appointed, and so he took me and his secretary to the court of appeals, so I became his clerk on the court of appeals and then he ended up with three clerks on the court of appeals. And that was much different work for all of us because before we were used to doing criminal calendars where you have criminal trials a couple of weeks a month and then you have a civil calendar, domestic calendar and it was trial work. And so you were constantly meeting attorneys and there was always conferences and motions hearings and a lot of activities and different things every day. Well the court of appeals is an appellate court where you write opinions and the Georgia Court of Appeals is the busiest appellate court at, intermediate appellate court in the nation. They have more appeals than any other mid-level appellate court in the country, and we were swamped with work all the time; it was constant pressure. And the, Judge Cooper didn't have the same interaction with litigants and attorneys at the court of appeals, you're very insulated because the only, the only attorneys you see are the ones who are making oral arguments and you don't have that interaction and that, that contact with people that you do at that level. And so we were just strictly writing opinions and it was, it was just a different kind of work for both of us. I don't think he cared for it too much. And, and at some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did you? Speaker 2: It was different for me, it was--I like to write and, and so I did not find it, that it was that hard but it was just demanding. It required a lot of time and a whole new way of working and the amount of work bothered me and it was very difficult to try to keep up with that because I didn't come from, as a law clerk, the research that I did and any writing I done, had done, was very limited. I would draft orders but that would be a one-page order. If anything, it required some analysis. You could instruct an attorney who was involved in the case to prepare an order, prepare a brief, and if I had to respond to Judge Cooper, he had so much work that he didn't have time to read memos from me, so I could just go in his office and just face to face tell him, "Well this is the law and this is probably the way you ought to go but this is, you know, what applies to the situation, you can decide, you know, the way you, you feel the case should be resolved based on what I found out." But here everything had to be written and the, what happens is, you're assigned to a certain number of cases per the term of court and you draft opinions and then other judges, there are three panels of three judges and so within that three judge panel, you have your set of cases when you've done your opinion, the opinion goes to the other judges and then they react to it and they get it back and so it's a lot of back and forth with the judges. And there's a lot of analysis, a lot of give and take and it was just a different kind of existence for him. And eventually a position opened in federal court, which was another trial level position for him. And he decided that he wanted to take that position, but the pay for my job had increased quite a bit from being a law clerk on the state court level and, or, in Fulton County [Superior Court of Fulton County] to that job it was a great deal more. And so I had--and going to federal court, would have been, I would have been stepping back and I would have been starting over and I was a state employee and there would be other judges coming in. So we, at that point, we decided that I was going to stay where the money was at the court of appeals and work for another judge. And I ended up working for the interim judge for him, Harold Banke [Harold R. Banke], who was there in the meantime and then another black judge was appointed from Augusta [Georgia], John Ruffin [John H. Ruffin, Jr.], was appointed in Judge Cooper's place. And so he came in probably in 1994. Story_ID: 495232 Speaker 1: Now during this time, and when I'd been in Fulton County [Superior Court of Fulton County], I had been approached by--well when I first started with Fulton County, the building [Fulton County Courthouse, Atlanta, Georgia] was not accessible. I had to go enter through the garage and the main entrances on both sides of the courthouse had steps, and I was concerned that it was very inconvenient. I had to go a very long route to get from the garage up the stairs, up to Judge Cooper's [Clarence Cooper] office. I just couldn't come in the front door. And had approached the county commissioners about making the front door accessible and it should have been accessible because it was a county building, but they were content, they kept saying, "Well we're going to build a new building eventually so we don't have to do anything about this building." So eventually I talked with some, had found out through the Shepherd Center [Atlanta, Georgia], eventually when I moved back to Atlanta [Georgia], I started having my medical care through the Shepherd Center and met some experts and talked to some experts about how to make the building accessible. And somebody, one of the news channels got word that I was having trouble getting around. I think there was a reporter for Channel 2 [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] who was a friend of the former clerk, and he let a reporter know that I was going through all this hassle trying to get in the building. So she decided that she, after I spoke with the experts about what ought to be done, she got with me and we went around the courthouse and she saw the dif- she filmed me going in, trying to go into doors that were not accessible and so that prompted them to listen to me, finally, and take the information I got from the experts, and finally put a lift on the main door to the front of the Fulton County administration building until they could build a new building. And then, eventually, built a new building and they formed an advisory group, which was the committee on disability affairs, and I was appointed to serve on the committee and then, because I had been a lawyer was, had passed the bar and was a law clerk and was working for Fulton County, they elected me the chairperson of the Commission on Disability Affairs. And they asked us to do a study of, the state of Fulton County [Georgia] in terms of disabilities at the time. The group of, everybody had their level of, or their area of study and we came together and I drafted the report that we gave to the Board of Commissioners. Eventually, the, the new, they built the new administration building [Fulton County Government Center, Atlanta, Georgia] and the doors on the new administration building were not accessible. You couldn't get in and out of those. So again, there was a reporter for the AJC [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] that I had known who was--and I was still with Fulton County at this, at this point, had not moved to the court of appeals [Court of Appeals of Georgia] yet, who got with me and showed me trying to get in the doors and, of course, they, they were not prompted 'til they would get embarrassed about it, finally put some automatic controls on the doors of the new administration building, which is the building now at 136, no 141 Pryor Street. They had done a lot of things in that building, they had to do it because the, the standards were there and then it was new construction so they had to make sure it was accessible. Story_ID: 495233 Speaker 1: So this actually happened, you were appointed to the commission of disability affairs during the time that you were in the Fulton County Courthouse [Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's when it, that's when it started. Speaker 1: So there wasn't, this was between '86 [1986] and '90 [1990]? Speaker 2: It was around '90 [1990]. Speaker 1: Around '90 [1990]? Speaker 2: It was around that time as I was moving from-- Speaker 1: But it was before you moved to court of appeals [Court of Appeals of Georgia]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. And then, but the activities went on all during the time. And then the Americans with Disabilities Act [Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990] I think was passed in 1994 [sic.] and, of course, then we had some muscle, we had the law behind us to force the government to actually conform to some standards that were being generated and at that point, they were building a new courthouse. They had moved from where the old administration building was and were, were going to build a new courthouse on those, in that footprint and then they asked us to advise about the new courthouse, which we did. By this time, I was at the court of appeals and still working with the Fulton County Commission on Disability Affairs. Those were, you didn't have to be an employee or associated with Fulton County [Georgia], you were appointed by a member of the Board of Commissioners. Every commissioner had two appointees to the, the commission. And so we then had to advise them on how to make the courthouse accessible, and it was interesting talking about how to make the judge's bench accessible. You know, they had not envisioned at that point that it would be a problem, that there would be a judge who would need to be up to the bench. So they did make provisions and had, installed a lift in one courtroom to make sure but we were worried about how jurors were going to, in a wheelchair, might sit there or if you were hearing impaired or visually impaired, how you would be able to participate in the proceedings, and just making all aspects of the courthouse accessible. So, that commission eventually was just formed to advise them, but eventually was made a permanent part of county government. One of the things we recommended was that they establish an Office of Disability Affairs [Office of Equal Employment Opportunity and Disability Affairs] with a full-time employee handling disability issues, which they agreed to do, and today there's still a person who's a full-time employee. It has a staff in county government who handles disability issues. Story_ID: 495234 Speaker 1: You move on, no well you actually-- Speaker 2: I'm at the court of appeals [Court of Appeals of Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you're at the court of appeals and you have a new judge that you're-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --clerking for. Speaker 2: And so I worked for Judge Ruffin [John H. Ruffin, Jr.] who's a different kind of judge. He's not as outgoing but the work is still the same-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and at that point I was the senior staff attorney in the office and worked, still very stressful, worked for him until 1996 and actually in '95 [1995], had gone to the doctor and was having problems since there was, I detected some blood in my urine and didn't know what that meant. So they did an examination of my bladder and found I had tumors in my bladder. This was in the, just before, it was the end of '95 [1995]. And after Christmas, they did a biopsy and found I had cancer and it was, of course, how can one person be stricken with so many things and just unbelievable that, that could happen to me? And we tried, you know, I went in the hospital and they tried to do what they can to see if they could remove, there were a number of tumors but had had no indication that was having any problems up to that point other than when the blood was detected. So, you know, it was just another loop to and another hurdle and I'm still trying to adjust and trying to figure out how to work in the new building and trying to adjust to the, the requirements of working at the court of appeals and then, now I'm having to figure out what kind of cancer treatment I'm going to have. Speaker 1: Well what type of cancer were they? Speaker 2: It was cancer of the bladder. So there were tumors in my bladder and so the doctor that I was going to, a Dr. Bruce Green [Bruce G. Green], there was a treatment where they would inject a really toxic substance into your bladder that they would, and you would hold it in your bladder, they would, they cut off your bladder and you would hold it and it was the idea that it would attack the tumors there and that there would be some progress in alleviating the tumors and you wouldn't, you know, it eventually, the hope would be that it would get rid of them. And so you would go, I would have to go for, would leave work on Wednesday to go for this treatment and, it was not painful but it was dangerous because the people who administered it what--I forget what the substance was, but they were having to wear protective gear to keep from being contaminated. It was very, very strong but it would cause a lot of bleeding so I would be debilitated after, but I still tried to work and had not told people at work. I was afraid to tell people at work because it was just another thing I was going to have to try to, I felt that I was going to have to try to make allowances for and try to adapt to, and so I did tell them, I finally told my boss that, you know, that I had been diagnosed with cancer. He had no reaction one way or another just--. It devastated me that I was, it was like I was telling him that I had lost my shoes. I mean, he had that much empathy for what I was going through but he was worrying about getting his work done. And so I attempted to work through, I guess this was from January going, undergoing, it was eight weeks of this treatment, and made it through 'til maybe, approximately March and then they would go in and take a look to see if there was any progress. Well after the first eight weeks, there was no progress so they said, well the protocol is for us to try again. Well at this point, it was at the end of a term of court and Judge Ruffin had, was just not making it easy for me. And, we had a parting of the ways at that point. I just had to stop, had to stop working. Story_ID: 495235 Speaker 1: So you left the court of appeals [Court of Appeals of Georgia]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, I did (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and this was in nineteen ninety-- Speaker 2: This was in 1996. Speaker 1: --six [1996], okay. Speaker 2: It was in the end of March, beginning of April 1996 and then at that point we decided to undergo another course of this treatment, which was about eight weeks, which took me up to about June or July and they went back again and looked and it hadn't, still, there was no progress made. And so then we had to decide at that point--it wasn't getting any worse but it wasn't getting any better--as to what the, what the treatment was going to be. And really, the only thing they can do at that point is just to remove your bladder to get rid of it and, you know, totally extract the cancer, and fortunately my cancer had not spread anywhere; it was, it was confined to the bladder. So, it wasn't really until October that they were able to schedule the surgery and that's when I had surgery to remove my bladder, and, of course, the good news at that point was they examine your lymph nodes and it had not spread to any other part of my body. So I didn't have to have any radiation or chemotherapy after that. Story_ID: 495236 Speaker 1: Now in '96 [1996], did you play a part in the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics], the--here in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well, I was involved in the Paralympics [1996 Paralympic Games, Atlanta, Georgia] and also in advising the committee on the Olympic Games as to arrangements for people with disabilities. There was a committee of people with disabilities that were involved in regular meetings with ACOG [Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games] to advise on venue issues, venue concerns about making venues accessible and so I was appointed to that group. And then, of course, the Paralympics, which involved disabled athletes, was convened immediately after the Olympics, and it was the same committee of us were involved in all kinds of planning issues involved with the Paralympics as well. And, of course, during the Olympics, there is an Olympic relay where, you know, the torch comes to town and different people are chosen to carry the torch and during the Paralympics there's assembler Paralympic relay and the flame came from Barcelona [Spain] where the Olympics had been in the previous year and had traveled through the United States and I was one of the people selected in Atlanta to carry the Paralympic torch and, you know, you have a different area of town where you carry the torch. My place where I carried the torch was right down Peachtree Street, so it was right near Channel 2 [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], and it was a good long stretch and what they did was they mounted a little carrier to your chair so that the flame was off to the side and you could just maneuver your chair. So there was a point in which, you know, I did carry the torch. I was able to keep my torch that I have today as a reminder of doing so and that was prior to the, you know, the torch that was carried to the stadium for the opening of the Paralympic Games. And, of course, athletes had come to Atlanta from all over the world which was ama- it was amazing to have people show up to this town to get here from all the places in the world for the Olympics, to think that our town was some place was a destination for people all over the world but it was even more astounding to see all these thousands of athletes to come in wheelchairs and, of course, then the airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] had to figure out how to handle this volume of people who were coming with disabilities. And everybody made it, there were a lot of problems, but Atlanta finally kind of started to wake up and realize that, that people with disabilities were here, and it has been a changed place ever since. People are much more receptive. At that point, the city also formed an Office of Disability Affairs [Office of Equal Employment Opportunity and Disability Affairs] and now they have somebody who's there full-time handling disability issues. So it, it really helped to have the Paralympics and the Olympics in town to, to push that forward. Story_ID: 495237 Speaker 1: After your surgery, what happens after your surgery? Speaker 2: Well, in, that was in October of '96 [1996]. Well in the following year, I developed a sore and had to have another surgery in '97 [1997]. When these things occur, you have to be off of your, of the area where it is, so I was going from one surgery to having to be off to another surgery in '97 [1997]. And then, after recovering, that, that surgery was in July of '97 [1997] and then, and then you're in, I was in the hospital for several weeks after, about six weeks after that surgery and got out in the fall. At that point, my dad [Albert Miles Davis] became ill and had decided to give up his medical practice, and then got ill very quickly and the beginning of 1998, he was very sick and had--was diagnosed actually with prostate cancer back in the early '80s [1980s] and had radiation and was kind of managing the cancer but it had really progressed by 1998. And at that point, my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] had, had run for three terms of the city council [Atlanta City Council], had run for mayor in '93 [1993] and was not successful in running for mayor, but then had started working for the city afterwards in the water department. She was head of customer service in the water department and worked there for possibly, I guess, about five years until she finally--my dad was ill, he was at home, it got to be too much to, to try to continue to work with, and take care of him. She hired some people to come and I was actually at home during this period of time. I was not working. I had started looking, had applied for a judgeship with and somebody said well, you've trained with judges, you know, you've worked with Judge Cooper [Clarence Cooper] and you would be a good judge and I was always told that, that, that was my calling and that was, I had trained at so many different levels of court until it would be a good fit for me to apply. I applied for one position and, in '97 [1997], I guess, ninety- the end of '97 [1997] and it was my first time applying. So, it was, I was not in that, in that chain of people who customarily apply. And that's what happens normally is, when a position's open, people apply and there's usually a hierarchy of people who've applied a number of times and unless, you know, you are somebody who has been encouraged to apply and so you're told basically that's your position, if you're not in that, in that situation, then you've got to get in line and wait your turn until those people are appointed. So I was basically at the end of the line for a position in city court [Municipal Court of Atlanta], which was a judgeship in traffic court in the City of Atlanta [Georgia], but at least I felt I had put myself out there. So I really, I wasn't working during that period of time and I was at home during the period which my dad was really going downhill. And he, you know, eventually got sicker and sicker and by the summer of '98 [1998], he was very ill and he died in September of 1998 and, of course, that was devastating for everybody. At, and, you know, it took a while for everybody to kind of adjust to, and, of course, it's something you really never recover from. But, you know, having been such a presence and then having been ill at hou- at the house, it was difficult for us to figure out, you know, how to be in the house without him. Story_ID: 495238 Speaker 1: Then I knew at tha- at some point I had to figure out what I was going to do with myself. And I got called for jury duty in late '98 [1998] and while I was there, I went to talk with a friend of our family who was a state court judge and-- Speaker 2: Who was? Speaker 1: His name is A.L. Thompson. And actually his father had died, I think when he was a young man and my father [Albert Miles Davis] had been their family doctor and he was kind of a father figure to him and his sisters and he knew that, what my experiences had been, kind of with Judge Ruffin [John H. Ruffin, Jr.] and leaving, leaving the court of appeals [Court of Appeals of Georgia], nobody had known that I had had cancer but he knew that I was having difficulty during that period of time and asked me if I thought about being a magistrate. And he had the authority as the chief judge of state court to appoint magistrates to, to work and asked me if I thought about doing that and I really hadn't because I did not, was not aware of the magistrate court [Magistrate Court of Fulton County] at the time. He said, "Well, let me see what I can do." And so, you know, he kind of left it out there for a while and really for that year of '99 [1999], I didn't do much. I was involved in activities. I didn't, I started working out a lot and going and exercising and I was going to Shepherd [Shepherd Center, Atlanta, Georgia] every day. Fortunately, I, as a result of my accident, I had sued Toyota [Toyota Motor Corporation] and had sued State of California based on what we alleged were defects in the vehicle. And I settled with the two of them so I had some financial resources when that--was not pressed to work at the time but, you know, I had a law degree and had been working and knew that I needed to get back on track and decide, and do something with all the preparation I had. But through the year, '99 [1999] passed and I got involved in a lot of disability issues and around that time I was using MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority], the MARTA para-transit service, which is the accompanying bus service to transport people with disabilities, it's the smaller buses and had not, had had limited success with getting to work on time and getting wherever you want to get on time. And there were a lot of meetings about dealing with MARTA and how to improve the service because they would have us waiting for long periods of time out in the weather, not showing up at all. The, the bus services, the buses, the fixed route buses, the big buses, did not have lifts on them. They were not accessible. The trains did not make the announcements that they needed to make so that if you were visually impaired, you knew where you were, you couldn't hear the announcement of the station and there were a lot of improvements that needed to be made. Speaker 2: Well how were you getting back and forth to the Shepherd Center? Was somebody driving you to all your appointments (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was using, I was using MARTA. What you would do is you call and make an appointment, make a reservation and tell them about what time you needed to go places and then they would come and pick you up and they'll drop you off where you need to go. But it's a, you know, it's kind of half dozen here, half dozen another places. You never know, at that point, you, you could pretty much guarantee that you were going to be late or you would get there too early and, you know, just be stuck there until the place opened and you might be waiting forever for them to show back up; it was just not a consistent service. Story_ID: 495239 Speaker 1: We started meeting about, with MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority] to try to affect some changes and finally there were some attorneys that had decided that they were going to, on a pro bono basis, file a lawsuit and they were looking for plaintiffs who had been hurt or who had been victims of all these snafus with MARTA. And somebody suggested that I would be a good candidate as one of the plaintiffs. And so there were five of us who were selected with different disabilities and different experiences with MARTA who were selected to be plaintiffs in this lawsuit against MARTA. And so the suit was filed in federal court, and, of course, we had discovery and they took depositions and we had to describe our experiences with MARTA and, of course, I had rude drivers who I felt challenged me and tried to intimidate me and put me in kind of, were, did not have a sensitivity training they should have had to deal with people with disabilities. Did not know how to talk to people, were just rude and there were a lot of, a lot of problems. And we included all of that in the lawsuit and eventually we prevailed in every instance that we cited. There was one instance where we complained about elevators not being operable in certain stations from time to time, and them not having real solutions for that and the judge did not quite see that we could, that there would be a real solution for that because elevators do break, but I've seen improvement even in MARTA staying on top of elevators since then. Of course, they have slipped back since the lawsuit. I'm still using MARTA and I feel that it's important for me to stay and use it as much as I can because I'm, I need to monitor for everybody else. And so I do rely on it and I still, there's still ups, there's still a need maybe for another lawsuit to be filed right now, but it's better than it was. Story_ID: 495240 Speaker 1: Did you learn how to drive, though? Speaker 2: I did. I--actually I had some apprehension after my accident in doing so. But there was a period of time when I was not working when I decided, well, I had let my license lapse and I said, well, let me go ahead and, and attempt--. I had bought a van. I thought, my, initially when I came home, it was more convenient for us to get a van than trying to transfer in and out of a vehicle, in my wheelchair, and getting in the car and putting the, particularly in bad weather. It's easier just to wheel into a van. So, we bought a van right after I came home and I had bought another van in and around '92 [1992] but it was not equipped for me to drive. And so we were getting towards the end of, going towards 2000 and the van was going to be, needing to be replaced so I figured, you know, while I'm off during this time, I might as well do driver training. So I did go through the training at the Shepherd Center [Atlanta, Georgia] and got my license and so now I can drive even though I'm not driving yet (laughter), but I can drive. Story_ID: 495241 Speaker 1: So the lawsuit with MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority] was in 2001. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and just before that time, of course, I was still, had in mind, and Judge Thompson [A.L. Thompson] had in mind, appointing me to the magistrate court [Magistrate Court of Fulton County]. There was, he was waiting for a vacancy to--there were three full-time judges at the time and he decided not to wait and to appoint me as a part-time judge and that happened at the beginning of 2000. And so, I was called to court to preside over plea hearings at the jail where people who were convicted of misdemeanors had been in jail a sufficient amount of time and they were ready to take pleas. So I would go to the jail and hear calendars just to, to take their guilty pleas. At this point, the, the benches, the courtrooms that were used by magistrate court judges, none of them were accessible. The one lift that we had installed in the courthouse was in a courtroom that was occupied by a, another judge, and I could not use her courtroom. So here I am, after all these many years, advocating to try to get the benches accessible, it was actually my time to be a judge and the bench needed to be accessible for me. And I could not do anything in the courthouse until the courtroom that magistrate court used was accessible and, fortunately, the court administrator agreed that they needed to expedite ordering the lift for, at least one of the courtrooms that I would be using. And so, you know, I complained because I was only doing calendars at the jail, that was only one calendar and the bulk of the work was being done at the courthouse. So, by, I think by June of 2000, they had installed a ramp system that takes forever for county government to work to actually figure out what kind of lift to install, but they did have a ramp going up to the bench so I started doing the regular work of magistrate court by 2000, by the summer of 2000. And so then I was still part-time but they would call me in to do calendars, two and three days a week, and it was enough to get my, my foot in the door. I was doing criminal, first appearance calendars for misde- well, for all the cases that involved Fulton County police [Fulton County Police Department] and police from other jurisdictions. Atlanta [Atlanta Police Department] had their own court for, for first appearance hearings and then Fulton County [Superior Court of Fulton County] would hear the hearings for Fulton County police and all the other police departments that are in Fulton County, that would be the, all the university police departments and all the other cities in Fulton County. So I was doing those hearings, I was doing small claim court hearings. There's a child support calendar, the abandonment calendar. I was doing that calendar and on different days, I did, I had different calendars and finally there was a new position created, one judge had been appointed in that position before me and when she left to go to the state court [State Court of Fulton County], I was, been appointed a full-time magistrate in 2002. And I just had my five year anniversary as a magistrate court judge on September 11th of this year. Story_ID: 495242 Speaker 1: What type of judge are you? Speaker 2: Well, I am s- I am told that I am very patient, and I am, and I try to give everybody their day in court. What happens in magistrate court [Magistrate Court of Fulton County] is that often litigants are not represented by counsel, and they are not sophisticated in knowing how to handle their cases in court. One of the calendars that I handle quite frequently is a warrant application calendar where anybody can pay ten dollars to take out a warrant against anybody else. And there are any number of reasons why people take out warrants. They don't often even understand what they expect to happen when a warrant is applied for, and so sometimes they're there just for the judge to tell the other person to leave them alone. Sometimes they really want somebody arrested, sometimes they just need a referee in a family dispute. And I think, too, if you were to ask the, the deputies that work in the courtroom with me, they would tell you that I'm very patient, that I allow everybody to feel like they've been heard, and that I'm fair. And I, I think that, I try to model myself after Judge Cooper [Clarence Cooper] who enjoyed a great reputation amongst the people that came to court. A lot of attorneys didn't appreciate it, and they may not appreciate it with me, but they don't have a choice because I'm the boss in the courtroom, and there's nothing they can do but to, to get with my program. So, I, I try to be very fair and allow everybody to feel like they've had their day in court even when they don't make sense and I try to help them make sense and try to make them fe- even if I don't rule in their favor, they can understand why I've not ruled in their favor when they leave the courtroom and I've heard back from people that, that that's what they've gotten when they've appeared before me. Speaker 1: So, actually becoming a judge without any trial experience-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I mean, do you think that it's any more difficult to become a judge, to learn, you know, what you do without that experience? Speaker 2: Well having been with Judge Cooper and having observed him as a trial judge was helpful, but I think my credibility with judges and attorneys has been, to some people who have not known my background, has been something that I've had to deal with because everybody of course has stories about what they've done as an attorney representing, you know, different people. Of course, I've had, I was thrown into the situation and now have a full range of stories about what I've done as a judge. And I have observed attorneys and I've known what they've done that I've appreciated and what they haven't done, and there are a lot of attorneys who are trial attorneys who've always said, even when I was a law clerk, that you've really done the analysis that a judge would have done. And so, I think I've just trained from another perspective. And I think a lot of people have not had the experience I've had to know, you know, how to sit back and listen to both sides and decide cases and know how to decide them quickly and be able to tell people in their face that this is how I'm ruling in your favor because a lot of the colleagues that I work with don't tell people, don't announce the decisions in court. They may mail it to them, or have a law clerk call them up later and I was the person who always had to call the attorneys to tell them, on Judge Cooper's behalf, what the decision had been. So I'm accustomed to doing that and I, that's the kind of judge I've become. Story_ID: 495243 Speaker 1: Do you have any stories to share, maybe something funny or maybe something, or a case that was very important? Speaker 2: Well, there's a full gamut of cases. Recently, I, of course I h- there's a man, John Mark Karr, who identified himself as the person who was present when JonBenet Ramsey was killed. And recently he was accused of being in an altercation with his father [Wexford Karr] and was arrested and brought to my court [Magistrate Court of Fulton County] several weeks ago. He had never been arrested in Georgia before and ordinarily in a domestic violence situation as that was, we allow, and really require, that people undergo counseling unless the father was not injured and actually he was charged as well. So, we usually require that they undergo counseling, do not subject them to the full gamut of consequences of being an accused and having them go through a preliminary hearing and be tried for an offense when it's their first time. So he was required to go counseling, to go to family violence counseling and he agreed to do it and that's what he did. Of course, he's come back after his first six weeks and has complied with my order, with my order to do that, and I handled domestic violence cases every Friday and they are very difficult. Of course, women have been, have, are the primary victims, and they have been injured, and there are all kinds of challenges with them coming back to court and changing their minds and not wanting to testify. You know, the man has been in jail for a couple of weeks and they don't have money anymore and they need the breadwinner back home. And so it's very difficult to hear the cases, to hear the acts of violence and to know that children are being brought up in this environment and possibly starting a cycle of violence again with another generation, and those cases are hard, but then that warrant application calendar is, you know, you have hard cases there. And I had a case this week where there were women, a group of senior citizens, one was taking out a warrant against another because they had had their community meeting and there is friction between the new officers and the old officers. And before the meeting started, they knew that there was going to be a problem with the financial report. And so they had, there had been some talk prior to the meeting that there was going to be an attack on the financial secretary--now these are all old women, there was, be an attack on the financial secretary or the president so the president was bracing for some is- something to happen at the meeting. Well, she called the meeting to order and then they, they said a prayer, started the meeting, she's on the microphone and called for the financial report. Well, just everything, everything broke loose during the, everybody started screaming and hollering at the financial secretary. Now she's about 4'11" and is trying to give her report. There were witnesses on both sides; there were about six people on one side and five people on the other side. A warrant was taken out against a lady who got fed up with the meeting, went up to the, the president, the president saw her coming up and quickly adjourned the meeting, started announcing in the microphone, "The meeting is adjourned," when the lady started charging her. The lady tried to grab the microphone, they scuffled over the microphone and the president's wrist was twisted. So she came to take out, the police were called, they didn't do anything. So somebody told her to come down to the courthouse and take out a warrant against this other old lady. So I'm hearing the case and the lady (laughter) first gets up and, you know, people have no inhibitions about what they say when they come to court. So, she was setting the tone for what the meeting was like and I'm liable to hear anything out of people's mouths, and I have two deputies that sit in front of me. So, the, the president was talking about well what happened when the meeting first started and she said, this, this defendant came up to the front of the room and said, "Well I smell some stink ass perfume in here." Well it just went on from there and the courtroom erupted, and it's hard to keep your composure. I'm really very good about not laughing at people 'cause they're serious, and she wasn't laughing, but I couldn't, I put my head down, I was trying to find out what kind of room, were they in a big room or small room, but I, I completely lost it and, you know, everybody was laughing and, you know, then you quickly, you know, got to step back in and understand that this lady is serious, and she was not laughing and I had to quickly get, get serious about it. And then I heard from the other side and she said it was her microphone and she could grab it if she wanted to. And then they went back and forth with each other about what happened and, you know, of course, the, the defendants said, "Your Honor, I'm not guilty of anything but love in the first degree." She said, "I love everybody in the courtroom." Well, you know, it's an untenable situation. I'm not going to have this lady arrested, she's in her seventies, but this other woman has been injured and something has got to happen. So normally in that situation, I did find that there was probable cause in the case and charged the lady with simple battery for having twisted her, her wrist. And I've set them to come back to court next week. Hopefully by next week I will figure out what needs to happen with them but that's kind of a lighter side of what I do and that's what, what makes the, the hard times kind of bearable that you know you have a situation like this (laughter). Story_ID: 495244 Speaker 1: Tell me the other activities that you're involved with outside of the court [Magistrate Court of Fulton County], maybe some of the, other organizations that you're involved with. Speaker 2: Okay. In '96 [1996], I was asked to join the board of the Atlanta Women's Fund. At the time, the fund was a part of the Metropolitan Community Foundation [Metropolitan Atlanta Community Foundation, Inc.; Community Foundation for Greater Atlanta], which, in Atlanta [Georgia], is a combination of foundations and organizations that are, give grants out. They're usual- they're private funds that make grants to needy organizations. And the Atlanta Women's Fund was focused primarily on women and girls. They had, they focused on women who are homeless with domestic violence and economic justice at the time and would give grants three times a year to those different, in those different focus areas and they would give grants of about ten thousand, maybe they would have a hundred thousand in each grant cycle to give small grants to grassroots organizations. Well, it became very popular and would have an annual luncheon. It was the first organization in time to have a luncheon to charge a thous- a hundred dollars per person for a luncheon. And the first luncheon featured Gloria Steinem and Jane Fonda as the, the guest speakers at the luncheon, and it was a hit and it's just taken off from there. And it's, ever since that first luncheon, it, the ball was rolling and eventually became a freestanding foundation on its own. It's grown, has assets in the millions of dollars, became the Atlanta Women's Foundation, and I was a board member there until two years ago and then just rotated off the board to, I've had my cycle of about ten years. But it is a fantastic force in the community to empower women and girls and it's a, we were an active board, not only did we have to make personal contributions to the foundation for the administration, all the, at that point, a great majority of the money that was raised went directly to grants which meant that the board members had to raise money or personally contribute for all the administration of the, of the foundation since it has grown so much until the board can't do that but the board all, had to do all of the, the site visits and making decisions about where all the grants went. So you got to know the grantees from one year to the next and so it was a great experience in getting to know what is happening in Atlanta in the, with women and girls and where the needs are and we had to constantly be educated about what was happening in areas of domestic violence and homelessness and, of course then, the foundation expanded to other areas in teen pregnancy and women's health and religious issues and so it's, it's grown tremendously and from that little small fund to a foundation. So it was a great experience to be involved with the Atlanta Women's Foundation. Story_ID: 495245 Speaker 1: And you're also on the board at-- Speaker 2: On the--the Shepherd Center [Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) Shepherd Center? Speaker 2: --has, has a board of directors but I was asked to--my mother [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis] was actually a member of the board of directors for a time. And so she stepped down from the board of directors and at that time they asked me to be a part on the advisory board in which you act as an ambassador. You're called upon from time to time to do things on behalf of Shepherd to, you know, sometimes if, if they need somebody to come and speak about a particular issue, then they may call on me to do that. There are people who, from time to time, who are going to donate money to Shepherd and they may need people to put a face to patients at Shepherd Center and they will call on me to go on tours with those people to try to put a face to really what the work is, that's going on at Shepherd and, of course, I'm there all the time to advise them, anything that they need in terms of new offerings at Shepherd and, and I go there to work out three times a week so I'm constantly involved in everything that's going on there and it's, it has expanded recently with a new wing. It's going to be probably the largest spinal cord center in this, in the eastern part of the United States and they are now opening a family residential center, which we did not have. My mother had to get an apartment and live up some, a short distance from the hospital, but now Shepherd is building its own wing for families to live right at the hospital, and so that's, that's very important now. Story_ID: 495246 Speaker 1: Well what's next for you? Speaker 2: Well, fortunately, my job is one that I would like to do as long as I work. I'm fortunate that I do not have to run for office. I am at a court [Magistrate Court of Fulton County] where I'm doing something different every day and it interests me, you know, to still stay at this level and to reach people at the level where I am. I have been asked about whether I have as- aspirations to go either to the state court [State Court of Fulton County], which is a trial level court and I would be stuck doing trials all the time, and that does not interest me. And the superior court [Superior Court of Fulton County], of course, would be more money and would probably be more prestigious, but I do not believe in the death penalty, and inevitably you're going to be faced with that decision in superior court as to whether or not you have a trial and whether the district attorney decides to go for the death penalty and I don't even want to, to have to be involved in making that decision. You would be sworn to uphold the law and so, and the law in the State of Georgia now is the death penalty. So, I am where I am and that's, I enjoy being there. I need to--at the point which I came to the court of appeals [Court of Appeals of Georgia] was, I mean, to the magistrate court, it was only five years ago, so I've got a long time before I can be vested in Fulton County [Georgia]. And so, there are chances for advancement to maybe chief magistrate at some point. We have somebody who's in that position now. Right now I'm the, the judge with the, actually senior status of the judges, the full-time judges there, so maybe there's an opportunity for me to move there at some point down the road when she's ready to move on, but I'm enjoying what I'm doing, and it's a job that I, I would like to do as long as I can continue to work. Story_ID: 495247 Speaker 1: Do you have a concern about Atlanta [Georgia] and the African American community as it relates to what's going on in the community with the, with African Americans? Speaker 2: Well, you know, the, in, in this court [Magistrate Court of Fulton County], I don't see very many white people on the criminal calendar. The majority of the people that I see are African Americans and they are poor and many are arrested over and over again because I'm seeing people charged with misdemeanors and it, it is a cycle, I mean, we're there to, to do the work all the time, to basically process people but I'm concerned that really, Atlanta is, is developing at an extremely fast level and people are being displaced. And I don't know that we have the, the income in this town to support everything that's being developed. And certainly I see, I don't see black people being able to make the incomes to be able to live all around this town as property values go up and certainly all of our housing projects have, public housing, has certainly improved the condition, but we've seen as they've moved to mixed income, that the vast majority of low income people are not able to stay and they are in, now moving to other counties where you see crime going up, but others are--elderly people that are not able to stay where they are. So, it's a, it's a big concern that Atlanta's becoming a very expensive city and it's moving people out who have been living in Atlanta traditionally and aren't going to have a place. I think that, you know, in, our education system [Atlanta Public Schools] is, is clearly, there's some improvements with our superintendent [Beverly L. Hall], but we're still at the bottom, in terms of test scores. I mean, I don't understand the children that I see that come to court are able to drop out of school and many have not finished high school and it's almost the exception when you have a person to come to court who's finished high school who's in the age range of ab- under twenty-five years old because they've all been allowed to drop out of school. That's a real concern of mine. You can tell when they talk to you that they have not, nobody's stayed on them to, to insist that they learn how to speak correct English. You don't even understand what these kids are saying these days. So, Atlanta has a lot of problems where, whereas we, you know, we are developing and we- we're looking good in terms of all the new high rises and new developments, we've got some real problems at the core. Story_ID: 495248 Speaker 1: Now I know that you're very young-- Speaker 2: I'm not that young (laughter). Speaker 1: --well, for this question, well people who are in your age group will say, well, I haven't thought about it, but what would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Well, you know, recently I have moved. I had been living with my family for forty-five years up to, at the house where we were [in Atlanta, Georgia]. So I, I actually moved away from here, moved away from the family home two years ago. And so, I'm at the point now where I'm living independently, did not think that that was ever going to be possible and I guess a lot of people measure their lives by how many boards they're on, or how many committees they sit on and, you know, learning how to live independently, for me, has been a big, a big deal. And so what I like to do every day is try to be an example for people to see. I get up with a positive attitude and, you know, I carry a mantle of being black, female and a person with a disability and that's a lot to manage all the time and I've just tried to be an asset to think about the kind of person my parents [HistoryMaker Myrtle Davis and Albert Miles Davis] would like for me to be and--'cause I feel like I'm an extension of them and so I would like for people to say that wherever she went, she was positive, she set a good example and that she's somebody that we looked up to and she treated us fairly when we were there. And I hope that they would see that I would treat other people the way I would want to be treated and I, that's the kind of the way that I live my life. Story_ID: 495249 Speaker 1: Given your concerns about the African American community and because this information will be made available for future generations, what message would you like to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: You need to stay in school as long as you can because you never know what the world is going to be like. There are resources there for you and unless you avail yourself of education, you will not be able to participate in anything other than the criminal justice system. There will be no options for you. School is most important, and although it's, you may think that you're not learning anything that's relevant, the longer you stay in school, the better off you will be. And you should get the highest degree you can get so that you're prepared to do whatever is available for you when you get out. Speaker 1: Well, I want to thank you for taking the time to share your story with us. Speaker 2: Thank you very much for the opportunity myself. Story_ID: 495250 Speaker 1: This is the Trumpet Awards. In the picture this is the Doctors' Committee on Implementation [sic. Doctors' Committee for Implementation] that received a Trumpet Award for the desegregation of hospitals. And on the left is Dr. Roy Bell, in the middle is Dr. Otis Smith [Otis W. Smith] and to the right is my dad, Albert Davis [Albert Miles Davis]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is my [maternal] grandmother, Emmalee Reid [Emmalee Williams Reid], and my mother, [HistoryMaker] Myrtle Davis, at a football game, I believe in 1977 at South Carolina State University [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is my [paternal] grandfather, Edward Davis [Edward Langston Davis, Sr.], and me, probably in 1959, I was probably one year old and we are between the two houses that he built on Fair Street, where I, my first house at, the first place I lived in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me at Santa Clara Valley Medical Center [San Jose, California] after my spinal cord injury and at my bedside is my mother, Myrtle Davis and my sister, Stacey, who is now [HistoryMaker] Stacey Stewart. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: All right, I was--my sister and I were both Girl Scouts growing up and this is me in my uniform for Troop 910. I was probably about ten years old and my sister's probably four years old, that's Stacey. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And this is me at Stanford University [Stanford, California] when I started feeding my need to be a performer with two of my close friends at Stanford. We are the Pointless Sisters [ph.]. That's me on the left, Lisa Carroll [ph.] in the middle and Carrie Casey on the right. That's at Stanford University. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, this is a picture of me receiving the torch from Mayor Bill Campbell at the time, at the beginning of a torch relay to commemorate the anniversary of the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act [Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990]. That's Bill Campbell on the right with me. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, and this is my family, in 1993, at the opening of my mother's campaign headquarters when she ran for mayor of Atlanta and so that's my sister, Stacey, and my mother, Myrtle, my dad Albert, and of course me in the middle. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Who did she run against? Speaker 1: Bill Campbell and [HistoryMaker] Michael Lomax. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken for a magazine, probably in about 1964. I would have been about six years old and I think it was around that time. That's my mother and me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is a portion of the Davis family at the fiftieth wedding anniversary of my grandparents. They are my father and his brother, from the top, it's my uncle, Edward Davis [Edward Langston Davis, Jr.] and his wife, Louise [Louise Fowler Davis]; that's my mother and my father. Seated from left to right is my cousin, Emilie Louise Davis; my grandmother; that's me in the middle, my grandfather, Edward Davis; and my cousin, Edward Davis III [Edward Langston Davis III]. He's called, his nickname is Bud. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And those are my grandparents, Edward Davis and Lena Davis [Lena Miles Davis] at the anniv- fiftieth anniversary celebration. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: We're just going to get this middle picture. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And that is a picture of my father at age eight weeks old. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That, that is my graduation picture, 1976, from Northside High School [North Atlanta High School] in Atlanta. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is a picture of me at my graduation from Emory law school [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia] in May of 1985. In the picture is the dean of the law school, Tom Morgan [Thomas D. Morgan] and that's me in the middle and pushing me at the time is my cousin, George Land [ph.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture from June of 1980, at my graduation from Stanford University. The person in the photo on the left is Dr. Henry Breitrose [Henry S. Breitrose], who was the head of the Department of Communication at Stanford. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. That picture was taken the morning of my first day at school in my backyard going to St. Paul of the Cross elementary school [St. Paul of the Cross Catholic School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: That was in 1964. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That was my sen- my senior picture from the yearbook for Northside High School. It was taken actually in 1975...