 Story_ID: 369770 Speaker 1: We're gonna start by slating. My name is Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer. Matt Hickey [Matthew Hickey] is the videographer. Would you state your name, and spell it for me? Speaker 2: Sure, it's Wilhelmina--my whole name? Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 2: Wilhelmina Ruth Fitzgerald Delco [HistoryMaker Wilhelmina Delco], and it's W-I-L-H-E-L-M-I-N-A, Ruth, R-U-T-H, Fitzgerald, F-I-T-Z-G-E-R-A-L-D, Delco, D-E-L-C-O. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: July 16, 1929. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: In Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And today's date is-- Speaker 2: May 4th, 2006. Speaker 1: And the interview is being held where? Speaker 2: At my home in Austin, Texas. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 369771 Speaker 1: Now, we're going to--I'm gonna ask you a couple of questions. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably a mix between periwinkle and royal blue. Speaker 1: And your favorite food? Speaker 2: I like to eat, so that's hard (laughter). I can't say; I really like good salads-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and good soups. Speaker 1: And tell me your favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: My favorite, I think, is to visit my sister [Muriel Fitzgerald Storey] and my brother [Daniel Fitzgerald] (laughter), and we go places together, so really I enjoy being with my family, but we travel around the world, and there're lots of very interesting places that we have been, or plan to see, hopefully. Speaker 1: So there's not one place that you just really loved? Speaker 2: Home (laughter). No, I don't care where you go, I always enjoy getting back home, but we used to enjoy going when my brother-in-law was alive; my sister and brother-in-law and my husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.] and I went to Aruba the first week in August for years, and I enjoyed that, but that was family-related. I can't say it had that much to do with the place-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I enjoy seeing new things and going new places, and we love to cruise. If I had to figure out a favorite way to travel, it would be to cruise 'cause you only unpack once (laughter), and you can go and see things, then come back. I'm not a great hand on experimenting with food and looking for places to stay in strange places, so that answers all of the questions that make traveling fun and easy for me. Speaker 1: Okay. What is your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring, I think; everything's all fresh and new. It's not hot hot, and it's not cold cold; well, I live in Texas so it's not cold cold anytime (laughter), but I think spring; it's the newness, the freshness. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite phrase? Speaker 2: Well, my husband has a favorite phrase and his is, "Prior preparation prevents poor performance," so I always respond, "Don't do today what you can put off until tomorrow 'cause tomorrow you might not have to do it," (laughter), which says that I'm more I guess inclined to be spontaneous than he is, so I always say that I do what I have to do and I pray over the rest (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: I do what I can do, and I pray over the rest. Story_ID: 369772 Speaker 1: Okay, so now, we're gonna get started and we're going to take a journey back into your life and your family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, let's start with your mother. Tell me her name, and spell it for me, and tell me where she was born and where she was raised. Speaker 2: My mother was born--her name is--was Juanita, J-U-A-N-I-T-A; her maiden name was Heath, H-E-A-T-H. She was married to my father whose name was Fitzgerald [William Fitzgerald, Sr.], of course, and then she married later my stepfather [Charles Watson] whose name was Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N, so her name was Juanita--oh, her middle name was Marie, I forgot that. Boy, she had a lot of names! Juanita Marie Heath Fitzgerald Watson [Juanita Heath Watson], and she was born in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: I think she was born in 1911. Speaker 1: Okay--in Baton Rouge. Speaker 2: No, New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: New Orleans. Speaker 2: She was born in New Orleans, and her father [George Heath] worked for Illinois Central Railroad there as a master carpenter, and when she was nine years old they transferred him to Chicago [Illinois], so they moved to Chicago. Speaker 1: Did your mother share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: Well, she grew up in Louisiana-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and she grew up in the Louisiana that was full of all the superstitions and people scrubbing the door and the first person in the house had to be a man, and all of those kind of things, and so she had a lot of stories, and my grandfather had a lot of stories about funeral parades, and he said--he told one about--he was a little boy and they had this jazz parade and he was running behind the casket, you know, with all these other people, and the casket opened up and this man said, "What's going on?" And they dropped the casket and everybody ran (laughter). So he used to tell outrageous stories like that, and my mother was a great storyteller about her life (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us some of the stories. Speaker 2: Well, she just talked about her life; she married because my grandfather would not let her go out on a date after he promised. He had remarried after my grandmother [Wilhelmina Irving Heath] died, and she felt like he had made a promise, and when he didn't keep his promise, she married my daddy, and we always said it kind of was outta spite; but she had five children, so I don't know how spiteful that could have been. But anyway, she married at sixteen, and I was born when she was seventeen, and she had five children. But she told--my mother had an excellent memory, even when she died. She could remember everybody's birthday, anniversary--even the people that were fairly casual acquaintances; she really remembered things very well. Speaker 1: How far did she go in school? Speaker 2: She went to--she didn't graduate from high school 'cause she married my father when she was seventeen, but she went back and she got a GED [General Educational Development] and she said--she lived with my sister in New Jersey for a number of years, and while she was with my sister in New Jersey, she enrolled--she got a GED and she enrolled at Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and she always wanted--she told my sister to make sure that on her grave it said that she went to Rutgers University. So she was very--I think she would have been an outstanding student because of her thirst for knowledge and her love for reading, and her remarkable memory. But she actually formally finished maybe the tenth grade, and then, like I said, she went back after, after my sister was married--my youngest sister [Muriel Fitzgerald Storey]--and she stayed with her. She went back, got a GED, and then enrolled in college, so she was always mindful of education; she read a lot all the time, and she read--all the time she was here with me she did crossword puzzles, and every morning she--and I do it to this day--every morning she gets up--she'd get up and she'd work the crossword puzzle and she says, "Well, I don't have Alzheimer's today." (Laughter) And that's what--I still do it; I get up every morning and work the crossword puzzle--reminds me of my mother, but it also says, "I don't have Alzheimer's today." Speaker 1: So, did she work outside the home at all? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. She worked--in Chicago they had a ward system, and the only way you could get involved in the workforce was to get involved in politics, so she was a precinct captain--Democratic precinct captain in the 2nd Ward Regular Democratic Organization. Every Monday, she and my father went to the Democratic meeting, and my mother worked for seventeen years as an adult probation officer for the City of Chicago, and that's where I decided--when I went to college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] I majored in sociology because I had every intention of being an adult probation officer, but I kind of got sidetracked, but I did get my degree in sociology, but mother worked in the criminal court system for seventeen years, until her hearing and her sight began to fail her, and she had to retire, and she appointed or got my sister appointed to that job. By then I was married and moving in Texas, so--moved to Texas--so my second sister became an adult probation officer where mother had once been. Story_ID: 369773 Speaker 1: What type of mother was she [Delco's mother, Juanita Heath Watson]? Speaker 2: Excellent. Speaker 1: Was she the disciplinarian of the house (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. My mother brooked no backtalk--none of that, particularly since I had two brothers [William Fitzgerald, Jr. and Daniel Fitzgerald], and they--we always felt that my father [William Fitzgerald, Sr.] was a great talker, and we felt that all five of us got his gift of gab. I think one of the things that I've always been able to do is speak well extemporaneously, and mother would always say that we had gotten the gift of gab from my daddy, but she did not brook any problems. I remember my brothers used to always get in trouble. I was too afraid to get in trouble; I was an outstanding student because I loved books. The sister next to me [Dolores Fitzgerald Bowman] was very, very attractive, so I felt like she had the looks and I had the brains (laughter), so I was really a bookworm, to be perfectly truthful, so I never got in trouble, I was too afraid to, but my brothers stayed in trouble and my mother was constantly threatening them, but they could talk their way out of getting any real punishment, and she'd end up laughing at 'em (laughter). Speaker 1: What do you remember most about your mother? Speaker 2: My mother was dedicated and determined, and fearless--she was absolutely fearless. One of the things I always remember about mother is she never--groceries, for example. Mother would go to the store and get groceries and she'd get back home, and if the milk didn't smell well, or the potato chips seemed stale, Mother would march right back to the store and take 'em back all the time; she loved returning things. It would embarrass us but it didn't bother her a bit. She'd go buy clothes and then come home and say, "Now you know that really doesn't look right in this light." She'd get right back on the bus and take it back to the store. And she would, she would argue her point with anybody, and I think I got that from her; she never had any problem responding, she never had any problem looking people straight in the eye and telling 'em what was--she used to say, "And telling him what was on my sober mind." (Laughter) She, she was something else. Story_ID: 369774 Speaker 1: Let's talk about her parents. Speaker 2: Well, her mother was a--as far as I can tell, she always said her mother was a nurse, so her mother was probably a licensed vocational nurse, and--or kind of like a midwifey nurse--I'm assuming that. And when mother [Juanita Heath Watson] came to Chicago [Illinois], her mother did not live a year; she got appendicitis and died on her way to the hospital. Speaker 1: What was her mother's name? Speaker 2: Her name was Wilhelmina--Wilhelmina Irving [Wilhelmina Irving Heath]. What am I hesitating for? That was my grandmother's name. I always think of Elenora Irving because that was her grandmother's name, and remember I--the reason I never knew her grandmother, of course, and I never knew my grandmother-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but I remember Elenora Irving because mother had a letter from her once, and she wrote in this beautiful--what we call calligraphy, that beautiful curly script, and I was always so impressed. But that was mother's grandmother, and they lived in Louisiana, and I imagine that all of them left, and they had a problem during the Depression [Great Depression] when my mother moved to Chicago. Things were so bad in Louisiana that--they were light-skinned blacks, and a lot of them moved to California and did what my mother used to call passe blanc--they passed for white, and they used to always--mother said they used to tell her, "Now, if you come to California and you see me on the street, don't speak," (laughter) because they didn't want anybody to know they were black; it was--I guess times were so hard for black people that if you had any other option, you took advantage of it, so I have no idea of any of the relatives that were in that area when my mother was in Louisiana because most of them left Louisiana. And I remember when she came to live with me, she decided she wanted to rejoin the Catholic church, and she could never find the records because the church records where she lived, and presumably went to church, had burned. So there really isn't a whole lot of history there; she recalls some of it, and my husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.] built a family tree for her eightieth birthday, and she recalled as much as she could then, but she couldn't go back very far. Her father [George Heath] was--her father, my grandfather, was half white and half Indian [Native American], and mother always told the story about his mother. She had this child by this white man who was president of Straight University in New Orleans [Louisiana] where Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana] is now, and he had this child by this Indian, and she gave the child--his, his mother gave the child to this black family and her name was Cousin Fannie and she was--we always thought she was our cousin; Fannie Ferguson [ph.] was her name, but her family raised my grandfather, and when his mother gave him to this family and they promised her that they would take care of him, she sat outside the reservation and starved to death; she never--mother said that--grandpappy said that they tried--the blacks tried to give her food; she refused food and she was no longer welcome in her tribe because she had disgraced them by having this baby. But my grandfather heard from the Straight family--from the Heaths. For years we were always amazed when we were little, he'd get Christmas cards--they were somewhere up on the East Coast; he had moved up there with his family. But he wrote to my grandfather and my grandfather acknowledged that that was his father, but we never knew him or met him. It was fascinating. Story_ID: 369775 Speaker 1: We have gone back as far as we can. Speaker 2: Well, with my father--with my mother [Juanita Heath Watson]. Now, my father--my father's another story altogether. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father tells a different story of his life. I told you he had a gift of gab-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --so he would make up all these stories and you had no idea. His name was William--he said Patrick Fitzgerald, and we think that he was born in Fitzgerald, Georgia which is where the Fitzgerald came from, and mother swears that his middle name was really Percy, but when he got to Chicago [Illinois] and realized that the Fitzgerald was Irish and the William was Irish, and that this was a big, a big holiday--St. Patrick's Day--my father changed it to William Patrick Fitzgerald [William Fitzgerald, Sr.] (laughter), and he used to always say that he'd gone to college, and mother said, "No," because he was a year ahead of her in high school, and when she quit, he quit, too. But he worked for the post office and he worked very hard but he--he had, as I said, a gift of gab; he could talk his way into and out of anything. Mother used to say that--they went to these meetings at the Regular Democratic Organization [2nd Ward Regular Democratic Organization] on Monday nights and they had speakers and all of that, and sometimes the speakers didn't show up, and the chairman would just say, "Okay, Fitz, our speech tonight was supposed to be on China. Come up and talk about thirty minutes." Daddy had no idea what China was, or where it was, or what was going on, but he could get up and eloquently keep everybody spellbound for thirty minutes on China (laughter). He just had what everybody called a gift of gab. Speaker 1: How did your mother and father meet? Speaker 2: Well, he was the one that was gonna take her out on this date-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --and my grandfather [George Heath] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Refused. Speaker 2: --refused. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he said, "Well, let's get married." And she said, "Okay." Speaker 1: Did they go to school together (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, they were both at Phillips. Yeah, they were both at Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School] in Chicago. And interestingly enough, they both went to Douglas Elementary School [Stephen A. Douglas Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], and a long time later I went to Douglas Elementary School in Chicago, and when I got to the eighth grade, I had this old--this old teacher; her name was Miss Mason [ph.], and she taught my mother and my father, and whenever I did anything good, she'd say, "Just like your sweet mother Juanita." And whenever I didn't do something she thought I should have done, "You're just like that rascally father of yours," (laughter), so none--I tell that story, and so none of my kids wanted to go to a school where any of their siblings went, or where we went; they didn't wanna have any part of that. They said, "We don't want your teachers or your history coming back to beat up on us." But she--I'll never forget her; she wore those--what people call those coke bottle glasses, and she wore her hair in this bun and it was gray, and I can still see her shaking her head when she thought--mine was usually--she thought I should have done more, or something, and she'd say, "Now, if you really applied yourself, you would have been able to get this perfectly, but you're just like that daddy of yours," (laughter) so I don't ever recommend kids having to follow where their parents went to school. Story_ID: 369776 Speaker 1: How many siblings did you have? Can you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have two brothers and two sisters. I was the oldest of five children; my mother [Juanita Heath Watson] had five children in seven years. As a matter of fact, the sister that was next to me, and she has since passed--my birthday was July 16th, hers was July 14th the next year, so every year on the 15th of July, we were the same age, so we would have our birthday party the day we were twins. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Well, tell me their names, and start with yourself, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was the oldest. My sister's name was Dolores [Dolores Fitzgerald Bowman], D-O-L-O-R-E-S, and she married and she has three sons, but she passed in 1987 right here at my house, visiting me. It was awful. Anyway, then my brother--my oldest brother who was the apple of my mother's eye and she made no bones about her little bouncing black chocolate baby boy. She loved the ground my brother walked on. He was like my daddy [William Fitzgerald, Sr.] so he exploited it pretty well (laughter). He knew how to get around mother, and then my--and he passed in 1998. And my next brother is Daniel--his name was William Patrick, Jr. [William Fitzgerald, Jr.], and we called him Billy. And then, of course, when he got older he was Bill. But my youngest brother is Daniel; his name was Daniel Gardner Fitzgerald [Daniel Fitzgerald], and he lived in Chicago [Illinois], but last year he and his wife sold their home and they live in Orlando, Florida now. And then my youngest sister is Muriel Fitzgerald Storey, and her husband passed also, right here, while they were visiting me, and she lives in Orange, New Jersey. Story_ID: 369777 Speaker 1: Was your mother [Juanita Heath Watson] very light like the rest of her family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Why do you think she didn't-- Speaker 2: Well, she was a little girl. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: She was a little girl, but I'll tell you an interesting story. She married my stepfather [Charles Watson] who was three months older than her father [George Heath], but he had known her since she was a little girl in Chicago [Illinois] and he just thought the world circled around my mother. Matter of fact, they were married seventeen years before he passed, and he served my mother breakfast in bed every one of those seventeen years days--every day; he just--and he always told us, "You're so fortunate to have such a wonderful mother," and we'd say, "Um-hm, sure," (laughter). But he really--I think Mother was like a doll to him-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but she, she married him and was--they, they were together for, like I said, those seventeen years. Speaker 1: That was after your father [William Fitzgerald, Sr.] passed? Speaker 2: No, my father hadn't passed; they divorced. Speaker 1: Oh, they divorced. Speaker 2: They divorced when I was twelve years old. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah--and I was the oldest, so we had five--I mean there were five of us, and mother divorced. Speaker 1: Was your--your father was dark-skinned? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Do you think that was another reason why her dad didn't want him to date your mom? Speaker 2: Oh, it had nothing to do with the person. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He didn't object to the person; he just didn't want mother to go out-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he--and mother always contended it was because the woman he was married to looked upon her as a free servant, and the story mother told was she--at the last minute, she wanted mother to do something and my grandfather said, "Okay, you stay and do," I don't know what the lady's name was, but--, "You stay and--'cause she needs for you to do something." And so mother had planned to go to this party, and got in a dress and was all excited about it and everything, and she just decided she was gonna get married so she could go to do what she wanted to do. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And of course she didn't; she ended up having five kids (laughter). Speaker 1: So tell me, what were holidays like at your home? Speaker 2: Wonderful. We've always been big on holidays and birthdays, and so whenever there's a holiday, everybody came and we all had presents, and I remember we'd get something like a dollar, or two dollars to buy everybody presents, and we'd get these great big old--I remember great big old gaudy bottles of--clearly nothing but colored water, but we thought it was perfume (laughter)--get these great big old gaudy earrings, and all of that. So we--no, we always celebrated. We always had a big Thanksgiving, we always decorated eggs for Easter, even when we really didn't have anything; we lived in an apartment building on the eighth floor and we didn't have any electricity, and mother went out--when the little guy that was the elevator operator, his name was Shorty, and he really, I think he really kind of liked mother. But anyway, at night, mother would go and--had this long extension cord, and she'd connect the extension cord up to the hall light outside in the hallway and cook, and that year, somebody gave us a turkey, and mother fried the turkey. And now--that's a big rage now, but then that was the only way--we didn't have electricity in the house, there was no stove that worked, so we had the turkey fried. Mother just cut it up and just put it--floured it and put it in skillets and cooked it, and we had fried turkey (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, your father was working at this time? Speaker 2: He was--I think that was when he and mother were kind of splitting. Story_ID: 369778 Speaker 1: And he [Delco's father, William Fitzgerald, Sr.] had another girlfriend. My brother was--my father was phenomenal with, with lady friends; he just--as matter of fact, somebody said once that daddy couldn't throw a block in a schoolyard anywhere in Chicago [Illinois] 'cause he might hit one of his own children (laughter). I don't know if he was as bad as all that, but he sure did have lady friends. As a matter of fact, one of our favorite experiences, and then I guess it shouldn't be a favorite experience. But when my daddy died, we all went to his funeral in Chicago, and we got to the funeral home--now, my stepmother was right there, and incidentally, my stepmother and my mother [Juanita Heath Watson] were, until mother died, very good friends because they said they both had suffered through, through daddy and survived, so they had a lot in common. But anyway, at the funeral--we got to the funeral, there was this lady sitting in the back with this black veil on, just quietly crying, you know, like Rudolph Valentino or something; just quietly crying, and my brothers [William Fitzgerald, Jr. and Daniel Fitzgerald] and my sisters [Dolores Fitzgerald Bowman and Muriel Fitzgerald Storey] and I said, "Who is that? Who is that?" And said, "I don't know, I don't know." And then when the minister--the mortician--got ready to close the casket, he told us to come, you know, at the wake service, he told us to all come up and say goodbye to Daddy, and we went back to our seats and he was getting ready to close it, and from the side door comes this woman in this streaming yellow chiffon. I mean it was just--you know--and she threw herself on the ca- "Oh, Bill, don't go! Don't leave, me, don't leave me!" And my brother said, "Damn!" (Laughter) It was so funny, it was so funny. And my stepmother just sat there looking straight ahead (laughter). But it was, it was incredible. I, I don't know what my daddy had--my brothers used to always say, "What did he really have?" I don't know 'cause he wasn't--my father was not a nice-looking person but he evidently he had that gift of gab, and I guess he just charmed people. But we never could figure out who that woman was. And then the next day at the funeral--I mean at the burial service, when they got ready to go get on the Dan Ryan Expressway, which is a huge highway in Chicago, they closed the Dan Ryan for my brother's--my husband's--my father's funeral, and my brothers, we were all sitting in this family car, and my brother said, my brother said, "Daddy, Daddy, you need to wake up! They have closed the Dan Ryan! You would love it! You would love it!" (Laughter) And when they got to the cemetery--it was Griffin Funeral Home in Chicago, and he'd gone to school with my mother and father so they were good friends, and he--after the service, you know, the graveside service, he had this soft music playing, and the casket slowly went down into the ground, and I think my stepmother was getting ready to do something, you know, emotional; it went down to the ground, and when it said, "Click," you know, at the bottom, he turned to all of us and he said, "You are reverently dismissed" (laughter), and he walked out. It was hysterical. And he called it the--you know, you exhume bodies to bring 'em--he said, he called it the reverent inhumation; you know, you inhume when--I never heard that before (laughter) but it was, every time I think of my father's funeral, I have to laugh 'cause it really was (laughter) different. Story_ID: 369779 Speaker 1: She lived in a park--Miss Mason [ph.] lived in a park, and every time we passed by there on the street, everybody always said, "Wonder if Miss Mason is in there," 'cause she was old. You know, everybody thought that she was kind of witchy; I don't know (laughter), but she lived there, and when we went to Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]--when I went to Wendell Phillips School, mother [Juanita Heath Watson] and daddy [William Fitzgerald, Sr.] had gone to Wendell Phillips as well, but by that time we'd lived--you know I told you about living in--on the eighth floor-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --well, when they opened up the Ida B. Wells housing project [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois], they selected people to live in there, and we were so honored because we were selected to live in the project, and it just makes me wanna cry now to look at it because we all tended--it was the first real house where we had--everything in the house was us, and we had a little garden, and everybody really took care of the house, and it was, it was the nicest community that we knew in Chicago [Illinois], and we would walk to high school. We lived on Pershing Road, and we'd walk straight up to Phillips High School--all of us. We belonged to the Hi-Y and Tri-Y [Tri-Hi-Y], and my stepfather [Charles Watson] had a tailor shop, and since I was the oldest, every day after school, he would pick me up and I'd go work in the tailor shop until it closed; I'd go Saturday morning and work all day Saturday, from eight in the morning 'til eight at night, and I never--the whole four years I was in high school, got a chance to go to a football game because I had to work all day Saturday. The one recreational thing we could do was go to the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] on Sunday after we'd been to Sunday school, after we'd promise we were gonna do all these wonderful things, then my stepfather would let us go to the Y and we'd all walk up there. And we could go to the socials at the Y 'cause we always went in groups, and when we'd come back, mother would say, "Be in this house at 10:00." And we'd walk, and when we'd get close to our house--we'd sing all the way home, all the songs that you learn at the Y--all those kind of camp songs. And we'd get near my house and it was five minutes after ten [o'clock], everybody else would scatter (laughter) 'cause mother was sitting right there on the front porch and she always said, "Do you know what time it is?" "Yes, ma'am." "What time did I tell you to be home?" And then we tried starting to explain: "We got caught up at blah, blah, blah, blah." "I don't wanna hear it," and she'd have that strap rolled around her hand. But she never whipped us; she'd whip my brothers [William Fitzgerald, Jr. and Daniel Fitzgerald] but she'd sit there with it, and it was so--we were so intimidated she really didn't have to (laughter), so we'd go upstairs and she wouldn't let us go to the movies the next week, or something like that, but she was always sitting there if we were one minute late. "Do you know what time it is? Do you know what time I told you to be home?" "Yes, ma'am." Story_ID: 369780 Speaker 1: What other things did you do as a family? Radio? TV (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had this--radio? TV? Speaker 1: Well, well, later on. Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, no, no. By the time we got a TV, we were grown (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: But we had--there was this--my grandfather [George Heath] worked for the railroad, but he had this friend, and we used to call him Mr. George--I mean Mr. Charles [ph.]--and Mr. Charles was really good-looking. All of us had crushes on Mr. Charles, but Mr. Charles used to marry these wealthy women and then take all their money and leave 'em (laughter), and we always wished that Mr. Charles would marry mother [Juanita Heath Watson]. Now, I look back and think that would have been dreadful (laugher), that would have been dreadful. But Mr. Charles was my stepfather's [Charles Watson] really good friend and my stepfather's good friend, my grandfather's good friend. Oh, gosh, I can't think of his name, but he had a farm in Dixmoor, Illinois which was outside of Chicago [Illinois], so every single summer Mr.--oh, gosh, I can't think of--his name was Mr. Howard [ph.]. Anyway, he would invite us to come out to the farm, and it was always the same; when we got ready, we'd eat until we couldn't eat anymore. He's show us the farm and we'd ooh and ah over everything, and every single summer when we got ready to get into the car, he'd say, "Gosh, if you just had something to take it with, you could take a lot of this stuff back home." My mother had been collecting paper bags for weeks (laughter), so she had all these bags, and we'd go scurrying back out getting greens and tomatoes, you know, all that fresh produce, and we'd fill up the back of the car with it, and he said, "Oh, I'm so glad you all had something to take it home with." Mother would say--oh, no, mother would say, "Let me check, I think we may have a bag or two in the back." (Laughter) It was so funny because he knew we were gonna have the bags, and we knew we were gonna get 'em filled, so--but it was kind of like--I think people did a lot of those kind of ritual things then that I'd completely forgotten about but--and we'd eat fresh vegetables for a long time, and all we couldn't eat, mother would, you know, cook, and then you canned 'em, you know; there was no deep freeze. Speaker 1: Did you help can? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. All of us had to learn how to cook, including my brothers [William Fitzgerald, Jr. and Daniel Fitzgerald]--yeah, oh, yeah. Mother didn't, mother didn't play that. There was another interesting thing. My mother had beautiful hair. Mother had the kind of hair that when you wet it, whatever you did--you could put those little finger waves in it, you could put those little curls in it, you could turn it up, you could turn it under. Whatever you did to my mother's hair when it was wet, stayed just like that until you wet it again, so mother had just beautiful hair. My sister [Dolores Fitzgerald Bowman], the one I lost, had hair like mother's hair was beautiful. My hair was not considered beautiful; I wore great big old fat braids, you know, and finally, my stepfather's former girlfriend was a beautician, and so she told mother that she would like to--I was gonna do something, and she said, "I'd like to fix her hair." So that's when I first got my hair pressed. Oh, I thought I was something, and the lady next door when we lived in the project [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois], Miss Gibson [ph.], she would do my hair, and one week I was supposed to do something 'cause I was, you know, president of my high school student council, and in a lot of activities in high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], so I was always going someplace or doing something, and this particular time, Miss Gibson couldn't do my hair; she wasn't there, so mother said, "This is no big deal, I can do this." Mother had me sit down and--course when Miss Gibson did my hair, she'd come over and, you know, she'd just put the iron on the stove, but everybody pulled up seats and it was like a show. Everybody sat there and watched while she did my hair; so this particular time mother says, "This is no big deal, I've watched Catherine [ph.] do this; I can do this." Mother let that iron get red-hot. She slapped it against her knee and she pulled it through my hair. I thought I was gonna die (laughter). I said, "Mother, that's not the way she did it." "Oh, shut up! This is--." It's a miracle that she didn't pull all my hair out. But she didn't know; she'd never been around anything like that, but that was another one of those memories. Anyway. Story_ID: 369781 Speaker 1: Now you're in high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. What year is this? Speaker 2: I graduated--I went to high school--I went to elementary school [Stephen A. Douglas Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], graduated from elementary school; in Chicago [Illinois] it's first through eighth grade-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and I graduated from elementary school in 1942, and I graduated from high school in 1946, so I was in high school from '42 [1942] to '46 [1946]. Speaker 1: During your time in high school, was there someone who put an idea in your head that you wanted to go to college? Speaker 2: My mother [Juanita Heath Watson]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, my mother she knew all of her kids were going to college. She said, "I don't know how you're gonna go, I don't know where you're gonna go, but you're gonna go to college." And I look now at parents that pay their kids for grades; if we came home with a B, mother would say, "Well, what's your problem?" She said, "I get up and go to work every day to put food in your stomach and a roof over your head--that's my job; bringing home good grades from school is your job." And she was very serious; she really felt that education was our job, and she brooked no excuses or apologies. You were supposed to go to school and you were supposed to get good grades, and that's where my brothers [William Fitzgerald, Jr. and Daniel Fitzgerald] got into most of their trouble (laughter) because they would skip school and the teachers would call and tell mother because they knew how mother felt. Mother had no qualms about going to school; I told mother--oh, I guess about--few years before she died, when I had grandchildren. I said, "Mother, you know you would have been under the jail for child abuse." She would have been under the jail (laughter) because she would go up to the school and she would whip my brothers right there in front of the class, and then she'd make them thank the teacher for thinking enough of them to speak to them and correct them--to help them become better people. And they hated that apology more than anything in the world. Then, she'd go home and tell my daddy [William Fitzgerald, Sr.], and my daddy would whip 'em with the electric cord--the ironing cord. So when you talk about child abuse now (laughter), that was--that's just the way it was and we never thought anything of it because we were just afraid; we'd bring--when we brought our report cards home, my brothers would walk in the door explaining (laughter) 'cause they knew, they knew what mother was going to say. But we all graduated from high school, and all five of my mother's children graduated from college. Speaker 1: The teachers at your high school, were they black, white (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Both, both. Speaker 1: Both? What about the students? Speaker 2: All-black; it was an all-black high school because it was right in the heart of South Side of Chicago and I think Phillips is, is--I think, has a historical marker now because it's one of the oldest high schools in Chicago. But all of us went to Phillips and we--I was there--they have a hall of fame at Phillips, and our family is in the hall of fame because mother graduated all five of her kids, and all five of us graduated from college. Speaker 1: So, preparing for college, who helped you prepare for college? Speaker 2: Well, basically, it was grades, and I was in the National Honor Society, and there's an interesting story there. I told you mother was involved in politics, well William L. Dawson was our congressman, and he was trying to get blacks into the University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois]. You could get into the university, but there were no blacks in the dormitory, and he wanted me because he knew I had good grades, and scholastically I could compete and achieve. He wanted me to be the first black to integrate the dormitory in Champaign-Urbana--at the University of Illinois, and he had gotten me accepted and all that, but I was president of the student body at Phillips, and in Chicago they had this great big conference of all the high school leaders--student council presidents--people like that. And we were at this meeting, and this little white guy from somewhere in suburban Chicago got up, and I was talking about something and he jumped up and called me a communist. Well, I wasn't sure what a Communist was, but I knew from the way he said it, it wasn't good. So he got up in my face and I got up in his face, and on the front page of the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] was a picture of the two of us fussing; it said, "Students disagree," or squabble, or something at the student council convention, or something. Congressman Dawson called mother, he said, "Unh-uh," he said, "I can't be going down there getting her outta jail every week; I need somebody that will turn the other cheek." Mother said, "Well, you got the wrong person 'cause she's not gonna be turning any cheeks." Well, he went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], and so he recommended me and I went to Fisk, and it was the first time I'd ever been south. And so I went too, and graduated from Fisk University in Nashville [Tennessee]--loved it, loved it. But that's how I got to, to Fisk (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's how you got to Fisk? So what is going on at, at, at home? Your other brothers--you're the oldest, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So they're still in school, yes. Speaker 1: So you're the first one to-- Speaker 2: I was the first one to leave. And my brother--my sister [Dolores Fitzgerald Bowman] went to Fisk for a year, but she stayed in the hospital in Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], so she came back home and she went to Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University] in Chicago. My brother went to Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] for a year, and he flat straight-up flunked, so he went into the [U.S.] Navy, and when he got outta the Navy, he went to Roosevelt and graduated. My next brother went to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana] in New Orleans [Louisiana] and graduated from Xavier, and my youngest sister [Muriel Fitzgerald Storey] went to Fisk, and graduated from Fisk-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so all five of us, which was, for that time, really phenomenal. Story_ID: 369782 Speaker 1: Right 'cause this is 1944 now, right? Speaker 2: Well, it was--I went to college in 1946. Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946]. Speaker 2: Graduated 1950, yeah--celebrated last year my fifty-fifth class reunion at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And this November, I will--with my '46 [1946] class, Phillips [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], we'll celebrate our sixtieth class reunion from high school. Speaker 1: How many people were there? Speaker 2: For--at Fisk? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: About forty-seven--well, I don't know this year 'cause we--and they talked about me something terrible because I wasn't there for the fifty-fifth reunion. I was there for the fiftieth, but we had a chance to go to Paris [France] with a group called Learning on Location, so we went to Paris, and one of my roommates called me and said, "How dare you choose Paris over Phillips." (Laughter) I said, "It wasn't even hard"--over Fisk. I said, "It wasn't even hard, I didn't even blink, I paid my money and I went." (Laughter) But no, it was, it was a good group; I think there were about fifty of us at the fiftieth reunion, and I don't know how many were there for the fifty-fifth, and I'm really anxious to see who's going to be at our sixtieth reunion because we're gonna do a Caribbean cruise, and so I'm--I've already paid my money, and I'm going in November. Speaker 1: So tell me about your first year; and this is your first time away from home? Speaker 2: Well, I had gone--I was a YWCA--YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] representative to the international conference in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I went to that, and it was the first time I'd ever been away from home, so I had been away from home for just a trip. But when I got ready to go to Fisk, my mother [Juanita Heath Watson] and grandfather [George Heath] went with me, and my mother took deodorant, sanitary things, toothpaste; she had a whole box because see, she hadn't been to the South since she was a little girl, and she said, "Now, I don't know if they're gonna sell all those to black people," so she took all that stuff with her when I went down to Nashville [Tennessee], and she and my grandfather stayed until I was enrolled, and then four years later, the two of them came back for my graduation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she took me to college; she didn't take any of the others. But I was the first person in my family to go to college, so it was a big deal. Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you did during your time at Fisk? Speaker 2: Well, I was--I thought, quite frankly, coming from Chicago [Illinois], and I had this National Honor Society pin which was a big deal, and I'm--, "Oh, boy, this--I'm going down to the South and I'm gonna just wow these folks." I got on the Fisk campus, and those National Honor Society pins were like safety pins (laughter); everybody had 'em, so that kind of diminished me. And then I had a--my roommate, they asked me if I'd mind having a blind roommate, and I said, "No," so this--there were four of us in the room, and one of them was a friend that I'd known from Chicago, and my blind roommate whose name was Mary Burdell; she was from Waterloo, Iowa, and Gloria Hutchins, who was from Macon, Georgia, and we lived on--the reason I said I'd do it 'cause every--all the other freshmen had to live on the fourth floor of the dormitory, and we could live on the second floor, but I got a rude awakening; I thought college was a piece of cake; I mean I had gone to high school and I'd done very well, and the work didn't seem to be very hard to me. And that first semester, I came into the dormitory and these girls were crying because see, then, they did not play, and if you failed, they packed up your clothes, called your parents, gave you a bus ticket, and told your parents when to expect the bus; I mean you didn't do what you're supposed to do, you were out of there. That was so scary to me because I could not imagine going back home having failed. And where I had kind of taken it easy and thought, you know, "This is no big deal; I mean this isn't as hard as high school." Well, yes it was, I wasn't applying myself. But I want you to know I straightened up in a hurry (laughter) because I did not wanna go home having failed in high school--I mean in college. And it was a wonderful experience because Fisk was and is an excellent institution, and you got to really meet what was the cream of the crop. I saw black people whose families had money, who were second and third-generation college graduates, and organizations. I mean Fisk was just steeped in history. Langston Hughes had taught there, W.E.B. Du Bois had taught there, James Weldon Johnson had been--so it was just a whole litany of the kinds a things that living in Chicago we had never really been exposed to, so I saw a lot of black folks there that were really achieving and taking their achievement and their culture for granted, and Fisk was the home, as you know, of the first group that publicized the Negro spiritual, so the music department was fantastic and the Jubilee Singers [Fisk Jubilee Singers] were known all over the world. Story_ID: 369783 Speaker 1: So, the cultural things helping you--and that's why I insisted on my kids going to HBCUs--historically black colleges because I said, "There are certain things that you learn there about yourself that you don't learn anyplace else, and I think it's invaluable." I read a book by Ayn Rand once, 'The Fountainhead,' and she said, "You can never say 'I love you' to somebody else until you could say it to and about yourself first, with respect." And I always thought about the value of having been exposed to people different, and those girls would come to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] with two and three trunks of clothes, because every night we wore bobby socks then, and the big thing were these old nylon sweater sets, and you could wear bobby socks during the day, and sweaters during the day, but at night for dinner you always had to put on a blouse at least, and you always had to wear hose. When you went into Nashville [Tennessee], you always had to have heels and hose, and white gloves, because Fisk students were a part--we're talking about a segregated South in 1946, and they had--all of the movie theaters downtown were situated on alleys, and blacks had to go down the alley and up the fire escape to the second level to go to the movies; I never went to the movies downtown in Nashville. We had a movie across the street from the campus that--that's the one we went to, and it had all these serial stories and it was, it was hilarious but we--you know, we enjoyed it but all--even though I never went to the movies, it never dawned on me to protest, which is what the kids did in the '50s [1950s], they protested, they sat--you know, had sit-ins and all of that. We never did that. I just never went. It never dawned on me that I should be doing something about it, but that was the Nashville that we knew. And of course Fisk had the only opera--classical opera--in Nashville; they had the Grand Ole Opry [Nashville, Tennessee], but they had--we had the only classical opera, so that when Fisk would put on its opera every year, whites could come but we didn't have sections for them; if they wanted to come on our campus, our campus was a desegregated campus, and they came, and I remember my junior year this woman who became a famous opera star did 'Madama Butterfly' [Giacomo Puccini] at Fisk; she was a student, and it was just--the music department was fantastic. And I was at Fisk when Gunnar Myrdal released 'An American Dilemma' ['An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy,' Gunnar Myrdal]. I was a sociology major and I was right there when he signed it at Fisk. It was a wonderful--it was a wonderful experience--just fantastic. And I still keep in touch with my roommate, and every place you go--my husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.] belongs to a fraternity that was founded by W.E.B. Du Bois called Sigma Pi Phi [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], and every year when you go to their convention--it's not an undergraduate fraternity; it was founded on the principle of fraternal spirit among the Talented Tenth, so they're all professional African American men, and when my husband goes, I always go 'cause I get to be the spouse, I get to go to the fashion show and dress up for the formal, and I don't have to give speeches or anything. But when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you pledge? Speaker 1: Yes, I belong to a sorority; I'm a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and I'm also a Link [The Links, Incorporated]. Speaker 2: Well, tell me about your experience in your sorority. Speaker 1: Oh, it was, it was okay with--except I owe Alpha Kappa Alpha for the fact that I never smoked. When I was getting ready to go on probation, it was a whole lot different then, because you pledged the second semester, I think, of your freshman year, and then you went through the first semester of your sophomore year, and you were on probation for a week and you had to wear all these clothes exactly alike and march into the dining room, and that's where I met my husband because he was on probation for the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], and the Alphas and the AKAs were sister and brother, and so we sat at the same tables and I--it was during Lent, and so he asked me what I was giving up for Lent, and then I told him--everybody gives up sweets for Lent, so I said, "I'm giving up my desserts." He said, "Can I have 'em?" I says, "Well, what are you giving up for Lent?" My husband was giving up mountain climbing and deep sea fishing and whitewater rafting; he had about twenty things, none of which he had ever done in life, and he was giving that up. And just had his face just as straight, and said, "But I'll eat your desserts," (laughter) and he did. But it was a wonderful experience for me, except that one of the things they had us do, they had the pledges go out and get the supplies we needed for the sessions at night, and they had to get an onion and a cigar, and the little girl who was assigned to me, she had no idea what it was for, and I didn't know she was even getting it. But she got me this cheap big old strong cigar, and this great big old strong onion. We had to sit on a Coke [Coca-Cola] bottle, and the Coke bottles were those little bitty bottles--sit on a Coke bottle, take a bite out of that onion, and a puff off a that cigar. I thought I would die; the smoke was coming out of my ears and, and the tears were coming down from that strong onion. I have never wanted to smoke anything since, so I owe it to them that smoking was never glamorous to me; that's one of the things I took from Alpha Kappa Alpha (laughter). Story_ID: 369784 Speaker 1: You talked about giving up something for Lent-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --so were you--you were Catholic; we didn't talk about your religious (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't become a Catholic until after I went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Matter of fact I--my mother [Juanita Heath Watson], my mother--we lived in Chicago [Illinois], very close to Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], and we loved to go to Sunday school at Olivet Baptist Church, and we would sneak into the service, but there--that's when these people--you know these women wore these great big beautiful hats, and they--and Olivet had two really nice-looking young men as ministers. They were the Reverends Bowman, I think their names were. No, Bolden [sic.]--I can't remember, but they were really Joseph [ph.] and John [ph.]; they were so nice looking, and these women would take these hats off, sit 'em down, and then they'd do this shouting--falling all over everywhere. And we thought it was the greatest show, and every time they called for new members, we'd go marching up there, but you had to have your parents' consent. Know what my mother did? She said, "Now you wanna join that church, right?" She went and got a copy of the Baptist covenant, which said you're not supposed to smoke, you're not supposed to drink, you're not supposed to dance, and all these don'ts. She said, "Now, if you're gonna be a Baptist, this is what you're signed up to do." Well, of course we weren't ready to sign up to do that, so we didn't join the church, and when I met my husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.] and started going to the Catholic church with him, I joined the Catholic church, and we were married in the Catholic church; then, when my mother moved with me, she rejoined the Catholic church. Speaker 1: So, she was a Catholic originally? Speaker 2: A little, but when we were growing up, mother never went to any church. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: No, she never went, but she always sent us. Speaker 1: But she sent you to the Catholic church. Speaker 2: No, she sent me to Olivet Baptist Church 'cause it was across the street-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it was within easy walking distance. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, you say rejoined, so I'm trying to see when did she join the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, see, she was born in New Orleans [Louisiana] and I imagine when she was a baby, she was baptized Catholic, but all those records were destroyed when she decided to rejoin the church when she moved in with me-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so I'm assuming that she had been bap- well, she knew she had been baptized Catholic-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --but she'd never really gone to church after her mother [Wilhelmina Irving Heath] died and she moved to Chicago. Story_ID: 369785 Speaker 1: What else do you wanna tell me about your days at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Well I, of course, met my husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.] and belonged to a lot of organizations, and really kind of got involved. Fisk--one of the things that they did that I wish that colleges did now again, she--one of the things that I wish they did--when you first got on the campus, they gave you a speech that you had to read, and you had to take a course in speech, depending on how you read it. I was exempt from speech, but one of the things that they always insisted on was your ability to express yourself; they always felt like you ought to be able to get up and talk extemporaneously, and not kill the King's English in the process. And that was important to me because as I got older, people could always tell; they said, "You went to Fisk, didn't you?" Because they had real strong standards of--we had to be in as freshmen at 10:15, we had to be in as sophomores at 10:30, juniors, 10:45, seniors, 11:00; and if you weren't there, you were locked out, and there again was that dean of women with your suitcase packed, those white gloves sitting on top of it with your bus ticket. They sent you home. I mean it was such a structured way of doing things, and there was so much pride in being identified with this premium institution 'cause Fisk was the institution in Nashville [Tennessee], even though Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] was there, and other schools was--Fisk was the institution. Story_ID: 369786 Speaker 1: We were talking about your delightful time at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], and you were gonna tell me about your daughter (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I wanted my daughter to go, my oldest daughter, and we had some friends here who had a daughter at Fisk, so she invited Debbie [Deborah Delco] to go and spend the Thanksgiving break there because at--when you go away to college like that, you don't cone home for those little--well, we didn't; we never came home for the little short holidays because it was too expensive number one, and it was too time-consuming. We were on trains, and you spend one day going and one day coming back, so you had very little time at home. Anyway, Debbie went, and she was there, and it was--I think it was Nasser [Gamal Abdel Nasser] died in Egypt. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she, Debbie, was all wrapped up in current events because we had those kind of discussions all the time here, and they were partying. She was outraged. She said, "Mommy, nobody--the world is going by, the world is being destroyed, and they're partying! I can't go anyplace like that." And she didn't wanna go, so she went to Macalester [Macalester College] in St. Paul, Minnesota, but my other kids went to historically black colleges [HBCUs], but they didn't wanna go to Fisk because of the Miss Mason [ph.] story (laughter), so they didn't wanna run into anybody that knew me or their daddy [Exalton Delco, Jr.], so they went to Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. My son [Exalton Delco, III] went to St. Augustine's [St. Augustine's University] in Raleigh-Durham [North Carolina], but he only stayed one semester, he said he just wasn't into college. But the girls went to Clark Atlanta, and all three of the girls have master's degrees. Speaker 1: When did you decide, or did you decide at that time, what your major was gonna be, and what you were gonna do? Speaker 2: Yes, I wanted--I told you I went there with the idea of majoring in sociology-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I did; I got a bachelor's [degree] in sociology with a minor in business administration and economics, but to be a social worker, I would have had to--and I was accepted at the University of Chicago School of Social Work [University of Chicago School of Social Service Administration, Chicago, Illinois], but I decided I wasn't ready to go to school anymore; I wanted to get out into the real world, so I accepted a job in--at the Illinois Bell Telephone Company as one of the first black service reps, so I got introduced to the world of business, and worked there almost two years before I got married. My husband was in graduate school at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], so when he got his master's and got a job at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], well then we got married. Speaker 1: Where did y'all get married? Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, in Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, at St. Anselm Catholic Church [Chicago, Illinois], yeah. Speaker 1: And then you moved where--to-- Speaker 2: We moved to Houston [Texas]. Speaker 1: Houston. Speaker 2: He was from Houston. He had a job at Texas Southern, and of course at that time, blacks couldn't--we drove back; all my wedding gifts and all that were in the car, and we drove back, but we couldn't stop along the way 'cause we couldn't go to motels or hotels or restaurants, and I got so hungry for some hot food. My husband went into this cafe and they told him that they couldn't serve us, but they gave him a nice hot plate of food, and then when he got ready to leave, she said, "Keep the plate." And that really struck me, you know, that they didn't even want the china back if we used it, so that was my first real introduction to the South because I'd been to Nashville [Tennessee], but Fisk is a very protected environment in Nashville. We didn't--especially if you didn't go downtown to the movies. You never had too much opportunity to come in contact with the prejudice and the discrimination that was the South then, but when we got to Houston--I mean we were coming back--we didn't have too much in Houston because we lived in the black community and my husband was employed at Texas Southern, but when we came to Austin [Texas] when he got ready to work on his doctorate [at the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]--well, we lived here, and I encountered, I'd have to say, more discrimination in Austin than I had in either Houston or Nashville. Story_ID: 369787 Speaker 1: What year was this that you were moving? Was this '48 [1948] or '49 [1949]? Speaker 2: No, I got married in 1952. Speaker 1: In '52 [1952]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I married, I worked for the Illinois Bell Telephone Company as a service rep for almost two years, and then got married when he [Delco's husband, Exalton Delco, Jr.] got his--he got his master's [degree] from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and got a job at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]; we got married that August when he was going back (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you came down to-- Speaker 2: --to Houston [Texas]-- Speaker 1: --Houston-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and then you moved to Austin [Texas]. Speaker 2: We moved to Austin when he got ready to--he had to go into the [U.S.] Army-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and one of my children was born in Germany. I went and joined him in the Army, and we lived on housing--what they call the German economy, because he was just a--he was just an enlisted man; he did not--he was not an officer or anything. They wanted him to go to Officer Candidate School, but he would have had to re-en- you know, sign up for a longer period of time. He had had six postponements and, I think, four or five deferments and they told him, "I don't care how long you defer and how long you postpone, you are going into the Army." So he did go into the Army, and when he was assigned to Germany, we went over there and joined him. Speaker 1: So, how long--what year is this? Speaker 2: Not quite--we were in Germany--Loretta [Loretta Delco Edelen] was born in 1956--probably 1955 and 1956. Speaker 1: So you were there for one year. Speaker 2: A little bit more than a year. He went into the Army, I think, in '54 [1954], and as soon as--he did his basic training at Fort Hood [Texas] in El Paso [Texas] too, and then when he was assigned--finished his training--he went to Germany, and that's when we joined him. Speaker 1: And how did you like life in Germany? Speaker 2: Well, I really can't say that I had too much of the life in Germany 'cause I went over there with two children and came back with three babies, and I didn't drive a car; I didn't know how to drive, so I was pretty much housebound, but he lived--he was near. We lived on German economy, which meant out in town, but he was within easy access of the base, so--except for us to get a little second-hand beat-up car and drive to Paris [France], and we drove one other place; I didn't know that much about Germany except that we lived with a German family and I got to know them. And one of those ladies was my youngest daughter's--my middle daughter's godmother in Germany. Story_ID: 369788 Speaker 1: So, you come back to the states in '56 [1956]-- Speaker 2: And he [Delco's husband, Exalton Delco, Jr.] came to--he decided--he was eligible for the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], so he decided he wanted to go back and--to UT [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] and get his doctorate. He had planned originally to get a medical degree, but he was a surgical nurse in the [U.S.] Army, and he said he just couldn't deal with the pain and the death over and over again; he just felt it was so depressing that he just decided he'd go ahead and get a doctorate and teach biology, which is what he did. He got the first black Ph.D. in biology at UT here in Austin [Texas]. And when he came to Austin and we were gonna come with him, we had a home in Houston [Texas], but he--we came with him, and blacks could not stay at the housing, the married students' housing at UT, the Brackenridge Apartments [Austin, Texas], so they offered to help us get a place in Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington Terraces, Austin, Texas], the housing project. Well, we weren't anxious to do that with three little babies, so he had a friend from high school who knew about Huston-Tillotson [Huston-Tillotson College; Huston-Tullotson University, Austin, Texas], and they had some merit; it was one of those old veterans barracks that they had for married students, and we--they let us have one of those and we lived there. I did not know how to drive, so I walked my kids across the campus every day to Holy Cross [Holy Cross Catholic School, Austin, Texas], to school, and I read a lot, so I used to do a book review every week at--I used to do a book review every week at the library at Huston-Tillotson. And there was one time when I--they were having a disagreement on the campus; they had a new president, Dr. Seabrook [John Jarvis Seabrook], and a lot of students objected to the merger of the two institutions, and Dr. Seabrook, and we lived facing Chicon [Chicon Street]--that's where those apartments faced, and these kids got out of this car and they lit this cross that they had soaked in gasoline, which was really dumb, and they were gonna drag it over 'cause his house was behind these apartments, and they were gonna drag it over there to put it in his lawn, but of course it was too hot, and they dropped it right there in our yard, and my husband came out and he had his shotgun and he said, "Get that thing up and get away from here, and if you endanger my family anymore, you won't live to tell it." And so they put it out and they ran. And the next day I was walking my kids across the campus past the dormitory to the Holy Cross (laughter), they were going--yeah, to Holy Cross, to the Catholic school that was there then, and when I crossed the campus, they said, "There goes that lady and those little kids with the pistol-packing papa," and we just got hysterical, it was so funny (laughter). He said, "There they go," 'cause I didn't know how to drive; we walked--I walked everywhere. I took driver's education at the old Anderson High School [L.C. Anderson High School, Austin, Texas] here at night. The lady in the little apartment next to mine would watch the kids while Exalton was up at the university in labs; he's a biologist, so he was in labs. And she watched the kids, and I didn't even let him know I was taking drivers ed [drivers education] until I could wave my license 'cause I sure didn't want him to know if I'd taken it and I didn't pass it, so I didn't even let him know I was taking it until after I got my license. And almost to this day, since I took my lessons at night, I would almost automatically get in the car and turn on the lights (laughter). He'd say, "What are you doing there?" That's what I, you know, did in--when I took it in evening school. But anyway--it was, it was interesting, and coming to Austin and going to Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]. I had never lived in the South, and of course they had this great football rivalry between the two high schools and I'd never seen that, and it was fascinating. Speaker 1: So you got a chance to see some football games, huh? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. And of course, once I was elected to the legislature [Texas Legislature] for twelve years, I chaired higher education, so I went to a lot of college activities. Story_ID: 369789 Speaker 1: So now your kids are growing up, and when is the first time you leave home to go to work? Speaker 2: Well, actually I have never, my husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.] says to this day. I have had a part-time job, too. I had one when my son was real little; I worked for the Texas Congress of Colored Parents and Teachers. I worked part-time as a clerk in their office, which was--and I could take my son [Exalton Delco, III] with me while my daughter was in school. And then I worked in the legislature [Texas Legislature] all those years, making five hundred dollars a month, so you really can't say I've ever held a job, but my husband says that I have built-in radar for all the non-paying jobs in the free world (laughter); he said I just go straight to them. So, I've done--mostly, I was always privileged to be home with my kids, and that's another story. When we first got married, we knew we wanted to have children, so they had this home for unwed mothers here, and they had a lecture for young marrieds, and I asked a question, you know, what was one of the reasons why girls--women had kids out of wedlock, and the sister said that one of the main reasons girls did was when they first came home from school, if there was nobody there that they could tell if they'd had a problem or an achievement, or something they wanted to share at school--if nobody was there, if it was a problem, they would internalize it or rationalize it, and if it was an achievement, they'd share it with a peer, and that's how a lot of 'em got pregnant. And so we promised that we would, when we had kids, that I would always be there when they left in the morning and when they came back in the afternoon, and I was. So that's how I did mostly volunteer work 'cause I was one of the few African American women with a college degree, that didn't work every day. So I was in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], I was the first black for this, the first black for that, because I could do volunteer organizations. And of course, since my children were the focus of our real lives, most of the activities I got involved in were related to education. And I ran for the school board [Austin Independent School District Board of Trustees] because I was a Girl Scout leader, and every time we wanted--and president of the PTA. And every time we wanted to have anything, the school board would say, "Well, you can't do this and you can't do that." And I'd say, "Well, I need to be on the school board." And I decided to run for the school board. Well, I wasn't the first African American to run for the school board, but I was the first one elected in Travis County [Texas], and I believe the reason--I had worked with the League of Women Voters and had a kind of a network of people that really had encouraged me to run, and were there to help me, but I believe the reason I was elected was the election was two days after Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, and I believe the reaction in the community was so strong that I beat a white incumbent physician--pediatrician. Speaker 1: Oh, really? Speaker 2: Yes, Dr. Cook [ph.] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember--? Story_ID: 369790 Speaker 1: --What you were doing when you heard that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated? Speaker 2: Yes. I was getting ready to go down two doors--I lived on this street, but I lived farther down in a rental--a friend's house that was renting; they were living in Washington, and one of the people that was helping me with my campaign was having some people at her house two doors down, and I was getting ready to go down there, and it came on the radio that he'd been shot, and we were going down there for the purpose of getting all these Huston-Tillotson [Huston-Tillotson College; Huston-Tillotson University, Austin, Texas] and University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] students organized to walk door-to-door on Election Day to get out the vote, which was two days later. Well, we canceled all that 'cause the feeling was so high we didn't want those white kids trying to go in our neighborhoods to tell people how to vote, so we canceled, but I remember very well. We just sat there crying and in shock that, you know, that he'd been killed. Speaker 1: What about Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]? Since Texas is the state where he was killed, what--what's your thoughts on that? Speaker 2: Well, I--that was another occasion; by then, I was in public office. And he was coming to Austin [Texas] from Dallas [Texas]; they were having a big fundraising dinner, and I had been invited since I was the token black, I was a black--the black elected official in Austin, and we were going to watch. We lived on the campus at Huston-Tillotson and--no, we didn't live on the campus, we lived over here; we lived in the rental house down the street, and they were going--the parade was going to pass near Huston-Tillotson, so we were gonna go over there and watch the parade when he came in from the airport, and I had been invited, my husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.] and I, to the reception for him at the Driskill Hotel [Austin, Texas] before the dinner, and of course he never made it, he never made it. But--and that, too, was--I remember where--what I was doing when he died, when Martin Luther King died, when Franklin Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] died (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Roosevelt? Speaker 2: --because those were--I was in high school--1946, he died in 1945, I believe, and I was coming home from school and they said, "The president just died." I remember that. And when Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] was bombed, it was a Sunday. But those--you know, you always remember where you were and what you were doing. Speaker 1: What were--you were coming home from school when Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenshower] was killed? Speaker 2: No, not Eisenhower, no. Franklin Roosevelt. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Franklin Roosevelt. Speaker 2: Yeah--no, I walked in the house and mother [Juanita Heath Watson] said, "The president was--has just died." Franklin Roosevelt wasn't killed, he died of a brain hemorrhage or something--yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, yes. I'm sorry I said the wrong thing. Speaker 2: Yeah--no, no, no, no. But anyway, I remember those historic things. 'Cause one of the things about my mother, we always had current event conversations around the dinner table every night. I mean we--the first time my husband said he came to my house to visit--he was an only child; he couldn't believe he--it sounded like we were arguing all the time 'cause everybody was trying to get in their point, and my stepfather [Charles Watson] would sit there--he was West Indian, and he would sit there and I'd tell him, I'm fresh out, you know, in college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and--, "Well, this is the--," you know, this--I'm spouting off these facts and I'm just doing all this stuff. And he'd just look at me and shake his head and say, "A little learning is a dangerous thing," (laughter) and that would shut us up in a hurry. He would just sit there and just shake his head, and I just--you know, you just drop 'cause how you gonna answer that? Story_ID: 369791 Speaker 1: I decided to run for the school board [Austin Independent School District Board of Trustees] and--on that basis--and I was elected, and I served--I was elected in April; in August, the first team from the federal government came to Austin [Texas] to say that we were in noncompliance with the desegregation rule, so immediately from being this quiet little board that nobody knew what they did, it--we were on the news every night. And of course, since I was the black on the board, everybody was asking me, "What do black people think? What do black people want?" And I'd tell 'em, "I can't tell you what my husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.] thinks; I'm not about to speak for no whole race." But I had no problem telling them how I felt, so I got to be very well known because I was so visible in the news. And, of course, then--before then, it was ministers and the black precinct chairs that were always invited and involved in things, but now since I was a bona fide elected official, and I was elected at-large because we didn't have single member districts then, so I was elected at-large; that meant that I really was in a sense more representative of black people than all these other people, so anytime anybody came to town, I was in the receiving line, I was invited because I was an elected official. And I had no idea that that was part of what I was getting into when I ran for the school board. And six years later, I--'cause the school board term was six years, and I was trying to decide whether I was gonna run again or just come home 'cause my kids then were getting in--out of high school and, and my oldest daughter [Deborah Delco] was going to her first year in college. And the Rodriguez decision [San Antonio Independent School District v. Rodriguez, 1973] was handed down in the [U.S.] Supreme Court about public school finance, and I decided, given the financial situation in Austin, that I needed to be there, and so I ran for the legislature [Texas Legislature] and became the first African American from Travis County [Texas] elected to the legislature, and I served there twenty years, mostly in legis- in education areas. And I chaired the Committee on Higher Education [Higher Education Committee] for twelve years, and I was speaker pro tempore, and I'm still the only woman that's been speaker pro tempore of the House [Texas House of Representatives]. Story_ID: 369792 Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you wanted to see change that happened during your terms? Speaker 2: Well, there are a lot, but the one I think that was the most significant, when I became chair of Higher Education [Higher Education Committee, Texas House of Representatives], the disparity between Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and the University of Texas system--it was a member of the University of Texas system, but in every sense of the word it was a stepchild, and I think the thing I'm proudest of in education is getting them to be a permanent part of the Permanent University Fund, and getting them a lot of money, and getting them the status and the recognition that they should have had from the beginning. There were all sorts of horror stories around what happened to Prairie View; they got all the leftover books, they got all the hand-me-downs. As a matter of fact, one of the stories was that the man who was principal--they didn't even call the president of Prairie View [Prairie View State Normal School; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], president, they called him principal, like it was in a high school or an elementary school, and they decided that instead of giving the money to Prairie View that year, the legislature [Texas Legislature], they gave it to the University of Texas because they were building the medical school in Galveston [Texas], and the comptroller said, "We don't have enough money to do both," so he simply took Prairie View's money to put into Galveston for this medical school. Well, Mr. Anderson [Laurine Cecil Anderson], who was principal, got on his horse and came to Austin [Texas], and he appealed to the legislature. He said--and he was very eloquent--he said, "My young men raise their own food, they make their own clothes, they work very hard, but gentlemen, they have got to have books, and we can't make books, and without your help we can't buy books." And he was so eloquent, when he got back to Prairie View, they had put his furniture and his family out on the road for having the audacity to go by what they said was over them, to appeal to the legislature. Well, the man who was president of the school board [Austin Independent School District Board of Trustees] here in Austin was so impressed, he sent for him and hired him and he became the first black principal in Austin, and L.C. Anderson [L.C. Anderson High School, Austin, Texas] was named after him, and that was another story when I was on the school board. One of the things that HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] mandated was that we close Anderson High School, the black high school, and our kids had to get on the bus to go to the other schools. But they promised those kids that the next high school that they built would be named Anderson. Well, of course--so that they'd have some preservation of their history and heritage. Well, of course, when the high school was built, it was built out in northwest Austin, and they didn't wanna name it Anderson. Well, I said, "Well, I was going to vote to name it Anderson if nobody else did," I was going to honor what I felt was a commitment that the board had made. And this guy that was very quiet--he was a little doctor, Dr. Pat Cato, and he says, "If you make the motion, Mrs. Delco [HistoryMaker Wilhelmina Delco], I will second it." And they tried to talk me into saying we'll name it after any other black--blah, blah, blah. I said, "No. If you recognize me, I am going to make the motion," I said to the president of the school board. When we got out in the meeting--then, you could have meetings before the meeting. When we got out into the meeting, he said, "Are there any nominations?" I'll never forget it. He said, "Are there any nominations for the name for the new high school?" And I raised my hand and he said, "Yes, Mrs. Delco." I said, "I move that we name it L.C. Anderson." Dr. Cato said, "I second the motion." And the vote was unanimous; they all chickened out (laughter). But--and incidentally, Will Davis [Will D. Davis] went on to be president of the state and the national--the School Board Association [National School Boards Association]; he'd been chair of the Democratic Party for Texas, and Carole Keeton Rylander Strayhorn was on the school board with me, and now she is a comptroller running for governor. Speaker 1: Oh, that's wonderful. Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was, that was one of my really proud achievements on the school board. And when I decided to run for governor [sic.]--the school board didn't cost a lot and I didn't--I wasn't ever gonna go into debt using my grocery money; if I couldn't raise the money, I just wouldn't do it. And I was so fortunate; when I got ready to run for the legislature, they kept telling me I had to raise money, so this guy Charles Miles was--had worked at UT [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], and he knew a lot of students out there. He said, "We gotta get you somebody that can raise money." And he sent this lady to my office and she walked in and she says--to my campaign office--and she said, "Are you Wilhelmina Delco?" And I said, "Yes." She said, "You wanna be in the legislature?" I said, "Yes." She said, "We need you there. Put on some comfortable shoes. Let's go raise some money. I'm Ann Richards." Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: And she raised every dime for my first campaign--she really did. Story_ID: 369793 Speaker 1: While you were in legislature [Texas Legislature], how were you treated as a woman, and as a black woman (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I tell you the people ask--one of the things that a group of women asked once. "If an issue came up in the House [Texas House of Representatives]," there weren't gonna be many, but, "if an issue came up that you had to make a choice between supporting women and supporting blacks, what would your choice be?" And I told 'em, "Well, you know, my mother [Juanita Heath Watson] knew I was gonna be black before she knew I was gonna be female," and that was my choice. There weren't many issues that that came up, but I was always mindful. People say they're color blind, but if somebody wanted to describe you to somebody who didn't know you, the first identifying mark they'd say, "Well, she's black, she's got long hair." I mean people are not color blind; they wouldn't say, "Well, she's a nice lady." No, they're gonna describe you. Your ethnicity is part of that description. And so I always was very mindful, I always felt that I was elected as a black because Travis County [Texas] felt like they needed a black in the legislature, and I had served in--on the school board [Austin Independent School District Board of Trustees]. And I told you the circumstances under which I was elected to the school board. So I always bore in mind that I was to represent my people wherever I could. If there was no conflict--and I'm not gonna get in any fight on racism, on the low bid on dust rags; I mean there--you pick your fights, but you have to stand for something, or like my mother used to say, "If you don't stand for anything, you'll fall for everything." And so I've always felt that I had to stand for issues because I was the only thing that my people had up there. Speaker 1: What about your peers? How did they treat you--the men? Speaker 2: Well, there's a good ol' boys network, there's no question about that; there is a good ol' boys network, and they were alive and well, and the way it was so effective was because we spend 140 days every other year in Austin [Texas], and it's pretty concentrated, and so most of those guys, their families are back home because we only made six hundred dollars a month, so it's obvious either they had independent wealth, or somebody was at home working, namely their wives, so they tended to share apartments, so it was perfectly common for committee chairs to all be together. Well, they would discuss their committee work, so you felt like they all knew what they were going to do and it was the good ol' boys network. I was never a part of that because I never went anyplace socially without my husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.]; I thought it was important for me to make that statement. I never, in all the time I was in the legislature, went on the floor of the House in pants because I always wanted them to understand that I was a woman and proud to be a woman; I never used profanity. I just always thought that there was a certain demeanor that I was supposed to have, and when I left the House after twenty years, everybody up there was still calling me Mrs. Delco [HistoryMaker Wilhelmina Delco], even people that had served with me from the beginning. Story_ID: 369794 Speaker 1: I just wanted to go back to the school board [Austin Independent School District Board of Trustees]. I wanted to understand about the desegregation ruling. Speaker 2: Well, in 1954 [in the Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka decision], if you remember, the court [U.S. Supreme Court] said that all schools had to be desegregated with all deliberate speed. Well, the way that was interpreted in most of the South was you do what you can and hope they'll change their mind and you don't have to do anything. In Austin [Texas], they decided to desegregate a grade a year, starting with the twelfth grade; so, instead of starting at the bottom with the young kids, every year there would be another class that would be desegregated. Well, of course by the time I got ready to run for the school board, they hadn't gotten very far down in that, and there was an Adams case [Adams v. Richardson, 1973] that said that they felt that all of the South--and they included Texas in that--was dragging their feet, so they wanted them to show progress, and they wanted them to show substantial progress immediately. Well, Austin was then caught in the dilemma of how do we do this? Well, they still had an all-black high school where most blacks went--because the only way kids went to the other high schools was at their own expense, they had to apply, it was no residential requirement or anything; in other words, it wasn't a neighborhood thing, even though blacks were disbursed a little bit better throughout the neighborhood; it really was a matter of choice, and it ended up with kids whose parents wanted them to go and were able to take them and pick them up. So, what the court ordered was that we had to make sure that we had to either integrate the all-black high school or close it. Well, we--the judge first ordered that we integrate it with a community that was close to our community that was all-white. Well, the judge ordered that on Monday, and by Thursday he rescinded the order, and they closed Anderson [L.C. Anderson High School, Austin, Texas] instead; they said, "It just won't work," so they closed Anderson, and instead of the whites who lived in the Maplewood [Maplewood Elementary School, Austin, Texas] community going--being a part a the Anderson district, they took blacks and we had to go--our kids had to go to the other schools and they kind of distributed them out; the kids who went to this elementary school went there, like that. But we were the ones that bore the brunt of the desegregation, and of course I was on the school board at that time, so I had to take that, and had to try to deal the best way I could with it. One of the things was that at Reagan High School [John H. Reagan High School, Austin, Texas], where my kids went to school, I was at home during the day, and I'm not a person to listen to the radio during the day. A parent called me and they said, "Ms. Delco [HistoryMaker Wilhelmina Delco], I'm at work and they're saying there's a riot going on at Reagan. Would you please go over there and look out, you know, for my child?" So I immediately got in my clothes and went over to Reagan. The police arrested black kids, you know why? Because when it got to be a situation--it was probably a fight between a couple a kids that got out of hand, and the principal, when he couldn't control the fight, he called the police, but he did not call the school buses, so the white kids could walk home because it was their neighborhood. When the police got there, there weren't anything there but black kids, and so they all went to jail, which was patently unfair because you can't have fight with one side, and of course they--the assumption was, of course, that if there was trouble, they were the ones that called it. And I was very upset because within--and to this day, I will tell ministers that within walking distance of that high school, there was a church of every religious denomination, and there wasn't a single black kid who felt comfortable walking to the church of his denomination in that neighborhood. I said, "Now, that's an indictment of religion because if I'm a Baptist and I feel threatened, and there's a Baptist church nearby, I ought to feel comfortable walking into that church for sanctuary." And that was the trouble--that these kids were in a foreign land, for all intents and purposes. It was not a neighborhood, it was not a supportive community for these kids. They were there because the courts ordered 'em there, there were in activities because we insisted that if they'd been in activities at Anderson, they were entitled to be in the same activities at the new school, so they--we made them open all up the band, the drill teams, the pep squads, all those. If these kids had been in those activities at the old Anderson, they were automatically in them at the new. And of course over time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did it work? Speaker 2: Oh, yes! Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's when I went--when I told you I went to a lot of football games? I went to the games and I had my binoculars and I'm counting the kids in the band, I'm looking at the cheerleaders (laughter), and it got to be funny 'cause I'd go to a program at the school and the choir was going to sing, and there wouldn't be any black kids, and the choir director would, "Ms. Delco, Mary Lou [ph.] is in the choir but she just couldn't make it today." (Laughter) You know, they were very conscious that I was going to mention it and make something of it. Story_ID: 369795 Speaker 1: But we've regressed from that now, and the commitment and the sensitivity is no longer there and, you know, we're worse off than we were, I say, before desegregation because when the schools were segregated, the really sharp kids and the slower kids, the well-to-do kids and the very poor kids of single-parent families, the--you know, the other families, were all in the same school, so these kids got role models and opportunities to see diversity. Now, all the poor black kids are in school with poor black kids, all the upper middle class college-bound black kids are in school with upper middle class college-bound white kids. So you really don't have that interaction that you had. The best--some of the best black teachers are now in white schools; the young white teachers are sent to black schools, and so the situation to me hasn't gotten better, it's gotten worse. And incidentally, one of my daughters was on the school board [Austin Independent School District Board of Trustees] here, and she just decided not to run for her third team; she was on the school board for two terms. Speaker 2: What's your feeling about the TAG school [Magnet School for the Talented and Gifted, Dallas, Texas]? I heard a lot about that since coming here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The what? Speaker 2: TAG school--the schools that are here in Texas where they have 100 percent of the students now that are college bound? I was listening to the news here the other day. Speaker 1: They're probably suburban schools; I don't know TAG school. You, you're thinking about the tax test? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: There's a test that all kids are required to take, and some schools have very high percentages of kids who excel in those tests, and of course our kids are not doing very well in the tests at all, but that's more a measure. We have suburban communities, of course, that are all of one ethnicity or one race, but blacks move into them eventually. But the inner-city schools are getting blacker and the suburban schools are getting whiter, and the minority that is the center of attention now in Texas is Hispanic. I mean we're still kind of like at the back of the bus. Speaker 2: So, your thoughts now are that we are just not going forward in getting any better (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I think that we need different--we need a different approach. One of the things that people are always talking about is the absence of parental involvement. When we were little, you know, parents were into everything; and not only that, but everybody in the neighborhood was your parent. I remember my sister, my sister was very, very attractive and I told you I was very plain; and my mother [Juanita Heath Watson] had to go to work and we'd walk to school and mother would--as soon as mother left and we start out to school, well I had these great big old braids and, you know, my socks and everything on were--my sister had--I told you she had this beautiful hair that my mother had, and she'd get out her little lipstick and she'd be, you know--open up her blouse and she was looking all cute; we wouldn't get to the next block before somebody would say, "Now, Dolly [Dolores Fitzgerald Bowman], you know your mother would have a fit if she knew you were going to school looking like that. You better get all that stuff off your face and get yourself together." "Yes, ma'am." (Laughter) I mean you didn't just have your mother all along; now, people are afraid to reprimand kids 'cause not only will they cuss you out and maybe even get violent, but their parents uphold them, and so teachers don't wanna say anything. Doesn't have to be black or white teachers; teachers just don't feel comfortable reprimanding kids or correcting them, or even trying to help them in any real sense. Story_ID: 369796 Speaker 1: It's a situation where I think we've got to regroup, and I think we're getting there because more and more of the social service organizations are getting more into mentoring and trying to deal with issues in our community and helping our kids. And I belong to a number of organizations that are trying to reach out into the community to help where parents can't because the reality is that we have more and more single-parent families, and very often that mother has to work two and three, and sometimes four jobs to put food on the table. So it's ridiculous to say, "Well, because she doesn't come to PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings she's not interested in her kids." She can't come to PTA meeting 'cause she's taking care of your kids so you can go to PTA meetings. And I think that we need to reframe the context of what we expect of kids and a family in learning situations. And we used to have a concept called in loco parentis, that there was somebody that would step up in place of a parent. And I really think we need to start more in the way of nurturing our children, and that's one of the reasons my kids, or one of my daughters has her kids in charter schools, and one of the requirements for that is that the parent must spend a certain amount of time, and it's a matter of priorities. We try to make up in material goods for things we feel we can't give our kids in time, so the poorer the kid, the more likely they are to have all sorts of exotic Christmas presents and birthday gifts and signature clothes, because parents are trying to make up for the time. Well, I think we need to reverse that priority and say they may not need those new brand sneakers, they may need you to be there to watch 'em run, you know. I'm saying that there has to become a change in attitude, and it has to be internal. People were so furious with Bill Cosby, but the reality is that we've got to start looking to and helping ourselves, because these are our children. And as Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] said so often, nobody's gonna help us but us, nobody's gonna deal with us but us, and if we're not willing to do--we're just leaving our kids out there, they're just--you know, I look--there would've been--I don't know what I would've done. People ask, "Don't you wish you were young again?" No. I made it through once, thanks to the good Lord (laughter), and I'm grateful, but I think the kids now have a terrible burden. They have pressure from peers, pressure from older people, pressure from other groups, and they're just out there, and a lot of 'em are lost, and nobody's really--the system doesn't work the way it is now for them. And even now in the levels of government, the children are not the priority; they're the rhetorical priority, but when you get to the reality, they're at the back a the line, not the front of the line--healthcare, social services, education, employment options, economic opportunities, environmental concerns, all of those things. We give lip service, but they're not priorities when it comes to funding, so the kids are just out there. Right now, I--a man called me a couple of years ago and he said, "You know, Mrs. Delco [HistoryMaker Wilhelmina Delco]--," he had worked with me when I was in the legislature [Texas Legislature] and I chaired the Committee on Higher Education [Higher Education Committee] so I knew all of the institutions, and he says, "I have to tell you something." He said, "In your life you've done a lot of things very well, but I gotta tell you, you have flunked retirement." (Laughter) And I think he's right. Right now, I chair the board of trustees at the historically black college [HBCU] here in Austin [Texas], Huston-Tillotson University, and one of the things we're always trying to do is to empower our students, to give them a sense of comfort, of belonging, of family, and to be supportive, but kids are not dumb, they know how to take advantage, you know. They--one of the things people were saying about the young people in New Orleans [Louisiana] where they were so devastated by Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], we had kids come to Huston-Tillotson and say, "Well, you know," because they knew all the records were destroyed, "I was an honor student in the last semester of my senior year" (laughter). "Now, if you all would just give me my credits and give me my degree, I can go home." They're exploiting a situation. We had to institute a test to see--, "Okay, we'll tell you how much you knew, and where you were." But young people are very creative, and if we don't help them be what we want 'em to be, they'll be what works for them, and it's not always the same thing. So I'm very, very concerned, and I guess as long as I draw breath, I'll be involved in something. Story_ID: 369797 Speaker 1: But I think the focus of the future has got to be our kids, and parents--I have nine grandchildren, and I'm very proud of my daughters; my son's [Exalton Delco, III] not married, but my daughters--I'm very proud of the way that they are trying to take hold in their family and they're trying to do--but they're educated, they've had an opportunity. I often tell them that their inheritance is the fact that we sent all of them as far as they wanted to go in school, debt-free, so their inheritance is up here, and it's up to them to use it, and I'm proud of the way they use it, but the reality is that it's still not easy, and you have to be that time on task, and that's the difference between their world and my world. There was a support system in place for us, there was a community--identifiable, responsible--that you respected. I bet' not have talked back to nobody; I would have found myself picking myself up off the floor so quick; like I said, my mother [Juanita Heath Watson] would have been under the jail for child abuse in this environment, but there's something that we've got to learn how to do; we've got to learn how to retake our community and our culture, and more than anything else, our children. It's frightening, it's frightening when you see girls that don't understand what self-respect is, and they think that anything guys say, as long as they're saying it to them, goes. Well, you know, no young man could come to my door late for something; my mother wouldn't let 'em in. And if they didn't come with clean clothes and, if we were going someplace, with a tie on, you know; my mother would stop 'em. And now, you know, there's usually not even a mother there, and I don't blame the kids, I blame those of us who knew better and sit on the sidelines and do nothing, but say what they ought to be doing. You know, it's very easy to criticize from the outside, but I don't envy young people today. I look back on and I--in this I'm retelling stories that I'd forgotten, but I had a wonderful childhood. You know, one of the things my mother said that I repeat all the time to young people when they talk about, "Well we're poor, we can't do this, we can't do that." I say, "My mother used to tell us all the time, 'We're not poor, we just don't have any money.'" Now, there's a philosophical difference in that; it says that poverty is a matter of spirit, of attitude--it's not a matter of money, because mother said, "I'm making you go to school so you can make money, but you're not poor." And I think that now there's this whole philosophy of: poor kids, they don't have this, they don't have that, they can't do this, they can't do that. Well, I think there's something wrong and we got to try to correct it. We're losing 'em. Story_ID: 369798 Speaker 1: So, when you think over your life, what is the one thing that stands out the most? Speaker 2: I think the one thing that stands out to me is that I've always been fortunate in having love and support. I had my mother [Juanita Heath Watson]; my father [William Fitzgerald, Sr.] left my mother but she--well, she left him, but whatever, there was somebody else that stood there. I always felt like when--you know, when you're on the program, somebody's out there in the audience rooting for you. My husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.] has always been supportive, and with me being the one in the public spotlight, it wasn't easy for him because people tend to belittle spouses. "Oh," they say, "oh, you're Mr. Wilhelmina Delco; what do you do?" Well, my husband earned a living; I'm doing all these non-paying things. He's making it possible for us to eat. And you have to be very strong of character to see yourself relegated to a background role when he has a Ph.D., and he worked very hard, and is a professional and all of that. So, I've always had a strong support service--a support system, and I've always felt treasured and loved, and respected, and I think that's a real blessing. I've always had a strong faith; I think those are blessings that we kind of tend to take for granted, those of us who have them, but the older I get and the more I look around me, the more I realize that I'm in a lot of cases the exception, not the rule, and therefore, I have a responsibility to try to reach out, and help others and to say to them that if there's something I can do, then I need to be about doing it. And I think one of the things that we need to learn from history is that we are a people who are a prophetic people; whatever's gonna happen bad happens to us first, but we have always found a way to overcome adversity. We have always been survivors as a people, and that's what we've passed down to our kids; we've always given them a sense that I made it, you can make it. But somebody was always there to help us. I'm not sure that somebody's there to help our kids now except the drug dealers and the pimps, and the people who are going to exploit them, abuse them and use them, you know? It's ridiculous for a fourth of our men to be in prison, and they're reinstituting slavery in prisons because they've done it by making the goods that they manufacture selling on the open market, a market for their goods; they go to jail for life--three strikes you're out. You can steal twenty-five dollars out of a purse three straight times and go to jail for life at seventeen and eighteen years old. We're reinstituting a concept of slavery, and women are almost desperate for recognition for almost anything; they work, they have no respect for themselves, they have no respect for their bodies, they have no respect for education. Kids don't believe education is important. We were told that if you didn't go to school--my mother used to tell us, "Don't tell me you're sick because unless the blood is running red and fresh down the hall, and your temperature heats up this room, you are going to school." "Yes, ma'am." So, didn't do you any good to lie and say, "I don't feel so good." Mother would say, "So?" (Laughter) You know, I mean it's just not the same; it's not that same drive. Story_ID: 369799 Speaker 1: I used to do a lot of public speaking to kids, and I talked to some kids the other day and I have what I call my five Bs, and I said, "You know, black is beautiful, but it's not beautiful when it's poor or when it's dumb, and there are guidelines to life; one of them to me is the Bible." We are people strongly rooted in moral values. I mean all of us--everybody went to church. You could squirm and you might go there just to dress up and show off, but you were there. The leader in most of our communities was a minister, so the Bible was very important. Books were very important. We came out of slavery having been suffer--killed and maimed trying to learn how to read, so it became of value for us, and education was very important to us and we treasured it. We had our schools--our churches established schools. Learning is a lifelong process and we valued it. Parents' proudest moments were when their kids went to school, and went on to school, or became schoolteachers; it was a big deal--that was important to us. It was important to us to have the ballot, to vote; we don't value that anymore, but it was great. It was great when you could go and vote, and the politicians came to see you, and what did you want, and we'll boycott, we'll do this. If you don't give us what we want, we'll do this. I mean we were politically sensitive and aware. We just don't have those values; we have not instilled, and not consciously in front of us all the time, and there's the business of money. We always wanted to make money 'cause mother [Juanita Heath Watson] used to say, "Well, money may not be the most important thing in the world, but it's way ahead of whatever's in second place," (laughter) and she was right. But she made sure that we gave back. I mean when we stayed at the house, we nev- once we got a job, we always had to give mother money. Now, sometimes she'd save it for us, but we gave it to her because she said, "I have to buy groceries, I have to pay rent," you know. We always were made to feel that you had to earn your own way, and pay back, so when you made money, you didn't--money wasn't your god, it was there for a purpose, and you didn't abuse it, and you didn't let it abuse you. And then I guess the final B that I always talked to kids about was the one of brotherhood. You know, you don't have to like people to get along, but you got to get along. You're in a world where you have to live with other folks different from yourself, and if you wanna be respected, you got to be respectful. And I'm not talking Uncle Tom, I'm talking about plain old human to human, and so brotherhood is important. And I tell those five things to kids all the time because I said, "You really have to have basic values and basic values are what your parents gave to you, and you ought to be able to not only pass 'em on to your kids, but demonstrate as you pass 'em on, that you've practiced 'em." I don't know, it's kind of scary though, isn't it? Story_ID: 369800 Speaker 1: So, what is your hope for your grandchildren? Speaker 2: My grandchildren is--exactly what I hope that I've said to every child. I want them to be good in school. My mother [Juanita Heath Watson] never rewarded us for getting good grades; she assumed that we'd get good grades. She said, "I go to work every day to put food on the table and a roof on your head, that's my job. Your job is to go to school and get good grades." And that was expected. I expect that of my grandchildren. I expect them to be respectful. My grandchildren come in this house and they say, "Yes, ma'am" and "No, ma'am." I have--and I joke--my youngest daughter has twins, and they are--they were sixteen in April, and my daughter is 5'11"--her husband is 6'8"; the twins--my grandson is 6'6" and wears a size seventeen shoe; his sister is 6'0", and they are tall. But I look up, I say, "You may think you are, but you're not taller than I am," and they look, "Yes, ma'am," (laughter), and I know deep down they're laughing. But the reality is that I want them to be respectful, I want them to be respected, I want them to be educated, I want them to be educators, whether it's professional or otherwise educated--educators by example. I want them to have a religious faith--not necessarily mine because I'm Catholic, but two of my daughters are not anymore. That's fine, as long as they go to church and they have some moral values that they're passing on to their children. I want them to make big bucks, but I want them to give back. I want them to be responsible in their money and in their lives, and I want them to get along with people different from themselves. That's what I want for them. Story_ID: 369801 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think I'd like to be remembered as somebody who tried to make a difference. I'd like for people to feel that--she may have been angry sometimes and she may have gotten on your last nerve, but you can never say that she wasn't trying to make a positive difference. I really would like to be remembered as someone who was in and of and for my community and my people. I'll always be proud of being African American; I think it was a gift from God. Speaker 1: Ms. Delco [HistoryMaker Wilhelmina Delco], we wanna thank you for your time because, you know--and this is just wonderful--the stories were wonderful, and so full of life, and I'm sure when students are--well, anybody who looks at this, they're gonna have a sense, just feel a part of your story and your life. And it's just so important that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're gonna know, what he said--what is your name? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Matthew [Matthew Hickey]. Speaker 2: Matthew's gonna be remembering my daddy's [William Fitzgerald, Sr.] funeral (laughter); that's what he says, which I often do. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, this is just so great (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my--'cause he was cracking up (laughter). Speaker 1: Was there anything that we missed? Speaker 2: Probably, but I can't think, I--there were stories that would come and go, and by the time you cut off, I think of something else. 'Cause now that I look back, I started saying, "Stories, what kind of stories do I have?" And once you start talking you think--I mean there's been a lot. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: There's been a lot in my life, an awful lot, and I guess I will think of things that I wish I'd said. I used to do that all the time. We--I had a priest once that said, "I don't care how hard you tried," I was lamenting over something, and he said, "I don't care how hard you try, you can never redo yesterday, and the most destructive words you can have as a philosophy are 'what if,' and 'if only,' because they assume that these are situations that are already over." And I always think of that--no matter how hard you try, you can't redo yesterday. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And I've got a saying back on my wall, "There isn't anything you can do about the past, but you can ruin a perfectly good present." Story_ID: 369802 Speaker 1: Yeah, that must have been when I was about three years old. Speaker 2: Was there an occasion for the picture? Speaker 1: Probably my birthday or something, I'm all dressed up. Surely, there had to be some reason for me to be so dressed up, ribbon and all. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Those were just the oldest three, so I was probably about five, and my sister was four, and my brother was probably about two. Speaker 2: Okay, could you name everybody (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, my--me, I'm on the left, my brother is William Patrick [William Fitzgerald, Jr.] and my sister is Dolores [Dolores Fitzgerald Bowman], and unfortunately, both of them are deceased now. Speaker 2: I--that was an article noting the fact that every year, until last year as a matter of fact, I made all of my grandchildren's clothes for Christmas and Easter every year. And the boys I would make bow ties, and--I'd make bow ties and those little cummerbund kind of things for them, and the girls, I made all of their outfits, and I think that was when I first started making 'em different. At first, I made 'em all outta the same material; let's say I'd go get a roll of material (laughter) and make everybody's clothes. Speaker 1: Oh, and that picture was my sophomore or junior year in college, and my future husband. Oh, we were on the campus at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], yeah, on the campus at Fisk. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, we were on the campus at Fisk. I was probably a sophomore and he was probably a junior, or I was a junior and he was a senior; I suspect it's sophomore and junior, though. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's when I was sworn in as a member of the state legislature [Texas Legislature] with my mother [Juanita Heath Watson] looking on critically (laughter). That's my mother sitting down. Speaker 2: That's the same picture with my husband. They didn't either one of them, seem to be impressed with the process (laughter). That's my husband at the legislature. Speaker 1: What was the year again? Speaker 2: Oh, I was first elected to the legislature in 19--that was probably 1975. Speaker 1: Okay, and your husband's name again? Speaker 2: Exalton, E-X-A-L-T-O-N [Exalton Delco, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, and that's when the president was running. That's Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] and that's Al Edwards [HistoryMaker Albert Edwards], the representative from Houston [Texas], in the background. But that's--she was Mrs. First Lady then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, she's senator. Speaker 2: And that's at a meeting. It looks like a meeting of the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] with President Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], but I'm not positive. That's who it looks like 'cause it looks like one a those Cabinet Room pictures. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's who it looks like. Speaker 1: And that's me with Governor Ann Richards. She was governor, and I was speaker pro tempore of the House [Texas House of Representatives], and we were discussing something very weighty. You know, they said that they caught all that cancer; she's doing well. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: She's tough. Speaker 2: And that's me getting an honorary degree; I don't know where. It looks like--I'm not gonna speculate, I got ten, so--that's not the one that I really have in the album 'cause I got one from Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] at the same time that President Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] got one--the first President Bush. Speaker 1: And that's me and Barbara Jordan. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And this is me at my desk in the House, as a member of the House of Representatives. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's me as, as--well, I wasn't acting as speaker that time, I was just working on a bill. I guess I was introducing a bill. I was at the front mike, so I must have been introducing a bill. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And that's me and Governor Mark White. Oh, that was when I was inducted into the Texas Women's Hall of Fame; I remember the dress. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's a campaign card when I first ran for the legislature--Place 1; I ran at large, and that was 1968. Oh no--for the legislature it was 1974; I ran for the school board [Austin Independent School District Board of Trustees] in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: And that's me and my two sisters in my kitchen. The sister in the middle is my youngest sister Muriel [Muriel Fitzgerald Storey], and the one in the yellow is my sister Dolly who is deceased. I miss her dearly. Speaker 2: Oh, and that's a dedication of the classroom building [Wilhelmina R. F. Delco Building] that was named for me at Prairie View [Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas]. That's--on the left, is the chancellor of the Prairie View A&M system, and in the middle is the president of Prairie View, and me; I was cutting the ribbon for the classroom building that they named after me. Speaker 1: When was that? Speaker 2: Prairie View. Speaker 1: When? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh--it was before mother and my mother-in-law [Pauline Delco] died, so I guess it had to be about 1995 maybe--about 1995. No, not--couldn't have been 19--yes, it could have been. Speaker 1: And that's the building that was named for me at Prairie View A&M University. All that lettering all across the top, that's how much space it took to do my name 'cause it says Wilhelmina Fitzgerald Delco (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that's me and Speaker Gib Lewis and my sister; it's the last picture I have of her before she passed. Story_ID: 369803 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was on the founding board of Austin Community College [Austin, Texas], and that's the portrait that they took for that. Speaker 2: Named Austinite of the Year, and it was in February, 1989 (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, who named you Austinite of the Year? Speaker 2: The Austin Chamber of Commerce [Austin, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, that's me and William Jefferson Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. Speaker 1: What was the occasion? Speaker 2: It was a reception at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: All right, let's start at the top left here. Speaker 2: Top left, that's one of my daughters--the one in the dark robe is graduating from college, the one in the shorts is my youngest daughter, the one in the middle is graduating from high school, and my husband [Exalton Delco, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And next to them is my husband's grandmother; her name was Elmira Broussard [ph.]. And the next one is me being sworn in again at the Capitol [Texas State Capitol, Austin, Texas] for legislative term, and next to that is my husband--our wedding reception; we married in Chicago [Illinois], but we had a reception in Houston [Texas] when we got back to Texas, and that's our picture. And I'm wearing one of my bridesmaid's dresses. And the one in the corner is just a picture of my husband and I; I think it was right after I was elected to the school board [Austin Independent School District Board of Trustees]. Speaker 1: And then in the--going back left is my son [Exalton Delco, III]; he must have been about ten. And next to him is a picture of my four children in the heyday of the afro. And next to them is the children smaller--the three--it was before my youngest daughter was born. And the next picture is me and my mother [Juanita Heath Watson], and my first child, and my mother's father--my grandfather; his name was George Heath. And the next picture is a baptism of my fourth child, and that's the baby's godmother Jean Salone [ph.], and my mother-in-law, and the priest, Father Joseph Francis, and my husband's best friend and Jean's husband A.T. Salone [Alexander Salone]; and the children are my three older children. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the next picture is my husband being robed when he earned his doctorate of philosophy--his Ph.D. degree at the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas]. And the next picture down, starting left again, is my campaign headquarters, the first time I ran for the legislature [Texas Legislature]. Speaker 2: And the next picture is a picture of my dad, William P. Fitzgerald [William Fitzgerald, Sr.]. And then there's a picture of me just with my afro, and the next is a picture of my youngest daughter Cheryl [Cheryl Delco], just to show you the size of those braids and all that hair I had to comb every day. And next to her is my father-in-law Exalton Delco, Sr. Speaker 1: And on the far left is a picture of my mother and I when I was sworn in--she was there. And the next picture is a picture of me in the middle, my mother on the left, my mother-in-law Pauline Delco, and the occasion was one of my daughters' debutantes--the one that's in the next picture--her debutante picture. And that's my young- my middle daughter Loretta [Loretta Delco Edelen], with my husband. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Now this is--I like that one because it has a picture inside of my granddaughter, but they call me Austin's [Austin, Texas] gift to education 'cause that's what I did; I was on every--as a matter of fact, I have served on every national board that has education in the title. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Go ahead, what's this picture? Speaker 2: That's me with some elementary school children. I was going to talk to a class at Barbara Jordan Elementary School [Austin, Texas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Delco Primary School in Pflugerville, Texas [Austin, Texas]; it's pre-K [pre-kindergarten] to second grade, and it has state-of-the-art everything, and the cutest kids in the country (laughter). Speaker 1: Was there a significance to the town they put it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I have a couple of grandchildren that live in Pflugerville. It's a suburb of Austin-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --after us, so they got the--jumped the gun on Austin. And then Austin named this activity center after my husband and I. Speaker 1: And where is the activity center? Speaker 2: It's in Austin. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's the one I was telling you, if you went straight down Springdale Road, you'd pass it. And my husband has a picture in there of him in front of the door where our name is over the door. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah. I'd say it was dedicated in 2003. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's my granddaughter when--and this is my daughter Loretta. Speaker 1: Tell us about this picture. Speaker 2: Oh, that's just me supporting Bar- Speaker 1: Ann Richards? Speaker 2: --Ann Richards when she was running for governor; that's me supporting her. Speaker 1: Here I am sewing at the machine. Speaker 2: And that's me and my oldest daughter; we're both Links [The Links, Incorporated]. Speaker 1: And that's mother with one of her grandchildren. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's my oldest (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What were you sewing? Speaker 1: I was making their clothes. Speaker 2: Their Christmas clothes? Speaker 1: Christmas or Easter, one of the two. Speaker 2: Oh, these are the commencement. Speaker 1: And that's your mother in the middle? Speaker 2: That's my mother. Here's one. Speaker 1: And then the bottom one is-- Speaker 2: Oh, look at this one, look at this one. Speaker 1: And the bottom picture is you and which daughter? Speaker 2: My daughter Debbie [Deborah Delco]--Debbie, my oldest daughter. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Look at this--and we're both Links. Look at this one. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Oh. I wasn't Monica Lewinsky, but--I was up there. Speaker 1: And here's me and the Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. Speaker 2: Okay, so tell us who this is so it'll be on the tape. Speaker 1: Oh, that's Bill Clinton, the Reverend--I mean the--Mr. President, William Jefferson Clinton. Speaker 2: What year was this? Speaker 1: Oh gosh; that was his first term. Speaker 2: It's probably on the picture. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's probably on there--"Vote Democrat, Vote Delco." Speaker 1: See, here they are with the Delco Center [Wilhelmina Delco Center, Austin, Texas]. It took six years to get it but that's okay, we got our Delco Center...