 Story_ID: 533342 Speaker 1: My name is Sasha Daltonn and I am your interviewer, and Matthew [Matthew Hickey] is the videographer and Larry Crowe is observing us for today. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I would like for you to spell your name, state and spell your name please, and your middle initial or name if you have one (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Marv Dyson, don't have a middle initial really. It's Marvin Dyson, M-A-R-V-I-N, D-Y-S-O-N, but I've gone by Marv most of my life. Speaker 1: And your birthdate and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: Twenty-eight November, 1937, Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: What's today's date? Speaker 1: January 20th. Speaker 2: January 20th, 2007. Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation, Mr. Dyson? Speaker 2: Entrepreneur, radio executive, father, that's pretty much it. Speaker 1: That's a lot (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Story_ID: 533343 Speaker 1: The first thing I'm gonna ask you is kind of following a format (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --of People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Breakfast, sausage, eggs, hash browns and wheat toast, and grape juice (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your--and grape juice, and your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of year, summer. Speaker 1: And your favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple, believe it or not. Speaker 1: Purple is the color of power I understand. Speaker 2: It is? I didn't know that. Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's associated with power (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just--I've always liked purple and--I don't think I have any purple in this house, but I love purple. But my wife [Kim Dittmer Dyson] dominates the color schemes around here. Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Mexico. Speaker 1: And if you have a favorite phrase or saying, what is it? Speaker 2: Everything's hard until it's easy. And I tell my children that, all of them. And it is in fact true, everything really is hard until it's easy and the only way it gets easy is by doing it. And that's kind of been my guiding light. Story_ID: 533344 Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me a little bit about your family background? Speaker 2: My mom's parents were born and raised in Kentucky, my dad's parents are from Maryland, I don't have a lot of history on them. My grandmother [Georgia Smith Langford] lived to 102 on my mom's side and she was kind of one of my favorite people. She used to come visit every summer and we'd just hang out. I miss her tremendously. My parents [Florence Smith Dyson and Richard Dyson, Sr.] were both in radio. Speaker 1: What were your fondest memories of your grandmother? Speaker 2: Cotton candy, taking us to Riverview [Riverview Park, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Riverview (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, allowing me to sip her beer at night. My grandmother had a--she'd always have a tall glass of Schlitz beer and crackers and cheese every night, and she lived to 102 and she swore that was what kept her alive. I think what really kept her alive was she moved like every three or four months so the grim reaper couldn't find her. She married her childhood sweetheart when she was ninety-six. They weren't able to put it together that and my grandfather had died, his wife had died and he was in an old people's home and she went to visit him and he said, "You know, I'd really like to get out of here." She got a power of attorney and got him out and they got married when he was ninety-seven and she was ninety-six. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: And they lived happily ever after for about ten more years. Speaker 1: And that was her childhood sweetheart? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 533345 Speaker 1: Tell me a little about, about your mom? Speaker 2: My mom, Florence Dyson [Florence Smith Dyson], was probably one of the original pioneers in black or urban radio. She had her own radio program on various radio stations, WBEE [WBEE Radio, Harvey, Illinois], would be the most notable. She did a show every day called 'Listen Ladies' and it was noon every day and she did it at different locations around the city [Chicago, Illinois]. And she was a radio junkie. I have some of her programs around here somewhere or at my brother's house and when I re-listen to them now they were god awful but back then radio was really not what it is today. And my mom--my dad [Richard Dyson, Sr.] was in radio also, he had a program on the old WCFL [WCFL Radio; WMVP Radio, Chicago, Illinois] back in the early '30s [1930s] and he actually courted my mother on the radio. He had a radio program so he'd dedicate songs to her and that kind of stuff and it was all live. And she was kind of sweet on his younger brother but my dad had a radio program so he had a little more clout (laughter). So, they ended up getting married and then she got into radio and he got out of it. And then as a result of her getting into radio, I used to drive her to the radio station every day--that was an excuse to drive, you know, so I'd drive her to the radio station in--I think it was in Harvey [Illinois]. Jack L. Cooper was the owner of the radio station. That--now, you know, that really goes back a long time. Speaker 1: A long time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was the--I guess the mid-'40s [1940s] or early '50s [1950s]. And I never had any interest in radio, just none at all. I just used to get a chance to drive her and that was pretty much it. Story_ID: 533346 Speaker 1: Now, was your mom [Florence Smith Dyson] from Chicago [Illinois] also? Speaker 2: She was born in Kentucky, but she spent all of her years here in Chicago. She went to St. Elizabeth's high school [St. Elizabeth Catholic School, Chicago, Illinois] and she was in radio for most of her adult life and she was the first national voice for Aunt Jemima pancakes. She had her own radio program, she got--she had McDonald's and Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo] as sponsors and she got 'em all on her own way back before anybody else had really thought of it. She was just a very industrious lady. Speaker 1: Do you have any stories that you can share with us that may be interesting about your mom? Speaker 2: Yeah, one. My mom--one of her major clients was--or advertisers was Mogen David Wine [Mogen David Wine Corporation] and I remember this--she had gone to New York [New York] for a con- a radio convention and she was supposed to be gone for like three days, and she ended up being gone for five days staying away for five days. And I remember my dad [Richard Dyson, Sr.] got on a plane and flew to New York and my mom tells the story she was staying at the Waldorf Astoria [Waldorf Astoria New York, New York, New York] and it was on a Sunday afternoon, and she was entertaining some clients and my dad walked in the room after he got off the airplane and went into the ballroom at the Waldorf Astoria, went over to her and grabbed her hand and said, "Honey, it's time to come home." And they literally walked out of the hotel and he brought her home on an airplane. And, I think that was an experience that my mom realized that my dad really, really loved her and missed her. And it wasn't a jealous thing or anything, it was just he missed his woman and he wanted her home. Speaker 1: So, how many years were they married? Speaker 2: They were--when she died, they had been married about fifty years. Yeah. Speaker 1: And, how many siblings do you have? Speaker 2: I have two brothers. One is deceased, Lon Dyson, he was in radio. And I have my older brother [Richard Dyson, Jr.] is--lives in the city [Chicago, Illinois] in my folks, my parents' old home. And he's retired. Story_ID: 533347 Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you grow up in? Speaker 2: Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], around 63rd [Street] and Vernon [Avenue] and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] when it was called South Parkway before it was Martin Luther King Drive. And then I moved into the Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] area at 68th [Street] and Prairie [Avenue] and that's kind of the area I grew up in. Speaker 1: So, the elementary school you attended was? Speaker 2: McCosh Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] on 65th [Street] and Champlain [Avenue], I believe it is. Speaker 1: What do you remember most about the old community? Speaker 2: It was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause it's really changed a lot now? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. It was--everybody watched out for everybody else, if you did something wrong as a kid, your parents knew it before you got home, literally. The teachers cared about the students, I mean, they were really educators and they were involved with our parents. I know my mom [Florence Smith Dyson] played bridge with a lot of my teachers from McCosh, and you couldn't just do anything without them at least letting your parents know that you were doing it. I left McCosh in--I went to McCosh in the fourth grade because I originally gone to St. Anselm's Catholic school [St. Anselm's School, Chicago, Illinois], because my mom was a Catholic and she thought it would be nice to go to a Catholic school. I really didn't like it because they kept the boys and the girls in separate classrooms in Catholic schools so when I got to McCosh Elementary School, I thought I'd died and gone to heaven 'cause I was sitting behind and across from really cute girls and it was just really a great experience for me. Speaker 1: Now, being a native Chicagoan, are there any people from your elementary school years that you still associate with or remember? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or have any connections with? Speaker 2: No, no. At this age-- Speaker 1: What about teachers (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) None of the teachers are alive now but I do remember some of them. Mrs. White [ph.] was my second or third grade teacher, I believe, and she was just an incredible woman. She lived in the neighborhood and she kind of gave all of the children a lust for learning, and she just made learning fun. Story_ID: 533348 Speaker 1: Then you went to high school where? Speaker 2: At Parker, it is now Robeson High School, Robeson, Paul Robeson High School in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. And I went there, and that was a really good experience because when I got there the school was probably 98 percent and 2 percent African American. And the neighborhood, when I was at 68th [Street] and Prairie [Avenue], was just changing. And I remember when we moved in some of the white kids in the neighborhood or the hooligans didn't want the neighborhood to change and they knocked down our back fence and wrote some kind of degrading stuff on garage doors and that kind of stuff. And when I first went to Parker High School, they were kind of--some of the kids were trying to jack us up and take our money and that kind of stuff, the white kids. That only lasted about a week because we finally got it together and just--myself and four of the other black kids in the school just kind of stayed together. Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself as a student? Speaker 2: I was a good student; I was really a very good student. I was the salutatorian of my class in grammar school, and didn't do so well in high school but, you know, but I got out (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Why do you think that was? Speaker 2: Girls. And sports, I was just--I played basketball, shot pool, I did all the thug things that my mom [Florence Smith Dyson] used to say, you know, you're gonna--you're not gonna turn out to be a good person. And I used to always tell her, you know, she'd say you're judged by the company you keep. And I kept some pretty bad company, but I always believed that the company I kept really had nothing to do with how I was gonna turn out or who I was, or who I was going to be. But, I had a really good time as a child. My dad [Richard Dyson, Sr.] worked for Wilson and Company [Wilson Sporting Goods Company] way back in the days, sporting goods, and he managed their foot--their baseball teams, basketball teams, men and women, and I used to go to all of their games 'because he coached them. He did that in addition to the radio thing. And I remember really having really great days in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] when they were playing baseball and my brothers [Richard Dyson, Jr. and Lon Dyson] and I would be running around in the bushes and stuff. And my dad would buy us peanuts and candy and pop, and ice cream. And we'd come home sick, and I remember he used to take us to the movies every Sunday, the Tivoli Theater over on Cottage Grove [Avenue] in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois]. And I had a really great childhood, I really did. One of the things I do remember, every day my mom used to make us take a nap when we were younger and when we got up she'd dress us up, white shoes that she had polished and the whole number. And I'll show you pictures later of my brothers and I, and she'd send us back out to play to get dirty. But she just thought, you know, you have to take a nap every day and you should take a little bath. And she was just a great mom. Story_ID: 533349 Speaker 1: You mentioned you have two brothers. Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, are you the oldest? Speaker 2: I'm the middle child. Speaker 1: You're the middle. Speaker 2: And that usually is the problem child I'm told (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) And the youngest was? Speaker 2: Is Lon Dyson and he was in radio here in Chicago [Illinois] for the better part of forty years. He started out at WBEE [WBEE Radio, Harvey, Illinois] and then he was at WLS [WLS Radio, Chicago, Illinois] as their news director. He left there and I re-hired him at WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. And he did a radio show there until he retired, and he retired because he couldn't quit smoking and he had emphysema really bad and he'd reached the point where he literally couldn't talk without taking deep breaths. And he ended up dying of lung cancer five, six years ago. Speaker 1: And then your other brother was? Speaker 2: Richard [Richard Dyson, Jr.]. And he was a Franciscan priest, he got out of the religious life and was a social worker, working with troubled kids and teenagers, and he retired from that and he's been retired for about the last ten years. Speaker 1: Franciscan being a Catholic, a Catholic priest (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a Catholic, uh-huh, yes. Speaker 1: So, he went to seminary at? Speaker 2: Yes, he went to seminary in Minnesota. He taught at Fenwick High School, in fact, in Oak Park [Illinois] I guess it is and they have a statue there of a black saint, St. Martin de Porres. And my brother sat as the model for that saint. And I understand that the statue is in their small church or sanctuary at the school. And it's funny, I was at Fenwick last night because my oldest, young son, he's fifteen, is a diver and he was competing there with his high school and he took first. Speaker 1: Really, congratulations, congratulations. So you are the father of how many children? Speaker 2: Seven. I have-- Speaker 1: Would you give us their names and ages? Speaker 2: Victor [Victor Dyson] my son is forty-three, my oldest daughter Victoria [ph.] is forty-five, Veda [ph.] is forty, Gabrielle [Gabrielle Dyson] is twenty-eight, Danielle [Danielle Dyson] is nineteen--oh, you really pushing me here (laughter), Jordon [Jordan Dyson] is fifteen and Max [Max Dyson] is thirteen. I think I covered them all. Speaker 1: And that makes you, and that makes you fifty (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Makes me a, a bit over fifty, a bit over fifty. I still have three children here at home, one's away at college and my two younger sons are here. And it's from two different marriages (simultaneous). Story_ID: 533350 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And your wife is? Speaker 2: My wife is here, and her name is Kim [Kim Dittmer Dyson] and we've been married for twenty-two years and we've been together for twenty-six now--twenty-five. Speaker 1: And wasn't she in radio also? Speaker 2: Yes, I met my wife at WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] twenty-six years ago--was walking through the halls and the admin- the personnel director introduced her to me and she said, "Pay him no attention he's the biggest flirt in the place." And I was just an account executive at the time, just selling advertising and when she walked by I just looked at her and I thought, she's really cute. And it was in April I think and I'd ask her out--I asked her out the better part of the next year and a half to two years, and she never said yes. And then one night we were both working late and she said, "Would you like to go for a drink," and I said, "Yes," and that was 1981 or '2 [1982] and we went out for a drink and we've been together ever since. And I love her to death. Speaker 1: And I have heard you say she's the light of your life. Speaker 2: People ask me that all the time because she is not an African American, she's Caucasian or white and people ask me all the time, "How do you all deal with that," that kind of thing. And I said, "Well, I really rather have less," and I tell people this all the time, "I'd really rather have less with her than the world without her." And what that means is I just--I don't--I cannot imagine life without her being in it. She has just been an incredible mom, my best friend, and also a really great salesperson. She was the top billing salesperson at WGCI for the better part of fifteen years. And most of her friends are African American or she has friends from when she was in kindergarten. And she's just an incredible lady. Story_ID: 533351 Speaker 1: Do you still have some of the friends that you had in high school or? Speaker 2: No, no. You know, when you get this age most of them are--have either died or in jail or died in jail, or they've moved on and we've just kind of lost touch. My fiftieth high school reunion is coming up at some point, I haven't heard about it yet but I'm sure we're gonna have it. And when we have it, I would definitely go but I'm not in touch with any of them because we went all in different directions. Well, that's not true. Richard Steele [HistoryMaker Richard Claude Steele], yeah, though I'm a little older than he is, but he was in the same era when we were in high school. He was at Hirsch [Hirsch High School; Emil G. Hirsch Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] and I was at Parker [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Richard Pegue who is in radio here. So, yes, I am in touch with some of the people I went to high school with we just didn't go to the same high schools. Story_ID: 533352 Speaker 1: Mr. Dyson [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson], what are some of your fondest memories of growing up? Speaker 2: Playing--actually riding bicycles through different neighborhoods when I lived--pardon me--in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], myself and a lot of my thug buddies all had bicycles that we bought and used bicycles that we bought and repaired, and we'd do night raids and drive into--ride 'em into Park Manor [Chicago, Illinois] and go into people's yards and steal pears, that kind of thing. When I first learned to shoot pool and I used to sneak into poolrooms because I was under age, and played the older guys shooting pool and literally take their money 'cause I was gambling when I was fourteen and fifteen years old. Those are my fondest memories and really hanging out with my dad [Richard Dyson, Sr.] more than my mom [Florence Smith Dyson] because my dad was really into his boys and whenever he went somewhere we always went with him. And it was just really incredible, and I try to do that with my children too and I'd like to think my sons and daughters would say that I've been involved and I currently am involved in their lives. Story_ID: 533353 Speaker 1: Like some of the activities that I know you said you had older children-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and then you have the-- Speaker 2: The younger ones (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) younger ones, so what are some of the activities that you? Speaker 2: My older children--my son [Victor Dyson] was into baseball and basketball. He went to Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and he played basketball, he's now in radio. My oldest daughter works here in Chicago [Illinois] at the post office, my oldest, youngest grown daughter is in New York, married and she has one son and she has her own record label. And she's married to the former director of promotions and marketing for Warner Elektra Atlantic Records [Warner Music Group] and they're doing very well. My--I have a daughter [Gabrielle Dyson] here who's twenty-eight years old and we're going through some changes with her right now but I think she'll be okay. My youngest daughter [Danielle Dyson] is nineteen and she's at the University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and I expect her home sometime today because she's auditioning for the Boston Ballet to get an internship there this summer. My oldest son who is still at home is fifteen and his name is Jordon [Jordan Dyson], and he's the number one diver in the State of Illinois and number two in the nation. And I don't know where he got diving. I have no idea where that came from, in fact, as we speak he's at a diving meet. And my youngest Max [Max Dyson], he's upstairs and he is into football and basketball and he swears he's gonna go to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] and play football, and he's gonna be a professional football player. And, if he does all the things that I tell him to do which is really just hard work, I think he'll probably make it. Story_ID: 533354 Speaker 1: Do you and your family attend church? Speaker 2: I go to church every Sunday, and when I tell friends and people that know me, that really don't know about my religious background they laugh. I go to St. Isaac Jogues Church in Hinsdale [Illinois] every Sunday. My wife [Kim Dittmer Dyson] teaches Sunday school there and she has taught there for the last seven years. This is her last year because our youngest son [Max Dyson] is going to be graduating from grammar school and after that, she won't be teaching anymore. So I get a chance to take my fifteen year old son to church every Sunday because he doesn't go to, to bible studies anymore, so he and I go to church every Sunday. Yes. Story_ID: 533355 Speaker 1: Looking back over your early life, what would you say influenced you most as a young person? Speaker 2: My mom [Florence Smith Dyson] and dad [Richard Dyson, Sr.]. And I know everybody says that, but it really is true. My mom and dad were the hardest working people I'd ever known and they instilled a work ethic in us that was just unbelievable. I mean, I didn't get anything as a child that I didn't have to earn part of it or part of the money to buy it or to do it, but there was a lot of love in our household. And they really are my heroes. I'm in radio because of them, they never told us we couldn't accomplish anything we wanted to accomplish and my mom used to always say, "If you can think it, you can do it." And, she helped me along when I had doubts. My dad always told me, "Hey, you are going to be a success and all you gotta do is just decide." Story_ID: 533356 Speaker 1: How do you spend your spare time? Speaker 2: I don't have a lot of spare time. Actually, I spend a lot of spare time--I'm a TV addict. I usually get home around seven [o'clock] at night, I have dinner and I look at TV 'til around ten. I also participate in diving meets with my son [Jordan Dyson] because during the summer months he travels all over the country diving in different meets and stuff keeping his skills up. During the winter months when they're in school, I'm at football games with my younger son, basketball games with him, diving meets. When my daughter [Danielle Dyson] was home, I was at ballet with her. I used to take her to the ballet for ballet lessons every day. I take my sons to practice along with my wife [Kim Dittmer Dyson], we're doing that all the time, you know. I'm also working at the City Colleges of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and I own now twenty-four radio stations and on weekends I'm on the phone dealing with them and over--at night and stuff I'm on conference calls. Story_ID: 533357 Speaker 1: Before we talk about how--your radio stations--how did you get into radio? Speaker 2: I was working for Wilson Sporting Goods and Meat Packing [Wilson Sporting Goods Company] because my dad [Richard Dyson, Sr.] had retired from there and he got me a job there. And I was working for them and I had a cousin--or a friend of mine who was really interested in getting into radio and my younger brother, Lon [Lon Dyson], was working at the radio station at the time, it was WAAF [WAAF Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois], Daddy-O Daylie [HistoryMaker Holmes "Daddy-O" Daylie] was on and Marty Faye and Al Benson. This goes back a lot of years. And he was really interested in getting into radio this friend of mine, so I called my brother because he was working at WAAF and at the precise moment I was calling him, he was calling me. And I was getting ready to take a job in Detroit [Michigan] at the time and-- Speaker 1: In radio? Speaker 2: No, it was in sales, in sales for Parker House Sausage Company [Chicago, Illinois], which is actually here but the guy that was running the company then, Daryl Grisham had offered me an opportunity to go to Detroit and kind of head up a sales force there for Parker House Sausage. And I was getting ready to really go there and do that but then I made this call to the radio station. My brother answered the phone at the precise moment, actually, the phone didn't ring. My brother was calling me and I heard him say, "Damn." And I said, "Lon," and he said, "Yeah." I said, "This is Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson]," I said, "I'd really like to set up an appointment for a friend of mine who really wants to get into radio." And my brother said, "Marv, they're looking for a salesperson here and I really think you'd be good at this. Why don't you come down and at least interview?" And I thought, well, I didn't have anything to lose and it was just a (unclear) really and I said, "Okay I'll go." And I went down and there was a guy named Dick Eichner and he said--he put an ash tray on the table and said, "Sell me that ash tray." I have no idea what I said, but whatever it was, it convinced him that I could sell and he offered me a job in the sales department there. And I passed up on the job to go to Detroit because it was an opportunity to stay in Chicago [Illinois], and the money at the time seemed pretty cool. I think it was like $35,000 a year and that's more money than I'd ever made in my life. Speaker 1: And that was what year? Speaker 2: That was in 19--god, '67 [1967], '65 [1965], '67 [1967] somewhere in there. And I remember the first year I made $35,000 and I spent every dime of it, bought a new Corvette, had hot and cold running women. I say that all the time. Had an apartment in Lake Meadows [Lake Meadows Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], I was living large, ah, it was crazy. And at the end of that first year, my dad pulled me aside and said, "So do you have any money saved?" And I said, "No." And he said, "You really got to get your life together." And I went and took some courses in sales at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], I went to the Wharton business school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and took some courses in management and sales there. And really got serious about radio because I didn't want to be an embarrassment to my parents who had been in radio. And I started at WAAF and Daddy-O Daylie was really one of my mentors. And I was gonna get out of radio and Daddy-O told me, "You're good at this you need to stay in it." And then John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] bought the radio station and it became W--it was WGRT [WGRT Radio] from WAAF and then when Johnson bought it was WGRT and he called the call letters to WJPC [WJPC Radio] and I ran those radio stations for him. Story_ID: 533358 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the early days at JPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and working for that radio station. Speaker 2: Well, actually, when John Johnson bought the radio stations, they were located downtown when he built his new building, he had the new building up and he decided to move the radio station in there. And I was very instrumental in putting the radio station together in the new place, buying the equipment, the studios and that kind of stuff. And I remember when we moved in, we had a meeting every--literally, every morning with John H., that's what I called him, [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson. And, he used to always say, you know, when you'd watch--be in meetings with him he'd always tell you, "You know failure is something I just don't accept and I don't want people around me that are not going to be a success." And that really kind of stuck with me. I didn't pick up a lot of his habits because we were from totally different eras and he had a different concept of what success or what you had to do to become a success, but he was really one of the people that motivated me to become successful because I saw all the really wonderful things you could do if you had money and I thought, I want to be like that, you know. And he told me once, "I want all of the people that work for me to drive big cars and make a lot of money." And he made it really possible for a lot of people to drive big cars and make a lot of money. I got my first Jaguar working for him, and it was just an incredible experience. He didn't know a lot about radio and I did, so he kind of let me really run the radio station. And then we came to a parting of the ways because he had, had the opportunity to hire a guy that worked at WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] at the time and he thought, if you hire somebody from VON--that was the premier radio station in the market, you'd have a better shot at going on to bigger and better things. And I left the radio station and he, literally--he did, actually, pay me for a year after I left. And we had no signed contracts or anything. And that's when I ended up going over to WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] or WVON and WGCI at the time. Speaker 1: You started in sales-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and then you said that you helped to build the station? Speaker 2: The physical plant. WJPC, yes. Speaker 1: Where did you get that skill? Speaker 2: Oh, that was not a skill, you know, you just do stuff because it became necessary. We had engineers and consultants and that kind of stuff. And I'd been in enough radio stations that I kind of knew how they should be and John Johnson hired all the right people. And I was just there to kind of be sure that everything was put in the right places and the right equipment was bought, and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Who were some of the people or talk to us a little bit about some of the people that you worked with and your experiences there in the early days of radio, 'cause we're, we're looking at what, 1968 then, what was that like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '67 [1967], '68 [1968]. Tom Joyner, I hired Tom Joyner away from WBMX [WBMX Radio, Chicago, Illinois] to come over to WJPC and we were a daytime station, and WBMX was a twenty-four hour station. Story_ID: 533359 Speaker 1: Mr. Dyson [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --before we finish our previous conversation (laughter), I'd like to just go back-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --because you said something earlier about your mom-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --being in radio and being the voice of Aunt Jemima and the story that you told about her in New York [New York]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How did she get in radio? Speaker 2: Actually, my dad was in radio first. My dad came here from Maryland, his name is Richard Dyson [Richard Dyson, Sr.], and he came here from Maryland originally and he was working at the packinghouses, Wilson packinghouses [Wilson and Company; Wilson Sporting Goods Company] and killing cows and all that. But ultimately he moved into managing their sport teams and that kind of stuff and during all of that time, he and a couple of his buddies decided that they'd like--they were, you know, singing on the street corners and playing instruments and I don't know how it all came about totally but they ended up, he and three of his buddies going to a radio station, WCFL [WCFL Radio; WMVP Radio, Chicago, Illinois], which is 1000 on the dial now and I think it's a sports station now. Speaker 1: And that was an AM? Speaker 2: This was an AM radio station, WCFL AM 1000, and this was in the early '30s [1930s], late '30s [1930s], early '40s [1940s] or--no, actually it was in the early '30s [1930s] because it was before he got married and he had a little radio program there every day, fifteen minutes every day where they just played music live on the radio. And he had met my mom in the neighborhood in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] and I guess he was kind of sweet on her and so he started dedicating songs to her on the radio. And then my dad continued his radio career and ultimately got out of radio and devoted full time to Wilson Sporting Goods in managing their teams. But at that point, my mom got the radio bug. Speaker 1: Would you say that he was one of the first black pioneers in radio? Speaker 2: You know, now that I look back I had never thought of that. Nobody ever asked me but I suspect he probably was because I think--I don't remember any other black people being on the radio back then and--but nobody made a big thing about it. I mean, not in our family and not in the industry, and it's amazing nobody had ever asked me that, but I guess if he was on the radio in the early '30s [1930s], yes, he was definitely a pioneer, yes. Speaker 1: And then your mom, you mentioned earlier that he courted your mom on radio so she was on at that time also? Speaker 2: She wasn't on the radio. My mom at that time--they were just kind of dating. She was a typical young woman and she was an athlete. She was a track star and that kind of thing and she was out of high school then, and I don't remember how old they were back then. I really don't remember. Speaker 1: Do you remember what school she attended? Speaker 2: She went to St. Elizabeth's [St. Elizabeth Catholic School] on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] down in the '40s [1940s] somewhere. And then after my dad and she got together they ended up getting married, my dad got out of radio and at that point my mom got the radio bug. And I don't know exactly how it all came about, I think somebody--she was doing plays, you know, she was with a group called the Richard B. Harrison Players. Wha- I'm sorry-- Speaker 1: Richard B. Harrison Players. Speaker 2: The Richard B. Harrison Players and they were the-- Speaker 1: They were one of the first black-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they were a small theater group on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] and they put on plays and stuff every three or four months. And my mom was involved in that. And as a result of that, I think Jack L. Cooper had heard about her and had come to an event or one of the plays and met her and asked her if she'd have any interest in doing a radio show. And she said, yeah, it might be fun. And it was WHFC [WHFC Radio; WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now Jack L. Cooper was who (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cooper, he was one of the black pioneers in radio, he was the first guy to own a radio station here in--a black radio station in Chicago, African American, that I know of. And the radio station was actually located in his home in I believe it was Harvey, Illinois. Speaker 1: And his call letters were? Speaker 2: WHFC I believe they were. And he convinced my mom to do a radio program and she got into radio there. And her name was Florence, Florence Dyson [Florence Smith Dyson]. And she got into the radio thing there and did a radio show there for a number of years, then went from there to WBEE [WBEE Radio] in Harvey, Illinois and did a radio--a talk radio program there for a lot of years. Speaker 1: What was your mom's maiden name? Speaker 2: Smith, Florence Smith. Story_ID: 533360 Speaker 1: You mentioned that she [Dyson's mother, Florence Smith Dyson] then started her own brand of--way of marketing her show by getting major sponsors. Speaker 2: She went out (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Talk to us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: She went out and solicited McDonald's and Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo] and little mom and pop stores in the neighborhood too to sponsor her program. Speaker 1: And that was what year? Speaker 2: This was in the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s]. And she was originally from Kentucky, she moved here with her father when her parents separated and she moved here when she was in sixth or seventh grade. And she came here and finished her schooling here and then got into ra- I mean, got married and then ultimately got into radio. Speaker 1: So her show ['Listen Ladies'] was a, a talk show? Speaker 2: It was a talk kind of tips thing, you know, baking, taking care of family, kind of the early Dorsey Connors [Dorsey Connors Forbes] or Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] kind of thing only it was on the radio. And she interviewed guests, she interviewed--in fact, she interviewed a couple of presidents in her career and most of the famous people from the day at some point, back in the day were on her program. Speaker 1: Would you say that she was in a class of her own, that there were no other women doing what she was (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that time, there were not a lot of women in radio here, I mean, this was before Bernadine C. Washington at WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois], before the black lady [HistoryMaker Merri Dee] that had the program on Channel 26 [WCIU-TV, Chicago, Illinois]. I've forgotten her name now, but my mom was kind of the first black woman in Chicago [Illinois] to have her own radio show. Speaker 1: So in a sense, we could say that you are from a pioneer radio family (laughter)? Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess. You know, and it really is, you know, when you look back at it. You're not aware of it when you're going through it but then all of a sudden you look up and go, my god, my--both of my parents were in radio, my brother [Lon Dyson] was in radio and now I'm in radio. I guess it is kind of a pioneering thing. But like a lot of kids, because my parents were doing it, it was the one thing that I didn't wanna do. But, as life kind of developed and went on, you kind of fall into situations because I never had any idea what I wanted to do with my life. Story_ID: 533361 Speaker 1: When you left high school [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --what did you think you wanted to do? Speaker 2: I had no idea. I thought, well, maybe I'll go into the [U.S. military] service and kind of get that together and I ended up going to Wilson Junior College [Woodrow Wilson Junior College], which is now Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois] believe it or not, for a year or a year and a half. And then my high school counselor approached me and said that they were looking to integrate a college in Kansas. And that was right around the time when they were--the Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], and it was in Kansas and all that. It was not the best place to be but I went there to college, got a degree in elementary education and the college was, at that time it was College of Emporia [Emporia, Kansas], it's now Emporia State Teachers College [sic.]. And when I left there I came back here, taught for a hot minute. Speaker 1: Where? Speaker 2: At McCosh [McCosh Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] believe it or not. Speaker 1: At your old-- Speaker 2: At my old alma mater, uh-huh. And got out of teaching because it wasn't paying anything and the post office was actually paying more money. So I worked at the post office, CTA [Chicago Transit Authority], I did all of the jobs that black folks were allowed to do back then. And then I left, then my dad [Richard Dyson, Sr.] got me the opportunity to work at Wilson and Company [Wilson Sporting Goods Company] and put on a suit and tie, and sell meat and sporting goods. It went from meat and then I graduated to the sporting goods division at Wilson and Company. And I was calling on major sporting goods stores selling sporting goods and that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: How did it feel going back to your old elementary school as a teacher? Speaker 2: Looking back at it, I really don't remember a lot of it because it was only for like six months 'cause I got out of teaching shortly after that. But I never thought about it at the time but my mom [Florence Smith Dyson] and dad were very excited, they were going, I can't believe you're going back to that school where we all started but it--that's kind of how it went. Story_ID: 533362 Speaker 1: Now we're getting you into radio. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, you were saying that your brother had called you about a job-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you went in and sold the ashtray (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. (Laughter) That is absolutely true and it was the weirdest experience of my life. But then Daddy-O Daylie [HistoryMaker Holmes "Daddy-O" Daylie] was working there [WAAF Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois], Marty Faye, Jesse Owens. I remember Jesse Owens had a radio program, the Olympian, he had a radio program there too and I had an opportunity to work with all of those guys but I was just selling air time. And back then, they weren't allowing black salespeople, especially media salespeople and there weren't many of us anyway, to call on major advertising agencies or major clients. But it was around the time when a lot of businesses were trying to recruit African Americans, and all the ads in the newspapers said equal opportunity employer and that kind of thing so I kind of found a niche there and I started--I went to Inland Steel [Inland Steel Company], Sears Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], and got them to advertise for qualified African Americans to get into their management training programs. But in addition to that I was calling on small mom and pop stores on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] like M and M, I mean, H and H restaurant [H and H Cafe, Chicago, Illinois], those kinds of businesses, Parker House Sausage [Parker House Sausage Company, Chicago, Illinois], to get them to advertise on the radio. And I, I really found out that I really had a knack for selling and I realize now it was because I was doing something that I genuinely loved. I loved radio, I loved the concept of selling radio. I didn't want to be on the radio, I just--I was afraid to death to be on the radio because I think it takes a special talent. And I used to watch my younger brother who was on the radio, and he used to practice when he was a teenager. And I didn't tell you this, he was the youngest deejay in the history of radio, Lon Dyson. He went on the radio originally when he was thirteen years old at WBEE [WBEE Radio, Harvey, Illinois]. Speaker 1: And what type of show did he have? Speaker 2: He did a teen show called 'Teen Time' and it was on every Saturday, and he played music for teenagers. And my mom [Florence Smith Dyson] actually got him in, and she got McDonald's and Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] to sponsor his little program. And he did that for a lot of years. And she use to critique him after all of his shows. And the practice he did, he'd come home and go in to a closet, turn a light on in the closet and have a tape recorder and a newspaper and a record player and he would play records, and read--do news from the newspaper and just practice doing that in radio. And that's kind of how he got really good at radio. He went to Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and really honed his skills there. Speaker 1: But, so when you started selling to Inland Steel and these other companies that was kind of revolutionary. Speaker 2: Oh, it really was, yeah. Speaker 1: Talk to us a little bit about that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I didn't know it was revolutionary because a lot of those companies had people that were in charge of minority hiring or being sure that they had equal opportunity for black people. And at the time Inland Steel--Bill Lowry [HistoryMaker William E. Lowry, Jr.] was there and he had a TV program, in fact, an employment program so I got him to advertise to get black people into Inland Steel. I got a guy named George O'Hara [sic. George O'Hare], who is white, to get black folks into Sears, Roebuck and Company [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], Montgomery Ward, a lot of the major companies I got on the radio in terms of recruitment because that was the only business I could get and it developed from there. And then all of a sudden I just started--then they allowed me to call on advertising agencies and I was scared to death but I went in and I called on advertising agencies and got little business from them. And I was honing my skills as a salesperson at that point, and I read all the sales books I could get my hands on. I got an opportunity to go to the Wharton business school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] later on in my career and I spent the better part of a year there and got a degree from there in terms of just radio management and sales. Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-five [1985], '86 [1986] somewhere in there. Speaker 1: We got to go back some years to the '60s [1960s] (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, I know. Speaker 1: We need to talk about that period in radio (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And when you get my age, a lot of this you don't want to remember. That's kind of why I was avoiding this because I'm going, god, I don't remember a lot of these dates, you know. Somebody--I was getting a--I was doing a deposition with an attorney some weeks ago and I couldn't remember a whole lot of stuff that I'd done at WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. And it end up--the opposing attorney really got pissed at me because, I mean, it's been so long and I've had such a wonderful life. And you just can't remember every little bitty thing, you know, and when people ask you, you start thinking am I getting senile because I really don't remember that, you know, what I actually did. Story_ID: 533363 Speaker 1: Okay now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --you graduated college [College of Emporia, Emporia, Kansas] in 1959. Then you went to work for Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] about 1968? Speaker 2: Yeah, between them I was in the [U.S.] military, I was in the [U.S.] Army for three years. I left there. After I got out of the military, I came back to Chicago [Illinois], did the teach thing for a hot minute then I went into the post office because they were paying more money, and the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] because they were paying more money and then the thing with Johnson came up. Speaker 1: And then you got married? Speaker 2: Then I got married, and that was the first marriage and that didn't last. Then you gotta ask questions from there (laughter). I had three children, I ended up having three children. Speaker 1: I wanna talk about those early days in radio in 1968. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That must have been a very exciting time in black radio? Speaker 2: Oh, it really was. WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Talk to us a little bit about that. Speaker 2: WVON was the premier black radio station in America and a lot of people really don't remember back in those early days in one--at one year, WVON was the number one rated radio station in Chicago [Illinois] in one of the rating books. It had actually beaten WGN [WGN Radio, Chicago, Illinois], and a lot of people didn't know that. Speaker 1: And, was that because of listenership and revenue? Speaker 2: Listenership, not revenue so much. They just beat them in terms of ratings the number of people that were listening. And that was back when they had [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent on the air--who did they have--Herb Kent, Bernadine C. Washington, Bill "Butterball" Crane, [HistoryMaker] Pervis Spann, I don't remember all the names but those were the--[HistoryMaker] Lucky Cordell. And they were totally involved in the community and anything that happened in black Chicago, you heard about it on WVON--Roy Woods [sic. Roy Wood] when he use to do the editorials and that kind of stuff. So, those were the glory days of radio and it was also the payola days when the disc jockeys could play any records they wanted. And they did. And I don't know for sure, but I'm sure they probably got paid for playing music. Speaker 1: Explain to us a little bit about payola and how exactly--it's a phrase we hear about but? Speaker 2: Okay, and I'm not sure it's still going on now but I think the government is still investigating it. But what it really is, is it's pay for play. You pay a deejay either money or in kind things, cars, money, whatever it was to get them to play your record. And that's what payola was about and it was totally illegal, and it still is. But, I'm of the impression that goes on in different forms now in radio but, no, I don't think it's going on in major markets very honestly because nobody is gonna lose their jobs at a radio station taking nickel and dime payola like TVs or that kind of stuff, or trips. They just don't do it anymore. Speaker 1: And I'm sure that there're more regulations now. Speaker 2: Oh, the regulations are--they've been the same, they're just enforcing them more now, you know. And, and they're watching people now and a lot of people--the guys that are running radio stations now or the programmers, they're really not into that. I mean, most--all of them I know are pretty straightforward and honest guys. Story_ID: 533364 Speaker 1: Some of the people that you mentioned, I would like for you to talk about-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --them a little bit like, [HistoryMaker] Lucky Cordell is the main (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lucky Cordell was the program director at WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and he also had a radio--and he also had a show on the radio. And, it's kind of funny because, in the early days, Lucky Cordell had some speech problems and, believe it or not, my mom [Florence Smith Dyson]--he used to come by my house once or twice a week and my mom would kind of help him with his speech and stuff. [HistoryMaker] Pervis Spann, he's been around forever, the blues man. And, back then they had no competition, it was just them on the radio and they pretty much ran roughshod over the radio air waves. And it was a fun time in radio because black music was coming into its own at the time too. And, they were playing all the best black music and all of the black stars at that point the only outlet they had for exposure was on the radio. So, they'd visit the radio stations, they'd come into the markets. Now it's very difficult to get them to come into a market and visit a radio station unless they are promoting a new record or if they're on tour and they want to get--to sell some concert tickets. But back then, I mean, the relationship between the artists and the deejays was like brothers and sisters, you know, if you wanted to have your music played, you had to kind of kiss up to the deejays and that kind of thing because they were all powerful. Speaker 1: Bernadine C. Washington, talk to us a little bit about-- Speaker 2: Bernadine C. Washington was a, a--the community affairs director at WVON back in those days and she was totally involved in the community with the churches, and she had a club called the Bern Club and she'd take trips with African American women to different locations around the country or around the world, very honestly, and--she did tips on the radio. She was kind of the female voice for WVON, very beautiful, articulate, well dressed lady. And I understand she used to get her hair done every single day before she actually went in to the radio station. Speaker 1: And wasn't she married to someone that was--? Speaker 2: She was married to one of the deejays there [Eugene Washington]--trying to remember his name. It'll come to me later, I don't remember his name right now but he did a show called 'Women He Knew Were as Beautiful as a White Man's Front Porch' [ph.]. (Laughter) I don't know what that meant but that was, that was a really old saying back then--a rich man's front porch, that's what it was, a rich man's front porch. And, if I keep talking, I'll come up with his name. Speaker 1: At JPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois], it must've been very exciting working with people like Jesse Owens? Speaker 2: That was at WGRT [WGRT Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and WAA--actually, it was WAAF [WAAF Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois], WAAF. Speaker 1: Talk to us a little bit about those? Speaker 2: I didn't have a lot of contact with him but I remember I used to go in the studio with Daddy-O Daylie [HistoryMaker Holmes "Daddy-O" Daylie] and I'd just sit and kind of watch him do his show. And, he'd be going, "When you go, let 'em know Daddy-O told you so." And he was sponsored by Schlitz beer [Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company] at the time. And I used to go in and just watch Jesse Owens do a show, and it was a jazz format. And they used to talk about the early days, about their exploits and that kind of stuff. So it really was an experience just to be around those people. And I suppose it was very motivating too to me, but I mean, I was--I just thought I was big cheese back then, you know, 'cause I'm selling all of the premier black guys on radio and I'm, I'm going to all the parties, and I'm meeting all the stars and that kind of stuff. And it was a direct result of working with those people. Speaker 1: So, you would say that you were probably the number one salesperson there? Speaker 2: Oh, without a doubt. There's nobody that could--that could deny it now because I was--yeah, I was the top salesman there and I've been the top salesman at most of the radio stations I've been at while I was in the sales arena. Story_ID: 533365 Speaker 1: And you left JPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois] in what year? Speaker 2: I left JPC in--what year was that, 19--gosh, '70 [1970], '80 [1980], '90 [1990], 2000--about 1970. Speaker 1: And that's when you went to? Speaker 2: WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and WVON [WVON-FM], the call letters were still WVON at the time. Speaker 1: Okay, talk to us a little about those early days (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went there because they offered me an opportunity to make more money and, and actually as an account exec [executive], and I thought, hm, this might be fun to do. So, and when, when I moved over there, I was just an account exec. I had left JPC as a manager, when I went to WGRT [WGRT Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois] I was just an account executive. I mean, WGCI, I was just an account executive but after a few years I ele- I got promoted to the station manager and I've been running the radio station--I ran radio stations from then on. Speaker 1: And in that capacity you--? Speaker 2: I was pretty much responsible for everything that went on at the radio station. I hired Tom Joyner, the Fly Jock now, T-O-M, J-O-Y-N-E-R, [HistoryMaker] Doug Banks. During that timeframe, those were the two premier disc jockeys in the market at the time. And, we took those radio stations--when I got there they were doing two and a quarter million dollars in billing. Every year the billing increased and when I left in 2003, they were doing close to $40 million a year. And in the year 2000, WGCI was the highest billing radio station in Chicago [Illinois] and the third highest billing in the United States. And I think we did $42 million. So, it was a growth thing from 1970 up to then. Speaker 1: You said you hired Tom Joyner. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you identify his talent very early on? Speaker 2: No, god, no. Speaker 1: How did that happen? Speaker 2: The first time I heard Tom Joyner on the radio I think he was on WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and then he ended up going to WBMX [WBMX Radio, Chicago, Illinois], and I used to listen to him all the time and I'd go, god, he's awful. You know, but he was getting such great numbers and I thought, okay, he's winning I need to go after him. So I approached Tom to come to work for me at WGCI and he came to work for me, and he was doing afternoon--was he doing afternoon--he was doing--I hired him for afternoon drive. And, at the time, he was working in Dallas [Texas] 'cause he had left Chicago, he went back to Dallas and he was working in Dallas. And I called him and asked him if he'd like to come back to Chicago and do an afternoon show because he was doing a morning show in Dallas. And he said, "Yes, I'd like to come back to Chicago and work." We never talked about what he was gonna do about his morning show in Dallas. So, when he came to Chicago he had agreed to come to work for me, and then I had a call that somebody--I think it was Robert Feder, a columnist, and he had said, "Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson]--." Speaker 1: Now, Robert Feder is? Speaker 2: Robert Feder is a columnist with the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he said, "Marv, I'm understanding that Tom Joyner is coming to work for you and do afternoons, and he's also gonna be doing morn- continue to do mornings in Dallas." Well, he never told me that. So, I called Tom and Tom flew into Chicago and we sat down in my club and we had a meeting. And I said, "Tom, what are you talking about, you're gonna do mornings in Dallas and come to Chicago and do afternoons." And he said, "Yes." Two days later I flew to Dallas, we sat down with Tom's wife [Dora Chatmon Joyner] and a nutritionist and some people from American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.] and they convinced me that this thing was doable. And Tom Joyner ended up doing a morning show in Dallas and an afternoon show in Chicago. And he'd leave Dallas in the morning at ten o'clock, he'd arrive in Chicago at one. He'd go to the health club, play racketball, come to the radio station at two, stay on the air from two to six, get a plane, a limo, and go back to the airport and go back to Dallas, Texas. The whole world said we were crazy at that point in time. Tom Joyner ended up doing that for a total of eight years, and that's when he became known as the Fly Jock. Speaker 1: So, you said the world said you were crazy at that time for doing that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they said it was idiotic and would never work. Speaker 1: That was something revolutionary in radio. Speaker 2: Nobody had ever done it. Speaker 1: No one had ever done it. Speaker 2: I mean, that I know of. Nobody was--had ever done two shows in two separate markets on the same day. So, Tom Joyner did it for eight years. Now toward the end, he wasn't flying in every day. He'd fly in maybe two or three days a week and the other days we'd actually do the program where he'd stay in Dallas and we'd satellite it back to Chicago. Story_ID: 533366 Speaker 1: What else would you say that you've done in your radio career that is revolutionary? Speaker 2: Well, when Tom Joyner decided to leave WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and go to W- at that time WVAZ [WVAZ Radio, Oak Park, Illinois], I was really in a dilemma and I didn't quite know what to do or I didn't think I knew what to do but there was this comedian, Steve Harvey, who had been on the radio with Tom a number of times and I thought, hm, let's see if Steve would be interested in doing a radio program. So I approached Steve and it took about six months because he was a hard sell, and I convinced him to come to Chicago [Illinois] and do a morning radio program. And at the time, he was gonna be competing against Tom Joyner 'cause Tom Joyner was doing mornings at that point at WBMX [WBMX Radio, Chicago, Illinois] or VAZ. And, Steve Harvey went on the air at WGCI and in one rating book beat Tom Joyner. Story_ID: 533367 Speaker 1: I also want to talk to you about the urban radio, that--you coining the phrase urban radio, and what--exactly what that means. Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know if I coined that phrase, but I think people always ask me when I was selling nationally, "Well, what is urban radio? Why are you calling yourselves urban contemporary radio?" And I used to tell them, I said, "Urban contemporary radio is really, it's contemporary music for urban dwellers, and today's contemporary music, all the best of it is African American or black," so that's why we came up with the term urban contemporary because we didn't want to say black, like they don't like to say gospel now, because gospel to advertisers they kind of start thinking about holy rollers and that kind of thing. So now they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, gospel still has a hard time. Speaker 2: --they call it inspiration. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I have a gospel station, and we do gospel on the college station [WKKC Radio, Chicago, Illinois], but gospel is really coming into its own now, but the gospel radio stations have to get out of the mindset that there are certain things we can't say and do on the radio, because all of the folks that listen to gospel radio drink, smoke, gamble, they do all those same things. In fact, I just did an article for Radio and Records, and it was a big hu- brouhaha because I said that gospel station should take beer, wine--beer and wine advertising as well as the gambling votes. And they're going, "Well, well, whoa don't you remember Jesus walking around making water into wine?" Come on guys get over that (simultaneous). Story_ID: 533368 Speaker 1: Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson], I just wanna pick up on one thing before we finish our other segment. The names of the radio stations that you worked for, let's get that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, I started out at WAAF [WAAF Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and it was owned by a gentlemen named Ralph Atlass and, don't ask me the years on these 'cause it's been too long. Speaker 1: Okay. Now all of these are AM, correct? Speaker 2: WAAF was AM. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Then I left--I didn't leave WAAF, the call letters changed to WGRT [WGRT Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois], Great [We're Great], because they decided to drop a jazz format which was at AAF and they went into a black music format. So then they started calling it Great, WGRT, Great radio. And it was located at 95.5 on the AM dial. Then John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] bought WGRT and changed the call letters to WJPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. And then he subsequently sold the radio station some years down the line. Then I left there. Speaker 1: Now, where was JPC on the dial? Speaker 2: JPC was the same position, 95.5. Speaker 1: Okay, 95.5 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The code--the name changed but the dial position didn't change. Speaker 1: Just the call letters, okay. Speaker 2: Then when that went away I went to work at WGR--WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois], WVON [WVON-FM], it was AM and FM. The dumbest thing I ever did was take the call letters of WVON and I changed those call letters to WGCI-AM. I should have kept the VON call letters but I didn't keep those call letters and I probably should have. But what ended up happening was [HistoryMaker] Pervis Spann then took those call letters back and he and his daughter, Melody [HistoryMaker Melody Spann-Cooper], continued those call letters at their new dial position at 16.90 I believe it is. Then I left GCI in 2003 for retirement. It was kind of a forced retirement, but it really wasn't forced, I mean, the radio station, it was part of a group of seven radio stations at the time. They put all the radio stations into one building and there was no reason to have a general manager over each one of the radio stations. So they had one guy managing 'em all and they decided that the other managers weren't needed, and I was one of the ones that left. And after twenty-six or twenty-seven years at the radio station, it was time to move on and I was really ready. Speaker 1: And that was Clear Channel that did [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Clear Channel (simultaneous). Story_ID: 533369 Speaker 1: We were talking about the relationship of some--with some of the on-air personalities at JPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. And I think we were mentioning Jesse Owens and-- Speaker 2: They were at WAAF [WAAF Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) WAAF, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, Jesse Owens, Marty Faye, Al Benson--it's amazing, all these people are dead now--Al Benson. Those are the ones I remember and they were the big names at the time, you know, and then when the call letters changed and the format went from jazz to black music they all kind of went by the wayside. Speaker 1: How would you describe black radio in the '60s [1960s]--from the '60s [1960s] to the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Fun. Not very well organized or not as professional as it is today, because we were all just learning it. There were no schools of radio and there were certainly nobody teaching black people how to do radio, so we were kind of doing it, you know, with spit and wire. And I remember one instance when I first got into radio at WAAF, Al Benson was trying to sell one of the major advertising agencies downtown and they just were not having it. "We are not gonna buy a black radio program and we're definitely not gonna buy your program." 'Cause Al didn't have the greatest command of the English language. Back then you didn't have to. He was just a normal brother talking on the radio. Very honestly, he was really not that good in terms of his command of the language but he had a charisma about him. Al Benson went on the radio and then asked all of his listeners to send letters saying that they wanted--that they were listeners of his radio program. He got five or six of those tall mailbags full of mail from black people in Chicago [Illinois]. He and four or five of his co-workers at WAAF took those five mailbags down to this particular advertising agency--and I don't remember the name of it, and dumped the mail in the waiting area and showed them. These are the number of people you are missing by not advertising on my radio program. And I think that was the beginning of a lot of major white companies realizing the importance and power of the African American listening audience. But when I got into radio, I mean, major companies were not advertising. I mean, we'd have to go in every time we made a presentation and we'd have to do research information on the power of the African American market in terms of income, education, homeownership, bank accounts and all of that. None of the white stations ever had to do that. And even with all of that information showing them how important it was that they advertise, a great many of them never did. I mean, I remember I would solicit clients to advertise on the radio here on national trips and New York [New York] going to major advertising agencies trying to get them to advertise like Jaguar [Jaguar Land Rover Limited] and Mercedes-Benz [Mercedes-Benz USA, LLC], and BMW [BMW of North America, LLC] and--not Walmart [Walmart Stores, Inc.] at the time, Crate and Barrel and those stores to advertise on black radio and they looked at me like I was crazy. I remember once I was pitching the guy at Crate and Barrel in New York and he was so racist, I ended up cussing him out and just walking out of the presentation. It was that bad. Bennigan's would not advertise on black radio. It took six years to get Bennigan's to advertise because we had to constantly go back and explain to them what they were missing. And then we finally came up with a concept that really made sense, we said, "Look, if you're trying to grow your business with the population, the way the black population is growing all over the country, if you don't solicit this market now, you are literally--the black population is your margin of profit in every major city in America." And we started telling that story over and over and over at the advertising agency level, at the client level. And they suddenly started beginning to realize that, if I want to grow my company, I really do have to reach out for this market. Story_ID: 533370 Speaker 1: One of my other experiences, I was trying to sell Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC] on advertising on WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] and Chrysler just wasn't having it. They're going, "Well, we don't have any dealerships in black areas and black people, as far as we know, they can't afford these cars." I went to the advertising agency, made a presentation, and they were just so vehement about not advertising on our radio station I went back to the radio station, got another appointment because John Johnson, back in the day [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson who owned Ebony magazine and he was the first guy I worked for in radio, he told me, "Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson], when the client says no, no more Mr. Nice Guy. You have nothing to lose at that point." So I got another appointment with the whole media department at a company called--I think it was Lee King [ph.], and they were handling Chrysler. I went in and did the presentation walking up and down on their conference room table. And they still said no. And I had all kinds of statistics to show them that black people would buy their cars and would drive to their showrooms to see them. They weren't having it. I wrote Lee Iacocca a letter and explained to him what I was going through. He sent me a letter for a lease that I could buy--drive a new Chrysler. He fired that advertising agency, hired another advertising agency, and they started advertising on black radio as a result of that. But that's the kind of stuff that black radio stations had to go through to get business. We couldn't just go to an agency, we literally had to go to the top to get people to understand that, if you don't do this, you are blowing a whole lot of money. Speaker 2: I think that--what was that Pontiac dealer? Speaker 1: Chappelle Pontiac [Chicago, Illinois]? Oh, Al Abrams. Speaker 2: Al Abrams, he understood though (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Al Abrams Pontiac [Al Abrams Motor Sales Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. He understood it because he was in the heart of the black community. He was at 47th [Street] I think it was. And he used to sell all those pink and chartreuse cars and stuff. But he was a very smart businessman, but after he moved out of the neighborhood and the black auto dealers all kind of went away, they just weren't advertising with us. But I put--when I was at JPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois], Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois], I got all seven of the black automobile dealers to advertise as a group. And we used the theme music from 'The Magnificent Seven' movie under the background, and we did--I wrote a series of commercials. And their business jumped 2000 percent as a result of them coming together and advertising. So, those are, those are some of the fun things I did when I was in radio. And some of the kind of innovative things also, but back then we had to come up with innovative things because one individual auto dealer couldn't afford to advertise. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But as a group they could. Story_ID: 533371 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the Civil Rights Movement a little bit in radio (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Okay. Speaker 1: Because you were right in that, in that timeframe. What was that like, how, how did that? Speaker 2: Funny story, when I was promoted to the general manager of WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois], the company was at that time--was owned by the Gannett Company [Gannett Company, Inc.], they print USA Today newspaper and that thing. The head of the company came in to Chicago [Illinois] and told me that I'd won the job of the station manager. The first place we went, and I have a picture upstairs, was to Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] to let Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] know that WGCI was going to have a black general manager and I was the general manager. That was kind of the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement in terms of radio for me. Shortly after that--I don't remember when Harold--right now, when Harold Washington decided to run for the mayor. Myself, Charles Sherrell a black guy that owned WBEE [WBEE Radio] here in Chicago, and the guy that was running WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] at the time, and the guy that was running WVAZ [WVAZ Radio, Oak Park, Illinois], at that time it was WBMX [WBMX Radio], we had a meeting and came together and we decided guys we think that black radio stations, if we come together we can put enough information out there that we can elect a black mayor in Chicago. And we met with Harold Washington and his people and we told them we were gonna put the full power of all five of the black radio stations behind getting him elected mayor. And Harold Washington was on one of the black radio stations, literally, almost every day through that whole campaign. We'd have breakfast meetings and we'd invite the public in and Harold would be there. He'd be in the studio in mornings, middays, afternoons, evenings on all the stations talking about his platform. Well the white folks that were running for mayor, they weren't listening to black radio so they had no idea what was going on in the African American community. Speaker 1: And that was who, Jane? Speaker 2: Jane Byrne was running against him at the time. And Jane but--I mean, a nice lady I suppose but she had no concept of what was going on in the black community in terms of black radio and what Harold Washington was doing. And about a week before the election, she called me and wanted to go on the radio because one of her handlers had told her that Harold Washington was all over black radio and she needed to be on. Well, at that point it was way too late and I told her, "I'm sorry we don't have time to put you on." And her handlers weren't smart enough to tell us that we had to put her on. Because we did. But they never came back to us with it, and as a result Harold Washington won the mayoral--the mayor's office in the City of Chicago. And I remember the day. Speaker 1: That was an exciting time. Speaker 2: I remember the day, I walked out on a balcony 'cause I was living in South Commons [Chicago, Illinois] and I had my daughter with me, and we walked out on the balcony that morning and just kind of looked. The city had a whole different look that day. And black people in this town walked around downtown with a, with a strut in their step that was just unbelievable. And the day Harold was elected my--one of my daughters was in school at Ancona [The Ancona School], a preschool in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And he lived in the building right there at 53rd [Street] I believe it is, in the building there. And before the election he had told me--I'd been telling him, I said, "I really would like you to stop by and just tell my daughter's class that you actually know her because they--I'd introduced her to him." The morning he got elected mayor, before he went anywhere, he walked out of his building, walked around the corner into Ancona School, and walked into my daughter's preschool class and asked to see Gabrielle Dyson. And--I water up when I think of it. He was just such a nice man. And my daughter was just--she was so elated because all of her friends were going, "You know Harold Washington?" You know, it was a, it was a really big thing, you know. But he was an incredible mayor, and I'd, I had the occasion and the opportunity to have lunch with him once a month the whole time he was mayor. He'd meet with the black radio station owners or managers. He also met with the white ones but we met separately, and we had lunch in his office once a month, just to find out what was going on and what we could do to help him make the city better for African Americans. And he was just an incredible man. And had he lived I think it would've been--the city would have been so much better off, but it's cool now. Speaker 1: Of some of the people that--and just as far as that whole mayoral campaign was concerned because that was such an interesting--such an exciting time in Chicago, who are some of the other people that you feel influenced, from the black community's perspective, the support of the mayor? Speaker 2: Well, from the radio aspect of it because that's all we did. It was Charles Mootry [Charles Mootry, Jr.] who ran WVON at the time--no WJPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois] I think it was, and Charles Sherrell who ran WBEE, and I ran WGCI, and Kernie Anderson ran WBMX at the time. Those were the guys that we really kind of worked with in terms of getting the mayor elected. In terms of other folks, I'm sure Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II] naturally was there 'cause he was everywhere at that point. And he was kind of the spearhead of the whole thing with him. And he kind of made it happen. Speaker 1: Going back, back a little bit further from Mayor Washington to Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], that time in black radio, what do you think the--how do you feel that the black radio stations in Chicago, yours particularly, helped with his efforts in Chicago. Speaker 2: In terms of King, that was before black radio--at least before my time. I knew King, I went to a couple of things with him but black radio was not really involved. VON was at the time, they were very involved but I was not working at WVON so I had very little contact with, with Dr. King other than the contacts that my mom [Florence Smith Dyson] had because they were personal friends. Story_ID: 533372 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you think is one of the things that made WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] so successful? Speaker 2: Very honestly I think it was just--its community involvement. We kind of stole some pages from WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois], when VON was a music station back in the day I grew up listening to it and I remembered they always did stuff that involved the black community and helping, and baskets, and Christmas and all that kind of stuff. So we--I just kind of stole a lot of those ideas. And when something happened to black people in the black community, I just made sure that WGCI was behind it. The little girl that got burned in that fire over on 38th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue] some years ago, we had a fundraiser for them and we ended up getting them all kinds of toys and clothing and the black--the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] gave them each a full four year scholarship and they ended up going to black colleges [HBCUs]. Girl X, ten years ago, when she was totally molested and abused. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about, about that, Girl X? Speaker 2: A girl was going between apartments in Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and somebody abducted her early in the morning and supposedly put lye or something down her throat, totally molested her, and--it was just a terrible experience for her and we didn't pay any attention to it. And the newspapers kind of died on it, and one day Richard Steele [HistoryMaker Richard Claude Steele] came in one day and-- Speaker 1: And Richard Steele is? Speaker 2: Richard Steele is a--he now works for WBEZ [WBEZ Radio, Chicago, Illinois], the public radio station but at the time he worked for me. And he was a deejay on the air there and he was doing news, and public affairs and that kind of stuff. And he came in one day and just happened to mention, "Man, have you seen this thing about this little girl that got molested." And we looked at it and at the time my daughter [Danielle Dyson], who is nineteen now was like eight or nine. So I kind of related to the little girl, so we decided to do a fundraiser for her. And she was--at that point she was at Northwestern Memorial Hospital [Chicago, Illinois]. And we were just gonna do a one day thing, so we sent our van over to Northwest Memorial Hospital [sic.] and I did a little editorial about, you know, the girl could use money to pay hospital bills and that kind of thing. We went to the hospital and started asking on the radio--asking people to come by and drop money off. And that--just that one stop we made like twenty-five thousand dollars. So then we took that and expanded it and went to different locations around the city. And for whatever reason, 'The Today Show' ['Today'] picked up on it, Maury Povich picked up on it, the first lady [Hillary Rodham Clinton]. And they all came in and interviewed us, and we ended up raising almost six hundred thousand dollars for Girl X. And got her a new home, a vehicle, and all kinds of money, and a scholarship think if she ever decides to go to college. And that was really kind of the--we had Boyz II Men come in, the singing group, because Girl X, that was her favorite singing group. And my daughter at the time in New York [New York] was working with Boyz II Men and she flew them in, and they went over to the school where Girl X was--where she was recuperating and she got a chance to meet them. She couldn't see but one of the guys whispered in her ear, "Hi," and started singing one of their hit songs and she actually started bawling and crying she was so happy and excited. And I remember the morning because I was actually in tears too, because she was just so happy and it was a time when she was being treated like a normal person because she was just a young kid. She was eight or nine, nine or ten years old. Speaker 1: And what year was this, Mr. Dyson [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson]? Speaker 2: It was ten years ago or eleven years ago now so what would that be, '96 [1996], '95 [1995], '96 [sic. 1997], yeah. And it's a shame because the guy they have in jail for doing that, Patrick Sykes, didn't do it. But they lost all of the DNA evidence and a lot of the other evidence when he went to trial, and he, literally in my opinion, got railroaded. And to this day he and I are still in touch. He's at--in--I think it's Pontiac, Illinois, the Pontiac correctional institution [Pontiac Correctional Center]. And I send money and pictures and letters, and stuff, and we talk about maybe twice a month. He calls and I take his call and we just talk. And I'm--at some point I am really gonna bring that case back to the public because he got a 125 years in jail for something he didn't do, simply because they were just trying to close that case. And I feel kind of responsible because the radio station was putting so much pressure on the system to find somebody that I think they just grabbed him. Speaker 1: And they--the condition of the little girl now, do you know? Speaker 2: I don't really know. I've lost touch only because after the trial I was just so disheartened with the way it was handled and the girl's mother just told all kinds of lies and it was just awful, and I just said I don't wanna be associated with them. But while it was going on I was very close to the mom. In fact, my son and I went shopping for them and we got her all kinds of new furniture and I remember one day my older son and I were over there, and we actually laid the carpeting in her apartment--her new house for her with her kids and stuff. And my wife [Kim Dittmer Dyson] shopped for them at Christmas. But then when the trial came up she just got crazy and she just did all the wrong things in my opinion. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And I just kind of disassociated myself. Story_ID: 533373 Speaker 1: Have you had any other experiences, because this--it sounds that you've become very committed to the situation even after it's over? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Your commitment still lingers (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. I still am--yes. Speaker 1: Are there any other situations that you've had in radio that you can recall like that? Speaker 2: Well like, right now I'm working with the City Colleges of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] because they've had a radio station that they've owned for twenty-five years. And it had a moment of, of greatness probably twelve or fifteen years ago when rap and hip hop music was beginning to happen and they were the only radio station that was doing it. And it's 89.3 WKKC [WKKC Radio, Chicago, Illinois], and it's on the campus of Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois] at 68th [Street] and Wentworth [sic.]. I'm volunteering and part-time working there to try to get their radio station up to where it needs to be, where I think it's a viable radio station. We discontinued all of the broadcast curriculum there and I'm in the process of putting together a new broadcast curriculum for the college that will open in 2007 when the new college opens. And the idea is to put together a college curriculum for broadcasting, specifically, radio where the young adults that come through it actually really have the training where they actually can work at a real radio station when they finish. Because a lot of colleges now are offering radio courses and stuff but they're not really preparing the students for real world radio. So that's one of the things I'm really excited about now. And I've got some of my old friends working with me at Kennedy-King. Speaker 1: Such as? Speaker 2: I got [HistoryMaker] La Donna Tittle, Bonnie DeShong, Harold Lee Rush, Walid Muhammad [ph.], [HistoryMaker] Richard Pegue, and they're all volunteering--they're doing shifts there, air shifts. Monday through Friday each one of them does a shift. And when we get it together they will actually be instructing students on radio etiquette is what I call it but they'll have an opportunity to learn from those people, the students. Story_ID: 533374 Speaker 1: You had a situation at WJPC [WJPC Radio; WNTD Radio, Chicago, Illinois] some years ago with an on air personality that was-- Speaker 2: Bob Wall. Speaker 1: Bob Wall, tell us a little bit about that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: GCI. Speaker 2: Bob Wall was huge here in Chicago [Illinois], he was a white disc jockey and he was number one in the market and he was on a black radio station, WGCI. Speaker 1: And was he the only--and he was the only white person on that? Speaker 2: He was the only white person on--well we had a lady doing afternoon drive named Barbara Stanek. The staff was totally mixed back then because the radio station was coming out of a disco format and going into a black format. So we kind of inherited some of the black--the white people and we kept them because they were just very good. But Bob Wall was accused of molesting his babysitter and it was a big stink. And at the time, Bob was just getting ready to get into a new contract with the radio station and I opted not to renew his contract just to see what was going on, and what ended up happening was he was accused and he ended up actually being found guilty of molesting his babysitter. He didn't do any time or anything because the family didn't really want him to do time. But he ended up losing his job at the radio station and went into pretty much oblivion for about the next four or five years. He ended up working in Tennessee--Memphis I believe it is. And two years ago I heard that he'd killed himself, he committed suicide. Because I'd brought him back to Chicago about five years ago to just--to put him on the air to see what the response would be on WVAZ [WVAZ Radio, Oak Park, Illinois] at the time. And he was on with Bonnie DeShong and we did a--kind of a week test to see how Bob would--how the community would react, and it was about a fifty-fifty split because he was so huge that the population here really did want him to come back. Half of them did and the other half didn't, and I had a call from [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Tillman at the time and she kind of put it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Dorothy Tillman is? Speaker 2: She's Alderman Dorothy Tillman, the hats. And she's--she just told me, "Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson], I can't believe you can't find a qualified black person to fill that position." And that really kind of made me think. You know what, with all of the black folks in Chicago that are looking for jobs in radio, and white people can find jobs at all of--they have more opportunities to work so I opted not to rehire Bob. And I think, because he didn't get a chance to come back and relive his glory days, I think that probably contributed to his suicide. Because his wife [Debra Harrison] called me afterwards and she said when he came back to Memphis or wherever he was, he was so excited about having an opportunity to come back here and then when it didn't happen, she said he went into a state of funk that was just unbelievable. And a year--I think it was a year later his children found him hung in his home in Memphis. Story_ID: 533375 Speaker 1: I'm hearing another side of you because I've heard so much about how you can be a little difficult to work with-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and have no problem in terminating people (laughter) if they're not living up to the challenge. But then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did have a reputation for firing people if they didn't live up to the challenge. And I fired my younger brother, my best friend. I mean, I've done that because-- Speaker 1: Your younger brother being? Speaker 2: Lon [Lon Dyson]. I fired Lon. Speaker 1: And Lon got you hired? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I ended up terminating him only because we were going in a different direction and he didn't fit, but I ended up hiring him back. My best friends-- Speaker 1: Which were--what were their names? Speaker 2: They were people you wouldn't know because they weren't big names in radio. But I know with Crazy Howard McGee he had been accused of hitting his girlfriend and that was really bad, and the whole community was coming down on him and they were saying, "Oh, he hit his girlfriend," and that kind of thing, and I spoke to Jeanne Sparrow and she said, "Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson], as a woman, I think you need to talk to women's organizations and see what they think." So I called all the women's organizations, NOW [National Organization for Women] and some of the local community organizations and asked them what I should do. And you know what they said, they said, "Marv, if he in fact did hit her, he needs to get counseling and help." And they recommended some places that he could go and get counseling and help. And we paid for him to get counseling and help for a year. And I spoke to Crazy Howard McGee two days ago and he said--that's been ten years ago and he said, "I still thank you for getting me help." And now he's fine. Speaker 1: And you had also arranged for Bob Wall to go to counseling (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, Bob Wall went to counseling also, right. Speaker 1: And, tell us the story about [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent? Speaker 2: Herb Kent, there's--I don't remember--It's been a lot of years ago, probably twelve or thirteen years ago now. Herb Kent's family was very concerned about Herb because he was really dealing in drugs really heavily, sniffing cocaine in his nose and he would always--when he'd come to work--he was working for me at the time on the Oldies AM station, WGCI-AM [WGCI Radio; WGRB Radio, Chicago, Illinois], and his family was very concerned and when I'd see Herb he was always blowing his nose and stuff but I never thought anything about it. His daughter [Robbin Kent] came in one day and said, "Marv, you've gotta get dad squared away because he's really messing up." So I called Herb in and I said--into the conference room one day, and I had our director of personnel in there and I said, "Herb, I don't know what's going on but your family is really concerned about you." And his nose was bleeding at the time, and he was wiping it. And I said, "Here's the deal, if you leave here and go into counseling right now for your addiction problems, I will hold your job for you until you come back. But if you don't, you're fired." He went into a rehab program, and I don't remember how long it was, I think it was like three or four months. And he came back to his job and he's been in radio ever since. Drugs is still rampant in this country. And it's really rampant in the entertainment industry, and probably in radio. Not as much as it used to be or not as much as I would imagine, you know, but I know it goes on and I've had my experiences with it with employees and that kind of thing. But you live with it, and I really believe that it is an addiction and people fall into it and that's not a reason to lose your job. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And I don't think--I didn't think Crazy Howard McGee should have lost his job because of a domestic dispute that was at his house. I think that's a person's personal life, but at the same time I can't condone hitting women. So I was, I was really very careful that, that didn't happen. And the same thing with R. Kelly when he was going through the changes because he was accused of molesting little girls and that kind of stuff, and we were getting all kinds of pressure to take his music off the radio, and they were taking him off, every other radio station in America. And I opted not to take him off GCI. And people were asking me, why? And it was really very simple. You're innocent until proven guilty, and because somebody accused him of something was not a reason to take it off the radio. And we were polling our listeners and our listeners were saying, "What does that have to do with his music, we wanna hear his music on the radio." So, my position was, if I take him off the--if I take his music off the radio that's kind of like the same thing that happened back in Nazi Germany when they decided they were gonna take books. Oh, okay, now it'll start with music and then it'll go to something else. And I said, I just didn't feel like I had the power to do that and I didn't wanna do it. So I kept his music on the radio and it's been on ever since, and I just did it because it was the right thing to do. That was really it and R. Kelly called and thanked me for standing up for him and all that, and I told him, "I'm not standing up for you, I am standing up for every man's right for his--to his day in court." That was really it. Michael Jackson, the same thing when he was accused. Everybody said, "Are you gonna take his music off?" Nope, not gonna take his music off. 'Cause he's innocent until proven guilty, and as it turned out he was found innocent. I didn't take his music off. Story_ID: 533376 Speaker 1: At GCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois], when you started there the--what kind of revenue were they making from--what kind of money were they making on sale and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I started at GCI they were doing two and a quarter million dollars a year in billing or revenue. And they actually thought that was all the money in the world. I mean, the company that owned them at the time, Gannett [Gannett Company, Inc.], they thought, wow, we got this black radio station and it's doing two and a quarter million dollars in billing. I mean, they just thought, man, this is crazy. Well, I didn't believe--when I'm looking at the billing figures for other radio stations in the market, I'm going, well, two and a quarter million is not a lot of money because some of these stations are doing $10, $15, $20, $25 million a year in billing. Why can't we do that? So, we decided to really get our act together and go after being the number one station in the market ratings wise and revenue wise, and I took that rating--not me, it was myself and an awful lot of really very smart people that worked with me in the sales arena and in the marketing arena and the promotions, and the ordinary staff. That radio station went from two and a quarter million dollars to close to $42 million in billing. Speaker 1: Over what period of time? Speaker 2: An eighteen year period. And it was fun. We had so much fun every day. I mean, the first time we cracked a million dollars a month, we had Korbel champagne, which is the cheapest champagne you can buy. (Laughter) And I remember my staff--we just thought that was a good champagne, and then we started doing--we went from a million a month--that first month we did like a million two. We just started celebrating every one and then we graduated to--we started with Cold Duck, then we went to Korbel, and then we went to Piper-Heidsieck and then we went to the real high one. We had Cristal once, one time we had Cristal but only one bottle. So everybody just kind of had a little sip, you know. But those were the fun days of radio and that's when we were--well, actually all of my career in radio has been fun but those were the times when that family at WGCI was then such a tightknit group of people. It was just an incredible sphere--well, you were there for some of it-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --so you know. You know, it was just--it was a fun time to be in radio and on radio. Story_ID: 533377 Speaker 1: Did you bring Elroy Smith into the business (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did. Yes, I did. Speaker 1: How did you spot his talent and tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: We had lost our program director at the time, and a friend of mine was working in Dallas [Texas], Maynard Grossman, who now works for me with my radio stations, and Maynard said, "There's a guy here named Elroy Smith that I think you need to talk to." And I'd heard about him, so I called Elroy and shortly after I called him, he'd lost his job in Dallas because the radio station he was managing was not beating Tom Joyner's so they decided to let Elroy go. So, Elroy and I talked on the phone for probably seven months at least once a week getting ideas about what he was doing and things I could do here in Chicago [Illinois] to really make GCI [WGCI Radio] better and the whole number. But he never asked for the job. And I thought, that's crazy. So, after about four or five months had passed and we had an interim program director and I don't even remember who he was, I flew four guys in that I decided I was gonna interview to be the program director at WGCI. Speaker 1: Do you remember who they were? Speaker 2: No. I only remember Elroy 'cause he made such a big impression. I mean, if I looked back I could probably remember but Elroy was the big mucky-muck at that time. And he flew into Chicago and I had 'em all staying at the Palmer House hotel [Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, Illinois]. And they all knew they were pitching for this job. And we interviewed all the other guys, it was in the conference room at WGCI. And Elroy's turn came in, and Elroy came in and he had a, a flip chart, a tape recorder, and he sat down and he had taped every single show on WGCI and he proceeded to critique every show and tell us what we needed to do to make them better. He then--the flip chart explaining with pictures what he would do on the air and some of the promotions he would do, and that kind of thing. After he finished his presentation, he folded up all of his stuff and started out of the room. And I said, "Mr. Smith, do we get a chance to ask you some questions?" And he said, "Oh, yeah, you certainly do." At that point, we were just so impressed with the homework he had done and I'd liked him on the phone anyway. We decided that Elroy Smith would be the guy that we wanted to hire to run WGCI. And, I guess he'd been there about four or five months and one day I was walking by his office, and he was on the telephone--no, it was about a year later and we had beaten WVAZ--or WBMX [WBMX Radio, Chicago, Illinois] in the ratings and he was kind of just coming into his own, you know, and I walked by his office and he was on the phone and was talking to Barry Mayo [HistoryMaker Barry A. Mayo]. And Barry Mayo was the manager of WBMX at the time, and I was a little upset because he was trying to get information from Barry. And I said, "Elroy, you don't call somebody you've beaten to get information. That's crazy. And I really don't like the idea that you're talking to the competitor about getting advice and direction." I said, "You gotta start believing in yourself." And from that point on, he disassociated himself at least in terms of getting information. And, and that was during the time when I had that reputation for hiring and firing people and I used to tell Elroy all the time, "Look, if we don't get these numbers you know you are fired." And we went to Memphis or somewhere in Tennessee to tape some commercials and that morning Elroy came down from his hotel room, and he was kind of in tears and he said, "Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson], I really have a problem with the way you're always threatening to fire me." And I really hadn't thought about it and I said, "Elroy, that's the last time I'll ever mention fire to you unless there actually is a blaze at the radio station." And we've been friends ever since and that's been about fifteen years ago. And he is one of the really good reasons why GCI has managed to maintain its status as the number one radio station. And Elroy will tell you he took over a great radio station, and his job was just to keep it where it was or make it better and that's what he's done. Story_ID: 533378 Speaker 1: But you have been able throughout your career to really identify--it's like a sense that you have of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, people tell me that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) who's gonna work on air and who isn't. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And it doesn't take you a long time. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Give us another example of someone--? Speaker 2: I tell people all the time if you're trying to hire deejays and they're sending audition tapes and that kind of stuff, if you turn on an audition tape, you know in the first ten seconds if somebody has it or they don't, at least I do. They have to grab you, they have to feel like when you turn it on, they gotta feel like--you have to feel like they're talking only to you. And that is a very unique talent. The good deejays have it. Tom Joyner has it, [HistoryMaker] Doug Banks has it, Yvonne Daniels had it, Bob Wall had it, [HistoryMaker] La Donna Tittle had it--has it, she's still around and she still has it, Bonnie DeShong, [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent has it. When Herb Kent's on the radio it's just like you're sitting down in his kitchen and he's just playing music. That's a unique talent that they have and I'm talented enough I guess that I kind of--I can hear it. Story_ID: 533379 Speaker 1: So you take GCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] from 2.25 million to 42 million [dollars]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and they let you go. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-hm. Speaker 1: What was that like? Speaker 2: I'd been doing it so long at that point, people always ask me that, "Aren't you angry, aren't you mad for what they did?" And my wife [Kim Dittmer Dyson] is even upset because I tell her no, I'm really not upset. Because I had done all I could do at WGCI, and in the interim I was kind of dabbling in ownership in radio stations so I had my own group that I was putting together. And Corporate America had kind of taken over radio and it would--kind of taken over WGCI and the fun was gone in terms of the day to day operation. We always had to report to corporate what we were doing and that kind of stuff. And I was kind of used to running a looser ship, and I think (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And corporate being Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Clear Channel and any major company that's running radio stations. They just--because of Wall Street, they have those--they have to hit numbers. And it really got kind of crazy, and I realized that with six or seven radio stations there was no way they were gonna have an individual manager at each one of those stations. And I saw the, the--I guess the hammer coming early on and, at that point, the morning it happened I told my wife, "I hope today is the day they let me go." 'Cause I wasn't gonna walk away, 'cause I wanted to get the severance package and all that, you know. So, I walked in that morning and it was a week after I'd just been honored as the Broadcast Ad Club [Broadcast Advertising Club of Chicago; Media Advertising Club of Chicago] person of the year, about a week or ten days, and that was the highest--that is the highest honor you can get in Chicago [Illinois] radio. I mean, that says you are the man or the woman. And I was the first African American to get it believe it or not after almost twenty-five years of--they were doing it. But that morning, I walked in they said, it's over and I said, fine, they gave me a severance package. I called all of the major clients, I wasn't mad. I called all of the major clients and told them things are okay, don't worry about it. If there's anything I can do just let me know. And I stayed on from October through the end of the year, December 2003, and I left. And I have no hard feelings about Clear Channel or the way they treated me at all because I had a thirty year career and some of those years were with Clear Channel, and they paid me an awful lot of money, and I had an awful lot of fun and they never once told me what I could and couldn't do at those radio stations. It was just a matter of radio was consolidating and that was it and I was odd man out. Story_ID: 533380 Speaker 1: You said that you were putting together a group [Urban Radio Broadcasting, LLC] to buy radio stations (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: And what is the status of that? Speaker 2: About twelve years ago a friend of mine who actually (background noise)--can I take that? Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: To continue, tell me a little bit more about your radio stations and how you're putting that together, how that happened (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How that happened? There was a young man named Kevin Wagner that worked for me at WGCI Radio [Chicago, Illinois] and he lived in Altgeld Gardens [Altgeld Gardens Homes, Chicago, Illinois], he got a cubicle or space behind my wife, Kim [Kim Dittmer Dyson], when she worked the radio station and she asked me when I hired him--'cause he came in and he had on Superfly clothes and stuff, and he worked for [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent. He was kind of selling advertising for Herb Kent's little private show when Herb Kent had a radio program on another station. He was brokering time. That's where he bought an hour or two hours of airtime and he'd do a show and he'd get his own advertisers and he'd keep the money. Well, this young guy, Kevin Wagner, was the guy that was doing the selling for him. Kevin came and said he wanted to work at WGCI Radio and he said, "I got clients I can bring over." And, I said "What are you talking about?" He said, "I got $3500 that I can give you right now and these clients want to advertise." That was money. I said, "Sure, come on over." So he came over, and my wife, who--college educated in the radio broadcasting and that kind of thing, I put him in a cubicle behind her and she was all upset at the time. We weren't married at the time, and she was all upset about it, and I'm going, "What's the problem?" She said, "He has no training or anything and he's now working at a radio station." And I said, "Yeah, but he walked in here with $3500. You walked in here with a college degree and two years of training at a rep firm and you haven't brought in a dime yet. I'm hiring him." So, he ended up getting hired and he was sitting behind her in a cubicle for five or six years. And he was copying everything she did, learning what she did, and he'd looked over my notes and stuff and he ended up dating my older daughter. Don't know what happened with that one either (laughter). You know, you never know about those things. And then he ultimately left the radio station because he was pursuing promotions in the record industry. And he got into--it was in Mobile, Alabama. And he called me one day and he said, "I'd like you to come down and look at this radio station that I'm kind of helping grow." I flew down, and it was a, literally, a shotgun house in the middle of a swamp in Mobile, Alabama. And it was an AM and an FM, and the FM was winning in terms of black audience and the AM was actually winning it because it was a gospel format. And he said "We're in debt up to here. Is there any way you can maybe help us out?" I invested fifty thousand dollars in that radio station, I ended up putting in a total of maybe seventy-five thousand dollars, over a three year period we sold those radio stations for $6 million. And I took the money and invested it in a couple of radio stations in Toledo, Ohio and we put together a business plan that took us seven years to sell to somebody. And we had it all around at all of the different Wall Street houses and bankers and that kind of thing. And Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] has a lady there, her name is Precious Williams [Precious Williams Owodunni] and she's an African American either Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale Law [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] grad, really had her stuff together. And she happened to come across our business plan maybe four or five years ago, and she liked the concept. She called us and they invested $30 million with our company. My initial investors, I had Tim Hardaway--and they're still in. Tim Hardaway, Donovan McNabb, they're kind of investors in the company. They each put in a little money to kind of keep us rolling. And my business partner and myself, and Goldman Sachs if you get in bed with them, they wanna be sure you have enough money in so if they get hurt, you get hurt too. So we started out with the one radio, two radio stations, we sold them, we got two in Toledo, Ohio then we started expanding. I'm now up to eleven radio stations--thirteen, I'm sorry. And I have a bid in now to buy eleven radio stations from Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.], so any day now, I'll be up to twenty-four radio stations. And they're in primarily small markets. Toledo is the biggest market and then I have Muscle Shoals, Alabama; Columbus [Mississippi]; Starkville, Mississippi and Alexandria, Louisiana. And, the ideas to grow the radio stations--I take a non-performing or low-performing radio station, go in, turn it around, and make it profitable. And sometimes that means you cut a lot of the expenses, you change the format, and I concentrate primarily in urban or black radio because that is what I know. But in Muscle Shoals, we have a news talk station, a rock station, and a sports talk station. So I'm beginning to get out of urban in some of the markets depending on what the formats are. But it's--it started out as just helping a friend out and now it's turned into a multimillion dollar enterprise. We're not making any crazy money yet, but we're having a lot of fun and I'm kind of recreating the atmosphere that we had at WGCI back in the day, which is not so corporate it's more just kind of laid back and just let's make it happen and have fun. Ultimately, I think it'll probably be worth a whole lot of money. Story_ID: 533381 Speaker 1: You said urban radio. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, that's a phrase that you kind of-- Speaker 2: It's kind of a euphemism for black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Euphemism. Speaker 2: --but we don't say black radio anymore, we call it urban radio, and, really, it's, it really is, it's black radio but there are different formats. It's straight up urban, which is what WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] is, which is a mix of hip hop and R and B. And then there's urban AC, which is urban adult contemporary and that is kind of what WVAZ [WVAZ Radio, Oak Park, Illinois] is. It's, it's older music mixed in with some--no rap or hip hop. And that's called urban AC. Then there's gospel but now they--trying to get away from calling it gospel and they call it inspiration or praise, because gospel to advertisers kind of gives them a visual picture of people that are in church who don't spend money which is the furthest from the truth you've ever seen. Because those are the folks that spend a lot of money. You go to any black church and you see the Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] and the Jaguars and the BMWs parked in front and everybody's dressed to the nines. So you know there's money there, and a lot of those people listen to gospel or praise or inspiration radio. Speaker 1: But, but gospel radio can't really take the same type of advertisers, can they? Speaker 2: Well, right now it can't. They, they put I guess infringements on themselves in terms of certain advertisers they can and can't take. Like they don't take alcoholic beverage advertisers like beer and wine. They don't take gambling boat advertising, they don't take condom advertising on a lot of the stations. I think ultimately though that is going to change, I think it's gonna have to because just because you listen to gospel radio, doesn't mean that you don't drink, smoke, go to the gambling boats and that kind of stuff. And I think with AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and what's going on, and children having children I think it is important that we allow the listeners to know that condoms are a safe way to go. I remember at GCI the first time we took condom advertising on, I spoke to the people on staff there before I actually accepted the advertising. And every woman on staff said, "Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson], we have to take this advertising because black young girls are getting AIDS, they're having children before they're old enough to have them. We need to put this information on the radio." And, I thought, oh, my god, when I put this on everybody in the world is gonna call me and say I'm doing the wrong thing. We put condom advertising on the radio at WBE--WGCI. I didn't get one single negative call about it. And that lets me know that America is changing and we have to change with it. And radio is changing also, and it's kind of fun to watch it. Story_ID: 533382 Speaker 1: Before we conclude-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --is there anything else that you'd like to tell me or tell our audience? Speaker 2: No. I can't think of anything that-- Speaker 1: WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] has had such an impact in making hits, as a hit maker. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so many people have come through this station. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Who are one of the--who is the one artist that you would say you were--were most intriguing or? Speaker 2: I have met just about every major black artist you can name. I remember one day we were, we were at the radio station and Tina Turner came by the radio station, and she went on the air and she was just talking. And I don't know what it was about her but she didn't sing a note. And everybody on staff came out of their offices and were gathered around Tina Turner, she just had an aura that just screamed, I am a very nice person. And she treated everybody with such class and dignity. That's the one person that, at a radio station, that really totally and completely impressed me. Of all the people I have ever met in my career in radio, I would say Nelson Mandela probably hit me the hardest when I met him. Some years ago when he was in Chicago [Illinois] for one of his visits shortly after he got out of jail, he came here and I had an opportunity to have lunch with him along with a thousand other people, but I was sitting at the head table with him. And I remember when I met him. I don't know how it would be to meet God, but that's how it felt. He just had a kind of (makes sounds) you know the deity sound, just--I just thought I was in the presence of true greatness. And I hadn't gotten that from anybody, from Michael [Michael Jackson], to Janet [Janet Jackson], to Gladys [Gladys Knight], to Prince. None of those people impacted me like he did. Will Smith on the other hand was one of the people that I liked very much in radio because he remembered people. When he was in his rap days, he used to come by the radio station and a year or two later he came back by and he remembered my name and everybody else's. And that's kind of nice and now he is so huge. Speaker 1: Yes, he is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But he is, what you see is what you get. Will is really one of the nice people. Story_ID: 533383 Speaker 1: Okay, Marv [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson], before we finish I just--I need to go back and get the name of your radio company? Speaker 2: Okay, the name of the radio company is Urban Radio Broadcasting, LLC (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And I just have to ask you this. Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: How golden was your parachute (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I retired from the Gannett Company [Gannett Company, Inc.] about ten years ago so they pay me a--it's a decent pension every month and because I'm older I get--also get social security and the golden parachute from Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.] was a year's salary plus a lot of the stock options that I managed to keep. So it was, it was pretty substantial money, it really was. Speaker 1: So we're okay? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm fine. Yeah, and my radio company I get a little stipend from them every month just for running that so we'll be okay. But one of these days I wanna be really super rich and that's the goal of the radio company. I wanna grow the company and either at some point sell it, and right now they're worth--the radio stations all together are worth about $40 million. So I could turn around and maybe sell those and pay off the debt I own on them and I might be able to walk away with $10 million. But that's not what I wanna do. I really would like to keep them and let my younger children move into that because I have an older son who's running radio stations in Kansas City [Missouri] and I would really like him to come to work for me after I'm not working in the company. Speaker 1: Now, what is his name? Speaker 2: His name is Victor, Victor Dyson, and he runs two radio stations in Kansas City. Speaker 1: Which are? Speaker 2: KPRS [KPRS Radio, Kansas City, Missouri], which is owned by the Carter family. They're one of the oldest black broadcasting families in the country, and he's been there for about eight years now--eight or nine years. And he's hugely successful, and we talk at least two or three times a week. Story_ID: 533384 Speaker 1: What advice would you give to a young person who wants to get into radio as a career path? Speaker 2: I would tell them first have a plan B in case that doesn't work out. I would also tell them don't major in communications in college because I've seen easily six, seven hundred students send resumes majoring in communications, and a lot of the training they've had, it's not inferior but it's not real world training in terms of radio. I would also tell 'em don't think you're gonna be a deejay because the Tom Joyners, the [HistoryMaker] Doug Banks, the Oprah Winfreys and all of the famous people in the media they're not gonna die anytime soon and there are not enough jobs out there for all the people that wanna be deejays. I tell students that all the time. The best advice I would tell them would--have a plan B, be sure you complete your education, and major in business because business makes the world go around. And most of the people I know that work in radio don't have degrees in the industry, they have degrees from other areas. And those that are running it, the major companies, none of them have degrees that I know of in broadcasting or communications. It's always finance or business. And I tell black kids, white kids, men, women, brown kids, yellow kids, please, major in business because that's the way it's going, and computers. Story_ID: 533385 Speaker 1: Now you're at Kennedy-King now-- Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you're putting together their--? Speaker 2: It's Kennedy-King College. Speaker 1: Kennedy-King College in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, and they're building a new college that's gonna open in 2007 at 63rd [Street] and Halsted [Street]. And one of my chores there in addition to running the radio station and consulting the TV station is also to put together a curriculum for the new college in radio broadcasting. And that's what I'm in the process of doing now. And my goal there is to make WKKC [WKKC Radio, Chicago, Illinois] the college radio station in America by which all others are measured. My other goal is to turn out students that have such a great background in radio and broadcasting that every major radio company in the country will want to hire students from Kennedy-King College. And I've kind of got that rolling now. I've got the twenty-nine radio stations the top ones here in Chicago, they've already assured me that if I put the programming together, that they will hire my graduates. And I have the major people in Chicago, that are running radio stations, are also on my board at Kennedy-King College. Speaker 1: Can you give us a few names? Speaker 2: Bruce DuMont, who runs the broadcast museum [Museum of Broadcast Communications, Chicago, Illinois], Jon Garon [ph.], who runs Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] radio section, Dick Rackovan who runs the Radio Advertising Bureau of Chicago, Melody Spann [HistoryMaker Melody Spann-Cooper], who owns WVON Radio in Chicago, Earl Jones, who runs Clear Channel [Clear Channel Communications, Inc.] here in Chicago, Elroy Smith, who is the director of operations at Clear Channel here in Chicago, and a couple of sales types. So I've got the people that have the power to hire and fire, but also the people that have the wherewithal to tell me that the things I am teaching are the things that they're gonna be looking for in the future. Like, radio is growing so fast, I mean, satellite radio, cable radio, radio on the web. All of that is growing in leaps and bounds. HD radio, and that's really wild. HD radio is high definition radio, and what it is, is every radio station now has side bands, so GCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] has two other side bands that they can put radio stations on. And they have 'em on 'em now. So that means if you own a radio station in Chicago you, in fact, own three radio stations. And that, that is gonna open up an awful lot of jobs and an awful lot of formats and different things that you're gonna hear on the radio that people have not even thought of. And that's why these young kids who are coming around today with the iPods and all of that, they're gonna be the radio people of the future, and they're gonna be programing these HD radio stations, and that's gonna create an awful lot of jobs and it is creating a different skill set if you wanna compete in that arena. And one of my goals is to try to be able to teach those skill sets to the students of today and tomorrow. And at the City Colleges [City Colleges of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], the average student is thirty-five, thirty years old. So, they're not gonna be going into radio stations as deejays and that kind of stuff. They're gonna go in as managers, salespeople, production people, marketing and promotions people. And some of 'em are not gonna make it. And that's what you have to tell these people too. "Look, if you think you're gonna get a job in radio after you finish two years here and you're forty years old now, I think maybe you'd be better off doing something else." Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And nobody's told them that because all they're trying to do--colleges are--let me get the money and if you don't get a job, it's not my problem. And that's what I wanna change. Story_ID: 533386 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you lived your life and what would you do differently? Speaker 2: I wouldn't do anything differently because I've pretty much lived my life so that when I got to this stage I wouldn't have to say, I wish I had. I would much rather say I wish I hadn't because then I would--I've had the experience. And I've had pretty much every experience I have ever wanted, good and bad. Some of 'em I didn't wish for, they just fell on me but they were all learning experiences. So I wouldn't change a thing. What I would do--what one of my goals now is, I would like to get all of my seven children together on a vacation with their spouses and my younger children, the older ones and all of our spouses, and I have a couple of grandchildren too. And put all that together and maybe rent a house somewhere or maybe take 'em to Mexico where I have some property and just spend a week just screaming and hollering and really just getting back to family. 'Cause we don't do that now. They come home--some of 'em come home at Christmas, some of 'em come home at Thanksgiving but they all don't ever come home at the same time. And I'd like to see that happen. That would be, that would be my personal goal. My professional goal is to stay healthy and to grow this little radio group [Urban Radio Broadcasting, LLC] so that it becomes something that the communities that the radio stations are in can be proud of. Story_ID: 533387 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community? Speaker 2: I think we're going in the right direction. I mean, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], who'd have thought it. I mean, he is--everybody calls him the rock star. We're not personal friends but we know each other, I admire and respect him a lot, and he says he admires and respects me a lot and I think people like him. [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr. and some of the other young people that are coming up all around the country. I think the African American community is in incredible shape right now, and I think it's because of the younger people that are coming along. Not me, I think--I'd like to think they're standing on my shoulders, and I'd like to think the radio people of the future will gain from all of the things that I've gone through, but in terms of what's gonna happen with the African American community, we have survived this long, I think we're gonna continue to survive. I think there're gonna be more of us successful than there ever has been in the past, and I'd like to think that Barack and all of these other people--black people around the country are gonna usher that period in and make us even more proud of our heritage than we are now. And I think that's pretty difficult because I think most of us are extremely proud of our heritage. I know I am. So I don't have any fears for the African American community. Speaker 1: Mr. Dyson [HistoryMaker Marv Dyson], thank you so much for sharing your story with us. Speaker 2: You're entirely welcome. Speaker 1: I--we really appreciate it. Is there anything else that you'd like to add? Speaker 2: No, I'm fine (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Anything that we didn't ask? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything. No, I really can't. Story_ID: 533388 Speaker 1: That's me, it was 1948. I was eleven years old, I think that was at St. Anselm's School on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]. (Laughter) It's a stripe tie and the shirt is actually a Coca-Cola shirt. It's yellow with Coke bottles on it I remember that (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: I can see 'em there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm ready go ahead and tell us about this. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a picture of my mom with a group--a theater group that she belonged to back in the late, mid-'30s [1930s] or maybe even the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s]. And my mom is the woman sitting down on the right, first row on the right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And her name? Speaker 1: And her name is Florence, Florence Dyson [Florence Smith Dyson]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): This is her, right? Speaker 1: Yes, that's Florence Dyson. That's my mom. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: That's my mom doing her radio show at WBEE [WBEE Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. I don't remember the year, and the young lady with her, her name is Corky Mitchell [Cortella "Corky" Mitchell]. She was in radio for a hot minute. My mom is the one on the right with the bigger hat. In fact, my mom's nickname was Hats in the family (laughter). Speaker 2: Why do you put it sideways? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It scans better. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 2: Oh, just talk about it? That's me and my two brothers. I am on the right and the taller one in the center is my older brother, Richard [Richard Dyson, Jr.], and the shorter one on the left side is my younger brother, Lon [Lon Dyson]. Speaker 1: --And dad [Richard Dyson, Sr.]--I don't remember the year, I would guess probably 1948 and my mom and dad you can see them. My dad is the one with the pipe, my mom's the little short lady and I am on the right. The one standing next to my mom on the left is my younger brother, Lon, and the taller brother in the back is my older brother, Richard. And that was taken in Flint, Michigan. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, I'm ready. Speaker 1: Okay, that's--I had an opportunity to have lunch with Nelson Mandela, and this was when I first met him just before we sat down for lunch. And that's Nelson Mandela the former--the president of African--where is it, South Africa--South Africa and the young lady is Reverend Willie Taplin Barrow [HistoryMaker Reverend Willie T. Barrow], the little warrior from Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm ready. Speaker 1: That is the Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and me, [HistoryMaker] Marv Dyson, and that was taken probably thirty years ago when I first got the job as the president and general manager of WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois]. And that was taken at Operation PUSH. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and ready. Speaker 1: That's my man. That's Mayor Harold Washington, the mayor of the City of Chicago and me, and he is giving me a proclamation naming--that was in 1987 and that's a proclamation where he was saying it was Marv Dyson Day in Chicago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Okay, ready. Speaker 1: You ready? I'm on the left, Marv Dyson. That's Mayor Richard Daley [Richard M. Daley] in the center and the guy on the right is Elroy Smith. He's the program director, operations director of WGCI Radio. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You know what I wish I had a picture of? Harold and Scotty together. You remember Scotty Piper [Louis "Scotty" Piper]? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's Mayor Eugene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] and me. And he's giving us a proclamation for the radio station from the City of Chicago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): So you had two mayors-- Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson and me. I started my radio career, the early part of it working for John Johnson. He owns Ebony and Jet magazine and Fashion Fair cosmetics. He is now deceased. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: You ready? That's the most handsome man in radio, that's Marv Dyson, that's me. I don't remember how old I was. I'm guessing probably forty-five or fifty. Speaker 2: Talk now? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, yes. Speaker 2: That's me with the big smile and the tie, and Elroy Smith standing behind me with the big grin showing his teeth. He's the operations director at WGN, I mean, at WGCI. And the guys on the group, that's the singing group, Boyz II Men. Speaker 1: (LARRY CROWE): They were so big at one time. Speaker 2: Yeah. That was taken in 2003 when I got the BAC, Broadcast Ad Club of Chicago [Broadcast Advertising Club of Chicago; Media Advertising Club of Chicago] person of the year. That's myself, my wife, three of my daughters and three of my sons, my mother-in-law and my sister-in-law. You don't have to get names of all of them, do you or do you? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, no. Speaker 2: Okay. That's just a kind of almost full family portrait, only one child is missing. Speaker 1: Y'all taking all my pictures. This gonna be awesome. I had some of both (unclear) somewhere and did you get the one of Michael Jackson--Jordon [Michael Jordan], I mean? Speaker 2: Oh, here, I just have it my hand-- Speaker 1: Oh, good. Okay, that's one of my trips to Washington [D.C.]. That's one of my trips to Washington and that's Al Gore. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm ready. Speaker 1: Okay, that's me and my wife, Kim [Kim Dittmer Dyson]. Speaker 2: That's a picture that was taken at the N'DIGO Gala [N'DIGO Foundation Gala] some years ago and its myself, I'm in the center in the back and to my--or to the right of me as you look at it is Johnnie Cochran, to the left of me is Reverend James Meeks, and standing directly in front of me is Reverend Willie Taplin Barrow of Operation PUSH. The heavyset lady in the red dress, that's Momma Hawk and she has a private school [Paderewski Elementary School] on the West Side of Chicago. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): How's she doing? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: Ready? That's me and John Conyers, and standing behind me there is Cliff Kelley from WVON Radio [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: People--that Walter Payton one. That's me, that's Marv Dyson without hair. That's how I look now. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's that same handsome devil, Marv Dyson. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What's the occasion? Speaker 2: Accepting an award from the Illinois Broadcasters [Illinois Broadcasters Association] in Ch- in Springfield, Illinois for the radio station. Story_ID: 533389 Speaker 1: That's actually a family portrait. It's my wife, myself and I can't--I don't know if--sitting at the top of the stairs is my son, Victor [Victor Dyson], sitting at the bottom of the stairs to the left is my son-in-law, Richard [ph.]. My daughter is next to him; my daughter-in-law is on the left on the first row. Behind Richard on the left is his son and my daughter, Veda [ph.]. And the young kid next to them is my son, Max [Max Dyson], and next to her--him is my wife, Kim [Kim Dittmer Dyson], and my son Jordon [Jordan Dyson]. And the little girl kind of popping her head up next to my big son is my daughter, Danielle [Danielle Dyson]. And the black speck on there is me, [HistoryMaker] Marv Dyson, and my daughter is the top, Gabrielle [Gabrielle Dyson]. Speaker 2: Okay, that's me and chief of police or the superintendent of police in the City of Chicago [Illinois], Terry Hillard [HistoryMaker Terry Hillard]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, that's me in the center and that's Babyface on the right. He is a very prolific songwriter, and he's now divorced from his wife [HistoryMaker Tracey Edmonds], and his wife is dating Eddie Murphy (laughter). Speaker 1: That's me and [HistoryMaker] Robin Robinson, she's a news anchor at Channel 32 [WFLD-TV], FOX 32, Chicago. Speaker 2: That's me, I'm in the center with the red tie and to my--to the left as you look at the picture is Mariah Carey. The other people are just some radio folks. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I'm in the center and my older brother, Richard [Richard Dyson, Jr.], is on the right and my younger brother, Lon [Lon Dyson], who is deceased is on the left. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's Tom Joyner on the left, that's me in the center and behind me to the--on the right side is Walter Payton, formerly of the Chicago Bears now deceased. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 2: That's Gil Walker and Al Gore, and that's in Washington, D.C. at one of our visits. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Uh-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, that's [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory and me at the radio station just kind of messing around. Speaker 1: That's Senator Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and me, and that was taken in 2006 in Chicago in his office. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's Gladys Knight on the left, Reverend Johnnie Colemon [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Johnnie Colemon] in the center and that's me on the right. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: I had some of Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] but I couldn't find 'em. Did you get Michael [Michael Jordan]? Speaker 2: That would be an awesome ticket with he and (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. That's--who is that--now me and the lady on the right, that's Nikki Wood [sic. Nikki Woods] she's the morning personality at WGCI [WGCI Radio, Chicago, Illinois] with Crazy Howard McGee. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I missed the very beginning. Speaker 1: Okay, Nikki Wood, me and Luther Vandross. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: Okay, that's Cuba Gooding, Jr. and me at a function when he came into town to view a concert. That was at E2 [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: Yeah, I said that all ready, didn't I? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I wasn't recording. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Oh, that's Bernard Shaw on the right, my wife, Kim, in the center and that's me on the left. Speaker 2: Talk? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, that's Emil Jones [HistoryMaker Emil Jones, Jr.] on the right, standing next to him is State Senator James Meeks, the young lady is the former program director of Gospel Radio 1390 [WGRB Radio, Chicago, Illinois], standing next to her is Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], and next to him is Rod Blagojevich and Elroy Smith, and I'm in the center. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, I'm ready. Speaker 2: Okay, that's recording star and film star Tyrese [Tyrese Gibson] and me, Marv Dyson. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's me and my [maternal] grandma, that's Georgia Langford Taylor-Smith [Georgia Smith Langford]. She died at the age of 104. Speaker 2: That's [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, my wife, Kim and me. Big time. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: That was Lionel Richie and me before I shaved off all my hair. I'm the guy with the grey hair. I showed that to Lionel when he was in town about six weeks ago, he said he remembered and I said, yeah, right. He did remember Kim though 'cause he said, "I remember you." Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's James Brown on the right and me at the radio station some time ago. James Brown, the godfather of soul. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, that's cool. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, I'm ready. Speaker 2: That's Revered Jesse Jackson in the center, I'm on the right and that's my dad, Richard [Richard Dyson, Sr.], on the left. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: That's me in the [U.S.] military in--I think that picture was taken in Korea. And the young guy on it is Brad, I mean, Charles Sanders [ph.]. He's one of my buddies. I'm on the right and that's Charles Sanders on the left. Speaker 1: Okay, that's--you ready? That's me and my wife, Kim, and we're at--actually, Juanita Jordan's [Juanita Vanoy Jordan] fortieth birthday party. And that's Michael Jordon I'm shaking hands with. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 1: And that's Mr. P-Funk, himself, George Clinton on one of his many trips to Chicago, keeping the whole city up at night. He'd start a concert at ten [o'clock] and it wouldn't get over until three in the morning and he would not leave the stage. Speaker 2: (LARRY CROWE): Too much fun. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's me on the right and I'm giving Michael Jordon some much needed advice on how to improve his jump shot. He's on the left (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready. Speaker 2: Okay, that's my wife, Kim, and I on the right--Kim's on the right and I'm on the left. And we're leaving Michael Jordon's wife's fortieth birthday party. And the little red car in the back is Kim's--the little red convertible. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's Ronald Isley and his wife [Angela Winbush] and me. I don't remember his wife's name but she's an entertainer. Speaker 1: That's me on the right and Walter Payton, the famed running back of the Chicago Bears, number 34, on the left. And his greeting to me every time I'd be somewhere he'd always grab my butt. I thought he was gay there for a minute (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: My wife Kim on the left and I'm in the center and that's [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson. Speaker 2: Harold Lee Rush on the right, I'm in the center and that's Bob Wall. He was probably the most famous white deejay to work on a black radio station in America. He's since dead, he committed suicide. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: Oh, my god. That's the Turntable Brothers, that's us shooting a commercial in--at one of the commercial houses. [HistoryMaker] Doug Banks is on the right, I'm in the center and the left is Tom Joyner...