 Story_ID: 53426 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the producer--interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Paul Bieschke is the videographer. And can you please state your name and spell it please? Speaker 2: Carrie Lapsky Davis, C-A-R-R-I-E, L-A-P-S-K-Y, D-A-V-I-S. Speaker 1: Okay, can, can you give us the date? Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What is today's date? Speaker 1: If not, I can give it to you. Speaker 2: What is today's date, the 6th? Speaker 1: May 9th. Speaker 2: The 9th? Is it the 9th? God-- Speaker 1: Yeah, 2002. Speaker 2: Okay, this is May 9th, 2002. Speaker 1: Okay, the address, the city (unclear) Chicago [Illinois]. We're at The HistoryMakers, 1900 S. Michigan, so. Speaker 2: Shall I say that? Speaker 1: Yeah, go ahead. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: 1900 S. Michigan, The HistoryMakers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is not being filmed, though, is it? Speaker 1: Yeah, this is--yes, it's, it's okay. What, what's your date of birth? Speaker 2: May 24th, 1944. Story_ID: 53427 Speaker 1: Okay, now I've got some questions to ask you. They sound kind of "People" magazine-ish, but we, we always ask pe--people this questions. Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: Kind of loosen you up a little bit. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Greens. Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Yellow. Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Bahamas. Speaker 1: Okay, what's your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Um, what do I always say? If it ain't broke, don't fix it. Story_ID: 53428 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Okay, what are your parents' names? Speaker 2: They're both deceased, but Lorenzo Lapsky and Carly Celia Lapsky. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're an only child? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, could you tell us a little bit about your mother? Speaker 2: My mother was born in Port Gibson, Mississippi. And she deceased now of course. She went to Wilberforce College [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] in Ohio. She loved to write. She was a very brilliant woman, very beautiful woman. She was a very proper lady, loved to cook, could make the best donuts in the world, and she was quite an inspiration to me. Speaker 1: Okay, so she-- Speaker 2: But I wasn't really reared by my mother. I was reared by grandmother. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, why, why were you reared by your grandmother instead of your mother? Speaker 2: Well, my father died, and my mother brought me home. It was kind of a tradition in the South. Then my mother went off to work, and my grandmother reared me. Speaker 1: She went to another state or-- Speaker 2: Went to Chicago [Illinois] Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, along with the Great Migration probably. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Exactly, so my grandmother rear--reared me, and she was really something. Speaker 1: And she reared you in-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --in Mississippi-- Speaker 2: --in Mississippi. Speaker 1: --Port Gibson? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was the matriarch of the family and a, a, a, a woman before her time, a very progressive--in fact, I'm named after her. Her name is Carrie Ellen; I'm Carrie--actually, I'm Carrie Dean Lapsky, but-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: --I didn't wanna use four spaces, so I just say Carrie Lapsky. Speaker 1: And you were born in Port Gibson-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --Mississippi. Speaker 2: --I was born in Port Gibson. Story_ID: 53429 Speaker 1: Okay, now can you tell me a little bit about your father [Lorenzo Lapsky] that you know? Speaker 2: My father--I was reared by my grandfather, but my father, my birth father, was a physician here in Chicago [Illinois]. He was Jewish. My mother [Carly Lapsky] went in to get a vaccination, and that's how she met him; and of that union you know I was born, and--but I was actually reared by my grandfather. He was a wonderful man. My parents owned--had a dairy in Mississippi, and my grandfather was a butcher. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Tommy Rice. Speaker 1: Tommy Rice? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So for most of your childhood your parents were actually in Chicago then? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right and I lived there. Speaker 1: All right, okay. As, as an only child, did you, did you miss having brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: No, I really didn't because my grandmother [Carrie Lapsky] also had several other grandchildren. So I always thought as though I grew up with sisters and brothers because we were all so close. We were all first cousins. Speaker 1: Well, how many cousins did you have? Speaker 2: There were three of us. Speaker 1: Three, okay, all right. And your grandmother reared all of your? Speaker 2: That's right, she reared all of us. Speaker 1: Okay, okay (unclear). Story_ID: 53430 Speaker 1: Okay. Can you remember some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of Port Gibson [Mississippi] when you were a child? Speaker 2: Yes, do I remember the magnolias? Oh my God, and then there was another flower, was called--I think it belonged--it belonged to the gardenia family. And these flowers grew on trees that got to be about 15 feet high, not too much higher. And they would bloom like around June, and we called them sweet scrubs. And we would take the flowers and put 'em in our clothes to get the smell, sort of like the gardenia. Oh, that was one of the best things that you could do, you know, in the summer to collect those sweet scrubs; it was wonderful. Speaker 1: So, so summers (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, I love the summer with the daffodils, they're so beautiful. Speaker 1: Is Port Gibson near the Delta or is it-- Speaker 2: It's way south. It's near Jackson [Mississippi], 60 miles south of Jackson. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's around the Mississippi River. Our property was around the Mississippi River. And we could just fish and go down the back way, as they called it, and go fishing. And it was very close to Lorman [Mississippi] where Alcorn College [Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] is. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: In fact only about 10 miles. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 53431 Speaker 1: Okay, where did you go to grade school? Speaker 2: I went to Port Gibson School [Port Gibson, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was later changed to an--was named later Edison School, but--and that was the first, my first school. Speaker 1: Okay, this is--was this a segregated school or? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a segregated school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Speaker 2: Everything was segregated. Speaker 1: (Unclear) yeah, okay. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: All right. How did you feel about that? I mean how did you-- Speaker 2: Well, I knew it was something different. I knew that it was a way of life. I think you just kind of like didn't question; we never questioned. We just went to the schools and we, you know, we, we lived in the community. And we were friends with, you know, with, with whites there. We never had a problem, and it was just kind of like a way of life. So you just didn't, you know--cause you never had integration, so you never knew what their side was like. You knew what was though. So we never, you know, we never had any problem in that little town. Speaker 1: Yeah, separate, separate sides of town Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll never forget when I was a little girl I went in the Selena (ph.) Ice Cream Parlor, and they looked at me and sent me to the white side. And then they looked at me on the white side, and they said who are you? And I said I'm Tommy Rice's granddaughter. And they said well, you better go back to the other side. Speaker 1: They had to check for references. Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly. Story_ID: 53432 Speaker 1: So, so they had to check for references to make sure that you should be there. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Yeah, that's (unclear)-- Speaker 2: And I remember all of the--everything was labeled black or white or, you know, that kind of thing. In fact, it wasn't until I got into Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] that I realized really what was happening. Because we--I guess we all lived--in that little town we lived such sheltered lives. I never heard of a lynching, and I never heard of any of that. Speaker 1: Did you ever get a chance to visit your mother [Carly Lapsky] in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, but I never liked-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I loved the country. I loved the South. I would come, but I couldn't wait to get back to Port Gibson [Mississippi] because I just loved the trees and the--I didn't like the apartments and the big city. Speaker 1: So the differences to you had more to do with the, the, I guess the space and the, and the, the-- Speaker 2: At that time, right, because I didn't really know, you know. I don't think I even asked my parents why do we go to separate schools, you know. And they always talked to us about life in general. And I never felt less than anyone else, or I just assumed that was just the way it was, you know. I never felt less. Story_ID: 53433 Speaker 1: What kind of a student were, were, were you in grade school? Speaker 2: Excellent. I was an excellent student. My grandmother [Carrie Lapsky] taught me to read before I went to school, 'cause she was a real--she was the kind of woman who just believed, you know, you had to go get an education, probably because she never got a chance to get one. But she was enterprising even without that. Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me about what kind of activities were going on when you were in school, and what did you enjoy doing in school? Speaker 2: Oh, we had lots of activities. We had--we did a lot of drama; we did a lot of plays. As for as long as I can remember, I was always learning a speech. And the church was a real--you know, that was great big activity. Because I think basically in the South the church is like the center. We didn't have a community center or anything like that, so the church provided all the activities and for season--it was Mother's Day, Easter, Christmas, any holiday there was a play. I never forget, once I was Little Red Riding Hood. And I remember some of the speeches, you know, that I used to--and the songs. So everything was kind of like--that was really the big activity. Everything kind of like stemmed from the church, and the school too. And the school, like most kids, you know we jumped rope, and we played hop scotch, and we had ba--basketball; and May Day was a big day. We'd all dress up and have big a parade, and we had a band, and those kinds of activities. Story_ID: 53434 Speaker 1: Who were your mentors, or did you have any mentors in the church or in the school? Speaker 2: Yes, my aunt [Annie Mills] was one of my mentors. She was a mathematician. She was a teacher, and she just was such an incredible woman. I had another teacher, Ms. Lucy Mae Washington. She was my music teacher, and I can remember her as if it was yesterday. She was a very fastidious woman, and so proper, and so very well groomed. Every day in music we would have--she would have her skirts all stiff ironed so beautifully, and she was so well groomed. She had such a beautiful voice, and she taught me every song in the book. I think I remember from "Old Black Joe," all the songs. I mean we just had a wonderful time with her. She was one of the persons that I really--and then Mr. Jones was a his--history teacher, very, very brilliant man. And I loved his classes, and I just wanted to be like him. In fact, I was going to be a history major, but then I late--you know, once you get in college sometimes you change. But he was one of my mentors too. Speaker 1: What was your aunt's name? Speaker 2: Annie Mills. Story_ID: 53435 Speaker 1: Well, is there anything else you wanna say about your, your grade school days, in--any, any events that took places during your grade school days that you really remember, that you-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I remember the May Day activities. And I was a queen in school. And I'll never forget my mother bought me this beautiful fabric, and she made this gorgeous dress; and we had the floats, and it was just such a spectacular day with the parade. And oh, it was just--May Day was always a biggest day in Port Gibson. We would wrap the May Pole, and it was just so beautiful. And we'd spend months just making the things for the floats. And it was like a big, big deal, a really big deal. Kids don't do that anymore. They miss out on a lot though. It was a lot of fun. Story_ID: 53436 Speaker 1: You--let's, let's move on to high school I guess. Now where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to Addison High School [Port Gibson, Mississippi]. By the time I got ready for high school, Port Gibson actually was called Claiborne County Training School. That school had--was--had become just a--I think it was like from kinder--from first grade through fifth or something like that. And they built a new school called Addison High school, and that's where I graduated from; that was the high school that I attended there. Speaker 1: Can you state the name of the county again and spell it? Speaker 2: Claiborne, C-L-A-I-B-O-R-N-E, Claiborne County, C-O-U-N-T-Y. Speaker 1: What was Addison High School like? Speaker 2: It was very nice and new. And we welcomed it because it was totally different than Claiborne County Training School. It was a fun place to be, you know, a very attractive place. And I have a lot of good memories there. Speaker 1: What did you--what kind of things were you involved in? Speaker 2: I was involved in all kinds of clubs and sewing club; I played trumpet in the band; and I was involved in--we had a little book club. And those were the kind of things that I did. Speaker 1: Did they have like a football team? Speaker 2: Yes, and a football team, had a football, they had a basketball team. I think we won a couple of, of championships there too; had a beautiful gym. We had never--'cause when I was at Claiborne County Training School we played outside in the outdoors on a flat court. And we had this fancy gym; it was just very nice, very, very nice. Speaker 1: Did you all visit some of the other schools--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, we had visiting. We would exchange, you know. They would come and we would have playoffs at our school, and the teams would go to other schools; they would go all around on the bus to play. Speaker 1: Did you have like a favorite teacher or mentor at Addison? Speaker 2: Yes, I loved Mr. Watson; in fact, the school was named after him. He was a man before his time I always thought. He knew so much about everything. He knew how to cure your cold. He--I'll never for--I still do--I still practice the things that he told me, you know. I mean he was just a very--he read a lot; he knew a lot, and I really, really admired him. Speaker 1: Was he from Port Gibson [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Yes, he was from Port Gibson. And his mother was the home economics teacher there. She was like the pillar of the school, and she was quite a woman. She, she was an excellent teacher, and I think we all learned so much from her. Speaker 1: Who was the principal of that school? Speaker 2: Mr. Reeves. In fact, there's a--there is a school name--there's a street named after him. They call him Fessor (ph.) Reeves. Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of people-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Fessor Reeves. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 53437 Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Addison High School, Port Gibson, Mississippi] did you think about going to college? Did you think that you would end up in college? Speaker 2: Yes, I knew I would go to college. My grandmother [Carrie Lapsky] already said you're going--you are going to college. In fact, I really wanted to go to Alcorn [Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi] because, you know, my parents didn't have a whole lot of money. And I didn't want them to take all the money that they had, you know, to send me to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Missippi], because Tougaloo was expensive, you know, compared to the state schools. And my mother [Carly Lapsky] said oh no, you're going to Tougaloo 'cause she thought that was a better place for me. Why, I don't know, but that's what she said. And she says if you don't go there, you're not gonna go anyplace, so that's where I went. Speaker 1: There's no--your mother didn't suggest you should go to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] or anything? Speaker 2: No, I think that would have been too far. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was barely--I had just turned 16, so I don't think she would have, you know, wanted me to go that far. Speaker 1: So you didn't have any worries about how you were gonna go to college or how-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --how it was gonna be paid for--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I didn't have any worries. My uncle had given my--my (unclear) grandmother had property. And you know, she made--she was an enterprising woman. She had houses that she rented out, but basically my uncle had given her some property and she had sold that property. And that was how I went in the beginning because at that time it was a thousand dollars a year. And we--that was just a lot of money back then, but I got a scholarship and I also got financial aid, and I worked. So I was--I, I did real--I had no problem. Speaker 1: I was just wondering, you know, how common would it have been for black people in that part of Mississippi to own a dairy. Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't the kind of dairy that you know. It was just a barn with some cows. And later on when I was about 14, they passed a law that you had to have everything pasteurized. You had to get all of this new equipment, so they had to--they couldn't do it anymore. They had to give it up, because they couldn't afford to do all that. So it was not like, you know, the, the kind of dairy that you, if you went up to Wisconsin, you'd find, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you--when you--can you remember is, is there anything particular you wanna say about your, your high school graduation or, or-- Speaker 2: Well, I was salutatorian of my class. And I--there were about sixty of us. It was very eventful, if I can remember. We had a really nice reception at the--in, in the new auditorium after that, and we all dressed up. And it was just really an, an eventful affair. Story_ID: 53438 Speaker 1: Okay, so now you go on to Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you told us already some of the reason why you went to Tougaloo. But when you got to Tougaloo did you--had you visited the school before? Did you know a lot about it? Speaker 2: Well, I had a cousin who went to school there. And my mother had talked to her mother, and she was very impressed with some of the things that she was doing there. And she just felt that it was a smaller school; I was so young; and I think that she just felt that that would be better for me, you know, than to go to, to, to Alcorn [Alcorn State University, Lorman, Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Did you like it? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved it. I, I still love it. Speaker 1: Okay, what were your favorite activities at Tougaloo? Speaker 2: Well, I was president of the Education Club, and so we, we, we did a lot of interesting things. I enjoyed dialoguing that we, we had this wonderful professor by the name of Ernest Borinski (ph.). He was the sociology--(unclear) Borinski was the sociology professor. And he--we would have all of these meetings. And his little area was like a sub-basement. And that was just one very pleasant thing to do. We sit around. I had never had blue cheese. And when I first saw it I thought oh my God, what is this, you know. And so he introduced us to many cultural things that we would not have known, you know, during that time. You know it's--I guess I was turning 17 then. So that was one of the things I really like to dialogue. And that's when I met Bob Moses; he would come down to the Social Science Lab. And it was just a very--a very intellectual kind of evening we would have, you know. He would have speakers to come in, and that I really did enjoy. Story_ID: 53439 Speaker 1: Now can you tell me--I think people watching this tape would probably be interested in the history of Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo], Mississippi. If you could give us maybe a little history about or what you know about how Tougaloo was started, and what kind of a campus it was, and what made it different from other schools. Speaker 2: Well, Tougaloo was--is really a--was really supported by the Con--Congregational Church. And from what I understand, a lot of the buildings, like the mansion, was donated by someone. And I don't really know if this is a story that is totally true, but it was said that this plantation owner, you know, whose wife had died there or something. Anyway, they gave this building to the school. And I think that's why today they're trying to preserve it. We have a big rehab going on down there now. And the mansion is like--I guess it's probably like 110 years old. And the Congregational Church started this--either started it or they sponsored, you know. Dr. Beittel [Dr. Adam Beittel], the president you were talking about, I think he was a member; he was a part of that, that, that church. And it was supported by the Congregational Church. Speaker 1: And Dr. Beittel--let's go back (unclear)--can you, can you spell his name for us? Speaker 2: I think it's Bietel. Speaker 1: Okay, he was-- Speaker 2: He was president when I was--my first year there. Speaker 1: And what, what is the significance of Dr. Beittel for--Tou--Tougaloo, I mean other than being the president? Speaker 2: The only thing that I can recall is that he was a part of this whole congregational, you know, group. And he was president when I--like I said, when I came to school there. I don't know anything else about him per se, but I thought he was an excellent president. Story_ID: 53440 Speaker 1: Tougaloo--most of the teachers, were they black or white in Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: We had mixed faculty, about half and half. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had several people from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. And I think a couple of them pretty old now, but I think they're still there. A lot of them built homes and they never did leave. In fact, Dr. Borinski was a--was German. He was a so--PhD in sociology; and in fact, when he died he left everything to the school. Speaker 1: And was Tougaloo a state school? Speaker 2: No, Tougaloo was a private school, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so it gave you so independence (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, very much so. We, we got no federal funds. We were totally supported by private-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION BY MALE) Speaker 2: In a state like Mississippi, it's not supposedly significant that you were in a state school, you know, in, in those days, you know, I suppose. Speaker 1: Well, it was unique that's for sure. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any other favorite teachers at Tougaloo? Speaker 2: Yes, Mrs. Jackson. She was a house mother, and she taught English. She was a very proper lady from New York. And she--she's just a very special woman. She--when we would go into the city on Saturdays on the bus, we'd have to wear our gloves and our hats. We had to be very proper 'cause she was a very property lady. So we learned a lot from Ms. Jackson. She was quite a, quite a lady. Story_ID: 53441 Speaker 1: So you feel this prepared you for the larger world (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. She was someone who could talk to, and she was like a mother, mother figure. And the wonderful thing about going to school there was it only 600 students so everybody knew everybody, and was kind of a environment where you always had somebody to watch your back; you always had someone to talk to; and it was a very close kind of lifestyle, very close, and very loving. And I really, really, really loved that. Speaker 1: In those days, the men and women were separate, right, on campus? They weren't-- Speaker 2: Yes, we lived in separate dorms. But my senior year, four year--four years later, they had the co-ed dorms; they, they opened, they changed. Speaker 1: Okay, go-- Speaker 2: It was a very strict school. I mean you could not be after a certain time and you had to be in, and there was always room checks and what have you. But the fourth year they did get coop--you know, co-ed dorm--dormitories there, so it did change. Story_ID: 53442 Speaker 1: So what was the social life like in the-- Speaker 2: Oh, it was wonderful. Yeah, it was a wonderful social life. We had a football team and a basketball team. There was always something going on, an art exhibit or some--something really, a gala or, or something going on. And we had access to Jackson, Mississippi, and we would always go to a, a lot of the entertainments--enter--entertaining activities in Jackson. There were--during that time, there were a lot of stars coming through Jackson like James Brown, B.B. King [HM], Ted Turner, all those guys. And we would get to go to see them perform. There was this beautiful place in Jackson called the Rose Room. I thought it was the most beautiful place I'd ever seen, coming from little Port Gibson [Mississippi] where we didn't even have a red light. The Rose Room had a beautiful pink rose in the ceiling, and they'd have beautiful music on weekends. And about once a month there would always be some famous entertainer. I saw--I don't think it was anyone that came to the South that we didn't get to see, including--oh my God--there's a play written about him at the--in fact, I went--Jackie Wilson. Yeah, I think I must have seen him several times. He was always my favorite. But there was always entertainment 'cause Jackson was the capital, so everyone came, came to Jackson. And we were only about 20 minutes from Jackson, so we'd get to see everybody; so it was fun. Story_ID: 53443 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You were talking about the entertainment in Jackson [Mississippi] and the, the musicians that came through there. And just, well, you know, continue to talk about that. Speaker 2: Well, that was one of the very, very wonderful things about being at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] because we, we were only 20 miles outside of Jackson. And all of the big entertainers would come through Jackson. They would perform at this place called the Rose Room. And coming from Port Gibson [Mississippi] where we didn't even have a red light, I just thought the Rose Room was the most beautiful place in the world. It had this beautiful rose right in the center, all neon. And it was a huge room with a stage, and they'd have a band. And when I was a Tougaloo, I got to see Ted Turner, James Brown, Jackie Wilson. Any star during the '60's [1960s] would come through Jackson and we would find a way to get there to see them, and we never missed any. In fact, I can remember James Brown sweating as if it were yesterday. And we were all standing on top of the tables so we could make sure that we got a real good look at him. But it was really a wonderful experience, a wonderful experience. I remember going to see B.B. King [HM] for 50 cents, and James--Bobby "Blue" Bland. There was a very special place call the, the Blue Room in Vicksburg, Mississippi, which is about 20 miles south of Jackson. And we would go there to see some of the stars too. It was a very special place. In fact, the owner, Tom Wince, was on "60 Minutes" about three years ago, how he developed this club. And I think he was the only guy in Mississippi that was a polygamist. Speaker 1: Really, he-- Speaker 2: Yes, he had several wives and a beautiful club, I mean just absolutely gorgeous. Story_ID: 53444 Speaker 1: Well, let's shift gears for a second. What was your major in school? Now, (unclear) get to the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: My major was education and sociology. Speaker 1: Okay, did you-- Speaker 2: I had a double major. Speaker 1: --did you really like sk-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --your studies? Speaker 2: I loved my studies. Dr. Borinski was my professor in sociology, and I just absolutely loved him. And Mrs. Perkins was my professor in education. And she's still alive and still remembers everything. And when I go to Jackson I always visit her. She was the education professor there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, and I really had a wonderful experience with both of them. Speaker 1: Paul Bieschke: Have--just tell a story about why you got into those two fields. Do you have any particular stories that may have inspired you to go into those fields of study? Speaker 2: Well, I always loved history. And I kind of decided that sociology might be a little broader; you know, it's kind of like a different phase. And my mother [Carly Lapsky] told me you have to major in teaching because you have to have that just in case you don't become a sociologist you can always be a teacher. So I got into education. I really enjoyed it. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Actually I've, I've, I've thought about maybe I'll go to law school. Speaker 1: Now Dr. Borinski was from Chicago [Illinois]? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was from Germany. Speaker 1: From Germany, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: He escaped all the, the Nazi terror. And he had an incredible history. I hope someone recorded his history there. Yeah, he came to Tougaloo. I--he must have been there years before I even got there. Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting. Speaker 2: Yep, he still had the accident. He was German. Speaker 1: Were there many fluent professors at, at, at Tougaloo? Speaker 2: Yes, we had lots of foreign professors, Indians, Germans, French. Speaker 1: What was the relationship of Tougaloo to the other colleges around there like, like Alcorn [Alcorn State University, Lomar, Mississippi] and Jackson State [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: At that time, I don't think they really had that much of a relate--Tougaloo was kind of like separate, you know. I don't think they had that much of a relationship, but today I think they do partner with Jackson State for some course, because Jackson State now offers a PhD program and Tougaloo doesn't. And I think there is some partnership going on now, but at that time, there was little or none really that I know of. Story_ID: 53445 Speaker 1: Now the Civil Rights Movement comes to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] in earnest while you're at school basically. That's when the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --sit-in movement started. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: So you wanna talk about that? Speaker 2: Well, Tougaloo was kind like the mother of the movement down there, because Tougaloo was a private school. And you know, that means not controlled by the state. So when the Freedom Riders came, they would come to Tougaloo to stay. And when all of the people came down who were involved in the movement, like Stokely Carmichael, Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], anyone that was involved, would always come to Tougaloo. I'll never forget when Dr. King came to Tougaloo, he came into--we had this beautiful chapel called Woodworth Chapel. And his presence was so powerful; it was like God had walked in the door. And Ralph Bunche came down; you know, he was--he came to visit us there. We just had so many very, very powerful and wonderful people who were a part of making this whole thing happene, you know, would come to Tougaloo, so, we, we, we, we housed people there. Speaker 1: Did students have access to Dr. King and Dr. Bunche and people like that? Speaker 2: Yes, for the time that they were there, was questions and answers and that kind of thing. But I remember many nights we would get a bomb scare, and we'd all have to run out the dorm, you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: So the local people in the town didn't appreciate the--well, the local white, white people I guess didn't--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Tougaloo--the little near town near Tougaloo was mostly black. And in fact, I don't know of any whites who lived near, so that was nev--was never a problem. Speaker 1: So they'd have to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Jackson [Mississippi] was the problem. We had--you know, that was-- Speaker 1: So the threats came from Jackson? Speaker 2: Yes, the threats came from Jackson, that's right. Story_ID: 53446 Speaker 1: In fact, I was very good friends with Medgar Evers. He had organized with an organizer during that time, and he had organized a lot of things; in fact, it was he who organized the demonstration that I was involved in. We, we, we didn't a lot of sit-ins with him. And I'll never forget the one, right before he was killed, he organized. We sat-in at this drugstore, and we were all arrested. We spent about five or six days at the county. Speaker 2: Now let's--now let me go back a little bit just to, to set this in some kind of chronological (unclear). But when did you first personally get involved in, in demonstrations and how did it happen that somebody--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: My freshman--my first year I became a--I became involved with the movement. I would go--we would go sing free--freedom songs, and we would all go for planning. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Medgar Evers would come up, and we'd have these big sessions, and we would--in the evenings. And-- Speaker 2: So all the students were involved. Speaker 1: Not all of them, all the ones that wanted to be involved. Everybody wasn't involved. Speaker 2: How, how, how did you find out about the, the meetings? Speaker 1: Well, they were publicized. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know, it was just like everybody knew, you know. Stokely Carmichael was here, you know, and so we go to see. And then you just become a part of--you listen and then you react, you know. Speaker 2: So the students were eager to, to-- Speaker 1: A lot of them were. Speaker 2: --to be a part of-- Speaker 1: Oh yes-- Speaker 2: --the movement. Speaker 1: --certainly, yes. And Medgar Evers would always come up, because he couldn't organize in Jackson--at Jackson State [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi]. So he would come to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], you know, and so we'd have not just the students, but other people would come from outside too. Speaker 2: Because of the freedom that Tougaloo--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Exactly, because of the freedom that Tougaloo offered. We'd sing freedom songs and we would just, you know, be all inspired, 'cause we know it was the right thing to do. Speaker 2: Did you meet at a church or, or-- Speaker 1: We would meet in the chapel-- Speaker 2: --in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --sometimes in the Social Studies Lab. That was the lab that Dr. Borinski had at Tougaloo, and sometimes we'd meet there. Speaker 2: Right on campus. Speaker 1: And we'd make plans right on campus, exactly. In fact, Medgar Evers was in the process of organization a march to Millsaps College [Jackson, Mississippi]; it was an all, all-white college, but he was killed right before that so we never got to do it. Story_ID: 53447 Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your first experience I guess in being part of a demonstration? Can, can, can you remember the very first experience you had and what it was about? Speaker 2: We sat-in at the Woolworth's and I wasn't--I had no fear, none. It's just amazing when I look back, none at all. And I remember they put ketchup all over us, and we were arrested and taken off to jail. And we were housed--it was so many people demonstrating, the jails were full so they put us on the Fairgrounds, you know, where they kept the cattle, and--a very bare place, nothing to lay on, just, just like cattle. And it was about 95 degrees outside, and they turned the heat on. So it was that kind of thing. Speaker 1: And what year would this be? Speaker 2: This was in '60--'66' [1966]. Speaker 1: Okay, this is--okay. So you had graduated by that time. Speaker 2: No, I graduate--I'm sorry. I graduated in '64' [1964]. I went to school in '6--this was in '62', 1962. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 53448 Speaker 1: Okay. Now there was--well, do you, do you have any other memories of other demonstrations? And how many--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, we, we used to march in the streets in Jackson [Mississippi]. We, we weren't, weren't arrested that time though. The arrest came when we went to Woolworths and sat in at the lunch counters. Speaker 1: Yeah, about how many actions do you think you were involved in, in, in school? Speaker 2: About at least 10 marches or so; I'm sure at least 10 or 12 marches, you know, and about three sit-ins. In fact, Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]--I wasn't a part of the two--there's, there's a group called the Tougaloo Nine. And they were people--they were girls--students--I'm sorry--who, I think they actually did the first sit-in in Jackson. And they're called the Tougaloo Nine. Speaker 1: Were they organized by Medgar Evers or-- Speaker 2: Yes, by Medgar Evers, that's right. Story_ID: 53449 Speaker 1: Now when did Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee come to Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: I think in 1960, 'cause there was a relationship all the while I as there. They call it SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. And somebody was always there to talk about stuff or to motivate kids to get involved, that kind of thing. But I, I, I, I did the first sit-in, sit-in in my hometown of Port Gibson [Mississippi]. The day they passed the Civil Rights Bill I had my husband--'cause I married in college, so I had my husband [James Davis] drive me to Port Gibson. And there was this drugstore called McDaniel's Pharmacy, and when I was a little girl growing up we'd have to go around to the side to get our milkshakes. And I always wanted to play the jukebox and sit down and have a milkshake. So I--when I was growing up in Port Gibson I wasn't--I don't know. I guess I just never thought about, you know, why I had to go around to the side. Once I became involved in the movement, I realized, everything came clear. So I said when they pass the Civil Rights Movement I'm gonna go to McDaniel's Pharmacy and have a milkshake. So I went down there and that's exactly what I did. And Mr. McDaniel's was friends with my family. And he said to me, little Carrie Dean, I don't why you're doing this. Now you know better, but he serve--he reluctantly served me. And he said you know, after all, I did give your grandmother good credit. And when I go back down there I always go to see him. He's still--he's, he's in his nineties and he's still alive. And I'm doing a book, and I'm going to interview him this summer. I liked to have just feel--you know, he's just a changed man, and I'd like to know what he--what he's thinking now and how his reflections might be. Speaker 1: And that was my next question: How have you changed or how is he, you know. Speaker 2: Well, he hi--he's hired lots of, of, of Afro Americans in his business. In fact, he has a new store now. And I understand he's still doing prescriptions. He's obviously had a change of heart, because after I did the sit-in in Port Gibson, everything changed. I mean there was a bit--there were--it was sit-ins; there were demonstrations; there was a big boycott, and it ended up that a lot of the white merchants, in fact ninety percent of, lost their businesses because of the--of, of the boycott. Several of the merchants that I used to buy from and my paren--family when I was there, they said that no black person would ever ring that cash register. And so black people just stopped going to those stores. And I don't know if you're familiar, but--and I should have brought all the information, and I can probably still get it, but I there was a suit filed against the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] by the whites in Port Gibson because of the big losses. But I, I don't think they ever won anything, because the town now is--there are a lot of black entrepreneurs as well as whites there. So it really changed for the better I think. Speaker 1: Is the town majority black, Port Gibson [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Port Gibson is about probably half and half, probably half and half. It's a very small town, probably less than 4,000 people, maybe-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --a little more now. Speaker 1: So black customers are significant, you know? Speaker 2: Oh, certainly, certainly. But before that, no one had ever thought about, you know, doing anything. I mean whites owned all the businesses there basically, you know, the, the, the retail stores, the few that we had. Story_ID: 53450 Speaker 1: Did your activity in the Civil Rights Movement affect your studies at school or in any way de--da--detract from what you were doing in school? Speaker 2: No, no, because I always had--I always found time to study. You know you had to make the grade, and I was on scholarship. And you had to have a B average in order to keep scholarships, so I was aware. I think that gave--I think that made me stronger and an even better student. Story_ID: 53451 Speaker 1: Paul Bieschke: In Medgar Evers, some of those responses were cut off. Could you--did you have any direct interaction with Medgar Evers? Speaker 2: Yes, I had direct interaction with him. Speaker 1: Paul Bieschke: Could you tell us a story of maybe the first time you remember meeting him, and maybe talk about organizing maybe one of the marches? Speaker 2: The first time I met Medgar Evers there was a rally on campus, and I went with some friends. I had never been involved in anything like that before, and he was such a powerful, dynamic person. And he talked about the injustices and you know, we have to--they had--there have--there has to be something that you're willing to, to die for, to believe in. And he talked about a lot of the, the things that were going on with the schools there. You know how the white schools had all these things, and the black schools didn't have, you know, the kind of facilities. It was a for, you know, for blacks to wake up and to, to vote. He was really big on voter registration. And I--that was the first time I had ever met him, and I never missed a meeting after that. Every Wednesday night he would come up and we would, you know. And so it's from there that I became involved. Speaker 1: Were you in school when Medgar Evers was killed? Speaker 2: Yes, I was in school when he was killed. Speaker 1: What was the reaction of the students that were-- Speaker 2: Nobody could believe it. Nobody could believe it. I was just un, un, unbelievable. Yep, nobody could believe it. Speaker 1: Okay, so did the, the--do you remember the trial of, of--was it Byron De La Beckwith? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't involved in that at all. And I never went to--you know, because it was a long time before they even--you know, at, at, at that time, I don't think they even thought about arresting anybody for that crime. It was a long--many, many years after, you know. Story_ID: 53452 Speaker 1: But I did go to the trial--to my trial, because when you go to jail, you have to--you have a trial. So I'll never forget that I went and--was like a little hearing. And after that I stayed. And I will never forget this judge, how he used niggers and, and was just--I just couldn't believe, you know, that I was in a court of law. Speaker 2: And this was in, in-- Speaker 1: Yeah, it was in Jackson [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: Jackson. Speaker 1: Jackson. That's right. In fact, I brought my papers, my release papers, with me so I could show them to you. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But it was just most--it was just the most inhuman thing I'd ever experienced. Speaker 2: Paul Bieschke: Now did you find a lot of bias in the law enforcement community and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yes, a lot of bias. Speaker 2: Paul Bieschke: Can you tell maybe if you have any more recollection about that? Go ahead. Speaker 1: Well, I remember the judge, you know, referred to blacks and niggers and that kind of thing. And--you mean bias in terms of-- Speaker 2: Paul Bieschke: Racial bias and you know, because in my mind it's just the--in the South a lot of the white law enforcement exercising their authority over the blacks just as a power situation. Speaker 1: Oh, sure. If you drove, you know, a new car, they would stop you, wanna know where you were from and that kind of thing. If you demonstrated you might--they might put the dogs on you, that kind of thing; or they might use water hose on you. It was, it was not a very nice thing back then. Speaker 2: The only thing I've, I've always wondered about is how did people, you know, travel from place to place without being harassed by the law enfor--the local law enforcement people from tec--from small town to small town. I mean-- Speaker 1: Well, they were harassed. A lot of people were harassed, and some of them were probably murdered. I mean there were people missing from time to time. Speaker 2: So travel was risky? Speaker 1: Yeah, especially during that time it was very risky. I'll never forget when they bombed the church in Bir--Birmingham, and those girl-Denise [Denise McNair, Addie Mae Collins, Cynthia Wesley, Carole Robertson] and all those girls were killed. We went up; in fact, I still have glass from that church. That was a very critical time to be driving anywhere. Story_ID: 53453 Speaker 1: So students from Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] went up to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, some of us went up. Speaker 1: Birmingham is, is sittin'--that was in 1963, right? Speaker 2: Something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, okay. Speaker 2: It was, it was so much. And I was in school during the time the--those guys from--what do you call--the Philadelphia 8? Chaney and all those guys were murdered, yeah. Speaker 1: So did you consider yourself a part of a Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, all through school, certainly. Speaker 1: So you were a member of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Certainly. Speaker 1: And were you--now you, you graduated in 1964. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And when--was it in May? Speaker 2: That's right, May 1964. Speaker 1: May 1964 is when you graduated. That summer of 1964 is the summer that, you know, Goodman, Schwerner, and Chaney were killed. And it's also known as "Freedom Summer." And can--do you have any recollections of that? Speaker 2: No, because I graduated from Tougaloo that year, and I don't remember. I'm sure now they do things at school, but we--you know, we were still just getting over--you know, just trying to figure out this whole thing, you know, why? I mean he--and there was an--there were other people too. I'm trying to think. There was some woman who'd come down as a Freedom Rider. There were a lot of people killed that we probably don't even know about really. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know when Bob Mo--Moses was here he talked about that. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 53454 Speaker 1: You have any recollections of Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, I remember Bob Moses. I had-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --such a crush on Bob Moses. Speaker 1: Yeah, tell, tell- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --us what you know about Bob Moses. Speaker 2: Well, I just--I, I just know he was a very brilliant man; he spoke very well; and he had a reputation of just being a very kind person. And I just--being a young girl, you know, I was just enamored with him I think, you know. Speaker 1: What, what about James Lawson, was, was he-- Speaker 2: I remember James Bevels. I don't remember James Lawson. I don't know if you know Bevel, Reverend Bevels? Speaker 1: Yes, but what do you remember about James Bevel [HM]? Speaker 2: Well, he was, he was an organizer; and I--he was very much involved with the movement; and he was like the rest of the leaders. He, he believed that you had to--you have to believe in something, and that you, you give your life for what you believe in. They were all fighters. And he did a lot of organizing in Mississippi, a lot of voter registration, 'cause I think that was really the key because blacks had never voted before, you know, get people to vote and you know, give them a sense of empowerment. Story_ID: 53455 Speaker 1: Can you give me a sense of how an organizer would inspire someone to get involved in a demonstration or an activity, an action, you know, in those days? Speaker 2: Well, I think you just talk about the facts, and the things that are going on, and the injustices. And when you look at what--that, that time if you looked at how life really was, I mean you almost had to be involved, you know, because everybody had--should have a right to vote and to have a certain freedom, to have a certain civil right. So I just felt--it was something I had to do. Speaker 1: So an organizer kind of made it clear that, that people needed to do something? Speaker 2: Yes, certainly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I don't think any of us had any fear. We just--I mean I never thought about my life. When I think now about how I went to Port Gibson [Mississippi] and sat-in there, I mean my family could have been hung. In fact, my grandfather [Tommy Rice] called me that night, and he says girl, you don't know what you've done down here. I had a lot of relatives that worked for--they worked as day workers for white women. And he says now your Aunt Geneva's lost her job, and Cousin Sally has lost her job, and you don't know what you've done down here. It was like about 12 o'clock at night when he called me, and I'll never forget. I ra--I just knew someone had passed, because in the South nobody calls anybody after nine o'clock. And I went to the phone, and he's--I said well, this is just something that we have to do; you know, we have to do this. Speaker 1: Did, did tho--were those things repaired somehow over time, or, or did, did things work out? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Did they work-- Speaker 2: --they, they worked out; things worked out. Speaker 1: Okay, can you maybe talk about how they--you know, you know. Speaker 2: Well, one thing, we never had any lynchings in our hometown. I mean I never heard of a lynching in Port Gibson ever. We he had relationships basically in some cases. No one hated each other. It was just the way it was. I mean if you were black you stay in your place, and if you were white you stayed in your place. And it was after this integration thing I think whites and blacks--even whites began to look at it differently that, you know, black people aren't so bad, you know, and that kind of thing in, in my home in, in Port Gibson. Now this is not the case in many places because I know there--I, I talk to girls who were in school with me. And they were from little towns where they swear that after a certain time of the day, you could not walk the streets, or you know, a black man just really didn't have any rights. There was this one place called Sundown, Mississippi. And they said it was named by that--named because after sundown, black people just couldn't walk the streets. But in Port Gibson we seemed to have worked out things. Like I say, now blacks have businesses there and there--you know, it's a thriving community. Story_ID: 53456 Speaker 1: I'm gonna switch gears again here a second now. Now you met your husband in college. Speaker 2: Yes, met my husband in college. Speaker 1: Was he at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]? Speaker 2: He had graduated, and he had come down to have an interview. He was--he had to take an exam with IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], and he came down to get some placement. Speaker 1: What, what's his name? Speaker 2: James Davis. Speaker 1: And so you met him-- Speaker 2: I met him during this period. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now, well--yeah, could you tell us about your, your meeting or what or how-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I met him at that-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Rose Room. Remember I told you the Rose Room with the big rose? Yes, I was there with friends on a Saturday night, and we were all just having a great time just listening to the music. We knew--I had friends who played in the band and didn't have any money to buy any drinks or anything with a soda. So they would always give us sa--soda, you know. And he was with another young lady that night, and that's kind of like how we met. And after that we got together, and then a year later we got married. Speaker 1: See, you were married in-- Speaker 2: I married in college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I married in March, graduated in May. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, in '64' [1964]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: in '64' [1964]. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 53457 Speaker 1: So what did you--now when you graduated, you, you, you had to major in education and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --sociology. Speaker 2: I had a double major. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I left Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] and moved--we moved to New Orleans [Louisiana]. We was in training there. And then I got pregnant in New Orleans and moved to Chicago [Illinois] later, 'cause he took a job in Chicago. But I never wanted to leave the South. It's only because of his work. Speaker 1: So, so what year was that when you moved to Chicago? Speaker 2: In '67' [1967], and I had a second child here. Speaker 1: So, in addition to being a mother, I mean what did you do in Chicago? Did you-- Speaker 2: Well, in the first few years I was with the children, then I started a teaching career when--we all went together when they became of school age. I went to Har--they went to Harvard Saint George in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And then we moved again; we moved to Ohio, and then back to Chicago. Speaker 1: Oh what part of Ohio did you move--? Speaker 2: A little town outside of Cleveland called Georgetown, and that's where we lived. And then I moved back here, moved near West, right near the University of Illinois, and then to Hyde Park. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And once I got to Hyde Park I said that's it. I'm not moving anymore. I wanted my kids to have stability. Story_ID: 53458 Speaker 1: We were talking about your children [Stephen and Christopher Davis] and when your children were born. And you were--you had just moved to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, just moved to Hyde Park. No, I had one and then I had another one. I had my children. They were getting ready to go to school when I moved to Hyde Park. They went to Harvard Saint George [Harvard Saint George School, Chicago, Illinois]. I moved from the West Side. I was at right at Westgate Terrace near the University of Illinois. And I chose Hyde Park because I liked the variety. It's like a melting pot over there, and I wanted my kids to grow up in an integrated environment where they could see that all people are really the same. And I think it really was very good for them, and I think it had a very positive effect on their lives. 'Cause I lived in a townhouse community, and we had just Koreans and just ev--any, any nationality was there. So they got a chance to have friends from around the world right in Hyde Park. Speaker 1: Did they go to school-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Yes, they went to Harvard Saint George and they went to Ray [William H. Ray Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. I took 'em out of private school because I thought they just needed to be--boys need to have certain experiences, and they need to be able, to be able to fight and to, to be fighters and to, to be able to make it, not just in a bubble. So they went to Ray, which I love that school, and they graduated from Kenwood [Kenwood Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], both of them. Story_ID: 53459 Speaker 1: And you taught in the public school--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. Speaker 1: You know, what, what schools did you teach at in those days? Speaker 2: O'Keefe [O'Keefe Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]; I taught at Byford [William H. Byford School, Chicago, Illinois], a very--a school on the West Side. I think they had the lowest reading scores of all the schools, you know. Speaker 1: And at some point you went to graduate school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, I went to North, Northeastern [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], and that was a great experience. I went to Inner City Studies [Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies] and-- Speaker 1: Tell, tell people about the Center for Inner City Studies. I think that it's when people hear Northeastern, they think of the main campus. But what is the Center for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's a center that was, as the name goes, inner city. It's on 35th and it's a really wonderful place to be. It's the kind of place where you create--you're cra--you're, you're in an environment and an awareness, a different kind of awareness is created there. You have a lot of extremely progressive professors like Awerl (ph.), Dr. Thompson--oh God, am I losing my thought--Dr. Jake Carruthers, those were all of my, my--they were my professors there. And I really enjoyed my year. (Unclear)--I was about two years there. I got a degree in ur--urban studies. And it was just a very eye-opening experiencing. Speaker 1: In what way--well, you say it's different. In what way is it different from maybe other schools? Speaker 2: Well, I don't--that's, that's the only graduate school I've ever been to, so I don't know about the others. But we just had such intense dialogue there; we did such intense research, and it was just great lectures and just really wonderful experiences. I didn't go to Egypt. I did go later. But they have all these trips, these programs, you know, educational programs where they actually not just teach the hieroglyphics there, but--and how many people you're gonna--what where can you go to learn the hiero--hieroglyphics? It's a very unique place. And, and Dr. Thompson organizes all these wonderful trips to Egypt. I don't know if he did one last year, but I know some years prior. I have friends that went, you know. And, and you come back with all this knowledge, and it's just firsthand. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: I think they've all been lots of times. And they bring all this information back to us, and it's just incredible. Speaker 1: Did, did, did you get a different perspective on-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Story_ID: 53460 Speaker 1: Yeah, oh, we were talking about the [Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies and the perspective that they have over there in terms of the city politics and so forth. Could you maybe elaborate on it? Speaker 2: Yeah, they--I think they're really realist. And they talk--I mean they just believe that the system needs to be changed to some extent. And they break it down in such a way that you really understand what they're talking about. Like, they talked about the welfare system, how it's become not just handouts for blacks, but it's a lucrative business for whites, you know, that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Can you, can you--is there any connection between the kind of political education you received in Mississippi with people like Medgar Evers and Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] and what you learned at the Center for Inner City Studies? Speaker 2: Well, it's kind of the same in a way, because it's--they both reveal something that, that you, that you-- that you're a part of and that you need to know about. It's like creating awareness, both of them do really, you know. In the South, you know, it's different, because during that time there was really very little rights, little civil rights. In the North, well, that's kinda like what we call it--and like in Chicago [Illinois], it's a different kind of-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: We were talking about The Center and the political similarity between the center and, and some of the things taught there and some of the things taught (unclear). Story_ID: 53461 Speaker 1: So can you continue to I guess talk about some of the lessons learned at the [Carruthers] Center for Inner City Studies then, then we'll move on to something else be--better. We were finishing-- Speaker 2: Oh, I just, I think I became more aware. I was--having gone to school there, I not just got a B.S. in urban studies, but I--an awareness. You know, I was--an awareness was created within me that opened my eyes to a lot of things that I saw--see differently, you know, about the whole system in Chicago [Illinois], because really, in the South you know where you stand, but in Chicago it's a totally different kind of, of, of, of segregation. You think it's not, but it really is. Story_ID: 53462 Speaker 1: Now you were a business--as a businesswoman, you had like two businesses. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I know you've been involved in two different businesses. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you tell us about--well, I know real estate, and you had a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --boutique. Speaker 2: I had a boutique. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Can you, can you talk about, about those and maybe relate them to what the, the, I guess the political landscape in Chicago [Illinois]? I mean was it difficult to start a business here or? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: It wasn't. Speaker 2: --it wasn't difficult. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It wasn't difficult at all. I did clothing, but more than that, I used the business to do a lot of other things. For example, if you read in my bio, I did lots of fundraisers with that business for a lot of politicians like Harold Washington [Mayor Harold Washington], Roland Burris [HM]. And we raised a lot of money, you know. Speaker 1: Is this with the, with the boutique or? Speaker 2: Yeah, with the boutique, um-huh, with the business. I did a lot of fashion shows, produced a lot of fashion shows, you know, for Carol Moseley Braun [Senator Carol Moseley Braun, HM]. In fact, we did the first big organiz--the organized fundraiser for Harold. We had 2500 people there, and raised lots of money for him with those clothes. So I, I found a way to do just more than make money for myself, but also to give something back to the community. Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about the campaign in a minute--but were you teaching at the same time you were-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --running the boutique? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, I was not teaching. Speaker 1: So that was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was 10 years in the business. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Ten years in the business. Speaker 1: And how long were you in, in real estate and, and which came first-- Speaker 2: I've always been in real estate. Speaker 1: --which came first? Speaker 2: Real estate, and I'm still doing it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm doing some things. Speaker 1: Do you have anything you wanna share about the real estate business in Chicago? Speaker 2: Buy low and sell high. Story_ID: 53463 Speaker 1: Okay, so the boutique--what kind of clothes--clothing did you-- Speaker 2: I did off-price designer clothing. I would go to New York and buy them at a bargain and come back and market them. And I did 'em through home businesses, through home shows, kind of like the Avon lady. Speaker 1: And where did you learn this? Did, did you have a mentor or somebody that showed you how to do this or? Speaker 2: Yes, I met someone who was doing that. And I did parties for this particular person. And then I eventually said I can do it for myself. Speaker 1: Can you name them? Speaker 2: His name was Jerry. He's a--he's, he's Jerry Chavin (ph.). He's, he's deceased now. Speaker 1: Okay, well, we were talking about the boutique and your, your, your operating procedures. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And could you, could you maybe go, go into those again? Speaker 2: Well, we did a lot of home parties, kind of like the Tupperware lady. And we gave a percentage of all of the sales. For example, if you booked a party, you'd invite all your friends over, and they would buy, and then you'd get a percentage of the sales. You could either buy clothes or take cash. So it was a fun business. Yeah, it was a real fun business, a lot of work though. Speaker 1: So people kind of enjoyed--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they enjoyed it. It was a big thing during that time. Speaker 1: Saying you were in business for how many years? Speaker 2: Ten years. Speaker 1: And where, where were you located? Speaker 2: At my home. I had a home business for a number of years-- Speaker 1: (Off-Camera interruption) Speaker 2: So you were in business about 10 years you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, about 10 years. Speaker 2: The name of your business again was? Speaker 1: Cari's Designer Fashion. Speaker 2: Okay. And you told us where it was? Speaker 1: Yes, I was out of my home. I had an English basement in my house, and I used that basement to create the business, and later I moved into a store at 5201 Kimbark. Speaker 2: Right in Kimbark Plaza? Speaker 1: No, I was right near Bettye O Day Spa. Story_ID: 53464 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna I guess move to your civic activities on which you are famous in the city, so. Yeah, it's so many activities, the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], Links [The Links, Inc.], Provident Hospital Women's Board, all of these activities. Can you maybe just, just give us some idea of all the different activities you're involved in? Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure that I'm involved in all of those now, but I am a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, and I'm a member of the Links. I organized the Lake Shore chapter. I think we've been in--we've been organized for the last almost seven years. I was, you know, Provident--the other Provident Hospital, you know, I was involved with that. I did--back in the day, I started this group called Clara's Helping and Hand for the Homeless. And I'm very much involved with my school, my, my--the Tougaloo College Alumni Chapter here; I'm very much involved with that, 'cause I just believe gotta save those--we have to save private schools in the South. They're so needed. I'm trying to think of what else. Speaker 1: NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: NAACP, right. Speaker 1: Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity]. Speaker 2: Operation PUSH. Speaker 1: Okay, and Society of Mannequins I have. Speaker 2: Society of Mannequins, right. Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: It's really a scholarship group. We give scholarships for students in design. They pick the 10 best dressed women, you know, but it's more than just that. It's just--it's really a very--it's, it's a kind of organization that reaches out; you know, not just how you dress, but we try to give something back to the community in terms of giving scholar--several scholarships to kids who probably would not be able to, to go to school. Speaker 1: How many scholarships have you given out so far or do you know? Speaker 2: Oh God, since I've been in there, at least 15 or 20. Speaker 1: And are these to the black colleges or any--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, they're to students who--to basically black students who want to go into design or maybe architectural design or fashions--fashion design--at the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, for the Art Institute. Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's, it's not a frivolous organization that just looks at how a woman dresses and you know. We, we do that because that's like a part of, of getting people involved. Speaker 1: How, how many members are, are there--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: About 50, so we're a big group. Speaker 1: Can you, can you talk about I guess the Provident Hospital Women's Board. I know you've, you've been-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was involved with that. That was back in the day when Provident--before Provident became Cook County Provident. We raised money 'cause we were trying to save the hospital, and it just didn't work out. Speaker 1: Okay, just, just for those who may not be able to hear me as well, can you just say Provident Hospital Wom--Women's Board for me (laughter). Speaker 2: Provident Hospital Women's Board. Speaker 1: Right, okay (unclear) good. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 53465 Speaker 1: Yeah. And you're also a part of the--now what was Clara's Hel--Helping Hand? And who was Clara? And is that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Clara is a--well, I guess she's still in--I haven't been involved with her recently, but she was a woman who organized shelters for the homeless. And I just got a group of women together, and we just tried to accentuate what she was doing by taking clothes and trying to do little things that could help her, because she'd given her whole life to do this. And I'm sure she's probably still doing it now. Speaker 1: Where, where was she located at? Speaker 2: She was located at 78th and Loomis. Speaker 1: That's (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Paul Bieschke: Maybe you could tell us the story about how you met her and why you thought it was important to help her cause. Speaker 1: Yeah, I met her--she was--I was at a luncheon and she was an honoree. And I thought it was important because, I mean, she was trying to help people who didn't have anything. In fact, when I started the Links that was really what I wanted to do, to help the homeless, but we ended up doing educational things like scholarships. But, I mean that's a--that's a real--mean that's a very critical thing. Speaker 2: Yeah, when did you get involved in Clara's Helping--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh my God, that was probably back in '90' [1990], something like that. Story_ID: 53466 Speaker 1: Okay. Can you talk about your involvement with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Well, basically, I've always been a member. I got involved back in the day when I was friends with Medgar Evers, because that was his big thing, the NAACP. So it's like second nature. You have to belong to the NAACP. So basically, I don't do any fundrai--I've never done any fundraising for them, but I do support them financially. Speaker 1: Okay, what about Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity]? Speaker 2: Same thing, I do support. I'm a life member, and I try to go sometimes because they have very--Operation PUSH has very interesting people come and speak. And you've probably been over there. You know that they have very, very in--everybody goes to-- Speaker 1: Do you have a-- Speaker 2: --to PUSH. Speaker 1: --any, any particular person really move you at Operation PUSH when you, when you go? Speaker 2: Jesse [Reverend Jesse Jackson, HM] of course. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know. Story_ID: 53467 Speaker 1: Now, I know you've, you've been involved in political campaigns-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --quite a few significant-- Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: --campaigns-- Speaker 2: --I have. Speaker 1: --in the city. And when did you first get involved or what campaign were you first involved with basically in, in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Harold Washington [Mayor Harold Washington]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did things for Tim Evans [Judge Timothy C. Evans]--he's my neighbor--on a, you know, a small scale. But I really got involved with--you know when Harold became--'cause it was a movement. Speaker 1: Yeah, how did you--now is this the 1983 campaign? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, and how did you get involved with the campaign? Speaker 2: For Harold? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Harold's whole thing was like a movement. It was more than just he was running mayor, you know. And so I just felt it was the right thing to do and got--I got these women together, and we called ourselves the Women's Committee to, to Elect Harold Washington Mayor, and we did it. Speaker 1: Okay. I guess I'll just--I was asking like did, did somebody make--I know it was a movement, but did some specific person come to you and enlist you or did (unclear) did you take the initiative then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I just took the initiative. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, to do something. And, and what is it that you all did actually to-- Speaker 2: Raise money, and we created an awareness with other people, and tried to get out the vote, talked to friends, and made phone calls. We raised about 50,000 for him. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Paul Bieschke: Maybe you could tell is there--was there any direct interaction with Mayor Washington whenever you--you know, before he was elected that you had. Speaker 1: No, I had no direct, nothing direct. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: But the second time around I did, not the first-- Speaker 2: Paul Bieschke: Maybe you could tell us something about the second time-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Paul Bieschke: --as well. Speaker 1: Well, I got to know him a little better than I would--than I did in the begin--you know, the first time we did the fundraiser. We did it because we knew of him. And we went down to his office and presented a check to him. And we had great conversation, and we laughed and we joked--I have lots of pictures from that--just found him to be just a very warm, kind, wonderful man. And we--as we know, he had a gift of gab and speech, and just talked about a lot of things. And then about--not too late--too much longer after that, he was gone. Story_ID: 53468 Speaker 1: Why did his candidacy move you? Speaker 2: Because I, I, I just thought that Harold [Mayor Harold Washington] had a vision, and we were all a part of that vision as black Americans, and we hadn't had that before. And I thought that it was about time, you know. We're majo--we, we--we're have a--we are majority minority here in this city, so why not have a black mayor? Speaker 1: Yeah, how do you think he won the, the election? What's your analysis of how he won the election? Speaker 2: I think he won because, to be honest with you, I think he won because we were able to get out the black vote, and people came out in droves to vote for him. Speaker 1: Okay, w--what, what do you consider the legacy of Harold Washington? And how did--well, how did you feel when he, when he died, and then what do you think his legacy was--(unclear)--as--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: I'll never forget I was at Mr. G's shopping, and someone said that Harold had been--(unclear)--there were rumors that he was dead or he was dying or something like that. And I just--it was just almost disbelief, just almost disbelief. I mean we still don't really know what happened, but no one could believe, you know. I mean I couldn't believe it. I think he proved that a black man could really run this city and that he could--he--I think he was the mayor for all the people. I think even many whites learned to respect him and to like him. And I think he really worked hard at being fair. He didn't just come in and just give everything. He was--I think he was very, very fair, and he opened doors that never would have been opened. Story_ID: 53469 Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna move to I guess Roland Burris's [HM] campaign. You, you, you--you're involved in--how were you involved in Roland Burris's campaign? Speaker 2: I raised fundraising for him too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His wife and I have always been friends. And I believed very much in what he was doing too. Speaker 1: And what do you--now he was-- Speaker 2: At that time he was running for comptroller once, and then once for governor. He did win--I'm, I'm sorry--states attorney, right. He won comptroller; he won state's attorney, and as you know, he, he was not successful-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --the governor's race. Speaker 1: But he was the first black attorney general-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --(unclear)--yeah. Speaker 2: He certainly was. Speaker 1: So did you have--did, did you have--did you know him? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We, we have-- Speaker 1: --relationship--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --we've always been friends, right. Our children grew up together, and our children were ver--were best friends in, in, in school, and they visited each other and sleep in each other's--had pajama parties together. So we were real friends, I mean real friends, yes. They're a very fine family. Story_ID: 53470 Speaker 1: Now Carol Moseley Braun [Senator Carol Moseley Braun, HM], now, I know you were involved in her campaign-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (unclear) for Senate. Speaker 2: Right; in fact, Carol had the first meeting in my home, in the ballroom at my house, when she decided to run against--I mean to run for Senator. Speaker 1: Okay, and what role did you--same role play, raising funds? Speaker 2: Yeah, we got people involved, and we did--we got--we, we had a women's committee for Carol, and we raised money for her, and was just give her sup--moral support because a lot of people didn't think that she could do it. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, in your opinion, how did she win the election? Speaker 2: I think she won because she had the right message. I think that she--I think that she was able to bring basically black and white women together; and I think together they worked to get out the vote for her. And she proved that a woman could really do it, you know, a black woman could do it. Speaker 1: And what do you think happened the second time when she, when she ran, when she lost? Speaker 2: I don't--sometimes I wonder if Carol really knew what she had. I don't know if she really fought hard for that. I don't know. Sometimes I wonder if she really, really and truly wanted to do that. I didn't see the fire like before. I think she had been through so much too probably. She, she--I think she's gotten a lot of bad press, and sometimes that can really through you off track too. Speaker 1: Do you really have a personal relationship with Carol? Speaker 2: Yes, I have a personal relationship with Carol. Speaker 1: How long have you known her? Speaker 2: At least 15 years. Story_ID: 53471 Speaker 1: Paul Bieschke: I have one other question. A lot of people feel as though, you know, they have their political views, but not a whole lot of people go so far as to become actively involved in other people's campaigns. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Paul Bieschke: What do you think instilled that in you? Speaker 2: To, to be involved in other people's campaigns? Speaker 1: Paul Bieschke: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Because when you see someone who's--who has, who has a vision that you share, I think that's motivating enough to, to, to become involved. And I think Roland [Roland Burris, HM], Carol [Senator Carol Moseley Braun, HM], and Harold [Mayor Harold Washington], we kind of shared the same vision. Speaker 1: Paul Bieschke: Was it something in your upbringing or maybe that you learned through being, you know, part of the Civil Rights Movement-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Paul Bieschke: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, I think, I think, I think I learned that during my years at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi], that you have to be involved, and you, you do make a difference. A lot of times we get lazy and we say ah, I'm not gonna go because I don't think, you know, I'm just one person; it's not gonna--but one, one person does make a difference. Story_ID: 53472 Speaker 1: Now you were active in, in Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson Clinton] campaigns too. Were you involved in 1992? Speaker 2: I was at--I, I got to meet Bill. I was Carol Moseley Braun's [Senator Carol Moseley Braun, HM] guest at one of the affairs here in Chicago [Illinois]. But I was kind of involved in Al Gore's [Vice President Al Gore] campaign. Speaker 1: Okay, so you really weren't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, not, not with Bill. Speaker 1: --Bill Clinton--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, I wasn't act--active in Bill. I got to meet him and to, you know, to dialogue with him, and Mrs. [Hillary] Clinton , through her. But I, I really was active in, in Al Gore's campaign--not really active, but I was like in a probably a support group, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now it says in my notes that you had dinner at the White House. Could you-- Speaker 2: No, I didn't have dinner at the White House. Speaker 1: Okay, it wasn't--all right, that's wrong, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That is so funny. I had dinner at the club, at the, at the--is it--I think the Athletic Club here with President Clinton and Mrs. Clinton. Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I did. I was a guest of Carol, with Carol, Carol Moseley-Braun. And so she invited me, and that's how I got to meet them. Speaker 1: Okay. What, what was your impression of-- Speaker 2: Of Bill Clinton? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Very charming, very smooth, extremely bright, very earthy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can see why pe--why he's so well loved. You feel like you've been knowing him all your life. He's just a very earthy man. Speaker 1: Do you have an assessment of his presidency and you know? Speaker 2: Oh, I think he was one of the best. I love Bill Clinton. Story_ID: 53473 Speaker 1: Okay, now the Gore [Vice President Al Gore] campaign, you were more involved--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, I was just a part of a support group called Gore's Kitchen Cabinet. And what we did, we'd have the meetings and just try to do some strategies as to, you know, how you get out the vote, and make people aware of certain things, and of course fundraising. Speaker 1: Okay, did you meet Al Gore? Did you have--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, I met Al Gore, and I met his wife [Tipper Gore]. And it was--he--he's a very kind man, totally different from Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson Clinton] though. And she's-- Speaker 1: In, in what respect? Speaker 2: He's--he doesn't have the--he didn't have the, the flair, you know. He's more--what do you call it--more--little more conservative I think. Story_ID: 70995 Speaker 1: We were talking about the Clinton campaign and the Gore campaign. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you were giving your personal reminiscences of Al Gore and Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson Clinton]. And we, we were--I think we were getting ready to talk about Hillary Clinton--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, exactly. And I was saying that when I met her she seemed so very timid, and so extremely conservative, and very sweet, and very quiet. But I know in reality she's a real tiger, but if you--when I met her she just didn't impress me as, as being that kind of woman. Speaker 1: Okay, so can have some down time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --I guess. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: What, what about Tipper Gore? Speaker 2: She's like the girl next door, you know, just totally out there, and bubbly, and just the girl next door. Story_ID: 70996 Speaker 1: Do you have I guess an assessment of why Gore [Vice President Al Gore] lost in, in 2000 for--what do you--how do you see that, 'cause it was a controversial election? Speaker 2: I think he should have had Bill [President William Jefferson Clinton] by his side. He would have won, really I do. I think that he--because of all the controversy with Bill Clinton, I think he kind of like didn't want him involved in the campaign as much as he would have been, had he not been involved in all this controversy; it's what they call a little baggage. But in spite of everything, I think that, you know, people--I think if Bill had--were able to won, he would have won again. I think that it's something about--he's--he has a special magnetism I think. My personal feel is that had he used Bill more in terms of, you know, getting out, talking to people, and helping to get the vote in, I think that he might have--he might have come out a lot better. I think he, he might have--he might won. Speaker 1: Despite the fact that he lost, did--do you feel like it was rewarding to be involved in a campaign--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure, of course, yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --it was rewarding. Speaker 1: In, in what sense--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, because you--you're try--you're learning a lot by interacting with other people. And even though he lost, you have this feeling that you gave something, you know, you feel worthy that you, you were a part of, of this particular thing, and that in many ways you made a difference. Story_ID: 70997 Speaker 1: Okay, let's switch gears again here. I wanna ask you something about at the AKAs, Alpha--Alpha Kappa Alpha, the-- Speaker 2: Sorority? Speaker 1: Sorority. Could-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been in AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] since I was 17. Speaker 1: You-- Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: Yeah, can you just state the full name of it, just so-- Speaker 2: I've been in Alpha Kappa Alpha since I was 17. I joined when I was at Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi]. And I don't--you--I don't if you were in a fraternity or not, but it's just--and a real experience. And I, I was, I was somewhat active here. I did a lot of fundraisers for the AKAs too. And I, I love that sor--it's the oldest black sorority, and I love that sorority. I think they inspire women in many ways. It's a wonderful networking organization to be a part of 'cause there's so many women doing so many wonderful things. And the most wonderful women are AKAs. Speaker 1: Was your mother a AKA? Speaker 2: No, my mother wasn't an AKA. Speaker 1: Was, was she a member of a sorority-- Speaker 2: No, she was not-- Speaker 1: --at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]? Speaker 2: --a sorority girl. No, she wasn't a sorority girl, no. Story_ID: 70998 Speaker 1: Can you talk about I guess your sons. We haven't mentioned your sons. Speaker 2: Yes, I have two sons, Steven and Christopher. Steven was the first born, and Steven--like I told you, they went to--as I told you, they went to Kenwood High and graduated from Kenwood High School [Kenwood Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and both went to Carleton College [Northfield, Minnesota]; they were econ majors. Steven went on to Columbia [Columbia University, New York City, New York] to get a J.D./M.B.A. And Christopher went on to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], full scholarship. He was--to get a PhD in economics. He finished all of his coursework, but he has not gotten his degree yet because he took a job on Wall Street [New York City, New York]. He was a consultant at JP Morgan, and they offered him--made him offer he couldn't refuse. And he still has one paper to finish, so hopefully he'll get his doctorate, you know, soon. But he is a trader at JP Morgan Chase. He trades derivatives and is doing very, very well; in fact he made VP [vice president] this year. And Steven left investment banking in New York. He practiced law for two years. He worked at one of the big firms in New York. Then he went into investment banking because he didn't like the law. He worked for Credit Suisse First Boston, and then he left there to go to start a company in California, out in Silicon Valley. So they're both doing very well, and I'm very proud of them. Story_ID: 70999 Speaker 1: So was it challenging to have a, have a career and be as-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --act--active as you are and-- Speaker 2: Yes, challenging. Speaker 1: --raise two sons [Stephen and Christopher Davis]. Speaker 2: Right, very challenging. Speaker 1: Okay, can you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But you do it. Well, I was very young. I had--I was a young mother, you know. And in your twenties, you have a lot of energy, and I grew up with my children. I was one of the boys. We were great pals. And I enjoyed every moment of it. I wouldn't trade those moments for anything. I have been so blessed to have wonderful children that I can really honestly sit here and say that I never had a moment's trouble with. We were--we, we have just always been very close, and we still are very close. Speaker 1: What are the values of I guess that, that, that provide that kind of stability? Speaker 2: Well, I think you have to tell--you have to train your children to understand that they must be responsible for their actions. And I think you have to create a relationship with your childrens where--with your children--where you are mother, but you're also friends. And that's a very difficult thing to do because the lines are so--the boundary lines are just so scary, but I managed to do that. I mean they knew the boundary lines, and they knew that whatever they did, they had to be responsible for. And I was never a very strict parent. My--I grew up in an extremely strict home, and I said I would never raise my kids like that. And it worked for me; it actually worked for me. Speaker 1: Was, was-- Speaker 2: My son had a car at 15, and I never had a problem. I think the only big fight we had was Steven, the oldest son, was home from college his sophomore year, and he wanted to have a party in the ballroom. And I said no, you can't because I'd heard a lot of these kids smoked pot, and I just didn't wanna be bother with all that. So I told him that he couldn't do it. And he got very upset with me and told me that was his house too, and he thought he should be able to do it. And that was really the biggest argument that we ever had. And he decided he was gonna go and stay with somebody else for the summer. So he packed up his things and he left, and he was gone for about 14 hours. He came back home, and he--I've never had a problem since. Speaker 1: Were, were you--have you been like involved with the church or anything? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I've been involved with everything that they've ev--ever done. You know, I was a role mother at Ray [Ray Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And I just--we had--we just, we took together all the time, and vacationed a lot, and just spent a lot of time together. I think that's also the key to it. You spend--you have to spend quality time with your children. You really--a lot of parents are so busy working, and they have a babysitter; they come home, they're tired; they, they babysit by the television. I think you just have to really talk to your children, and spend some quality time with them. Not that you have to be there 24 hours a day, but the time that you spend has to be meaningful, like around the dinner table where you, you, you, you make your rules. And you--you have to be consistent; you know, once you make 'em, that's it. So I think those are really--for me, it was the key for me. Story_ID: 71000 Speaker 1: If you--do you have a philosophy of life that you would like to share with future generations? Or, or is there, is there something you, you feel is your legacy that you'd like to leave behind? Speaker 2: Well, I kind of feel that you, you have to live your life every day like it's last; that you have to, you have to enjoy; you have to also share; you have to give something back. I've always lived; I've always traveled; I've always--I don't think you can wait until you retire to do things in life. I think you have to, you have to live every day and make every day meaningful. But most of all, you have to give back, because I think the art of living is giving. And I think one of the reasons that we have so many problems with our black colleges and organizations is that people don't give back. I know in my school [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] only maybe two percent of the kids give back. They just don't give back. But I think across the board, not--it's not a racial thing, but I think you have to be willing to share what you have with other people whether they're black, white, blue, green, because to have everything by yourself is no good, really. I mean you have to share it. That's the only way to live. Story_ID: 71001 Speaker 1: Do you, do you see, do you see these times as better than the time that you grew up, or, or do you think there's more hope now than, than it, than it was or what? Or does it make any difference? Speaker 2: In what way? You mean in terms of, in terms of the actual times or in terms of the movement or? Speaker 1: Well, I'm-- Speaker 2: You mean the time that we live in now? Speaker 1: Yeah, you think that we're, we're making any progress? Speaker 2: We, as a people, or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess in the world in general too. I mean we're really are not making progress (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I don't know if it's better than when I grew up. Sometimes I wish it were like when I grew up, you know. Speaker 1: What-- Speaker 2: I didn't--we didn't have drugs. And we didn't have--you know, we had just a different sense of who you are. We didn't have the rap music and all of the horrible language, and I don't know if I like this time. I mean I'm happy to be alive, you know, to have my family and all that, but I don't like what's going on in the gener--with this generation. Speaker 1: You, you think it's more challenging for young people now? Speaker 2: Oh yes, so much more, so--you have a--you have this new technology that we didn't have, you know, the computers and all of the fancy, dancy things. But I loved it back then, 'cause it was a different--it was, it was more of a loving ca--I grew up in a more of a, a more loving, caring kind of environment. I don't like this environment in the city where you have to--and even the South is drugs, and you have to lock your doors. I grew up in a time when we never locked our doors. You know, everybody--I was raised like where they called the village. Now it's totally different now. I think this is a very difficult time. Speaker 1: Would your grandmother [Carrie Lapsky] and grandfather [Tommy Rice] be shocked at what's going on? Speaker 2: Oh, I think they would just be in disbelief, you know, teachers at risk, and people--I mean it's like crack everywhere. We, we never heard of that when I was growing up. So I would trade--if I could back, I would rather live back then, without the technology, really. Speaker 1: Okay, so, is there any, any (unclear)--any last comment that you wanna make before we-- Speaker 2: Well, I think you for the interview and for thinking enough of me to invite me to come here today. Speaker 1: Well, I think it's been worth, worthwhile. So thank you. Thank you for your-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 71002 Speaker 1: This is a picture of my high school graduation from Addison High School in Port Gibson, Mississippi, and the year is 1960. Speaker 2: Can you spell Addison for us? Speaker 1: A-D-D-I-S-O-N. That's a nice picture, wasn't it? (Laughter). Speaker 2: This is my Hall of Fame picture in 1998. I was inducted into the Tougaloo College Hall of Fame, and this is my Hall of Fame picture. Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken in Port Gibson, Mississippi. I'm not quite sure of the year. I was probably around 10 or 11. And I had my Easter dress on. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): And the other person with you? Speaker 1: And that's my cousin, Vernita. She's my-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): B-E-N-I-T-A? Speaker 1: V-E-R-N-I-T-A, Vernita. Speaker 2: Are you on the right or? Speaker 1: Vernita's on the left; I'm on the right. And she was my little girl. I used to take care of her. That's my mother's sister's child. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): How old do you think you both were at that time? Speaker 1: She was probably around six, and I was probably around twelve or thirteen. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): And what was her last name? Speaker 1: Vernita Nuey, N-U-E-Y. Speaker 2: This was at a reception at the Hall of Fame party in Jackson, Mississippi in 1998. And this is a picture of my son, Steven, S-T-E-V-E-N, Davis, and myself. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Where is the location? Speaker 2: Jackson, Mississippi. That's Steven. That's my oldest son. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): How old was he at this time? Speaker 2: Thirty-three. He's the one that went to Columbia. Has a J.D. and B.A. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): So they both also went to Carleton [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota]? Speaker 2: Yes, both went to Carleton. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): In Minnesota? Speaker 2: In Minnesota. Speaker 1: This is a picture taken at the Drake Hotel. It was a fundraiser for Carol [Senator Carol Moseley Braun, HM]. And Mrs. [Hillary] Clinton came in, and we were all at this very private room there. I think it was only about for maybe 50 women. And it was really a very nice evening. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Since not everyone knows about black figures, the person who's listening to this, to this tape (unclear) just describe the name--(simultaneous)--person. Speaker 1: Okay, this is Carol Moseley Braun on the right, and of course Carrie Davis, and Hillary Clinton. Speaker 2: This is a picture that was taken at the new Hyatt on King Drive. Al Gore was there for a reception, fundraiser. And I was one of the participants in that reception. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): What year approximately? Speaker 2: That was the last time he ran, when was that? Speaker 1: About 2000. Speaker 2: Two Thousand, right, the year 2000. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): And this--(unclear)--(unclear)--Tipper Gore, right? Speaker 2: Tipper Gore, Carrie Davis, and Al Gore on the right. Speaker 1: This was taken at--in 1993 at the Black Caucus in Washington, D.C. And it's a picture of Carrie Davis and Governor Wilder. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Do you know Governor Wilder's [Governor Lawrence Douglas Wilder] first name? Speaker 1: What is the Governor Wild--what is it? Douglas Wilder, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): W-I-L-D-E-R. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Governor of Virginia. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And this is a picture at our first Links [The Links, Inc.] convention. I was the organizer of my chapter. And this is our president, Rita Wilson. So we were attending the big convention in New Orleans [Louisiana]. That was in 1998, yep, the year we organized. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): And Rita Wilson's spelled like--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: R-I-T-A, W-I-L-S-O-N. Speaker 1: This is a picture that was taken in South Orange, New Jersey in 2000--in the year 2000. It was wedding--not wedding--it was a shower for my first granddaughter. And that's my son, Christopher. We were at my daughter-in-law's mother's house. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): How old is that is time? Speaker 1: At that time he was 31. No, think he's--let's see--30. Chris is a-- Speaker 2: This is a picture of Jacqueline Jackson and Carrie Davis. And this was taken in 1995. I think it's 1995. It was taken in Jamaica. I was a guest at Jackie's son's wedding, Jonathan. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Do you remember how to spell Jacqueline? Speaker 2: J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E. And it was taken at the Ciboney Resort in Jamaica. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): And she, Jacqueline, is on the right? Speaker 2: Jacqueline's on the right; I'm on the left--Carrie Davis is on the left. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Congressman--on the right--Congressman Bennie Thompson, Carrie Davis, and Carrie Davis's husband, James Davis. It was a reception held at my home for Bennie Thompson. Bennie Thompson is a graduate of Tougaloo College in Mississippi, and we're very proud of him and the work he's doing there. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): I'm sorry. And what year was this again? Speaker 1: That was in approximately 1994. Story_ID: 71003 Speaker 1: You ready? This is picture of [Reverend] Jesse Jackson, Sr. [HM] to the right, Carrie Davis is in the center, and Jesse, Jr. to the left. This is a picture taken at my home during a reception/fundraiser for Jesse Jackson, Jr. [HM] during his first run for Congress in 1996. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken about 1993 with Oprah [Winfrey] and some celebrity guests. It was a party at the Drake Hotel. It was about 1993. I was a guest of Oprah and Stedman [Graham]. Stedman used to model for me when I had my clothing business. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION BY MALE VOICE): Did he start out doing the modeling? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION BY MALE VOICE): Stedman. Did he start out doing modeling, or this just someone you had-- Speaker 2: He used to model before he met Oprah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION BY MALE VOICE): Really? Speaker 2: Yeah, he used model and he had a little job too. He made a hundred dollars a show. Now I'm sure I couldn't get him to model for a million dollars. Speaker 1: This is a picture taken about 1996. It was at the reception for--reception fundraiser for Jesse Jackson--for Jesse Jackson, Jr. And Representative Canas came in for the party. It was held in the ballroom at my home at 4954 S. Ellis. And to the right, it's Congressman John--I don't know why I called him John Canas. I mean he--that is Canas. I'm thinking about Dellums. This is Congressman John Canas, Carrie Davis, and Jesse Jackson, Jr. Speaker 2: Yeah, John Canas of Michigan. Speaker 1: John Canas of Michigan, right. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken about 1991. It's a picture of Carrie Davis to the right, and Paul Simon to the left. I was a part of a, a pack organization. It's called SUPAC, Sojourners United Political Action Committee, and named, named after Sojourner Truth. And Paul Simon came to speak to our group. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): He's a United States Senator. Speaker 2: Yeah, Paul Simon is a United States Senator from Illinois. Speaker 1: Former Senator. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): And I'm sorry. Can I get a year on this one? Speaker 2: This was about 1993 I think. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Carrie Davis to the right, Jesse Jackson to the left, taken in Ocho Rios, Jamaica at the Ciboney Resort. I was their guest for the wedding of their son, Jonathan. And that was about 1996. Speaker 2: This is a picture take on March 27th at the Drake Hotel. I was attending a gala for Youth Guidance. Speaker 1: This is a picture taken about 1994. It's a picture of Dr. Gale Kates, Zenobia Black--I mean Dr. Gale Kates to the right, Zenobia Black, and to the left, Carrie Davis. We were planning a fundraiser for Provident Hospital. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Can you spell--(unclear)? Speaker 1: G-A-I-L, K-A-T-E-S, and Zenobia, Z-E-N-O-B-I-A, B L-A-C-K, and Carrie, C-A-R-R-I-E, D-A-V-I-S. Speaker 2: This is a picture of, of Gwendolyn Brooks and Carrie Davis--Gwendolyn Brooks to the right and Carrie Davis at inauguration of Carol Moseley-Braun in Washington, D.C. I don't know when--when did she win, Nineteen ninety-five? Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992]? Speaker 1: Was it '92' [1992] when Carol won the Senate? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Ninety-two [1992] and then she was out in--yeah, she--they serve six years. Speaker 2: Okay, 1992 in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: This is a picture taken in about 1996. It's a picture of Carrie Davis to the right and Windulem (ph.)--Carrie Davis to the right and Maya Angelou to the left. It was taken at DuSable Museum. There was a presentation there for--oh God, who was having something? Sh--I'm sorry. Maya Angelou [HM] was a guest there for a presentation by the Links I think, and she did a reading. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken during Vice Present-then Al Gore's campaign when he was running for president. It was taken about--when--that's about 1998 (unclear) when he ran the first time. When did he run? (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): What, in 2000 is when Gore ran for president. Speaker 1: Right, okay, it was in the year 2000. And this was taken at Mrs. Prixer's (ph.) home up on the North Side. I can't remember the exact address. But, it's Carrie Davis to the right and Hillary [Clinton]--and Tipper Gore to the left. Speaker 2: This was a photograph taken about 1990--maybe about 1997. It's Carrie Davis to the right, James Davis, Carrie's husband, and Berlean Burris and Roland Burris [HM]. It was a fundraiser/reception given at my house for Roland when he was running for Attorney General I think. And he's cutting the cake there. We made a cake for him. It was a win/win cake. So it was kind of fun. Story_ID: 53483 Speaker 1: This is a picture taken I guess about 1999. It's a picture of Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson Clinton] to the right and Carrie Davis at the Chicago Athletic Club. It was a luncheon, $25,000 a plate. Speaker 2: This is a picture. It was taken of ma--the ballroom in my home. I had a fundraiser for Bennie [Thompson], who was congressman for Mississippi. That's Bennie Thompson to the right and Carrie Davis to the left. And that was about 1990--about 1996. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Carrie Davis and Harold Washington at a fundraiser given by Carrie Davis for Harold Washington at the Hilton Hotel. That's Harold--Mayor Harold Washington to the right and Carrie Davis to the left. We raised over $50,000 that day. He had 2500 people. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Carrie Davis. I guess I was around eight or nine. And that's my cousin, Vernita. Vernita's to the right; Carrie Davis to the left. And this was probably taken about 1950 or something like--well (unclear)--'50' [1950]--about 1956 or something like that. Speaker 1: And this is my cousin. This is another picture of Carrie Davis around--I'm probably about eight years old. And that's my cat calico and that's my cous--my cousin--my aunt, Lorraine, L-O-R-R-A-I-N-E, Rice, R-I-C-E. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): What was cat's name? Speaker 1: That's Ms. Calico. Speaker 2: This is a picture of when I was probably around nine years old. These are my very good little friends. That's Dorothy Mae to the right, D-0-R-O-T-H-Y, M-A-E; and that's Carrie Davis; and Vernita, V-E-R-N-I-T-A, N-U-E-Y; and that's--to the far left that's Bobbie, B-O-B-B-I-E, Woods-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): In the hat? Speaker 2: Yeah, in the hat (laughter). They said we're like the lil' rascals. And the other one is Brother, B-R-O-T-H-E-R. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): His name was Brother? Speaker 2: You know, I can't remember his name, but I know we called him Brother. Speaker 1: And this is in Port Gibson, Mississippi, probably around 1957 or '58' [1958]. That's Carrie Davis to the right, when I was a kid, and Vernita to the left, V-E-R-N-I-T-A, and that's my cousin. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): It looks like you were thick as thieves. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, I used to babysit with her. Speaker 2: This is another picture in my yard in Port Gibson. That's Carrie Davis, the taller girl, and that's Vernita, V-E-R-N-I-T-A. Speaker 1: This is a picture taken about 1955. It's of my cousin Vernita to the right, V-E-R-N-I-T-A, N-U-E-Y, Vernita Nuey, and Carrie Davis to the left. This was taken at Riverview here in Chicago [Illinois]. And we were sitting on the--on, on, on the Moon. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): How were you do you think at this time? Speaker 1: Probably around ten, and Vernita was probably around five or six. I was probably around 12 because I'm a lil'--much older in than, than she is. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken in Port Gibson, Mississippi. This is where I was born--house that I was born in in Port Gibson. And this picture was taken probably around 1996. I went back to visit. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): What was the address? Speaker 2: 306 Anthony Street, A-N-T-H-O-N-Y, and my phone number was 523. Can you believe that (laughter). Speaker 1: This is a picture taken at a fundraiser at Provide Hospital probably in 1994. And to the right that's Vera Collins. She was an active member of a group called Chassey (ph.). And I was their guest, and we presented a fashion show at Chat--for Chassey. That's Vera Collins to the right, Carrie Davis, Mae Hodge--jeepers--I think that's Sally Smith, that's Jeanette Burgen (ph.), and Carrie Jones. I think that's right. What does it say? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): From left, Carrie--Carrie Greene, G-R-E-E-N-E. Speaker 1: Okay, it's Carrie Greene, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Then Burnette Stamps, BURE--B-U-R-N-E-T-T-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Then Vern Jarrett [Vernon Jarrett], then Carrie Davis, and, and Vera Collins. Speaker 1: This is a picture taken around 1993. It's a picture of my store in Hyde Park. It's a picture of Carrie Davis to the right and Lydia Salter, who worked for me in the store, to the left. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Vivia? Speaker 1: Lydia, L-Y-D-I-A, S-A-L-T-E-R, Lydia Salter. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken about 1993. It was a picture taken of Carrie Davis in her home in the garden. I always win on the garden contest for Chicago. Speaker 1: This is a picture taken probably about 1994. It's a picture of Carrie Davis to the right and Debbie Dixon to the left. We were planning for the AKA's sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] founders' day. Speaker 2: This is a picture taken probably in 1998. It's a picture of Carrie Davis to the right, Robin Robinson to the left. She was presenting me with an award for--from the Association of Mannequins as being one of the best dressed black women in Chicago. That's 19--about 1994; I'm sorry. Speaker 1: This is an autograph that I received from Ralph Bunche. He came to Tougaloo College [Tougaloo, Mississippi] in 1963. And he wrote me this autograph at the airport in Jackson, Mississippi. It says "To Carrie, With warm regards," Ralph Bunche. "Thanks for coming all the way to the airport to see me off." Speaker 2: That was taken in 1981 at the Ritz Carlton in the Estate Room where I host-- Story_ID: 53484 Speaker 1: That was also taken at the Ritz Carlton during the show in 1981. I'm not sure who this guy is though. Speaker 2: These are models of the Sidha Collection dresses that were from 25 to $4,000. That's Vivian Losette (ph.) to the right, that's Zennie (ph.) Hebert, that's Pat Smith, that's Sandra McCullum (ph.), and oh my God, what's this child's name--Cookie--and that's Cookie. And this was taken at the grand--at the Estate Room of the Ritz Carlton Hotel. Speaker 1: And this one is a picture of Carol Pilot to the right. She's my friend who was helping to show clothing to a customer. And those are some of the racks with the clothing on it. That was all in 1981. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Carrie Davis to the right and Jim Davis to the left. It's a picture of when we won the garden contest. That was about 1980. Speaker 1: That's your dining room? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: That's your dining room? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is a picture taken I guess about the same time, 1981 or something like that. But it's a picture of my dining room in my home. I rehabbed one of the old mansions in Kenwood, Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And it's a very beautiful house. You have to pay detail--you should pull the camera back so we can see the ceiling. The ceiling is so beautiful. Yeah, the whole room is lots of wood. It's just a very, very beautiful room, beautiful. Speaker 1: And this is a picture of my home, the ballroom of my home. And this is my son, Christopher; that's Carrie Davis, and her son Christopher. And that was taken about 1983. That was a picture from the "Sun-Times"--I mean from the Chi--"Chicago Tribune." Speaker 2: This is a picture taken about 1962 or '63' [1963], and it's the entrance at Tougaloo College in Tougaloo, Mississippi. In order to enter the campus, you had to come through this gate. So it's kind of like an emblem that we use on everything. Speaker 1: This is a picture in Tougaloo in 1960. And it's a picture of Carrie Davis to the right and Jerry Lewis. We were voted--he was voted most handsome, and I was voted prettiest girl that year. It's like for the who's who page. Speaker 2: That was a picture taken in 1963. And that's when I was in college, and I was Kappa Sweetheart. Speaker 1: Somebody's written "I love you" on there. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, my uncle (laughter). He wrote all over my picture...