 Story_ID: 37342 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Sylvester Harvey. Ma'am, can you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Sylvia Michelle Ewing, S-Y-L-V-I-A M-I-C-H-E-L-L-E E-W-I-N-G. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 3/20--my date of birth is March 21st, 1957. My place of birth is Erie, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: And right. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a, I'm an executive in education, the Director of External Affairs for the Illinois Network of Charter Schools and an adjunct professor in journalism at Columbia College, Chicago [Illinois], and on air pledge talent for WTTW, Channel 11. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is January 19, 2012, my sister's birthday. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Chicago, Illinois in the offices of the Illinois Network of Charter Schools in the Loop. Story_ID: 37343 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five light weight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I like so many foods but I have to say I will never turn down pizza. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Purple. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Rio Caliente, Mexico. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a spa in Mexico. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Just be happy. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37344 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history. And I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. But we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Louise Miller, L-O-U-I-S-E M-I-L-L-E-R. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I had it on that sheet, it's January 1st and I think it's 1937. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Houston, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any stories about--I mean or, or what do you know about your ancestors? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: My daughter recently traced her matriarchal lineage back several generations. So there's me, there is my mother Louise, there is her mother Rosa, and they lived in Mississippi. And my mother came up to Pennsylvania when she was nine [years old]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then my grandmother's mother was Cora. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then her mother was Adeline and she was first a slave and then a sharecropper. Speaker 1: Okay. So she was born during slavery? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And are there any stories that are passed down in the family about slavery or, or reconstruction? Speaker 2: The stories about reconstruction or I guess it would have been later than that. But one of the stories that I had heard about the South was that my grandmother was a proud and well kept together black woman. And when she was a little girl, she had on a really pretty dress and she was in a situation where a young white girl was envious of her dress and tore it and felt that my grandmother didn't deserve to have that dress. I don't know if that's where my interest in fashion and wardrobe began, but that's a story that I remember from childhood in just observing how important it was for family members and others to get dressed up on Sunday and go to church and how important what you wore was to maintaining your dignity. Speaker 1: Okay. So, well that's a good story from way back. Are there any other stories? It seems like there might be some more. Speaker 2: Well my mother talks about how, when it was time to move north she was really ready to go and didn't look back. And how her brother, my Uncle William who was a little bit older, was sad to leave and sad to leave the relatives and the life that he knew. But people joked about how my mom said, "Oh stop crying William, we're moving north." And I think that represented her attitude and still represents her attitude, someone who's always looking forward and positive about the future. Story_ID: 37345 Speaker 1: So did your mother [Louise Miller] go to school in Mississippi? Did she have a chance to--? Speaker 2: She left when she was nine [years old] so the majority of her education was north in Pennsylvania. I had an Aunt Nell who had relocated north to Ohio and my mother's sister, Willa Mae, had moved to Erie, Pennsylvania. And I think she was the first one to make that transition and then other relatives followed. Speaker 1: Okay. So your mother finished high school in Erie? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now did she have any stories about growing up that she told? Speaker 2: Well I think she was a majorette, she was you know enthusiastic and energetic and I have some pictures from--of her from that era. And I can see her in big sunglasses and a scarf wrapped around her head and sort of draped over her neck standing next to a convertible. We lived on Lake Erie and there are a lot of jokes about Lake Erie. But I really feel that I had an idyllic childhood because we lived across from a giant park and then next to the park was the actual lake. And so my sense of the horizon was very broad. I was next door to my aunt and her family. I lived with my mother and my grandmother [Rosa Anne Thomas] in my early years. And I played, you know in a, in a big park with lots of trees and we would have picnics and play baseball and things like that. And I would go next door to my aunt's house and I was an early reader so I would climb her peach tree and spy on my older cousins and read their textbooks that they brought home from school. Speaker 1: Okay. Well we don't want to get you too far gone 'cause we're going to try--we're just trying to cover your mother and then go to your father. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh my mom. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So more about my mom. She was the youngest and perhaps one of the most defining things about her early adulthood was that she had me when she was young. And I think it might have been you know challenging for her, but that was probably one of her more life-defining moments. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37346 Speaker 1: Well can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Well my biological father is Lynwood, L-Y-N-W-O-O-D Anthony, A-N-T-H-O-N-Y Dennard, D-E-N-N-A-R-D. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born in Macon [Georgia] and I don't recall his--it's on your sheet. Do you want me to have that to tell you or does it matter? Speaker 1: No, no. Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But yeah, Macon, Georgia. Speaker 1: Macon, Georgia okay. And--okay. And, all right. So what do you know about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: Well it's very interesting because I grew up thinking that another man who was a local person, a man named Paul Ponder--and you can tell me if this is inappropriate, but this is my story. But I grew up thinking that a man named Paul Ponder was my dad and that was the name that I had, P-O-N-D-E-R, growing up. They--he was married to my mom [Louise Miller] for a short while and they divorced when I was younger, probably before I was two [years old]. And my mother met my stepfather [Milton Miller], they dated for many years, probably from the time that I was five and ultimately married. But around the time that I was nineteen, my cousin came to the house with a gentleman who asked if I wanted to come out to dinner with them. And being a young, nineteen-year-old living on my own, I jumped at the chance to have a, you know a, a meal with my cousin and this new person. And over this meal, he told me that he was my father and that he had wanted to know me but that my mother really didn't want him involved in my life and you know it was a very critical moment for me. And I found that I had step-brothers and I learned a little bit about my dad. In retrospect from the distance of maturity, I can understand my mother's decision. He was a bit of a player. He was not from town. He traveled around doing you know small businesses. He ultimately had all of the typical black businesses, a record store, barbecue shop, car wash, but later in his life he found his real calling which was as a music producer and he had some success as a gospel music producer. But there was a long period of time when I did not know that much about my dad. I respected and appreciated my mother and my stepfather for all they had done to raise me and really drifted apart from my dad and it was only in about 2006 when my son [Matthew Ewing] wanted to know more about that side of the family that I did more investigation and reconnected with my stepmother [Margie Dennard] and learned that my father had passed. He made his transition. And then a few years later, just very recently, I found that I have a, a family on his side that has been actively having family reunions for going on fifty-nine years and that we can trace our lineage to a woman named Mary Dunn who was a slave, who was the first of our family to come from Africa. And the joke in the family history is that when emancipation came, they said we're "Dunn" being slaves and they took the name D-U-N-N. But there is a very rich and new history for me on that side of the family and so as I reach my maturity and my children reach theirs, it's nice to finally have the full picture and to feel comfortable about embracing it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37347 Speaker 1: So did your father [Lynwood Anthony Dennard] grow up in Georgia, your biological father? Speaker 2: He grew up in Georgia and had several siblings and I will show you his--I have a big book of his stuff a little bit later on. He married my stepmother [Margie Dennard] and he was married a couple of times. But he married my stepmother who is still alive and they raised two boys together and I did spend a few months living with them in California. Speaker 1: Now he was an entrepreneur. Speaker 2: He was an entrepreneur and his final work was as a record producer. Speaker 1: Now did he produce anything that we would recognize concerning the gospel--? Speaker 2: I'm not sure. His company as called 'Cold Wave Records'-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he was based in what was then Englewood and is now called Hawthorne, just outside of LA [Los Angeles] in California. At the time of his passing you know a lot of musicians and others came to honor him I'm told. I have a little brother in that branch of my family who did write music. His name is Mark Dennard and I think he's credited on a song called "Color Me Bad," which I don't know anymore about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 37348 Speaker 1: Now you want to tell us about your stepfather [Milton Miller]? Speaker 2: Yes, I-- Speaker 1: You were raised by him right? Speaker 2: I was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --raised by my stepfather and Milton Miller is the kind of man--my stepfather is the kind of man that doesn't get enough recognition. I think of him as an unsung hero. He did everything that you are traditionally expected to do for your family. He is originally from New Orleans [Louisiana], married my mom [Louise Miller], a young woman who already had a child and also raised my two sisters. And he worked at a paper mill all of his life, didn't really ask for much. As long as he could watch a little bit of football and you know take a nice walk, he was a happy person. And I think my sense of fairness and trying to live an ethnical life is from his influence. Speaker 1: Okay. So he had a big influence on you? Speaker 2: He had a big influence, a very positive influence on me. Speaker 1: So really there are three people that serve as a father figure in your life? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: One was Paul-- Speaker 2: Ponder. Speaker 1: --Paul Ponder. Speaker 2: It's my father, the man I thought was my father and my biological father [Lynwood Anthony Dennard]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 37349 Speaker 1: So now is there a story about how--well, we got three different, you know, people. So is there--we normally--is there a story how your parents met? So is it--? Speaker 2: I think my-- Speaker 1: We could get three stories out of this but it's all right, it's okay. Speaker 2: [Laughter] I, I know that my mom [Louise Miller] met my stepfather [Milton Miller] when she was still, you know, probably in her early twenties. And he had been a bit of a big man on campus. I think they might have known each other in high school. He had been a football player and I think he had a lot of potential and really brought that potential to bear in being a family person with my mom. When I was younger, a lot of the things that we did together, they dated for quite a while before I got--or before they got married and I can remember him buying a motorcycle when they were engaged and my mom being really upset because she wanted the wedding to move forward rather than the motorcycle. But he gave me a ride around the block and I went in and told my mother great things about that bike and what a great idea it was and they did after they were married, ride a motorcycle which I thought was really interesting. And they also--that was the day when James Brown would come to even small towns like Erie, Pennsylvania and perform. And everyone would go out in their best and dance and have a great time and you know then maybe fuss and fight a little bit. But they all recalled seeing James Brown and what a great show he put on. Story_ID: 37350 Speaker 1: Now when you consider your--well I'll ask you, now consider all of these men, you know these three you know I guess in this question. But when you think about your--their talents, dispositions, even looks, who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Louise Miller] or you know your biological father [Lynwood Anthony Dennard] or your stepfather [Milton Miller]? Speaker 2: I think my mother gave me a sense of optimism and a sense of being loving towards others that informs who I am. She is someone for whom the glass is not half empty but always full and overflowing. And she's very much appreciated as a counselor and such in her church and to everybody she meets. So I think there's some disposition things that I got from my mother for sure. I think that my stepfather informed how I wanted to live my life to you know be a productive member of my community and to take care of my family when I had one. But I think that my stepfather or that my biological father probably informed my artistic side or my creative side. He was a much more of a ne'er-do-well and I think my mom did all of the hard work that you put into raising someone and seeing them into adulthood. But I definitely feel that my lifelong interest in the arts and my creative sense is probably something that I got from him. And I didn't really know the man who I thought was my dad [Paul Ponder] very well. He lived in Florida and did construction. I think he worked on the World Trade Center and some other big buildings in New York that I recall was kind of one of his claims to fame. But I appreciate the Ponders and the people who I thought were my relatives and the way that they embraced me from childhood and I still think of them as my cousins and relatives to this day. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37351 Speaker 1: So now was there a name for the side of town you lived in, in Erie [Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Yeah. I lived on the lakefront [Lake Erie]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was on the west side and there, you know are a lot of distinctions about that. The property that I grew up on and the area where I lived when I was a child, it was probably more under developed and you know working class black folks, a few Italian families. I can remember gypsies coming through the neighborhood and selling things and my grandmother's [maternal; Rosa Anne Thomas] kind of biased warnings about you know not leaving things out around them, which you know was her view of the day. And I can just remember how much space everybody had for big vegetable gardens and flower gardens and flowering trees so it was really lovely. These days it's lakefront property and you know very few of those families still own that property. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37352 Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings for us? Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: In the order that they-- Speaker 2: Okay. With the siblings that I grew up with who are just my dearest hearts because I had been an only child for--to my knowledge I was an only child for around the first eleven years of my life. So my first sister is Nicole and my--Nicole Louise--and do I have to spell it and all that stuff, or no? Speaker 1: Yeah, if you give the names you should probably spell them. Speaker 2: Okay. Well I'll give them to you first and then spell them-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so you can edit. But my sisters are Nicole and Colette. They are the sisters that I grew up with in Erie, Pennsylvania. And that's N-I-C-O-L-E and then Colette is C-O-L-E-T-T-E. And there's a, you know an eleven and twelve year difference between us. And then I didn't know this until later in life but my other siblings are Angie, Mathis, Leonard and Louie. They're all the Dennard kids that their mom was also married to my biological father [Lynwood Anthony Dennard]. Louie is--lives in Japan. He works for the government and Lenny, Jr. is deceased. And then the brothers that I met from my biological father and my stepmother were Mark who is still alive and Tony, who is deceased and they're the ones that I know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 37353 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: One of my earliest childhood memories is being at home with my grandma [maternal; Rosa Anne Thomas] and playing with a toy while she used one of those old ringer washers. And I remember that we were in a basement but it was sunny and just kind of playing with my toy and feeling the shaft of light coming in and putting my toy in and out of that while my grandma turned this handle and did all of her, her laundry work. She was my Grandma Rosie who just always made me feel special and safe and loved. I can also remember maybe at four or five [years old], Sundays going to church and getting totally dressed up. And in those days you wore the gloves and you put Vaseline on your patent leather shoes and Vaseline on your legs and then the freedom that I felt when we would come home from church. And I was able to change and just run in the dirt and play and my cousins who had to keep their dresses on and couldn't have fun. A lot of my earliest memories had to do with the natural world. I can remember trying to capture a grasshopper and being really scared when it jumped in my face. I also can remember a story about--I loved tangy things and so do my sisters from Pennsylvania so olives, pickle juice, those kinds of things. And there was a cabinet, one of those old metal, not built in but just like a freestanding cabinet and there were olives and pickles at the very top of the cabinet. And I always was a climber and I climbed this cabinet to get to what I wanted and it toppled over and fell and I jumped away and was safe, but flour and things fell on me. And my older cousin when she came in, she was so mad, but then she couldn't help but laugh because I was covered from head to toe with flour. So that was a little bit of family lore. Story_ID: 37354 Speaker 1: Now what were some of the other sights and sounds and smells in growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, if you were a history buff, I come from a perfect town [Erie, Pennsylvania]. And later when I got older and more politically aware, you know I had a different perspective on it. But I grew up where there was a major battle from the War of 1812 and Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry said we have met the enemy and they are ours. And so this beachfront area was really important to the community but it was also a place where folks could go and fish and have picnics and have this actual state park with all kinds of habitats from marshes and lily ponds to sand dunes. And so I just loved going to the beach. We would always drive around year round and whether it was summer or winter so that was a big part of my growing up. But there was also a museum and it was in my part of town on the west side. And there was a big, giant black cauldron in the museum which was--it housed or it was the pot that the bones of general--of Matt Anthony Wayne who was a general from the 1800s, there was a whole story about how his body was moved from one spot to the other and that pot was supposedly where they boiled his bones. So as a rather curious and perhaps somewhat ghoulish child, I always enjoyed looking at that pot and wondering about the history and wondering about his lifetime. And there was also throughout my childhood the big thing that everyone was raising money for was the completion of this flagship Niagara which was in the War of 1812. And I can remember fishing with my cousins next to a piece of this ship and over time it, it's been reconstructed and it's one of the tall ships that sails around the country and it's really quite beautiful. But in my childhood it was just sort of a piece of memorabilia that was off to the side as I stood on a bridge fishing with my cousin. And I can remember we caught something that I think it was called a gar fish and it was just amazing cause you know we were maybe oh, I don't know, nine or ten [years old] and had that freedom to fish off of the pier. And it had a very long, skinny snout and I can remember we carried it around in a bucket and showed all of our friends and our relatives until our parents made us throw it back. But that was one of my highlights was catching that garfish with my cousins. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37355 Speaker 1: Now where did you start school? Speaker 2: I started I think it was Burns Elementary School [Erie, Pennsylvania]. I know I transferred. I had moved around a little bit and I had--I--my very first school was when I lived on the lakefront on Second Street and I can remember my cousins walked me to school. We all walked together. Speaker 1: So would this be in 1962 or so? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hmm. And you know we'd walk around the corner to school and then I can remember having my older cousins make lunch. We all walked home for lunch and putting way too much pepper in it and you know giving me my first, early taste of good, spicy food. And then I went to another school when my mom [Louise Miller] and my stepfather [Milton Miller] got married or relocated. Let's see, I guess--yeah I, it's probably when they got married and I liked school. I had been an early reader, being an only child. And I wrote poetry and always appreciate the counselors and teachers that were kind to me and you know who I remember till this day for their help. Speaker 1: Now was your school an integrated school or--? Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: North, you know the north, small town in Pennsylvania all of the schools that I attended were integrated. In some later years I had that experience of being more of a minority in the schools that I attended. Speaker 1: Okay. Who were your favorite teachers in grade school? I mean, now you started at Burns? Did you go--what was the next one? Speaker 2: I don't know if it was Washington or not. I can't remember. But there was a counselor named Mr. Izzy. Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Izzy and-- Speaker 2: And--I-Z-Z-Y. Speaker 1: I-Z-Z-Y? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. And I can remember that he gave me a copy of 'The Pied Piper of Hamlin'. And you know I just thought it was a lyrical book and really enjoyed it and you know kept it for quite some time. And I was a Girl Scout and you know did all of those activities. And then when my little sisters [Nicole and Colette] came along when I was about eleven [years old] or so, I can remember my sister tore that book so I always remembered that. And my sister Nicole broke my record player. But I was so pleased and delighted to have you know siblings and being eleven you're old enough to be helpful and to be reliable and you know old enough to manage any jealousy. You know it was a perfect time. I wasn't so old that I was, that I didn't have time for siblings and it just was like the greatest gift of my childhood was to have my sister Nicole come into the world. And Colette was I thought a great companion for Nicole and then you know stole my heart as well so they were a big part of my growing up. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37356 Speaker 1: Now did you manifest as a young person all the varied interests you have as an adult; dancing, acting, all those different things? Speaker 2: I think I found my creative voice very early. I always had a strong imagination and one of the--a strong imagination, a strong sort of intuition. And, and part of my early childhood memories are--they--it worried them a little bit that I was both intuitive and you know always thinking out of the box. And I can remember someone telling my grandma [maternal; Rosa Anne Thomas], you should have that child sleep with the Bible under her bed cause she's just out there. And I think they actually for a while you know put a Bible under the mattress. I was just creative and you know a different thinker. And I also talked a lot. I spent time with grown-ups and I talked and talked and talked, talked and talked. And my mom [Louise Miller] would say I will give you a dollar if you can be quiet and I never could. And you know the same with my daughter [Eve Ewing] later on. But it's funny because then I grew up to make a living, particularly doing the you know non-scripted pledge drives where just talking is on the air and on live television is what you know helps pay the bills and what I enjoy. I always drew and had some relatives that took interest in me and, and again having those older cousins I often would take their school books. And so I had anatomy books and books to help me teach myself how to draw and teach me how to do poetry. And I would line up all of my dolls and perform and preach because you know the preacher is our first performer right, the preacher and the teacher. And so I would entertain myself that way and entertain my little cousins and my neighbors with shows and always loved to kind of design the production and be in charge and say, now this is what we're going to do whether or not others agreed with me. And I will say that one of my earliest performance play memories was with my cousins Pat and Alma Jean and we were The Supremes. And I was mad because I never got to be Diana Ross cause then some other cousin was in there too but I always had to be a back up singer and I wanted to be Diana Ross. And so then to grow up and to meet the young men from Human Nature who were--who Smokey Robinson [William Smokey Robinson, Jr.] is mentoring as they sing Motown songs and to do their "Stop in the Name of Love" and to get to do it myself was a lot of fun. Story_ID: 37357 Speaker 1: So now in middle school [in Erie, Pennsylvania] were there any special teachers or mentors? Speaker 2: Yeah. There was a Ms. O'Connor--and I got a few awards. I got some early recognition. I got honored for my writing, for an essay that I wrote. It's probably one of the first black history months but you know talking about what that meant. And I also was honored for a dance that I did at the Booker T. Washington Center. You know this was around the time when you had the Martin Luther King Center and the Booker T. Washington Center and when communities were you know bringing in those social service supports that really were so helpful and gave people a place to go and you know explore their culture. I was one of the, I guess maybe, one of the first two or three African American cheerleaders in my town and it set a pattern for being one of the firsts. But then I guess that's jumping to high school. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: But middle school, writing was important to me, drawing was important to me, painting. And my mom [Louise Miller] was supportive, always made sure that I had what I needed for my interests but I had a cousin Paulette who was more like an aunt to me. She and my mom were the same age and--P-A-U-L-E-T-T-E--and she always supported what I did and would say write a poem for me. And I loved Paulette but I do have to say one of my middle school memories and heartbreaks was when she got married because I had a huge crush on her husband. And I was so sad you know when she took him off the market. You know he was a good twenty-five years my senior. But I can remember thinking oh, I was going to grow--I was going to marry him when I grow up. And then it was also fun because the mayor came to their wedding, the mayor of our hometown. And there were always rumors about the mob in this little town in which politicians were you know affiliated with that. And I think that kind of growing up in that environment where there were shady characters all around probably prepared me for Chicago [Illinois] and my love of this town. Story_ID: 37358 Speaker 1: So now, high school, how big was the area in terms of were there--how many high schools were say in Erie [Pennsylvania] when you were coming up? Speaker 2: Like maybe four. There's Tech, East, something else, something else, maybe--about four public high schools and then a number of kids went to parochial school. Speaker 1: Something about a 100,000 people, 150 [150,000]? Speaker 2: Maybe. It's the third largest town in Pennsylvania and it, it's more, it's on the northwest of the state so it seems to have more in common in Cleveland or with Cleveland, Ohio and Buffalo, New York than it does like Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. Pittsburgh's the closest large town in the state. It's a sports crazy town. Speaker 1: For football. Speaker 2: You know football, from the Steelers [NFL; Pittsburgh] to the high school teams to local hockey teams. I mean it's you know sports crazy. And being a cheerleader you really got all the extra perks in that town, probably more than we deserved. And we would travel all around the states by bus and I can remember we went to Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania and other little towns like that where Joe Namath [Joseph William Joe Namath, former American football quarterback] had played football. But I guess my favorite part of high school was going to a school where--well actually there was a riot in my junior high school. We lived in a neighborhood which if you look at the boundaries of where we lived, in order to further integration we were--I was bused to a school that was more of an inner city school from sort of a subdivision area, and it was great for me. It was probably the first school where I was around, as a teenager, where I was around more African American kids than ever and I really loved it. But there were some racial tensions and I can remember there was a riot one day and you know it was up for grabs in the school. And-- Speaker 1: What was the name of your middle school? Speaker 2: I think and this was like eighth grade. I think it was Wayne. Speaker 1: Wayne? Speaker 2: I think it was Wayne and I know it was on the east side of town and I was bused there with a bus full of white kids. But after this big you know kind of riot where everything was chaotic, I remember I climbed out the window and walked home with another kid cause the buses didn't come and--or whatever, so that was one of my interesting moments. And my mom [Louise Miller] said this is you know just crazy. You--I don't want you going to school with like disturbances and so she really made it a point to find the high school that she thought would be best for me and she found Technical Memorial High School. Story_ID: 37359 Speaker 1: And I, I'm not sure if you had to test in [to attend Technical Memorial High School, Erie, Pennsylvania] but it was interesting because it was a period when they were doing an educational experiment and they wanted to give a vocational training to as many kids as possible. So I went to school Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday and then another set of kids went to school Thursday, Friday and Saturday. And in many ways it was almost like a precursor to a charter school in that they were trying to do something innovative, they had flexibility around curriculum and they had flexibility around the school year. And my area of focus was at that time called commercial art and I was in heaven because for the you know, the next few years, I had--I was immersed in all facets of graphic art, design. We did silk screening, we would do a semester on photography, we would do a semester on package design and marketing, fine art, drawing from models and that was one of my most influential teachers, a man named Nelson Ahlgren--no Roy Ahlgren [Roy B. Ahlgren]. Nelson Ahlgren is the author. Speaker 2: Yeah, right I was going to say that, that's pretty big. Speaker 1: Yeah, I have a--I was just looking at a book about him. But Roy Ahlgren, A-L-G-H-R-E-N I think, and he was a graphic artist. This was at the time where they would have the, all the little squares and circles and it was kind of mod-art, you know very, very precision oriented. And his love of art and his ability to kind of introduce us to that world was great. And so I had the chance to learn, I had the chance to be with my peers and see what their interests were. And then he would take us to galleries and gallery openings and you know we might have to work the cloak room or you know have a chance to talk with famous artists. And one of the fame--the, the big artist that he was influenced by was Frank Stella. But I actually loved that. I found though by the end of my education there that my best strengths were in setting up the show and marketing the show and organizing and curating. So I think even then I started to see more of the producer or curator side of my talents coming to fore, although I still do water color and oils and acrylics till this day. Speaker 2: Okay. You were more--okay but you were drawn to the production aspect of it? Speaker 1: I was the prod--and the production aspect and the show, the show aspects of it, you know. That I'd have a pretty good piece in the show but I would do a great job of selling the tickets, finding the space, organizing it, marketing it. I also, during those years was influenced by the Dance Theater of Harlem and you know learning about Alvin Ailey and really just being blown away by the work that was being done you know in modern dance by African American performers. And I had my first introduction to African dance and African drumming and you know that was a big influence for me. And one of the reasons that I wanted to move to Chicago [Illinois] was because of the burgeoning modern dance scene here. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Story_ID: 37360 Speaker 1: All right, so how were your grades in high school [Technical Memorial High School, Erie, Pennsylvania]? What were you--? Speaker 2: I got good grades. I was probably on the you know, the straight As and up until the latter part of high school, I had one weak area and it remains weak till this day and that was math. But I can count money, but--and you know definitely do sort of business related math. But the early grounding that should have been reinforced in high school wasn't and I was given a pass. I had just before graduation you know when they kind of check your grades, say okay wait, you can't graduate unless you have X, Y, Z. I had been deficient in you know a couple of semesters in math and I was given the opportunity to make that up. And so I went to a special class which was full of athletes. You know I was a cheerleader and all the guys on the team and you know other folks that had some sort of mentor, we were in that class, we didn't study, we learned nothing and you know--but it was a class that we went to in order to pass. And when I look at that it was an example of a little bit of clout and a little bit of probably what happens far too often with athletes. I was just piggybacked in there as a cheerleader. But I really wish that I had learned more instead of you know sitting there writing notes to my girlfriends and fooling around with the athletes. And I also--one last fun thing about my high school experience was I discovered gymnastics and was again probably one of the first African Americans to seriously compete on the high school level in that sport. And my main area of expertise was the balance beam, but I could also compete all around. And you know that was really fun too. Gymnastics was an interesting sport because you're both part of a team and a group, but you also are really held accountable for your individual performance so I really valued those years a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37361 Speaker 1: So did you have good counseling [while at Technical Memorial High School, Erie, Pennsylvania] about college? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or did you expect to go? Speaker 2: I--you know what, it was an interesting time. I actually--I went to a school where if you didn't go to college you were theoretically prepared to enter the work force. So I could--I was supposed to be prepared to get a job in art and I actually did use my silk screening skills you know for a short while when I lived in Florida after high school. But you know I also came from a time when if you didn't have a full scholarship and you were counting on your parents to pay, you know there are many fathers that were thinking, I've got money for your wedding, I don't necessarily have money for college. And I didn't have I think a lot of support for higher education which is why it's so valuable to me now. And this is no criticism of my family. I think it's just what people knew. You know you work hard, you get a job and at--in that day in age, there were so many jobs that you know people just thought you, especially for young women, you didn't need to do that. And you know but I would have liked to have continued my education in art and that was definitely seen as being more of a frivolous pursuit. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is--you're a senior in 1975? Speaker 2: I graduated in '75 [1975], um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, but you said your counseling wasn't very good. They--were you in a college prep track or--? Speaker 2: I was in a vocational track. I mean it was Technical Memorial Vocational High School. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And so that you know 9, 10, 11, 12 are--10, 11, 12, right now I can't remember which it was, but that was--that certificate was supposed to you know be your ticket. And some people had trained in cosmetology; others had trained in auto repair. So perhaps I had a more esoteric you know field of interest. But you know I was--I graduated with a focus in commercial art. Speaker 1: All right. So you said you were--was there anything special about graduation itself that you remember? Speaker 2: I can--well one of the fun things about graduation, I can remember starting to have my fashion independence because my mom [Louise Miller] had always been a forward thinker when it came to fashion. And you know I was that kid in the latest go-go boots and I can remember wearing a designer skirt and having some kids say that's like a potato sack because it was cut on the bias, but you know I knew it was very fashionable. And so one of the things I remember about graduation was a lot of the girls had you know very frilly, very you know party type dresses underneath their cap and gown and I had this super cool, very high fashion Army green pinafore type thing which was cut in a very feminine way but the fabric and the color was very unusual. It was like an Army green and I just thought I was like you know the height of the high fashion and I enjoyed my fashion statement and it was good. It was a school that was good for me. I had been you know nominated for prom queen and things like that and so it was a good school, good memories. Story_ID: 37362 Speaker 1: Okay, before we get you out of high school [Technical Memorial High School, Erie, Pennsylvania]-- Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --during your youth, who inspired you in the media, TV, radio, newspaper. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Did you--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did the model UN, and I was really inspired by the news and information that I got from places like the BBC. You know they were the only people on a reliable scale who were talking about Africa and challenges in the world that I wanted to learn more about. And then you know I loved 'Ebony' and Mr. Johnson and what I knew about 'The Defender'. And you know all of that was influential for me. But I particularly liked television and you know the news readers of the day, the Walter Cronkites and you know I can remember--I can't remember exactly when Carole Simpson came on the scene you know but folks like that were inspirational to me. And I always wanted to be in everybody's business. My friends and family know, don't tell me a secret because it's very hard for me to keep it. I want to know all the secrets and I want to tell them all. So that was kind of my interest. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now did your--were there a lot of magazine subscriptions in your household and--? Speaker 2: Yep, you know the usual 'Ebony', 'Jet'. I have to say I think my mom [Louise Miller] liked 'True Romance' and all of the, you know 'McCall's', 'Good Housekeeping', 'Life', 'Look'. And the--probably like everybody else in that period, the pictorials in 'Life' and 'Look' you know really did paint an interesting story and just that I was more on the--I was young for the Civil Rights Movement but those images were really key. And this is out of your sequence but I do have to remember one of my earliest--I think the things that fascinated me first were television. We got two channels. I think there might have been three but our TV only got two of them. And I can remember when JFK [former president John F. Kennedy] died, how upset my grandma [maternal; Rosa Anne Thomas] was. And I really didn't understand it but I can remember kind of wanting to make myself cry in sympathy because she was so sad about that and just seeing the black and white TV images. Speaker 1: Yeah, so you were about five [years old], I guess. Speaker 2: I was. I was and I didn't get that at all. But I just, I can remember you know how she felt and it might even have been the funeral on TV and that warped my whole view of what funerals were too cause then I thought everybody had like you know a wheeled carriage and a horse and--that and Imitation of Life cause they had that kind of funeral in that too. So I had some growing up to do about that. Story_ID: 37363 Speaker 1: Now what about--do you remember the assassination of Dr. King [Martin Luther King, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --how that was covered? Speaker 2: I do remember how that was covered and you know how things were covered always fascinated me because I actually remember the delivery that JFK [former president John F. Kennedy] had. He was one of the first people that I saw and there was something about me even as a young person that could see how he read and looked up and how he addressed the camera and perhaps just his charisma. And so that was world rocking that you had you know, Dr. King, you had Bobby Kennedy, that you had you know all of this upheaval and change. And I felt you know isolated from many of the more immediate things like the riots and you know there's people showing how disgruntled and disheartened that they were. But the ripples that impacted everybody who thought that a light had gone out in the world. And I also had--came from that kind of home where you had Dr. King's picture on the wall so he was very much a guiding influence so much so that I was even more amazing and kind of drawn to Malcolm [X] when I learned about him because Malcolm wasn't in my sort of sphere of influence in the little church, Shiloh Baptist Church that my grandma [maternal; Rosa Anne Thomas] helped to build. Speaker 1: Okay. When did you find out about Malcolm X? Were you still in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, high school and really didn't look into the nuances of his life until another major media event and that was Spike Lee's pivotal work. You know I think that that gave me a picture of the man that--and the context about his life that had been missing before that. And, and that also is you know inspirational story telling for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37364 Speaker 1: So immediately after graduating from high school, Technical Memorial Vocational High School in Erie [Pennsylvania], you got a position in commercial art? Speaker 2: I did. And, but I would also say that I just kind of messed around. I think that not going to college removed a certain level of structure in my life, but it also allowed me to be creative and free flowing. So I gravitated to Florida where the man who I thought was my father [Paul Ponder] lived and that was kind of my first experience in Miami [Florida] with a bigger city and you know being in another world. And I was able to get a job silk screening the backs of pinball machines, you know for a period of time. And I also experienced a different type of racism and in that world, white people were nice to you as long as you weren't Cuban. And Cubans were nice to you as long as you didn't like [Fidel] Castro. So it was a different, you know political lens and I've always liked seeing you know the world from--to try and understand what it's like to walk in somebody else's shoes. But it was a new form of racism for me where there were so many levels and nuances. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Now, so you were in Cuba for--I mean not-- Speaker 2: Oh, didn't go-- Speaker 1: --not in Cuba, but in Florida for-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). No. [Laughter]. Speaker 1: You were in Florida for two years? That, is that--? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know--um, probably more like a year and a half. Came back from there--may--it's probably more like a year because I was there right after high school, a little bit against my mom's [Louise Miller] wishes but you know I wanted to explore. I had gone there to visit my guy I thought was dad and then went back and kind of hung out and just you know hung out and experienced a city that was so segregated, so much poverty. And, because it was warm and easy you know it--I felt like people accepted things that they wouldn't accept in the north cause you're cold and mad, you know. So--but when I came back to Pennsylvania, I tried living with my parents [Louise Miller and stepfather Milton Miller], but you know once you've been out of the house that's really hard. And remember there was such an age difference between my sisters and myself that my mom was you know very actively raising you know two younger daughters [Nicole and Colette Miller]. But that was the period of time when I was doing a lot of self analysis and spiritual exploration. It's probably the first time that I discovered eastern philosophy and TM [transcendental meditation] and yoga and things like that which helped me because I had a job in a laundry. You know I did art and studied dance but you know what brought money in was a super hard job putting aprons in this giant machine. And I got very fast at it and I was able to hone my early meditation skills because I could just kind of zone out with this tough job. Story_ID: 37365 Speaker 1: Now what drew you to an alternative spirituality or a quest for a different expression of spirituality? Speaker 2: I think what drew me to a different look at spirituality was questions. There is something about the explanation of typical Christianity that just didn't jive with me. I'm so grateful that I had a Baptist upbringing and I'm so grateful for the cultural experience that that gave me, as well as just you know a sense of caring about you know religion. But when I--what I learned about a philosophy that said that you can create your world by the way you live your life and by the thoughts and actions that you manifest, that seemed to make more sense to me than you know be good so you don't go to hell which was a shorthand and probably ignorant you know perception of other ways of thinking. And that sense where mind, body and spirit connect was important to me and I could see that the same feeling of fullness that you might get from hearing a great song and a great minister who really touches your heart could also be reached with deep reflection and you know a beautiful sunset as cliche as that sounds. And I liked the early exploration. Everything that I learned spoke to me. You know four people can read a book and it's time for one to understand that book. And so it just answered a lot of questions. And there was--my cousins--my cousin and I dated brothers and this one, I can't remember the brother's name but the guy that I dated was Norman, Norman Cason from Erie, Pennsylvania. His older brother--oh, Donnie was the first one to give me a book on yoga and I was like wow, this stuff really is interesting. This stuff really makes sense. And so now in the maturity of life, I understand that there are many paths to the top of the mountain. The only thing that's different is what we see on the way up but that you know Jesus and Buddha and you know Mohammed and everyone had something to say and in my personal view it's really all true. It's just, I think of it as electricity and the Christians may put in a yellow light bulb and then you know, the Hindus may put in a red light bulb but they all run on the same electricity so that's my sense of the world. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37366 Speaker 1: So now, what drew you to Chicago [Illinois] now? Speaker 2: I just love Chicago. I was drawn to Chicago originally because my friend--and I had lived in Florida, let's see I had you know spent a short time in California so I had a little bit of experience and always went back to Pennsylvania. But Chicago was the first place when I came to visit, it really--just something about it felt like home to me. And it was maybe '77 [1977] or six [1976] or something like that, maybe '77 [1977], cause I'd been in Florida and California in pretty short succession after graduation. And I came first to visit with my friend, they were sisters, Peaches and Cookie and one of them had been a model and you know, but was raising her kids or had been a runway model so she was the local girl that made big and was living in Chicago on the north side. And her sister was a good friend of mine and invited me to take the train to Chicago to visit her sister and hang out and shop and I was just blown away. And then I came back, I--maybe in '78 [1978], I decided to move to Chicago cause I had a friend here. The kind of, the dance opportunities that you might get a workshop once a year in Erie [Pennsylvania] when one of the black theater companies came--or dance companies came through, you had people doing everyday in Chicago. You had Randy Duncan and you had you know just a number of other African American dancers that were living the life that I wanted to live. Story_ID: 37367 Speaker 1: Now did you know Joel Hall and-- Speaker 2: Joel Hall, yeah Joel Hall. And in fact-- Speaker 1: Joseph Holmes and-- Speaker 2: Joseph Holmes, Joel Hall. And I'm trying to think, Joel Hall was the more famous but I took classes [in Chicago, Illinois; dance] with one of his folks and--but I think it was Joseph Holmes' studio that I actually--even though I had heard of Joel and that was the name that drew me, you know I never studied with his folks. So I took classes there. I took classes with the, what was then called the Chicago Moving Company. You know I stayed with my girlfriend for a while and then got my own place. I lived in the, what was then called the Sheffield area and then it became the DePaul area, now it's called Lincoln Park. But one of the first things that I remembered was Chicago was such a big urban metropolis with all of the benefits that that has to offer. But the fact that you can be in your little neighborhood and know your dry cleaner and your, you know grocer and your community, it just felt accessible. You had the best of both worlds. I was fascinated by the fact that there were alleys and people could walk along the alleys and you know young people back in the day, that artistic life, you could find a perfectly good bookcase and take it back to your apartment and then put out the coffee table that you didn't want and someone would take that. And it's a little silly thing but it always had that sense of communal life. And I also knew that the deep prejudice and segregation that could also impact Chicago and I could remember standing on a train and watching--or standing on an elevated train platform and seeing you know most of the African Americans go in one direction, most of the white folks go in another direction. But like many newcomers, I gravitated towards the north side and I think that like minded progressive folks just seemed to find each other. And it's here where my political interests, my creative interests, all of them you know bore fruit. And one of the first things that I did in Chicago, I--my first real job was at a management consulting company as a receptionist and it's so way back I probably didn't even put it in my notes but it was called Amherst Associates, founded by a former academic. And I worked my way up at that job but I tried to take some of the things that I learned about the professional and business world because they were doing management consulting and you know it was going into the go-go 80s [1980s] when you know all of that stuff was--the Wall Street type stuff, mergers and acquisitions were happening. I knew that wasn't my interest but I liked taking what I learned and bringing it into my creative work. Story_ID: 37368 Speaker 1: And that's when I did City Life Magazine and the Chicago Fashion Associates and spent a lot of time in Englewood at 63rd and Halsted [location; Chicago, Illinois] where we had our offices. And every week we-- Speaker 2: Now how did you make that connection from living on the north side to going all the way into Englewood? Speaker 1: And I still lived on the north side. Speaker 2: Sixty-- Speaker 1: 63rd and Halsted. Speaker 2: --Third and Halsted, yeah. Speaker 1: And I would--catching the train from the north side and seeing from the elevated, seeing from the Red Line that, you know the changes in the housing and you know the way people had resources or lacks there--or a lack thereof was an eye opener about the city and just you know the many layers of the onion of Chicago. And I had--I knew a photographer who knew--cause I actually did some photographic modeling which you know carried over and worked for a photographer, Carl Fox in my early days in Chicago. And so, but the photographer knew of someone who was starting a magazine who really wanted to make something hip and cool, and also something that would build bridges between the creative community in Chicago and that would have a real strong fashion sense. And that drew me in immediately on a variety of levels both from you know someone who had always written, someone who loved fashion and as someone who wanted to build bridges between people while still really appreciating and honoring my culture. So that's when I first met a man named Howard Shenault, S-H-E-N-A-U-L-T. And Howard was such a character and such an introduction to Chicago and we were polar opposites. I was a little bit of a black princess from Pennsylvania and Howard was a former Black Panther. And what we shared was a desire to take young people in hand and just show them a bigger world. We taught them to model. We taught them runway modeling. There was a core group--there was a woman named Julie Haggerty who was our partner as well, but I'm--the modeling and all of that grew out of the magazine. The first introduction to Howard was to become chief of staff of his magazine. And we had our first issue--I think I covered the boycott of Chicago Fest at Navy Pier and that was one of you know the stories that I covered. Story_ID: 37369 Speaker 1: Now what was that about? Let's--we just can't drop it. We have to tell what it was about so-- Speaker 2: Oh. This was when people were protesting spending all of the dollars on these festivals downtown and also not having as many you know contractors and others from communities of color of the--from the black community have access to those resources. And I think Reverend [Jesse] Jackson initiated the boycott and you know it was fascinating for me because one of my draws, one of the things that drew me to Chicago [Illinois] was all of these events where we'd all get together in Grant Park. And I saw Alberta Hunter, Albertina Walker and Alberta Hunter, the blues singer, just all these people for free in the park with thousands of others, and I loved that. But I also understood that you know that the way that the Taste of Chicago or Chicago Fest was done did close the door you know to vendors that weren't connected and things like that. Or at least that's what I saw from my far remove. So I covered that but quite frankly, we were a fashion magazine. We were a lifestyle magazine. We were subliminally subversive with our message and we weren't that good. The things that I know now about just proofing and editing and a good quality product, we had far more enthusiasm and energy than we had skill in really getting the job done. But we found that the parties that we threw to both fundraise for the magazine and to kick it off and--where we brought in some of the designers that we featured in the pages and had fashion shows with them and that we took some of the kids from the, I think it was Robert Taylor Homes around Halsted, you know 63rd and Halsted and around Englewood, where we took the kids from the CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] who had tremendous skill and tremendous interest and taught them the discipline of runway modeling, that was our success. So we backed into from City Life Magazine something that we called Chicago Fashion Associates. And in our heyday, we were featured in 'The Defender'. Warner Saunders covered us on Channel 5. A couple of the kids that modeled for us were twins and they got a contract with one of the gum companies to do an ad campaign. Speaker 1: Doublemint. Speaker 2: I think it was Doublemint. Speaker 1: Wrigley, yeah? Speaker 2: We had some folks go on to one of the height of success of the day which was the Ebony Fashion Fair, so it was really fun and exciting. But we used modeling and fashion as a way to give young people something to do every Saturday and something that would expand their horizons above you know quite often the poverty and you know violence that they encountered in their daily life and in their home community and it was really a fun time. I have to say though that we later had a bit of a split because I found that my interest in working with youth and giving voice to young people was really blossoming and that to me that was really the focus. And that the modeling and the fashion was just a hook to get them in and encourage them to go to college and encourage them to you know have high aspirations and high standards for themselves. And for my partner, he wanted to make some money you know cause it was--we were in his office or in an office above his family's furniture store. And so we kind of split when he started a modeling school and then our paths really diverged. He later went on to an entirely different type of business. Speaker 1: This is Howard Shenault? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know I don't know if I should say it, he had an escort company. I mean he went all the way into a different direction. So he went into a different direction and I kind of went into a different direction of more service and wanting to give voice to young people. Story_ID: 37370 Speaker 1: But you know from that work [at City Life Magazine and the Chicago Fashion Associates; Chicago, Illinois]--and I did it concurrently with my, you know my first real job in an office. I got married and started more of a freelance vein and really used a lot of what I learned in the anti-Apartheid movement. So I worked for the Mozambique Support Network. My first job I guess in that area was I did a conference for Namibia which was then called Southwest Africa and we were housed at Clergy and Laity Concerned, I'll never forget that. And I got to meet people like Alice Palmer [Alice J. Palmer, politician] and Buzz Palmer [Edward L. Buzz Palmer, globalist, civic activist and organizer] and Bob Starks and Conrad Warell and all the people in that movement and I was new to the movement but had the kind of organizing skills and interests and the, even the interest in marketing and branding to help move our agendas forward. Speaker 2: Okay. Now were you involved in taking any classes at the Center for Inner City Studies or Chicago (unclear)? Speaker 1: I actually--I didn't take classes there but we met there. You know I worked more peer to peer with Bob and that was kind of our, you know our home. And so Bob was over the Free South Africa Movement. I worked with Prexy Nesbitt [Rozell Prexy Nesbitt, advisor and consulate on Africa and South Africa] and CCISSA [Chicago Committee in Solidarity with Southern Africa] and CIDSA [Coalition for Illinois' Divestment from South Africa], the Committee in Solidarity with Southern Africa and-- Speaker 2: Basil (ph.) Speaker 1: And Basil Clooney. And one of my favorite or I guess one of the things I'm most proud of is something that we did in around, really jumping, but around '88 [1988], we did a music video dance party for people in Central America and Southern Africa and it was the beginning of my starting to tie my interests in media and story telling, video and just managing your message. Prexy and those guys introduced me to the ANC [African National Congress] and that was one of my first lessons. And it doesn't--you might be on the right side of an issue but if you don't tell your story, it doesn't matter. Story_ID: 37371 Speaker 1: Okay. So we were talking about the Mozambique Support Network and the activist, Prexy Nesbitt, Basil Clooney, Bob Starks, all these people you're working with-- Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: It was really eye opening for me and it was also the beginning of involving my family in my work. My daughter [Eve Ewing] used to come to work with me and people said that was a little bit dangerous because in those days we got a lot of threats and things from the South African folks and it was just an interesting time. But my daughter would get on her play phone and she'd say hello, Mozambique, so she said that very early. And she would be in her buggy and at the protests at the consulate and I would walk with my friend Carole Thompson and her baby and me with my daughter-- Speaker 1: Now we--now this has come up all of a sudden. We--I didn't know you had a daughter here at this point. So what happened, could you explain what happens there? Speaker 2: Oh. So-- Speaker 1: This is 1980--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I-- Speaker 1: '80 [1980] or so. Speaker 2: So after Chicago Fashion Associates and the Amherst stuff, I did say I got married and those were sort of my childrearing years and I did freelance work for Prexy and others and I brought my kids. And so my first child, Eve, I was still-- Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: --she was born in--Eve Ewing, E-V-E E-W-I-N-G, Eve Louise, named after my mother and Eve was breastfed in Reverend Jesse Jackson's [Jesse Louis Jackson, Sr., civil rights activist and Baptist preacher] bathroom because I was doing a fundraiser for the African National Congress [ANC] with some people in Pilsen [neighborhood in Chicago, Illinois] of all places and they said we want to support this cause and we want to raise money for the ANC. And one of their representatives came to town and you know back in that day whenever someone came to town they also still went to Operation Push. And Reverend Jackson had invited him down to speak to the Saturday gathering and since he was staying with me, I went with him and since I was nursing, I took my daughter. So it was a--you know her first touch of history and my first behind the scenes look at that part of the movement because the Reverend announced a boycott of Revlon and invited me to be on the radio with him the next day talking about that. And so my daughter was born and was with me during that period. The event that I talked about, the music video, Dance Party was when I first learned that I was pregnant with my son [Matthew Ewing]. Story_ID: 37372 Speaker 1: I was married to Dean Ewing who was from upstate New York who I met when we were both heading back home on travel to see our families. He was an artist and he did the artwork for Council Wars, which was you know the political issue of the day and did a lot of drawings and paintings of Harold in, in his career. Speaker 2: Okay did he--the Council Wars play that Aaron-- Speaker 1: That Aaron Freeman did. Speaker 2: --Freeman (unclear). Speaker 1: And so Aaron did the acting and the, you know the--created it and then he worked with my then husband to do--who did the drawings. So he drew Harold Skytalker and Jesse Jack Solo and all of those characters that were a parody of Star Wars so Council Wars was a parody. Speaker 2: Okay. So that--I know that was produced in what '83 [1983], '82 [1982], '83 [1983]? In '83 [1983], '83 [1983], it had to be in '83 [1983] cause he was elected in '83 [1983], Harold [Washington] was. And so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, but there was the--I don't know did that come after-- Speaker 2: And the Council Wars-- Speaker 1: --the special election or the--that came the--cause Harold was elected-- Speaker 2: In '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So I'm taking us back, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah, February '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: --you asked about my husband. Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was--so you--so did you meet him before the Harold Washington [Harold Lee Washington, first African American mayor (51st) of Chicago] campaign? Speaker 1: Our first date was to a Harold Washington fundraiser. Speaker 2: Okay, good, all right. Speaker 1: So yeah. Speaker 2: So this is '82 [1982] then? Speaker 1: Um-hmm, our first date was to a Harold Washington fundraiser. Our first child [Eve Ewing] was born in 1986-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and when he--he did a poster--and this shows how Mayor Daley or Mayor Washington changed things. Under Mayor Washington, the neighborhood festivals became neighborhood festivals. Some of the same resources and money that was spent like downtown-- Speaker 2: On Chicago Fest you mean. Speaker 1: --you know was spread around to the neighborhoods and for the first time people knew somebody in City Hall and could you know feel like they had a stake in things and a place at the table. And so I was pregnant with my daughter when--and we had minimal insurance and you know we're struggling artists and he did a, the city poster for the city festivals at that time. And so Harold was our first date and then that job under Harold's administration helped to pay for the delivery of our daughter. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Now okay there--I had a glitch in my outline here thinking that the committee, that the Mozambique Support Network started in 1980 but it was really in the early '80s [1980s] not really, not necessarily 1980. Speaker 1: Although, I don't know. Story_ID: 37373 Speaker 1: So your daughter [Eve Ewing] was born in '86 [1986]. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was born in '86 [1986] and she was, it was later because she was definitely like a year--when she was six months I worked for Prexy [Nesbitt] and I did the Namibia event for--and it was really under the auspices of the United Nations. The very first project that I did was the ANC [African National Congress] project that drew me into the circle more broadly and then I was invited to do the conference on Namibia. We did it at the Lutheran School of Theology and it was my first experience in organizing an event where the South Africans would--the government forces would beat up your keynote speaker and make them miss their plane, you know we had those issues. And that's when I first learned about the labor union women and Harold Rogers and people like that and the work that was being done internationally against apartheid and that was the beginning of that work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I kind of did that freelance you know while my children were young and then I went to work for Access Living with people--working with people with disabilities and that's probably not even in your outline cause I have too many jobs. Story_ID: 37374 Speaker 1: Now let me just back up a little bit. The '83 [1983], period is a really busy time in Chicago [Illinois] history for a lot of the things that would concern you cause this is--'83 [1983] is when Oprah Winfrey comes to town so did you take notice in how-- Speaker 2: I took notice of Oprah-- Speaker 1: What kind of notes did--? Speaker 2: --so I remember seeing Oprah walking down Madison Avenue and you know it was just that casual. And I remember when she first had her first show, 'Good Morning Chicago' around that time because of the work I did with Chicago Fashion Associates. In promoting that work I had done a few appearances myself as a guest, talking about our work on television. And when we did our fashion shows, our big claim to fame was we shared the same make-up artist that Oprah had because back in the day she just went to Carson Pirie Scott where a guy named Roosevelt who was like the you know black make-up artist worked. And so I would laugh as her career you know grew. I'd say Roosevelt does my lips to. I can see how he did her lips cause he does my lips the same way. So you know we kind of shared that. I also went on Oprah as a guest and was really--as an audience member and was really nervous to talk about a crazy trip to Mexico but I don't want to go to all those--there's a whole other side bar. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But Oprah was there, it was an interesting time. I also did and I have pictures of--by this time Chicago Fashion Associates had been around a while. We worked with a designer named Carnie Wiggins, Sterling Capriccio, a number of others and we were invited to have a fashion show, three or four in Daley Plaza. So they would invite us to bring our troop down and they would put out a runway and that was one of the joys for me of Chicago to be like right in the heart of the Loop and to commentate while our kids you know did their thing by the Picasso [sculpture by Pablo Picasso in Daley Plaza, Chicago]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37375 Speaker 1: So the Harold Washington campaign [mayoral; Chicago, Illinois] '82 [1982]/'83 [1983] is a big deal, Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] in town and then I have a note here that 'Chicago Tonight' actually started in 1984 on WTTW. Speaker 2: It did. It did and it started because it you know kind of came out of Harold's historic election and Council Wars and I didn't know it at the time but one of my great mentors you know John Callaway, really blossomed you know during that era. And you know I was an at-home viewer and at one point I started--because I was a young mother I watched the pledge drives and I had had experience with public speaking, commentating our fashion shows you know representing at conferences, things like that. I thought, hey I could do that. That looks like a fun job and it's for something that I believe in. And so I auditioned to be one of the pledge talent at Channel 11 and that was really my entry into public broadcasting. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when was that? When did you audition? Speaker 2: I think early '90s [1990s]? I was at-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's early '90s [1990s], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, cause I was at WVON. I had a-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well let's back up a little bit now. Speaker 2: Okay. [Laughter]. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. 1991 it says here you started at WVON, is that it? Speaker 2: That's right. That's right. So-- Speaker 1: In those days it was--Bob Starks is on (unclear). Speaker 2: Bob was there, Conrad was there, Lou Palmer was there. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Mr. South-- Speaker 1: Wesley South [Wesley W. South, journalist and radio owner/broadcaster]? Speaker 2: Wesley South and Mr. Spann were partners, Pervis Spann ["The Blues Man", Chicago based radio owner/broadcaster] were partners. And that came out in some ways of my anti-apartheid work because one of the biggest mentors in my life was a guy named Danny Schechter ["The News Dissector", television producer, independent filmmaker, media critic], who I met during the Namibia work. And Danny is like Forrest Gump. He pops up at every point in history. His nickname is Danny X because Malcolm [X] gave him that nickname. Abby Hoffman told him to come to Chicago [Illinois] you know during the trials that he was going through for the '68 [1968] convention. He was a civil rights worker out of Boston [Massachusetts] who took the media by storm and was there at the beginning of CNN, Geraldo's [Gerald Michael Rivera, American attorney, journalist, reporter, author and talk show host] early career, etc. And he had an independent production company. He left 20/20 [ABC television prime time news program], he went to South Africa with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson and he put him on 20/20 for that trip, and he left to start his own production company. And when he did, he asked me to do some liaison work here in the Midwest so I worked for a show called 'South Africa Now' which was seen in about seventy countries and was aired on PBS [Public Broadcast Service]. And I would go on WVON with Drake Collier who had an interest in international affairs to tell him what was going on or what was coming up on the show. So it was a little segment to forward promote our show about South Africa. This was when Nelson Mandela [Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela, former president of South Africa] was still in prison and that led to-- Speaker 1: This is like--was Stan West the morning man? Speaker 2: Stan West was the morning, was the--"Stan the Man." Speaker 1: Yeah, "Stan the Man," right. Story_ID: 37376 Speaker 1: And that was my introduction to WVON [radio station; Chicago, Illinois], and so I really came in with an internationalist you know interest and with Stan [West] who was you know quite global in his perspective. And we got in trouble all of the time. Mr. South said, Sylvia, nobody wants to hear poetry and to talk about South Africa which were my interests. And it was such a learning experience. Some of the best media training in the world was to be at WVON where if people didn't like you, they would tell you. And my first show I got a death threat because I had a gay black man who was a lawyer who was talking about Marlon Riggs [Marlon Troy Riggs, African American filmmaker, educator, poet, gay rights activist] who was a you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --black artist. And Marlon had a documentary called 'Tongues Untied' which stirred up all kinds of trouble with the NEA or the National Endowment for the Arts and others. And Robert Schultz, III, who was the brother who was an attorney, he posited that if you were kind of laughing and joking and shucking and jiving, it was okay to be gay, to be sort of clownish. But if you were just like you know a lawyer or something that--the community didn't want to hear that and there was a double standard in the black community about how we dealt with folks and how we dealt with people in church on the down low and just all of these issues. I thought it was a fascinating topic and so it was one of the things that I talked about on one of my first shows. Well at WVON, you have, you know people have to know you. You have to earn your stripes and to come in with like a totally out of the pocket, left field topic, I got callers that said God made and Adam and Eve not Adam and Steve. And what they told my engineer, Art, and I'll never forget this, they told Art, you better get that Sylvia Ewing off the air or I'm going to come down there with my shotgun and Art said, well you just bring it cause we're waiting. And I'm like, no don't say that part. We're not waiting. But then I saw an evolution in the audience and in the willingness to talk. You know a conversation is important, dialogue is important. And by the end of my regular hosting at WVON, you know I had callers that would call up and say well you know Sylvia, my cousin is like that or you know the things that we wanted to talk about, there was an audience for and there is an audience for and I think that you know that's been proven by the longevity of the station and by its ability to stay relevant but yeah, great training ground, bumpy time. And I think Stan and Bob and I all kind of left at the same time and one of my first bits of press that was a challenge--cause I had been in Kupp (ph.) and things and that was kind of fun. But my little taste of what it means to be on the wrong side of the media was when Bob Feder (ph.) announced that--can't remember if it was me and Stan or Bob and I that got fired at the same time, but I hadn't got fired, I quit. I saw the handwriting on the wall. I'm like, well I'm quitting. But you know tech--I had really left on my own volition, probably a little before I would have been asked to leave and I called him and said you're--you know what, you made a mistake and he retracted it and he said oh actually Sylvia was not fired. But it was a fun growth. Speaker 2: Well what happened? I mean did it--was it when Pervis Spann took over from Wesley South that you all were in trouble or--? Speaker 1: It was in the Pervis--it was in the wars between-- Speaker 2: Pervis Spann and Wesley South. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They struggled for control over it. Speaker 1: Well as they struggled for control, our--people kind of wanted to go back to the old roots and our talking about apartheid and feminist issues, like I had a woman on who did a poem called Panties on Fire. It was about--the poem, the name wasn't great but it was about serious issues. I think it was about Anita Hill and Clarence Thomas and you know--and so the poetry and the South Africa is what personally got me in trouble with Mr. South and you know Stan or Bob, I think it was the same thing. We really--we wanted to have the issues of the day on the table and we thought rightfully that the audience was intelligent enough and had interests that were broad enough to embrace what we had to say. And I think that's been born out by you know the line up, the national line up that you have on now, it talks about everything. But yeah we got in trouble back in the day. Speaker 2: Okay. This is WVON, for those who are not from Chicago, the black radio station, the original black radio station. Speaker 1: 'Voice of the Negro' was the first call line and then 'Voice of the Nation', and they did music but if, it was like 'The Defender', the role of 'The Defender' in telling the country's story. And so, but being on WVON was--give--gave me my confidence and you know proving ground for being able to do live, fast paced media. And I auditioned to be on a pledge talent at Channel 11. A woman named Chris Taylor ran it back in the day and it was tough. It was a small group. Drake was the only African American male, although I don't know if Richard Steele [born Richard Slaughter] was on there yet or not. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure myself. I think-- Speaker 1: I think Richard came after Drake. Speaker 2: I think Aaron Freeman had a presence on TTW too at some point. Speaker 1: He did with the 'Wild Chicago', I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, the late night show on Sundays. Speaker 1: Yeah, but it start--and he had 'Talking with Aaron Freeman' on Channel 50 and I actually was one of his first producers. Story_ID: 37377 Speaker 1: But the quick chronology cause this is a hard time line, VON to Channel 11 [radio stations; Chicago, Illinois], Channel 11 first as a pledge drive proved myself you know back in the day when you often didn't see two black folks on at the same time by the way. That just, it's like a black and an Asian, you know it was done differently. And then Laura-- Speaker 2: Now did--oh, go ahead. Speaker 1: Laura Washington suggested that a producer of 'Chicago Tonight' talk to me about freelancing and perhaps hosting and in fact and about being a correspondent and that is what Aaron did. Aaron was an early correspondent for C--the nickname is C, the letter C, the letter 2, the letter N, Chicago Tonight. So Aaron and I both went up for field producing and being on air. I got--Aaron got selected to be on air and he probably had more experience at that time than I did and I was given the opportunity to produce and that was how--that was my first entry into the station. And I became over the years the positions that I've held since then are a producer, a freelance producer of 'Chicago Tonight' and I won an award for a piece that I did on when Gwendolyn Brooks [Gwendolyn Elizabeth Brooks, American poet] passed away honoring her and a piece with Chicago firefighters talking about calling Reverend Jackson you know out of his name and in the middle of the whole hiring scandal where they didn't want to hire as many African Americans as people thought they should. So that work was done even while I was on a freelance basis and then I was invited to work at the station full time. I became the voice of the station. I did a show called 'The Cheap Show'. I did the voice for that with Angela Shelton. I was the first person to book a young man named Barack Obama [President Barack Obama] on the air at WTTW. I-- Speaker 2: That was on 'Chicago Tonight', right? Speaker 1: On 'Chicago Tonight'. I thought he was brilliant. He could talk about anything. And then he was on 'The Cheap Show' which was like a cheap version of Bill Maher's [William Bill Maher, Jr., American standup comedian, political commentator, television host, actor, author] 'Politically Incorrect', but it was, we did it with no money so the name stuck. I mean it was literally The Cheap Show and it was cheaply produced but it was fun. I did Art Beat and was the voice of that and did some on air work at Chicago Tonight and right through working with John Callaway who was just magnificent. Story_ID: 37378 Speaker 1: And if I may share a story from those days [while Ewing was at WTTV Radio; Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: During the cont--during this controversy around the racist statements that some firefighters made at a party in a firehouse, they were off duty but it was a party in a firehouse, they were drinking and videotaping themselves and they took a ride past Reverend [Jesse] Jackson's house shouting the "N" word, all this stuff while on the air or while on camera. Someone sent a copy of that videotape to me. That was my big coup just like Mike Wallace or you know Vernon Jarrett, Russ Ewing. So these are all great Chicago folks, but--at least the latter two. At any rate, I got the videotape and did this piece or was ready to do the live show and the live show opens with a taped package or a taped introduction. So part of my job as a producer was to pre-interview the guests, book the guests, to prep the host and to really do all these things to get ready for the show. And in the carrying out of those duties, I called the union rep for the firefighters and in speaking with him apparently he didn't know that I was African American. And I think that any great producer, you don't need to trick people, lie to people. You know you should be able to talk them into doing what you need because of the strength of your argument. And so I said well you should come on and tell your story cause people have heard stories about it and he's like, oh you know what those people and--you know how we talk when we're alone, we just talk. You know we all say--and I was like um-hmm, yeah I see, okay. Well I had a practice of coming out to greet the guests, just to kind of take the--their pulse and I think that you should do that. I wouldn't send an intern. I will tell you that was a man I looked forward to going out to give him his release when he came to the studio later that day and when he saw me, his face turned every shade of pale and he thought, uh-oh. And I told John Callaway everything that happened and briefed him. John was loaded for bear and anyone--he was nationally known but anyone who was from Chicago knew that he had this version of a local Night Line and he made Ted Koppel look like a wimp. John got this man on the air and they showed the tape and they played the clip of them talking about the Reverend and they have these firefighters who had sued the city you know for not being promoted or being--you know the way the tests were administered, so there were serious issues. But John leaned into the camera and said you just tell me, isn't this just the old white boys network? And that was some of the best television I had ever seen because this man was the proverbial deer in the headlights and I know his day had gone downhill from the moment he saw me until you know John Hill just--or John Callaway put the, the nail in the coffin. But for all of those you know titillating moments, we were doing what the media is supposed to do, tell the story, give everybody a seat at the table. Give them their best shot to express themselves and then it's up to the at home viewer to make their decisions. And those decisions are vital. They influence funding, they influence policy you know, they influence how we live our life so it really does matter that we have people telling the truth and setting a framework and providing a place at the table so that you know decisions can be made based on what you saw, and that's why I had [President] Barack [Obama] on. 'Chicago Tonight' actually has a policy of bringing in as much diversity as possible so that when you're at home every expert you see isn't a white male because there is more expertise out there than that. So love that show. We were nominated at least in my tenure for three Emmys and it was really a great opportunity for me. And I at one point did freelance work while at Channel 11 for public radio. I did their 'Chicago Matters' series which is a special issue driven year long project. Speaker 2: Right. What did you focus on when you were--I know they did education one year and-- Speaker 1: Yeah I did-- Speaker 2: --crime. Speaker 1: --maybe four or five. The first one was race and I did a piece with a field producer, I did the reporting on that one--a field producer from the BBC [British Broadcasting Company] who became a life long friend. And we talked about interracial relationships in Hyde Park and other parts of Chicago and just explored that. And then I moved into doing the Town Hall meetings because I have such a passion for giving the people an opportunity to raise their voice so I did housing, I did violence, I did health, you know I did a number of them and I--that was my free lance work for WBEZ which then brought me into ultimately after leaving--after 2011 or 2001, leaving full time news. I went to work for the Community Energy Co-op which is a branch of the Center for Neighborhood Technology and then from there I went to BEZ full time as a producer of 'Eight Forty-Eight'. Story_ID: 37379 Speaker 1: Before I go to talk about my public radio work, 'Chicago Tonight' was such a life changing thing and it also enhanced my interest in PR [public relations], and PR from the public education standpoint. Because again you know media matters right, in policy and funding. And I'll never forget booking a guest to talk about housing. And John [Callaway], he hated to talk about housing and education cause he felt that people spoke in acronyms and they spoke inside lingo and they just went on and on and you know these are things that you should cover but it didn't always make the best media or the best show. And you know I talked him into doing this show and I think it was a housing issue and this woman came on and she just, she had a very coveted seat at the table, you know a coveted seat at the table of 'Chicago Tonight' and she didn't use it well. She couldn't make her point, she was a little bit flustered and I was really disappointed because her issue and what she wanted to talk about mattered. This was in the early affordable housing issues and after you know the Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan, 40th president of the Untied States] Administration decimated Section 8 and you know these were vitally important matters. And I'm the producer. I'm supposed to be objective. But at the end of the show I kind of ran after her in the hall and said you know next time you're on, make your point. You know don't be so afraid. You deserve to be here. Speak up, it's not about you, it's about the people that you represent. And she had a PR person with her and I'm like and shame on your PR person because you should have been better prepared and it really fostered in me an interest in helping social change organizations tell their story. It's just like I said to the ANC [African National Congress], being on the right side of the issue isn't enough if you can't articulate your story and make the vast majority of people who are in the middle care. And it wasn't (unclear) an ANC person who inspired me with that. Nell Umzhana (ph.) had said he wanted to talk to the American people because he said he believed if you could just tell them your story they would care and they would act. So that was-- Speaker 2: I know organizers refer to being able to do that as cutting the issue-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --for the public. Speaker 1: How are you going to cut--exactly, exactly. And all of you know that early work with the Bob Starks and you know the Urban League folks and the people who were doing the anti-apartheid issues and how did you tell that story? How--we always--the show that I did with Danny Schechter, 'South Africa Now', we would tell you the news, the massacres, the challenges but we would have a culture segment. We would have something about an artist, something uplifting, you know something to leave you wanting to see people free because it wasn't just the gloom and doom, it was the inspiration or the reminder that, you know of the things that Dr. [Martin Luther] King used to say. If one of us isn't respected, all of us aren't, you know to paraphrase him. Speaker 2: Did you all do a show when Sarafina [South African musical] came to Chicago [Illinois] cause I know the actors were South Africans and they spent a lot of time in the city? Speaker 1: Yeah. I wasn't as involved with that. We, I think, covered it on Chicago Tonight. My big thing besides the conferences was when [Nelson] Mandela was released. 'Global Vision' was the official documentarian for him following him around the country. And I heard stories about people being--you know Spike Lee and others being like little kids waiting for him to show up, you know waiting to see Mandela. And so we covered that and I made sure that the premiere, the Midwest premiere of that 'Mandela in America' documentary took place at DuSable [Museum] and we had a screening there. Story_ID: 37380 Speaker 1: But you know moving to 'Eight Forty-Eight' and to radio was exciting. It was-- Speaker 2: Now this is--we've talked about you know you started at TTW in '94 [1994] so we're going to the balance of the '90s [1990s]. Now when did you start at '848'? Speaker 1: And so I started at WTTW in one capacity, moved to media more you know to news and public affairs more around--I have an award from like '99 [1999] or--and that was before I think I was--or '98 [1998] and then I was full time like '99 [1999] or something. So I have a stint back at the Energy Co-op. Speaker 2: Yes, in '97 [1997] it says here. Speaker 1: Umm-- Speaker 2: And you're writing too. You're writing freelance, you go to freelance writing. Speaker 1: Yeah so--but ninety--so I was at CNT in '97 [1997], see. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I was concurrently at CNT and Channel 11 [WTTW] and then went full time to Channel 11. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Left Channel 11 and went back to the Energy Co-op arm of CNT around--after 9/11. Speaker 2: Okay, 2001. Speaker 1: Yeah, 2001. So spent 2002 and 3-ish [2003] at the Energy Co-op and that's when I worked on I-Go car sharing and the greener cleaner sustainable--you know manufacturing sustainability issues and really saw the impact of brownfields and pollution on community--on African Americans cause you know we were living in the most polluted places. Story_ID: 37381 Speaker 1: Now Barack Obama was on in 2000 on TTW, on 'Chicago Tonight'. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, he was a state senator. Speaker 1: Yeah, he had-- Speaker 2: He was a-- Speaker 1: I think when he was on he was running against-- Speaker 2: That was when he was in the debates. Speaker 1: Okay, with Bobby Rush, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was running against--and then he got his hat handed to him by the one who--a national figure who's always--Alan Keys. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: That's a whole other story when they brought Alan Keys in to run against Barack. But I had Barack on just as a guest, not as a candidate and I think we helped introduce him to a broader audience. He was on before he ran against the congressman. So he was on you know--yeah I guess that makes sense cause he was a state senator before he took-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --Bobby's position to go to Washington [District of Columbia]. Speaker 1: Yeah he didn't--he ran against Bobby but he lost. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And then he--and then the Senate seat opened up. Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly, the historic Alice Palmer. Story_ID: 37382 Speaker 1: So spent time at the Energy Co-op, was really proud of that work but when that project ended you know I went back to freelancing, I taught fitness and then I had the opportunity to get back into media full time. So at the Energy Co-op I was the director of communications so that was-- Speaker 2: This is the Center for Neighborhood Technology? Speaker 1: Right. Right and that really, that's really what it was. And that was again the other side of the microphone, helping people tell their stories and shaping their message about issues that mattered to me. And so I was invited by Ron Jones, a vice president, the first African American vice president at WBEZ--general manager, vice president, I can't remember. But he was the--he invited me to come to work at the station and I just thought we could make history you know to have--having seen from the fundraising side, the public affairs and the TV side, having understood a little bit more about the corporation for public broadcasting under which both radio and television exist, I was just delighted to see somebody in power that could make decisions that mattered. And I came in working for '848' with Steve Edwards and just loved it. I still did 'Chicago Matters'. I did a piece on latch-key lockout on kids that didn't have anything to do after school. I interviewed Maggie Daley [Margaret Corbett Daley, former Chicago first lady], you know who was a great champion for kids. And I started to shift--professionally I was in radio but personally I wanted to see the energy and the passion that we had brought to the anti-apartheid movement brought to youth and to their voice. So youth medium and media literacy and not just talking about them, demonizing them and selling them stuff cause this was the time when everybody was afraid of kids and you know people had--even when I was on WVON they would say bring in the National Guard. And you know if you're afraid of your children you can't lead them, you can't nurture them, you can't help them grow. And it abdicates your responsibility as an adult to be frightened of your children. You have failed when you are frightened of your kids. So I got a nickname at the radio station, "Sylvia What About the Children Ewing," which was loving but you know kind of slammed. But I was able to bring in Curie Youth Radio, young people doing radio about their stories in their neighborhoods. My child-- Speaker 2: Curie High School? Speaker 1: Curie, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: C-U-R-I-E. My children were part of an organization called 'Young Chicago Authors' using creative writing to reach young people and I was able to bring their young poets on the air and get them segments. And I really thought that there was a period in time when Chicago could just be the Mecca for youth voice so it's--of all the things that I did at WBEZ I was most proud of the doors I was able to open for young people because I believe we should be door openers. You know we should be door openers more than gate keepers. And I saw this--raw voices at Columbia College develop. I just saw so much--so many venues for young people to do video and tell their stories and-- Speaker 2: What's the place, Street Level Video? Speaker 1: Street Level Media. Speaker 2: Gallery 37 in the summer. Speaker 1: And I have to say-- [Brief Pause] Speaker 2: But I have to say that this is where I give Maggie Daley credit. Forget about her husband, you know she was the boss of him too and you know the boss of her family. But if you want to talk about a woman that I admire, she was like a black woman you know in her passion for her family and her issues. And she said to me in an interview, I want young people Downtown. I want young people to feel like this belongs to them, like they can have a job, like they can belong, that--you know because that was part of what I had seen, different parts of the city that were so segregated. It went back to my years of Chicago Fashion Associates and what we tried to teach the young people that we taught, you have the rights and the responsibilities of citizenship of--in Chicago. You know all the rights and responsibilities that go with it. And so at WBEZ I got to really do that work. We had a youth program. I volunteered for every, you know every youth conference or opportunity to talk with them about media or engage them in media and so much of that still exists today and it's funded as a Chicago young media. Story_ID: 37383 Speaker 1: And then I kind of got tired. I left Channel 11 [WTTW] full time. I still did the pledge drives and those fun things. But I left news after 9/11 and after those hanging chads from you know with the [President George W.] Bush, the first Bush's administration. And I didn't like you know just going back, I didn't like being somewhere where my children could call me and I--on 9/11, it's like mommy can't help you. I've got to get the news. You know I--turned off the TV to my child who was at home. I had another child at a school near the station. I'm like maybe I can have a cameraman pick you up but you know I just can't--I've got to get the news. And I went to every building that might blow up on that day cause that was my job to see if it did blow up. So I knew I didn't want hard news again. And then after a while at WBEZ I didn't like the constraints of journalism that said you weren't necessarily supposed to have a point of view. Everybody has as point of view. And I watched some African American journalists kind of get tougher on their community because they didn't want to look soft because they were black, you know. Or--and I had seen these kinds of things and your job is to get the best guest in to tell the story honestly. That's your job. You can still care about what you care about and you can still have you know your personal point of view. If you're a white male producer and the only guests that you ever book are white males, to me there's your point of view. So as much as I enjoyed my colleagues and the work that we did, I wanted to be engaged more with young people and their issues and again harness that energy that I had seen that freed [Nelson] Mandela you know which was the success of my lifetime. And when I got an opportunity to work for the Illinois Network of Charter Schools, it was the old girls' network, Laura Washington again and Cindy Richards who had been an editor of mine when I freelanced at 'Chicago Parent' and had been a '[Chicago] Sun-Times' columnist, they told me about this woman who was looking for a communications director and I embraced it. I wanted to be openly for good education, openly for something and not always trying to walk that balance of you know what people a journalist's role should be. And that was my last full-time mainstream media work and I never regretted moving into education which is daunting, which is challenged and which is shameful in this country. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 37384 Speaker 1: Now before we get in--I want to backtrack a little bit. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And to ask about a couple of award winning productions of yours. Tell us about 'Bliss'. Now for this piece you won the Peter Lisagor Award for Broadcast Journalism. Speaker 2: Yeah, Bliss-- Speaker 1: That's 2004--this is 2004. Speaker 2: Yeah, Bliss--when I was at WBEZ, one of the stories that I got to do as a reporter was the story of a young girl named Bliss. She lived in the western suburbs of Chicago and she had a brain tumor. And the story came to my attention because the hospital and the, you know the doctors wanted to share this groundbreaking laser technology that made it possible for her to live, but her personal bravery--and I had come through the Disability Rights Movement and I knew the pitfalls of you know making heroes out of disabled people and all of that. But this was a child who just was so strong and so clear about her desire to be healthy and whose parents were faced with, you know, a challenge that would put anybody back on their heels, you know your child could die before you. And to watch them go through the tech, the technology and the special you know the special equipment and the work that she had to do to live was amazing. But the access that the family gave me to hear her story--and I opened it and perhaps one of the reasons that I won an award, but I opened it with her story about her dog. And the first thing that you hear in this piece is just any child and the sweet voice of any child. My name is Bliss Thurman and my dog is Snowball. I love--you know and she's talking about her dog. And then after you hear this you get the reality check that this isn't just any child having fun, this is a child who's in a fight for her life. So, it was really a joy to tell her story and you know it's cliche but it was an inspirational story and I'm glad that you know listeners responded to that and saw the value of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Also, same year, 2004, you share the Edward R. Murrow [Edward Roscoe Murrow] Award for 'Chicago Matters'. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think that that--that was a pivotal and exciting year. And it was a year that the ensemble really worked and this is what I love about--I think it's a through line about all my work. I use a term from theater but working at Chicago Public Radio was part of, like being part of an ensemble. And 'Chicago Matters', you have the newsroom working with a news magazine, working with the interns, working with everybody and my piece on it, I believe was the 'Latch Key Lockout', the--it was about, I don't know if it was education or the youth. Maybe it was the next generation. I think it was called 'The Next Generation' and you know looking at the struggles that they had after school, out of school time when more crime and violence occurs for young people than at any other time. So doesn't it make sense to have something useful and productive to do during that time? That work was just a joy and I think that the ability to hear from all these neighborhoods was really pivotal to our winning the award. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I might also--I don't know, I need to double check because 2004 might also have been some election coverage too. It was a great year. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37385 Speaker 1: Also let me just--2007 before you take the job here at INC [Illinois Network of Charter Schools; INCS], you worked with Steppenwolf [Theatre Company] on their 'Traffic' series? Speaker 2: I did. So everything that happens was once just somebody's dream or idea, right? So it behooves us to have good dreams and good ideas. So that same child that they put the Bible under my bed because I had all the kind of wacky ideas, as an adult it served me well. While I was at WBEZ, I reconnected with Billy Branch. And Billy Branch was a news or was a blues man, world class blues harmonica player and our worlds had converged early on because his first record cover, my then husband [Dean Ewing] did the artwork so it was a weird little circle to reconnect with him when I produced some pieces on blues. And as I got to talking to him, he was so thoughtful about the politics of the blues and he had a complaint about everything. He felt that blues were being co-opted, that black folks didn't want to honor it anymore, that more young white musicians got honors and recognitions and opportunities than did veterans like himself. And you know I, I'm a sucker for a story. I started thinking well you know what if you--what--how would you tell your story? And I also started seeing parallels because of having teens and a young son who was very much into hip hop, I started seeing parallels between the blues and hip hop and I thought there should be a show about the blues and hip hop. Both are oral traditions from the black griot tradition, both are kind of outlawed, both are kind of you know some society looks down upon them at times and so we created a blues-hip hop concept which we had wanted to be a PBS TV show. But WBEZ gave me the opportunity to do it as a radio special and we recorded it in the studio there and it was just a joy. And then someone at Steppenwolf listened to that piece and said you know what, this would be a great live traffic show at Steppenwolf and 'Traffic' was a series that was offered usually on Monday nights or when the theater was dark and it was a way to bring other types of art to this world class institution that really wanted to be relevant in a variety of worlds. And Kahil EL'Zabar [jazz multi-instrumentalist] had done some of the programming, people like Kurt Elling had participated. But a gentleman by the name of Tim Evans was the one who inducted me into that world. So we did a Traffic show, loved it and then they offered us the chance to do the show again at Millennium Park, you know that was going to be very exciting. But then I had been at INCS the first time just about half a year when Steppenwolf said you know what, we want you to come run the Traffic series, be a part of our public engagement work, help us connect with communities, grow our diversity and just be relevant to more people, and I jumped on it. And when I was there for that season that was a job where I have absolutely no regrets because anything that I wanted to do, I got done. I learned early don't--it's better to ask for forgiveness than permission, not that I had that problem because they were pretty open to me. But I brought in baggy pants, hip-hop kids. We brought in a group called Kumba Links (ph.) which works with young folks in Uptown to tell their stories. I brought in the Pocketbook Monologues which is an African American version of the Vagina Monologues with a woman named Sharon McGee talking about--she really wanted to make people aware of breast cancer and AIDS and other things that you don't necessarily want to talk about. But I got to work with LaDonna Tittle [radio personality, model, actress], the great LaDonna Tittle and just a number of talented people. I brought the blues/hip-hop back. We did a show at Millennium Park for about 5,000 people and you could look in this world class stage with this wonderful design and the Frank Gary Band Shell and see an eight year old dancing with their grandpa and you know people from Oak Park to Englewood all together enjoying this music and it was just phenomenal. So it was a wonderful season. I--it was the season that Steppenwolf took off. Maybe I was their lucky charm. Tracy Letts [American playwright and actor] got a Pulitzer for August Osage County, a Tony. It was such an opportunity. Story_ID: 37386 Speaker 1: It also was a lesson for someone who came out of radio because in radio if I don't like the way you breathe, I can edit it out. In television, you didn't smile, I can cut in a smile, I can edit in a smile. At Steppenwolf, the artist reigns so as a producer who wanted to produce things to within an inch of its life and control every aspect, I had to learn that when the artists were on stage, my job was done. There was nothing I could do but sit on my hands and hope I loved it because it was really such a different medium. And it was also different after doing something where 35,000 was a low number you know for people to see your work and to do something where 512 was the maximum that could enjoy it at the theater, it really shaped my artistic understanding differently and just gave me invaluable experience in working in ensemble and understanding the value of something that happens in this moment live. And it doesn't matter if someone said "um" too many times or it doesn't matter if--I could have edited it differently. It's that live art and the presentation of it that's so valuable. So I think that it was a great introduction for a lot of people to Steppenwolf and a great way to bring their art into a lot of communities. And I did the one book on Chicago Work [unclear] as well and their community engagement. Story_ID: 37387 Speaker 1: Oh can I just say-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --one of the things that I got to do at Steppenwolf [Theatre Company] was just like I had--was able to help tell Billy's story and give him a platform to get the respect that he earned and deserved in a broader venue, I was able to take one of my heroes, Oscar Brown, Jr. [American singer, poet, playwright, actor, civil rights activist], and do a show honoring him at Steppenwolf where Maggie Brown came in and we talked about his life and work. And it's work that I got to know better on the radio because I could hear more clips and had done a piece there. But to expand it from something that you see in one platform and move it onto the stage was just phenomenal and you know his other talented kids. And then I also got to honor people like Tim Black and the guy who found--or Burrell, Tim Black, Tom Burrell [advertising mogul], Michael Warr (ph.), KoKo Taylor [Cora Walton, "Queen of the Blues"]. I did a show called Music in Memories where we did--we had music and then we did interviews on stage a little bit like HistoryMakers with these people, probably inspired a little bit like The HistoryMakers and probably inspired by you know Julieanna's [Richardson, founder and executive director of The HistoryMakers] work. But we interviewed Timuel Black [Timuel D. Black] about his work as a political activist and a professor, Michael Warr who-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --was a poet and his work with Gwendolyn Brooks, Tom Burrell, his story and how he changed the way people perceived African Americans by taking us from the Aunt Jemima role in commercials and advertising to early commercials with the grandmother about to see her son graduate, you know and his work coming out of the black arts, kind of the end of the black arts movement and just taking us to a new realm. And Coco Taylor, that was such a joy and that was also a production where my children were involved. My son [Matthew Ewing] performed a rap poem or a hip hop song in honor of Timuel Black and talking about education and my daughter [Eve Ewing] interviewed Michael Warr. So it was a Ewing production through and through. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 37388 Speaker 1: Okay. You said after the job at Steppenwolf [Theatre Company], you said my job isn't about butts in seats, it's about civic responsibility. Speaker 2: That's right. That's right and it was, I think just like media, theater has a role in helping us to better understand who we are. If we can share an experience or learn about someone different, it can matter in how we live our lives. And it's important for black folks to see themselves on stage. It's important for us to be in the seats and I would say that watching a show with diverse people in the audience impacts how you perceive the show. And there had been an article about why is Chicago theater so white? And I like to think that I came in as that was starting to change but I do work now with Congo Square Theater Company which is dedicated to sharing the stories of the Diaspora for a black audience and relevant to everyone else and you know relevant to humans. And I am concerned about the battle for resources and I would hate to see culturally specific theater shut out because other big theater companies have gathered all the resources and gathered all the funding. So there's room you know for it all but I do want to see the survival of authentic African American theater. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And Chicago is rich in world-class theater of all sorts. Speaker 1: That's right, ETA, Kumba in the former days-- Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --Black Ensemble Company. Speaker 2: Congo Square, it's little known-- Speaker 1: Chicago Theater, yeah. Speaker 2: --but very, but powerful. Story_ID: 37389 Speaker 1: Now 2008, the Illinois Network of Charter Schools [INCS]. You come back here and what position do you take? Speaker 2: I came back as the deputy director. And just a little bit of a--to wrap up the Steppenwolf [Theatre Company] years, I came back to--I still had a contract to do some work with Steppenwolf and it was another show with Maggie Brown at Millennium Park. So I went from 5,000 people packed you know, I--as many people almost as when the Dalai Lama [spiritual leader of Tibet] came to forty-eight, because it rained. This was a wonderful show that was, that I really had high hopes for, for Maggie but Millennium Park is a rain or shine venue and it rained and there were literally forty-eight people in the venue. I know because the--again I had learned once it's on the stage, what can you do? So the director Jessica Thebus and I kind of danced out in the rain like crazy people and I shook everybody's hand for coming so that was one of my most meaningful experiences, to do great work, to do it with integrity, to give somebody a spot, pay them well and I got to shake the hand of every audience member cause there was only forty-eight people. But then that same week I started back at the Illinois Network of Charter Schools and that time I came back as deputy director because I felt the reason I had left, I still had work to do. I didn't leave because I wasn't happy or wasn't interested. I left because as my then boss, Elizabeth Evans said, this is a chance of a lifetime, take it. Go work for Steppenwolf but while you go, you have to be on the board of INCS. So when I came back as staff, I left the board. Story_ID: 37390 Speaker 1: And I got to work here [Illinois Network of Charter Schools (INCS)] at a time when we were really trying to explain what a charter school is, to explain it is a public school, to explain it just has a little more autonomy to do things, kind of like the school that I went to where you can change your curriculum, change your hours, do what needs to be done to put kids first. And you in exchange have accountability where you can be shut down, your charter can be revoked if you don't live up to your expectations. And charter schools are working closing the achievement gap and getting kids in college and you know it's work that I believe in. And what I would like to see are more African American operators, more people around the country in leadership roles because in the spectrum of education reform, charter schools have a role that's really important. I won't say that it's the panacea for everything that ails education, but to compete in a global society, we need to do things in a different way. And just like the airlines have changed--Southwest used to be the outlier, the unusual way of doing things. They survived and thrived when the big airlines have struggled. We're still working like we're on an agrarian society. We're still doing things in old fashioned ways that don't meet the needs of our kids and they're dropping out you know, every few seconds. And so I love the tools that charter schools offer and people like Howard Fuller and you know Kevin Hart--I won't even try and say his name but he was a former basketball player who started charter schools. Story_ID: 37391 Speaker 1: I love what charter schools offer by way of giving you the freedom as a community to say we believe that the better--the best way for kids to learn is if they're healthy, if they don't have diabetes, if they understand how to live a nutritious life. There's a school like that called Namaste which one of their measures of success is to lower the body mass index of their students. I love a school like Legacy in Rockford which can say we believe that an afro-centric curriculum is the best way for kids to learn, or Urban Prep where Tim King says we believe, and he says we believe, but that young men need to learn together and they need to learn how to be young gentlemen and scholars first and you know in a gender specific school and that's what works for him. And the charter model gives you the opportunity to come up with what you think is the best way to educate kids. And if we're ever going to compete with a global society, we better fix it really soon. And one of the things that I'm really proud of is an organization called The Right to Succeed cause, which is a concept which I helped to create with a partner based in California and the premise is simple. Every child has the right to succeed. We owe them that and we would like to see not just the big policy wonks talking about this but average folks talking about it. And we'd like to see examples of what a great school looks like because there are schools where the valedictorian can't read well but bad is so prevalent that you don't know what good looks like and we'd love to show the attributes of great schools around the country just to inspire people to create their own. Speaker 2: [Brief Pause] Speaker 1: So I would love to see people start more schools. If you think you can get it right, do it. There's too much arguing about formats and protocol. There has to be more actual delivering on educating kids in a way that matters to them and we need to re-visit how we've always done things cause it's just not working. Story_ID: 37392 Speaker 1: So, in 2009 John Callaway [journalist, who appeared on radio and television as a host, interviewer and moderator] passed. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: What are your reflections on John Callaway and 'Chicago Tonight'? Speaker 2: John Callaway really got it. He was a newsman to his core and he was the epitome of what it means to be a Chicago [Illinois] journalist like Russ Ewing, Vernon Jarrett, take no mess from anybody. And what I will always remember about him--he was also compassionate but he taught me that your purpose is to get some business done. You know in his view, the best show was a show that took a complex issue and made it accessible. And he'd say well we really got some business done tonight, and that still resonates with me. It's not how did you look, how did you sound? You know we've gotten so shallow. It's not did you get ratings points, did you titillate, did you kiss but, did you play politics? Did you get the business of the only career that's protected by the First Amendment? You know did you get the business of explaining and giving context to an issue so that people can make informed decisions in a democracy, did you get that done? And did you get it done in a fun way, a light way? You know did you leave things a little better than you found them? And you know that's really what I learned from John. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37393 Speaker 1: Now one of the things that you do I guess avocationally is that you--well I don't know now. You've become a meditation teacher in the Temple of Kriya Yoga, right? Speaker 2: Yep. I started meditating and doing yoga when I was about nineteen [years old], you know after high school [Technical Memorial Vocational High School, Erie, Pennsylvania]. And in--since 2005, I've practiced on a daily basis because I've always found that in times of crisis, in times of emergency, when things are tough, that stillness, that internal prayer, that understanding that there's a power greater than us has pulled me through. And what I have discovered in my latter years is we don't just have to learn from what went wrong, we can learn by being happy, we can learn by being content. And my meditation practice like finding a group of people, like-minded people to literally practice with has enhanced my life in everyway. And I would really love to see the benefits, the health, stress reduction, mind-freeing benefits of meditation brought more broadly into the African American community. With our health issues, with our--just the stress of being an African in America, you know we need to meditate, we need that tool. And it's something--one of my goals is to share that you can be any religion that you choose to be but this practice is something that you can bring in that will enhance that. And to that end I've written a manuscript for a book, Comfort and Joy, Stories for Hope, Meditation--Stories of Happiness, Meditations for Hope--Stories for Happiness, Meditations for Hope which in it I interview eight happy people and then I intersperse those--their stories with meditation techniques. And I interview people as diverse as Santita Jackson, Reverend [Jesse] Jackson's oldest daughter, Aaron Freeman, a black Jewish comedian and satirist, an astrologer, a Nigerian Muslim, a Nigerian-American Muslim and a lapse Catholic, a practicing Catholic, a Quaker and I also tell a story of a man who lost his child. She had been my intern and she was just such a joy and she was like a little sister to me for sure, Danielle Baker who was killed by a drunk driver. She had so much enthusiasm and passion for life, got pregnant in college, still finished with honors with her family's help, raised her child. Her daughter was two [years old] when she passed, but was raising her kid. And you know I've had a lot of jobs concurrently. This kid kept up with me and followed me to every one. She was my intern at WBEZ, she followed me to--can I sit in at your class at Columbia College? Can I sit in at your class? You know can I come to Channel 11 [WTTW]? Can I come to Channel 11? And she had more energy than I did and you know a drunk driver ended her life. But her father has this core of joy and stillness and happiness and his story is the one that I end the book with because even after having your heart you know pulled out of your chest by losing your child in such a silly way and such a special child, he is still a happy and loving person. And I wanted people to really touch that. And I've worked with women who are making their transition which is how I refer to transition from life to death, who have had cancer and I've seen how meditation has helped them. And I really you know want to follow-up on people, on the work that people have done in prisons because any time your body is one place or your body is failing you, it's wonderful to be able to free your mind and your spirit and meditation does that. Story_ID: 37394 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My concerns are--my concerns for the African American community are probably you know similar to any thoughtful person's. I worry about health issues and the obesity epidemic, the diabetes epidemic. I worry about us losing touch with sort of that mind, body, spirit. I worry about our health on all of those levels. And then I worry about the disconnect between elders and our young generation. There has to be some give on both sides. Young people have to respect and understand what their elders have to bring and older folks have to remember that young people are made to be seen and listened to, seen and heard and I don't always see that. I worry that we pick the wrong enemies and that the wrong or the negative commercial parts of rap versus hip-hop culture are--that it's destroying some of our young people that the, that we don't have context but we see what--we see things on TV. We see these reality shows, don't understand that they came about after a writer's strike and they were, you know they proved to be cheap to produce and now people are following them and thinking that they should have that extravagance that they see on television and dissatisfied when they don't. And I worry about the impact that bad media can have on all of society and particularly on the African American community. But on the other hand I have hopes. I have hopes that in some ways that same media can bring us together, that the Diaspora can make us stronger, that understanding the fights that West Africa--or that West Indian Londoners have with you know African Londoners, you know understanding those things will help us to grow. I have confidence in--or I'm con--I'm inspired by the people who give back, you know who have made money and put it where it belongs. I'm inspired by a man who I didn't even know was my cousin, guy named Larry Brown who when my father's [Lynwood Anthony Dillard] family embraced me, invited me to his wedding anniversary and all of the gifts were--it was suggested that you make a donation to two schools and one of them was a charter school. And that kind of thoughtfulness is inspiring for me and I just have faith in kids. I just think that they'll get it right and we just have to trust them to do it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37395 Speaker 1: Now we haven't mentioned all your writings because you have a lot of freelance work out there-- Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --and people should check that out on a number of different subjects. You received--you've been awarded by the Association of Black--The Chicago Association of Black--for Black Journalists-- Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --as well as the other awards we mentioned, the Murrow Award and other things. When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Now I know you have more to do. Speaker 2: I hope I have more to do but you know what, part of my spiritual practice is to be content and to try to live my life and I advise others to live their life, if you were to die tomorrow or if your life was short, you know what would you die for, now life for it. But I enjoyed working for 'N'digo', freelancing for 'N'digo' and writing several cover stories for them or even just the small pieces in the back. I enjoyed being a part of the black press cause one of my favorite national figures, a guy named Stanley Nelson who's done tremendous work, one of his first pieces was about the Defender Soldiers Without Swords. And so just to be a part of any of that print work was valuable to me and to be a door opener and highlight people. I loved being a part of the ensemble of people putting together 'Chicago Tonight' and I really just love radio. I think radio, being able to tell the stories of people just put a mic in front of them and let them tell their story. That's what makes public broadcasting different. It doesn't have to be, oh you're a celebrity. Oh, you're, you know a movie star or you had lip surgery or something. It could just be this is someone with something really important to say that will be inspiring. So these little personal stories that I did at BEZ about people like Curtis Kojo Morrow or the Bob Boone, the founder of Young Chicago Authors, people that inspired me being able to tell their stories has just been a privilege. And I hope to be able to enjoy some of the young people who I've mentored, to enjoy their work. Probably, probably the most important thing I did as a journalist was to help other people get jobs because for a long time I think we had the wrong measure of success. Name, name brand, black journalist is doing you know pretty good work in the community but making big bucks. They don't really cover the stories that you want to hear. You don't really see them, but then when it's contract negotiation time, oh I need my people behind me. I need support, you know, I've seen it. We chased some people out of Chicago [Illinois] who did that and they did very well in the national stage but that--I don't like the sense that the black audience owes helping you keep your job. I want a new measure of success. What jobs did you help get? And I can say I brought black folks into media. I mentored people. I brought people who had tremendous talent to the table so that they could shine and I think that that whether it be a kid named Ken Mitchell who came from WBEZ to 'Chicago Tonight' or helping showcase Barbara Allen who's one of my favorite people. She's an editor but a brilliant producer who did 'From DuSable to Obama', always showcasing her work and trying to you know give her a voice. She did the paper trail, the Defender story helping to tell her story and Lift Her Up is one of my treasurers. And a young man named Carlos Hernandez Gomez who I met covering the Elian Gonzalez mess and I went back to the station and said, I just met this young Puerto Rican dude that is off the chain and he was old school journalism, a War for Dora, you know, he knew where all the bodies were buried and was just you know a solid, solid reporter and unfortunately he died too young. But helping people get jobs is the legacy that I would like to be remembered for and I hope that the good work that they do will inspire somebody else to do good work cause I always say if I did you a favor just do it for somebody else. Story_ID: 37396 Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point again, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Yeah. There's probably--there are probably a few fights I picked early in my career that I would handle differently and I don't know if that's just the mellow you know meditating every morning yogi in me or if it's just good common sense. But yeah there's probably some things like putting Sharon Powell's 'Panties on Fire' poem on the air when Mr. South was mad at me at WVON was probably not my best move. There's probably--I just would say picking fights unnecessarily. You really--if there's a conflict, you need to reflect and see what have you done and what can you do differently because in the end it's all about you and you and how you--you can't change what happened, you can only change your reaction to it. So I would change my reaction to a few things. Oh, and I do have one--it's kind of a story. Can I--do I have a second to tell it? Speaker 1: Umm-hmm. Speaker 2: This is with John Callaway. There was a woman named Betty Loren Maltese who was the mayor of Cicero and Betty was always in trouble, Backseat Betty. She was always in trouble because she was in a mob, alleged--I don't have to be a journalist now. She was in a mob town and you know she was on the wrong side of a number of issues. But she had decided to put--to promote an ordinance that limited the number of people that could live in housing in Cicero and some people saw it as a great anti-gang move, some people saw it as an anti-Latino move, an anti--too many Mexicans coming to Cicero. But for once it wasn't like who stole money and her husband was killed by the--you know it was like oh, an interesting story on Betty. So we had her on, we invited her to 'Chicago Tonight' and she was extremely nervous about this and you know arrived with--in a car full of you know her minions. And when they got--they came in, they all smelled of cigarettes cause they were in the car like smoking, nervous. She wanted to come in the back door. I was like well I don't know if there's paparazzi waiting or if you know something I don't know about somebody else waiting for you but I'm happy to let you come in the back door if you want. And I told John that she was nervous and I felt he was soft on her because she just kind of sat there and looked frightened and I felt he didn't push her and that he was tougher on this woman from the Mexican-American Legal Defense Fund, and she was pregnant. He was--you know and he gave her that John Callaway stuff. And I'm like, well John I thought you were really soft tonight and he said, well you know what Sylvia, I just liked her story. So I kind of regret that I told John that she was nervous and maybe made him go easier on her than he should have. So that's what my story is. Story_ID: 37397 Speaker 1: What advice would you give a kid journalist out here that's aspiring? Speaker 2: Listen. Listen, listen, listen, do your homework and listen. I don't care if you--you know things have changed with the internet and technology. You still have to listen and know what you're talking about. I just learned from Rich Samuels, have five questions. If you can't get enough in five questions with follow-up and inspiration, then you're doing something wrong. I've seen people go in there, they have 20,000 questions for you know a seven minute interview or they just don't listen. If you only start with five basic things, then you've got room to react to what you hear and that's when you get your best stories. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37398 Speaker 1: Now let me ask you about your family. Tell us something about your children and I know you're engaged now. So-- Speaker 2: I am blessed with just the best family. I guess everyone feels that way but in my philosophy, your children pick you. It's my view that you pick who you need to be your parents so that you can learn whatever lessons you need to learn in this life. So whenever my kids get mad at me I can say hey, you picked me. This must be what you need. Don't get mad at me. You picked me, it's your karma. But seriously I have two children. [Brief Pause] Speaker 1: My first born is Eve Louise Ewing. Eve has been brilliant since she first told me her name was Eve when I was pregnant with her. I felt that she inspired me to name her that. She is one of the most compassionate people I have ever met. She's always wanted to give back. I have a newspaper article where she was interviewed at seventeen [years; age] saying she wanted to make a difference in the world. At fourteen, she was interviewed by Susan Sandberg on National Public Radio [NPR] talking about why Chicago [Illinois] was a world class city and she knew what she was talking about. She taught for three years and when she said that she wanted to teach, I was like, University of Chicago and you want to be a what? And then I thought, shame on me, don't we want our best and brightest to be teachers? It's such a calling. And now she's at Harvard [University] in the education policy school. And when I say I'm not so worried about the future, it's because caring people like Eve want to change the world and make it better. Matthew is--oh, and Eve you know scored perfectly on standardized tests, you know really uses that part of her brain. She's also a writer, but really works well within systems, Matthew, a little more of a maverick, a little more of the artistic side. He is a writer and a performer, does video. He's at Tribeca Flashpoint Academy in Chicago which is a digital media school and he's a kid who has been shooting stories since he was eight or nine [years old]. And he was an extra in the movie 'Roll Bounce' and I'll never forget, we were watching these cameramen skating backwards very slowly and they had their assistant you know pulling the cord. And I remember sitting there with Matt saying, "Wow, isn't that impressive? You know he's shooting and he's skating backwards." He's like "Mom, we skate jumping off things." Because he honed his craft as a skater boy in Chicago skating down railings and jumping over things and then videotaping it. And the favorite thing was to videotape someone falling. So I'm really excited about his vision and his artistry and his most recent work was a music video which had one of his paintings in it and also showed him at a barber shop where he worked and which he edited. And so I see his future as being really exciting. So my children are that first lens but I think you know a happy--when they're babies, a happy child is a happy family. When they're older, a happy mom is a happy family. And I'm engaged to the person who I think is my soul mate who matches my creative interests and who has just a lot of integrity. I like to sail, I like water and he worked for the Department of Natural Resources. He's now retired. He drove a boat. He has that sense of wanting to save and protect people and now I'm his number one job so I'm really excited. And his name is Sylvester [Harvey] so how can you go wrong, Sylvia and Sylvester. My mother [Louise Miller], I'm so blessed that she's still alive and she inspires me everyday. She is one, again a compassionate person and I think Eve gets a lot of that from her. I love my sisters [Nicole and Colette], the ones that I helped to raise and the one that I just got to know. And I have to even give a shout out to my in-laws, the Ewings. With all of my father confusion, Elmer Ewing was a really loving and kind father figure to me in addition to my stepfather [Milton Miller] and Marilyn Ewing, or "Momsie" as the kids call her, is probably where Eve got her inspiration to be a teacher. And then there are the folks on my father's [Lynwood Anthony Dennard] side who I'm coming to know and I hope that I have that opportunity to embrace his side of the family which I feel is my right as you know his child while still honoring and loving all of those who I've known all my life. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 37399 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you that we need to talk about before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I think I like teaching too. I like teaching at Columbia College [Chicago, Illinois] so I do enjoy and look forward to the time when I can teach more. The ability to shape new media minds to my way of thinking is life who let me do this? It's a treat. And my weird career of radio, television, internet, print, stage is something I can now teach at Columbia because that's the wave of the world. Working across platforms and being a good writer is what the future looks like. So I really look forward to doing more teaching and I just love being able to teach the business of media at Columbia. That's all. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37400 Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as someone who made a positive difference and was happy doing it. We have so many martyrs and we have so many people who made great sacrifices. I would just like to have in some small way, made my part of the world better. There's a saying, tend to and embrace the seeds that land in your valley. So anything that's in my little sphere of influence, I hope I had some positive impact on and that I demonstrated that you can be happy in this life. Story_ID: 37401 Speaker 1: This is my father, Lynwood Anthony Dennard, and it's one of the few pictures that I have of him, shows what a player he was and it was taken in California sometime in the '90s [1990s]. This is a family portrait of myself, Eve and Matthew [Ewing's children] and they were, I guess it was probably around 1995 and it was just a portrait. Speaker 2: Okay, good. Speaker 1: This was taken in 2000, around 2003 at the Harris--you know what, I might know--well this was taken at the Harris Theater in Chicago [Illinois] behind Millennium Park roughly around the--I don't know, whenever the Harris--I had premiered a Head Start video and the mayor was there. And that's my daughter. Oh-- Speaker 2: Which one's your daughter? Speaker 1: So that's-- I'm sorry, that's good. Can you name people from left to right (unclear)? Speaker 2: Going from left to right, Valerie Holloway who was a producer at the time, a producer of mine and a partner, Mayor Richard Daley and my daughter Eve Ewing and me, Sylvia Ewing at the Harris Theater at the premier of my Head Start video. This is Thanksgiving 2010 at Eve Ewing's house in Pilsen and that's Matthew Ewing, myself and Eve Ewing, my children. This is me, Sylvia Michelle Ewing, at that time Sylvia Michelle Ponder, about three years old, four? I have no clue. Probably three. We used to put this stuff on the floor and shoot it at Channel 11. That was our fav, our--until we had a fancy machine where you put it on a table. We were like, wow! Speaker 1: (Unclear), you know. Speaker 2: But we would shoot them for that night. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Put that stuff on the floor and pull back. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Chicago Access, had a little access show and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it was a table, you know the camera pointed at the table. Speaker 2: This is my family that I grew up with and who raised me, my stepfather Milton Miller is standing, my sister Colette is, Colette Stevens is on the left, my mother is, Louise is in the center and my sister Nicole is on the right. And that--oh, can I just say something? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: This was in the Shiloh Baptist Church family album. Okay, this one guy, I think he went to jail, this one so I don't know--can-- Speaker 1: Well as long as he's out now. Speaker 2: Unnamed, Kim Fields? No--yeah, Kim Fields from In Living Single, Sharon McGee and Sylvia Ewing back stage at Steppenwolf Theater in probably 2007. Spring of 2011, the great Joycelyn Elders, former Surgeon General in the Clinton Administration and Sylvia Ewing. This was shot for a Hartford PBS for the show, our--this was shot in Hartford, Connecticut in--when did [President] Barack [Obama] go in-- Speaker 1: 2008? Speaker 2: His first adminis--so it was 2008, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Cause I was--when the inauguration happened so it was 2008. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The inauguration was 2009. Speaker 1: Well when was the--then--the inauguration was 2009? Speaker 2: Yeah, January. Speaker 1: Yeah, cause it was a--so this was January 2009 at a PBS station in Hartford for a national pledge show. That's Bunny Sigler [Walter Bunny Sigler, songwriter] on the right, Sylvia Ewing next to him and a guy from one of those you know bands, I can't remember. Speaker 2: And you don't know the person in the red jacket is? Speaker 1: Don't remember, unnamed. Speaker 2: Okay. She is right here, fashion (unclear). Speaker 1: And I have a letter somewhere about that but this is Chicago Fashion Associates in probably 80s [1980s], 1983 or '84 [1984] at Daley Plaza and our models were doing their thing. That's so 80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Give me a moment, hold it (unclear). Is there anybody to name? That's you at the podium? Speaker 1: Me, don't remember anybody else. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: I'm bored with myself now. This is Sylvia Ewing on the left, presidential advisor David Axelrod in the center and Amy Dickerson, '[Chicago] Tribune', Ask Amy columnist and NPR person at--Sylvia was moderating a panel. That's Sylvia with her niece Avery on the beach in Pennsylvania in like 2007. I don't know. I'm making it up. That was Tim King from Urban Prep, Doris Abernathy, Christina McClain from INCS and Sylvia Ewing at the Urban Prep screening of 'Harry Potter' in 2011. That's the Blues/Hip-Hop crew at the Independent Sector Conference in October of 2011. Billy Branch is second from the left, Sylvia Ewing is in the orange and black, Sylvia's son Matthew is in the mask, Russ-Kevin Colville--doesn't help if I point like that probably. Kevin Colville, and poet Kevin Coleville and Avery are young supreme--okay. Blues harmonic player Russ Green, Kevin Coleville, poet and Def Poetry Jam guy, Matthew Ewing my son, FM Supreme, an MC, Avery R. Young, a poet and singer, Itch 13, turn tableist, Uncle Buda, a turn tableist, Sylvia Ewing, Billy Branch, guitarist. Whoo, okay. Speaker 2: You have a large collection. Speaker 1: Um-mm. This is WBEZ, this is Sylvia Ewing, Shirley Jahad, oh I wish I knew Whitney Young's niece's name, Melba Laura, Lucy Smith, Cheryl Corley and Dr. Barbara Ingalls. Sylvia Ewing with her BFF, Cheryl Hermada, summer 2011 at WTTW in Chicago. I'm done with Tim, that's too many of him. Let me see, me and Sylvester. Speaker 2: We're skipping that one, right? Speaker 1: We're skipping what, this one? Speaker 2: Right? Speaker 1: Yeah, skipping that one. I know that dress is cute though. But I have it on again. Sylvia Ewing and her fiance Sylvester Harvey, September 2011. Sylvia Ewing and the great Smokey Robinson, fall of 2011 at WTTW. A sample of the work that Sylvia Ewing did back in the 80s [1980s]. Sylvia and Eve Ewing in the 'Gary Post Tribune' in honor of Mother's Day. Sylvia Ewing as part of a panel on women journalists with Melanie Spann Cooper and Marie Lipinski at Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism. Mary Dunn, the matriarch of the Dunn Family on my father's side. And I just want to see, I think that might be it. I had this one cool picture of me and my four producer girlfriends. Let's see, it's like four women. Speaker 2: Four women? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (Unclear) by Nina Simone? Speaker 1: That's my dog. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Bad ass Wally. That's a crew at Channel 11 with Smokey and Human Nature, those are my co-workers. Oh, Billy Branch and then I'm done. Billy Branch, blues harmonic player and Sylvia buddy. I'm so sorry I don't have-- Speaker 2: Do you remember what happened to the Lone Ranger? Speaker 1: Um-umm. Speaker 2: Are we stopping here? Speaker 1: I think so. Oh this is, you know this--I don't--can you get any of that? That's from 1983. That was about Chicago Fashion Associates in 'The Defender'. Okay, I think that's it. That's you--no, don't know. Speaker 2: (Unclear) you can take the mic off her. Speaker 1: Got one here. Speaker 2: Okay (unclear). Speaker 1: Thank you...