 Story_ID: 645640 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Hazel Trice Edney: H-A-Z-E-L, T-R-I-C-E, E-D-N-E-Y, no hyphen. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: February 13th, 1960, Charlottesville, Virginia, the University of Virginia Hospital [University of Virginia Health System University Hospital]. Speaker 1: Okay, Charlottesville. Okay, that's--was the home of [President] Thomas Jefferson. Speaker 2: It was, and my mother's maiden name is Jefferson [Marie Jefferson Trice]. Speaker 1: So is there--well, I'm gone ask you in a minute about family history; we'll see. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But what is your oc- occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm a journalist and my title is editor-in-chief or editor/publisher--I'm kind of deciding--of the Trice Edney News Wire. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: The date is December 3, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time, and you don't have to give your address but? Speaker 2: In my apartment on Georgia Avenue in Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 645641 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer. First one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is it? Speaker 2: My mother's [Marie Jefferson Trice] fried chicken. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, red. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Someday Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I haven't been there yet, but that's, that's where I've envisioned going. But actually, where I like to vacation now is at in my mother's house in the country. Speaker 1: Okay and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, it's a Bible scripture: unto everything there's a season and a time for every purpose under the heavens [Ecclesiastes 3:1]. Story_ID: 645642 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history on your mother's side of the family and your father's [Norris Trice] side, but separately, and then we'll put, put 'em together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Her name is Marie Trice, T-R-I-C-E. Her maiden name is Jefferson [Marie Jefferson Trice]. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know. I'll have to fill that in later. Her, her date of birth is February 2nd, but I don't remember if it was 1931 or '32 [1932]. She's gonna-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --be eighty in this February, so whatever that math is. Speaker 1: That's probably '32 [1932]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay-- Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-two [1932]. Speaker 1: --and wa- where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Trevilians, Virginia. Speaker 1: Trevilians-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Louisa County, Trevilians, Virginia. Speaker 1: With an S? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Trevilians--how, how do you spell that? Speaker 2: T-R-E-V-I-L-L-I-A-N-S [sic]. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's ancestors? Ha- ha- how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, actually, my sister has, has done that. It's like a, a map back to about two generations before her two--actually three generations. And we're not sure where we were enslaved, but it is quite possible that we were owned by [President] Thomas Jefferson or the family because of my mother's maiden name. Her grandfather's name was Jefferson and Trevilians as you know is right near Monticello [Charlottesville, Virginia]. And so we're going to be doing that research very soon. I'm actually beginning to work on it, and so as far back as, as my grandfather. My grandfather was a minister and I'm not sure what my grandmother did. She probably was you know, a homemaker and--but I--her, her parents, I don't her. Her mother died when she was only seven years old, and so we don't know a whole lot about her mother. She was raised by her grandmother. Speaker 1: And what were your grandparents' names? Speaker 2: Virginia Jefferson [Jennie Jefferson] and her husband, my grandfather's name was Preston [Preston Jefferson]. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's very likely. You got 'cause the name Jefferson right there in Charlottesville [Virginia]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's what you'd think--or near Charlottesville, yeah. So what did they do for a living? Are there any stories about--well, first of all, are there any stories about slavery that are passed down, or any stories about the Civil War or that whole struggle? Speaker 2: Not that we talk about. We--you know, I didn't get to know them very well. My grandmother died before I really got to know her. And actually, when I say grandmother, she was my actually my great-grandmother, because as I said, my mother's mother died when she was very young. So we're talking about my great-grandmother and great-grandfather and so, no, I, I did not talk to them about slavery, and my mother doesn't, you know, talk much about things that they told her except, of course, you know warnings and you know, him. She remembers him actually going to vote and her grandfather going to vote, et cetera, sometimes him coming home with an attitude, talking about just being tired. And--but she didn't--you know, she doesn't talk much about those things unless we really probe and, and ask her, which we really haven't very much. Speaker 1: Okay, but, but you have a sense that things were not really that--race relations were-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, because it was during that season. You know, it was--it was--you know there are certain places that they couldn't go, you know. And you know my mother, she doesn't--like I said, she doesn't talk much about those things. But you know, even when I talk to her now, I just sense that there's sort of like a hush you know about voting. It's, it's, it's such a powerful thing; it's so important, you know, for her to do. And she'll just say, "I'm going down there tomorrow." And I would be like, "Going out where, mama?" And she'll say, "I'm going in there to vote." And it--and, and I can hear in her voice how important that is, because she came through a day when you know they really could not do that, or at least not able to do that comfortably. Story_ID: 645643 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] have any stories herself about growing up that she shared with you? Speaker 2: In--specifically pertaining to race relations? Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --just, just where she--how she went to school or what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --she liked to do, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) if she had a special talent. Speaker 2: --she, she--my mother always liked to dress, as I told you. You know, even I'm on the phone with her, she's like oh, "The shoemakers are there," (laughter). "No, it's The HistoryMakers, mama." But just growing up, she was--she was such a young lady. She enjoyed dressing even when she was five and six years old. She talks about how she just enjoyed--you know, saying how she looked, and she enjoyed, you know, certain kinds of clothes. My mother is a singer; that's what she does. And she started singing for the church when she was just seven years old. And when she graduated from high school (background noise). Do you want me to cut that off? Or how do we handle the phone? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Wanna pause? All right, go ahead. Speaker 2: Yeah, as I was saying, my mother is a singer. And when--she started singing when she was in the church only at seven years old. And fast forward, by the time she graduated from high school, in her high school yearbook they said that she was going to be the next Mahalia Jackson. And at the age of seventy-nine she is still called upon often to sing at funerals in Louisa, Virginia. She sings on programs and anniversaries, you know, and she sings and dances. That's what so powerful about her. I mean, even--you know, as she grows older, she just has no--she has this boundless energy when she praises God. And she is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So she sings and dances. Now I haven't-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --I don't know if I've seen that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) she sings. Speaker 1: --and I haven't-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she sings and she--you know, in the church we call it the shout, and she will actually begin to dance as she sings. And she'll dance across in front of the church as she sings. And-- Speaker 1: Now, now what is the denomination? What's your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's a Baptist; she's a Baptist deaconess at Zion Travelers Baptist Church [Louisa, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She grew up in Foster Creek Baptist Church, and that's in Trevilians [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Now these are--these are regular Baptist or do they have a special-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, just-- Speaker 1: Regular, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) plain Baptist, yeah. I know what you mean by that, 'cause there are the Progressive Baptist and different ones. But no, she's traditional Baptist church, and, and that--you know, she has an incredible ministry of song. She's like, you know, an encyclopedia of, of all of the great songs. And in fact, in 19--let's see, when she--when she turned sixty-seven, we had a special tribute to her because that marked her sixtieth year of singing for the Lord, because she started singing when she was seven. And we call it songs for mama. We sang her songs back to her, the songs that we have all heard growing up, and she always sang 'em at the clothesline. Story_ID: 645644 Speaker 1: What are the--what are her favorite songs? Speaker 2: She loves just, oh, some of the older songs like 'Old Rugged Cross' ['The Old Rugged Cross']. She sings songs like 'He's Real to Me' [ph.]; 'I'm Free,' which is one of her favorites. She gets up and she'll sing, "I'm free, I'm free; no more chains are holding me," and--you know, the, the old-- Speaker 1: Now that sounds like it's really addressing, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. It, it probably-- Speaker 1: --emancipation. Speaker 2: --comes from way back. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: It comes from way back, and some of these songs I'm not even sure if she knows where she got them, because she knows the words; she knows every verse of some of the oldest songs, and so. Speaker 1: "I'm free, I'm free; no chains are holding me." Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What's the rest? Speaker 2: I don't even know the rest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was her mama's songs, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so passed down (unclear) other generations. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I sure believe that. Speaker 1: All right, so, now did your mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] have a chance to finish high school and-- Speaker 2: She did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother graduated from high school and got married to her beloved, the man that she fell in love with when I think she was about fourteen (laughter), my father [Norris Trice]. And had she not decided to get married, she probably would have gone on to be a nurse. I've heard her speak of Morgan State [Morgan College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland]. You know, that's where she would have gone, you know, had she decided to go to college, but she had decided instead to get married. Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother got married around 1950 I guess. Is that true then if she finished high school? Speaker 2: She got married, I think she was about twenty-one or so. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so that's a little bit-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So she probably worked for a while or something. Story_ID: 645645 Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's--I'm gonna go to your father's side, and we'll talk, talk about his side of the family. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: His name is Norris, N-O-R-R-I-S, Bellew, B-E-L-L-E-W, Trice [Norris Trice]. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: He was born November 20th in Louisa. And I don't know his date of birth, but it was two years before my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice]. And so he was fifty-two when he died, and he died in 1985. So--can I go back and correct some of this later? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Or how does that go? Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, you could--you could send us an email-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --or something or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, because mama, you know, she has all of that information-- Speaker 1: So some-- Speaker 2: --at some time. Speaker 1: --you know, some, some of this may not be right on in the head, but it's, it's close-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for, for this interview so. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay, so we're not like missing like ten years or anything? We were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, no, it was around about that time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and, and where was your father born? Speaker 2: He was born in Louisa, Virginia, and I'm not--I don't think he was born in a hospital. I'm not sure. These are such wonderful questions, things--I realize what I don't know. You know what I'm saying about my parents. Speaker 1: So, so you think he was born on the--on, on the place--on the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he was probably born-- Speaker 1: --on the farm-- Speaker 2: --at home. Speaker 1: --in rural-- Speaker 2: Yes, he was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --probably born at home. And his, his, his mother [Ethel Brown Trice] died when he was very young. I never met his mother. We ma- never met his mother. We never met his father [William Trice]. So he was also raised by--he was actually raised by his older sister, who he called mama, and her name was Ethel [Ethel Trice Thompson]. Story_ID: 645646 Speaker 1: Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's [Norris Trice] side. Can you trace that side very far back? Speaker 2: I cannot. I, I just know that his, his--both parents [Ethel Brown Trice and William Trice] die when they were young. I--he often spoke of being Indians--being Indian, and I think--I think he meant West Indian. The West Indian people just take hold to me and claim me. They (laughter)--students have bet before I open my mouth that I was gonna have a West Indian accent. And so for some reason I, I just really just sensed that he has a West Indian descendency, but I don't--I don't know that for sure. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, there's no--just, just because of--is there any, any reason why he think he's just West Indian instead of American Indi- In- Indian [Native American]? Speaker 2: Simply because of how we look. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because we look like West Indian, and he would always say, "I'm Indian, but I--," but he may have actually said Cherokee. He--if I remember correctly. But I'm thinking that maybe he didn't really know. You know how it is with us. You know, often times we'll her--hear somebody say something, and we'll repeat it, because there is always an internal struggle. Where did we come from? Who are we connected with? You know. Speaker 1: Is his family--has his family been connected with--you're, you're around, around Louisa [Virginia] for a long, long time? Is, is there any other place that they claim? Speaker 2: No, they, they are concentrated there in Louisa, and then they send--tend to go--you know, they move other places, but they, they--they're concentrated right there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what did your father say about growing up? Or did he talk about what things were like when he came along? Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he, he didn't talk a lot about his childhood with us. My father was somewhat of a closed man because I--because of some of the things that he'd gone through. But he talked about being in--my father was a military man. He was in the Unites States Army. He served and was a corporal. And he talked about the racism that he experienced. For example, once he got into a fight, and he broke his finger. He hit a white guy in the mouth who was telling him that he could not use the cigarette machine in front of him. The white guy said he had to use the cigarette machine first. And you know, ensued--an argument ensued, and my father hit him. And we knew that that was race. He called my father a boy, and that--and that was the same incident. And my father said, "Look under my nose," 'cause he had a moustache, and that's when I think he let him have it (laughter). Speaker 1: While he was looking. Speaker 2: I remember those, those stories that, that he told. And he was very cautious; he was very protective of us, especially during the Civil Rights Movement. I was born in 1960, and so I, I remember--for example, my brother [Marvin Trice] telling my father that he was going to go into a white barbershop and ask to be served. And you know, the argument that--you know, my father seemed to be so afraid and so protective of his children not to, to incite anything. And we lived in such a small town where people wanted to (air quotes) keep the peace, you know, if you will. And so he was very protective. He didn't talk a whole lot about what was going on at that time. He talked about what he had gone through. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So now was he in the Army during the Korean War? Speaker 2: Yes, and he served in-- Speaker 1: Did he go to Korea? Speaker 2: --the Korean War. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Yes, this is something that I'm still researching. It's very emotional for me as I research it. But my father told a story of, of being court martialed during the Korean War because he defied a direct Army--I mean a direct order from a superior officer. The officer told him to not feed the Korean children. He was at the mess hall, and he had a tray full of food, and he wasn't about to allow those children to stand outside the gates and beg for food with buckets--this is how he described them--and for him to sit there and eat. And so he defied the direct order not to feed the children, and he went over and he dumped his food into the bucket of a child and was court martialed for that. He received an honorable discharge; and so therefore, we can only speculate that the court martial came out all right. But we--we're--we're gonna be researching that as well to find out what did happen. Because you know the U.S. Army records were destroyed in a fire. And we don't know if his records still exist, but I'm gonna be seeing what I can find. Story_ID: 645647 Speaker 1: There's another story that he told of being shot. He--well, actually not being shot, of a grenade that exploded in battle. And he would let us feel his elbow because there was shrapnel in there, in, in his arm right here. And we feel that because he was injured in the heat of battle that he should have received a Purple Heart. Speaker 2: He should have, yeah. Speaker 1: Yes, and possibly because of segregation and racism he did not, but we will also be looking into that. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's--well, this is--I don't know. This is just my personal experience with so many people who serve in the Korean War black men were shot or injured in some way or another. I mean, I haven't talked to one that wasn't, you know, which is--I'm sixty-four now. You know, so this was a pretty violent, you know, war. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You know, with-- Speaker 1: Yes, it was-- Speaker 2: --violence coming-- Speaker 1: --it was a-- Speaker 2: --on both--on both sides because of the attempt to integrate the [U.S.] Army. We had violence within the Army and then without the Korean-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Yeah, it was just like during World War II [WWII], where they had the, the Double V, you know, campaign. It was the same thing going on, you know, just--they had integrated but they didn't want to. It was so against, you know, their will, and so they still treated the soldiers as if they were not American. Speaker 2: Any other stories from your dad's [Norris Trice] experiences in the war or when he came back? Speaker 1: I remember him talking about being so hungry, you know, that I remember him talking about he cried when an apple he was trying to reach dropped into a bird's nest. I mean, just small things like that. And when you're-- Speaker 2: Is this when he was growing up? Speaker 1: No, no, no, this was in Korea. This is in Korea. But if you're talking about stories that he told growing up, he just--he, he just didn't. My father's name--nickname was Bean, Bean. He was a small man, and I have pictures over there. He was a small built man, and I imagine that that's why they call him Bean. I'm not sure if he had a happy upbringing. I'm just not sure, because I don't remember him ever, you know, really talking about his childhood life, you know, with family and you know, those kinds of, you know, happy stories. So I'm, I'm just not sure. Story_ID: 645648 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their, their dispositions, their sense of humor, their talents, how they walk, they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I have a--it's so hard. That's hard because I have a compassion for people. I love people, especially people who are hurting. And so when you think about my father [Norris Trice] and what he did in defying the direct order, I feel that that comes from him. I also have a very defiant side that I believe comes from my father. And my, my temperament can be a little off the chain sometimes, which I believe comes from my father. My father is an incredibly gifted man. He spoke very meticulously, as some people say that I did. He also--he played music; he loved art; he played the guitar; and he could sing, as well as my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice]. She's musical; she can sing. I sing or I used to, and--but my mother also has an incredible heart for people. You know, she constantly now tells me about a lady that she's concerned about. You know, she--you know, who, who needs food, et cetera. She goes to the nursing home on Sundays I--even after a day of church she'll go to the nursing home just to sit with her friends or the elderly, and, and she's seventy-nine. And so I have the heart I believe of both of 'em. Maybe that's something that they had in common. But if I had to choose one that I think I'm more like that I take after, I think it would be my father. And I, I think that simply because my mother doesn't have that defiance that I have. You know, my father has this incredible defiance, and he'll just like stand up and roll out when he see--when he would see an injustice. And that's what I was reminded of when I--when, when he talked about the Korean children. Story_ID: 645649 Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings for us beginning with the eldest and put yourself in the position? And kind of tell us a little bit about what they're doing. Speaker 2: Yes, my older--my oldest brother, and my only brother actually, Marvin [Marvin Trice], he's a, a minister, and he is a--an artist also. He has a--another job. I'm not even sure what he does on his job, but, but primarily he's a minister and he's an artist. And all of his life he's drawn these meticulous pictures of--I mean, he, he likes abstract art, but he grew up drawing Marvel comics, et cetera. And so recently--actually a few years ago, he was asked by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and commissioned to draw a picture of John Mercer Langston, who was the first black congressman from Virginia. And that--and we were just so incredibly proud when the, the judges of the circuit court in the town of Louisa [Virginia] convene on a Sunday afternoon in order to take my brother's drawing and hang it in the Louisa Circuit Court among Confederate generals mind you. You know, they were all around the wall, like huh. And so my brother's an artist. My older sister after him is--she's a deaconess in a church [Zion Travelers Baptist Church, Louisa, Virginia], in the same church as my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice]. She is an incredible administrator. She loves secretarial work; you know, she, she handles offices, et cetera, and so that what she does now. She's an office administrator. She's also a singer. She takes after my mother in those--in so many ways, and she's an incredible homemaker. She's, she's a wife and a wonderful mother. Her son goes to Berklee school of music [Berklee College of Music, Boston Massachusetts]. He's a freshman there, and so that's a job in and of itself, having been such an incredible parent. She's married to Charlie Poindexter [ph.]; that's her husband. And my youngest sister--I'm after my oldest sister. I'm sort of like the middle girl. And I'm also a minister and--Greater Mount Calvary Holy Church [Washington, D.C.]. And my youngest sister is a pastor who is--(laughter) it, 'cause--it runs in the family. She, she is--she's about to turn--she'll be turning fifty next year. And she's--wow, she can sing out of her mind. She really takes after my mother. She's an amazing singer. In addition to that, of course, she's a pastor, but she works at Wells Fargo [Wells Fargo and Company] as a profession. You know, she's--she--she's an administrator as well. She works in the office for a vice president of Wells Fargo bank. Story_ID: 645650 Speaker 1: So we were talking about your brothers [Marvin Trice] and sisters [Queen Trice (ph.) and Julie Trice (ph.)]. Did, did we get through all of them? Speaker 2: Yes. I was talking about my younger sister, who's a pastor and singer, yes I think, and I said that she works--she's--and she works at Wells Fargo bank [Wells Fargo and Company]. And my, my, my whole family is just incredibly gifted with--they're all singers, all musical in some way. Speaker 1: Or artists. Speaker 2: Or they do artists--yeah, they do art you know or speak, et cetera. so. Speaker 1: Okay, it must have been a lot of fun growing up. Speaker 2: Oh, it was. We, we sang; you know, we harmonized on everything. We knew all the commercials, you know, all the, the, 'Good Times,' all the--you know, the themes of the TV shows and everything. And we just would always harmonize on something. And when we get together now at Christmas and Thanksgiving there's always a song that, you know, pops up. And then mama [Marie Jefferson Trice], she'll bass in and it's all beautiful. Speaker 1: So do you sing wa- too? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I'm--I also sing. I used to do weddings when I was a teenager, but I don't, like, sing now; I don't sing sing. I laugh; I tell my sister I sound like a frog. They're the ones who keep singing. They kept singing, but I just stopped singing and decided I would, you know, speak; I would write. Writing is my talent, my primary talent I think. Story_ID: 645651 Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory--earliest? Speaker 2: (Pause) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It actually just came back up, and I had to ask my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] about it. It was--you know, it's just a basic memory of being in a house and feeling like it's time to move into the other room. And I thought it was the newness of this apartment, because I moved into this apartment this year. And I would--I kept feeling like it's time to move into the other bedroom as fall started to come. But I was like no, this is something deeper than just here. And I actually called my mother and I said, "Mama," I said, "did we ever live in a house in which you and daddy [Norris Trice] switched bedrooms when the season changed?" And she said, "You, you can't remember that." (Laughter) I was like, "Ah, mama, I remember." I said, "Not only do I remember, but I see the different rooms," and I described the rooms to her. And she said, "How is it possible?" She said, "You were just in the basinet; you were less than a year old," you know. So how, how is this possible? But yet I remember it, and I described it to her. And, and so that kind of confirmed for me that there are some things that I thought that I was imagining that I really do remember. I remember petting a snake, you know. You never know what your kids are doing sometimes. Speaker 1: You petted a snake? Speaker 2: It was a garter snake. Now that I, I know what kind of snake it--you know, what snakes look like, it was a green snake [smooth green snake]. And I was picking strawberries. I was about two years old, and I was picking strawberries, and the snake pokes his head out and it's green. And I look at it and I pet it like that, and then I run (laughter), just scurry away. And I can remember a dream that I had when I was about two. I was trying to figure out what a skunk looks like because all my, my brother [Marvin Trice] and sisters [Queen Trice (ph.) and Julie Trice (ph.)] were coming--, "Oh, we saw a skunk, a skunk." You know, it was on the edge of dark when they would come in. And I fell asleep, and I dreamed that a skunk was flying. And it was a brown animal like a bat, but it was brown and it was flying through the sky. And I remember waking up from that dream like, oh, I'm not--now I'm afraid of skunks. Story_ID: 645652 Speaker 1: One of my earliest best memories of my father [Norris Trice]--this is gonna be strange, but he taught me how to shoot a rifle when I was about--I had to have been about two or three. He--yeah, he took us (laughter) in the backyard, and he had a tin can hanging in the tree off the limb. My father was a real gun enthusiast. He collected rifles of all kinds. And he put the rifle--uh-oh, do you need to fix that? Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, go ahead. Speaker 2: It was--it was--I think it was springtime. I'm not sure, but it was warm outside. We didn't have on coats. And my father took us into the backyard of the house we were living, and he hung a, a tin can from a tree limb that was like way up there. And my brother [Marvin Trice] and my sister were out there too, and he put--he wanted to teach us how to shoot. He wanted us to know how. And you know, remember when, when I talked to you about how protective he was and how he didn't talk about the Civil Rights Movement, but yet he always wanted us to be able to protect ourselves. And that may have been a part of it. I just don't know. But anyway, he put the gun in my hand. I was kind of young to hold it, but I--but I held it. And he pointed the target--he pointed the target out and told me how to aim the gun, et cetera, and to shoot when I felt that I was ready, that I had aimed. And I actually pulled the trigger of the gun. I looked back 'cause I was scared, and I looked back like that and I pulled the trigger of the gun. And I heard the tin can go (makes sound). It had hit the tin can and it was--and it was like circling around the limb of the tree. And I'll never forget my father's laughter. He was so proud and--you know, you, you remember moments like that of pride, you know, from your parents (laughter), although I was--it was just a target practice. But he was so proud that not only had I hit the target, but I looked away and hit the target, and at that time I was the youngest; I was only about two years old. But those are kind of the exciting, very fun, kind of lighthearted moments that I remember from, from very young. Story_ID: 645653 Speaker 1: Now can you describe--now, now I saw a photo of the place you grew up. I guess--is it--is that the house that it, it--in, in the photo that's behind us that (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the house we moved to when I was about four--four or five. The house where we were when I shot and all of that and pet the snake, those were like two or three previous houses. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We, we moved a lot before I turned four. But when I turned four, we lived at this house until I was nineteen years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The one behind me. Speaker 1: All right, so how far away was this house from the--I guess the nearest town? Speaker 2: This house? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Actually, it was in walking distance, Louisa [Virginia], the town of Louisa. Speaker 1: So it's in the town (unclear)? Speaker 2: Um-hm, it's in the town of Louisa, but it was way back, you know, deep in the woods, away from the streets and the sidewalk; and, and there were no neighbors per se that we could see. It was completely surrounded by woods. Story_ID: 645654 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Virginia]? Speaker 2: The cows in the pasture on the other side of the woods--at night hearing the lowing, you know, of the cows. And we could--you know, people ask me now, "How do you distinguish between a cow and a bull?" I was like, "Oh, that's a bull; oh, that's a cow." Because when you grow up with them you know them. And so we could hear the lowing of the cows at night. The crickets--I, I used to write poetry when I was a teenager, and I would talk about the largest choir in the world--you know, going to sleep to the sounds of the crickets and the frogs down at the pond; and you know, bugs that you know, you don't know exactly what they are, but they were just strange sounds in the night--the whip-poor-will--some, some sounds that we never could identify, but yet they occurred every night, you know, out in the woods. And then there was morning, you know, waking up to the sounds of the chirping birds, and the beautiful, you know, sunshine and the fresh air; and in the springtime seeing the little--I don't if these were daffodils or what kind of flowers they were, but every year they would come back in the same place. And we knew when we saw the tips, those green tips coming up out of the ground, we knew that it was springtime coming. And it was very, very exciting to see those tips coming up out of the ground. There were lots and lots of insects where we lived. There were June bugs, there were wasps' nests that sometimes made its way into our houses--into our house, you know, where we lived. And, and actually in a previous house, there were lots of snakes. There were like snake nests inside of the front porch, and we constantly ran from snakes. My mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] had to burn rags in order to, to ward off snakes that were in a previous house. But in the house that I grew up in after the age of four, that's where, where I just described. There was--they--there was the lowing of the cattle and lots of--just the, the sound of the woods. And it was a very beautiful, beautiful upbringing. Then there was the, the trees, the papa oak. My father [Norris Trice] could identify them all and--'cause he was a--you know, a woodsman--and the spring, going down the spring hill 'cause we had no running water, no indoor plumbing and so we had to--our daily chore was to go and get buckets of water, you know, from the spring. And there's pictures on the wall there too. Story_ID: 645655 Speaker 1: What was the town itself like? I mean, was there, there a downtown, or a-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --shopping dis- district? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was town and I remember the small stores there. There were--I mean, there--of course, at that time there were no Walmarts [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] and you know, the big--there were no big Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] or anything like that in a small town. There were just little, small--what we call--you know, so called mom and pop stores. There was the A and P grocery store [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] where mama [Marie Jefferson Trice] would shop on Friday evenings. And then there was--there was a store called Thompson's Store [ph.], and the also had, you know, small groceries. There were a lot of business owners, you know, who had their specialty. There was Shank's [ph.], who sold a lot of fresh pork meat, et cetera. And, and so the town was, was very small. I mean, they got their first--Louisa [Virginia] got its first stoplight maybe in 19--in the 1970s. And now there're still only two stoplights in the town. And so it's a very quaint, very, very wonderful town, very friendly, and you know, very warm. And at that time, of course, maybe we didn't know how fortunate we are, but now it's--you know, spending time in the big cities, et cetera, we can see how, how sweet, you know, of a city it is and very quiet--very quiet town. Speaker 1: Okay, about what was the percentage of African Americans in town I guess? Speaker 2: Now or then? Speaker 1: Then, when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I, I don't know the exact, but I would--I would guess it was about 20--about 20 percent. That's what I would guess, or less, and, and this is--I'm talking about the town of Louisa--actually, probably less than that. When it ca- when it comes to Louisa County [Virginia], it would probably be between 20 and 30; but the town of Louisa, it was probably far less than 20 percent--maybe about 15, 10. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and what--was there--you said earlier you grew up during I guess the last days of segregation in, in Louisa I suppose in the '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) so-- Speaker 2: --born in 1960, and I remember my mother taking us to the bathroom, and I remember seeing the colored and the white signs. I remember going into the colored bathroom and seeing how unclean it was because they didn't clean it. You know, it was a public bathroom and you know, they didn't clean it, but when we had to go, we had to go. And--but there wasn't a lot of talk about these things. I mean, it, it wasn't pointed out to us that this is the colored bathroom so, you know. They didn't talk about those things; we, we observed them. Back during the--you know, after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, I think that's when the racial tensions really began to rise. Even in, in Louisa as my, you know, high--my brother's [Marvin Trice] high school, there were, I wouldn't say race riots, but there were fights between blacks and whites. They intensified a great deal; and there was much more discussion of what was happening in the world around us as it related to the town of Louisa. Story_ID: 645656 Speaker 1: So were the schools integrated in Louisa [Virginia] when you were growing up (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The schools in--in my first year of integration was--let's see, when I was in the fifth grade, so that would have meant I was about ten years old maybe. And so that would have been around 1970 or so, something like that; but I was in the fifth grade. Speaker 1: Now, now what was the name of your school? Speaker 2: That was-- Speaker 1: Your, your first school? Speaker 2: My first school was Z.C. Morton, Zelda Carter Morton Elementary [Zelda Carter Morton Elementary School; Thomas Jefferson Elementary School, Louisa, Virginia], and that was a black school. And then in the fifth grade was the first year of integration, and that was at Louisa Elementary School [Louisa, Virginia] Speaker 1: Okay and this is--this is in the fifth grade? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was my first year of going to school alongside white kids. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now did you like school growing up? Speaker 2: I actually did at first. I was a very good student starting off. As an elementary student I was, you know, very talented, and in the fourth grade I was elected president of the 4-H club, and you know, my--I was teacher's pet in a lot of ways. But then I became very delinquent. I became incredibly rebellious. Speaker 1: This is after fourth grade? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes and-- Speaker 1: Now is there correlation between going to the integrated school in the fifth grade and being--and being delinquent and you know, everything being pretty much okay where you were before? Speaker 2: Something happened in the fifth grade. I, I had a--the first time I got suspended from school it was a fight. And it wasn't with a white girl. You know, it was a fight in the fifth grade. And for the first time as a child, my teachers began to talk to my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] about me, and, and seeing that something was going on with me. I was putting dots on my paper. Speaker 1: So this, this is at Louisa Elementary? Speaker 2: This is at Louisa Elementary. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: You're making me remember things that, you know, I'm not altogether comfortable, but, but yes, I'm just realizing that that is, you know, when things began to transition. And I, I can't say that something had happened specifically at that time, but it was--that was the first time that the, the teachers really began to complain to my mother. Now I had misbehaved in the fourth grade a lot. You know, I, I led rebellions (laughter) against a white teacher named Mr. Swope [ph.]-- Speaker 1: Well, there were-- Speaker 2: --in the fourth grade. Speaker 1: What was it about? Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: 'Cause you were--you'd've been nine. Speaker 2: I just--I think I was--yeah, I was just testing my powers. I was--I was very influential at that time with the other students. And, and Mr. Swope would tell us not to stump coming up the steps. Why am I telling all this on camera? How are you pulling this out of me? And, and we would--and I would stump, and so every--all the other kids would stump, and he would beat us. That was when, you know, it was legal to beat your students. And he would beat us with his paddle. Speaker 1: Now this is a black teacher, right? Speaker 2: No, this was a white teacher. This was Mr. Swope. Speaker 1: In--oh, at--in the fourth grade. Now this is at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No--yeah, he was--he was a-- Speaker 1: In Z.C. Morton? Speaker 2: --he was a white teacher peat- teaching at a black school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, they had white teachers, but they didn't have white students. And so we just--I, I would have these rebellions. And I would throw shoes at the teacher in the classroom, and he would make me go all day with no shoes on. And then when we got--when we moved over to Louisa Elementary, that's when something began to manifest that, you know, it, it just got worse. Story_ID: 645657 Speaker 1: Were you happy at that, that, that stage of life as a child? Speaker 2: There were some things going on at home, you know. My parents were wonderful parents to their children, but you know, there were some abuses. I--you know, from my father [Norris Trice] to my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice], and sometimes they were physical and, and quite traumatic to us, the children in the household. And so, you know, I think sometimes having to suppress--not having an outlet for what we witnessed and what we saw could possibly have been causing me to act out in, in various ways because of probably some suppressed anger, et cetera. Story_ID: 645658 Speaker 1: Now I know, I know church was a big part of growing up, right? Speaker 2: Yes, we went to church, yes. Speaker 1: So and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] was-- Speaker 1: --and you--were you-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --were you really involved as a youth in church activities or? Speaker 2: I was, especially in my teenage years. I would sing in the choir, et cetera, but still I was, you know, acting out at school and doing my--doing my thing. Speaker 1: Was there--did you have any kind of--did anybody take an interest in you in school as like a mentor or a role model or? Speaker 2: Well, what happened was after a certain season of my life, I became pregnant at fifteen. I had my son [Monty Trice]-- Speaker 1: So this is in high school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was--and I was a freshman in high school when I became pregnant. And that that-- Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your, your high school? Speaker 2: That was Louisa County High School [Mineral, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there were always people who were interested in my talents. You know, I, I had become captain cheerleader when I was in the seventh grade, but my father [Norris Trice] made me quit because I was so rebellious, and I ran away from school and got suspended so he made me quit the, the cheerleading squad. And so--and I rebelled even more, you know, got pregnant in the ninth grade and had to leave school. Speaker 1: Now did, did you intend to get pregnant, or were you just--you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was just not-- Speaker 1: --breaking the rules-- Speaker 2: --being careful. It wasn't like, oh, I'm gonna get pregnant, but it was--I mean, just to be having sex at fifteen was rebellion, you know. And so that's what I mean. I was, you know, being rebellious because of course if my parents knew, you know like I said, at that time beating was legal. And so I, I ended up getting pregnant and I had to leave school. Speaker 1: Now was this unusual? Now, the reason why I ask is I, I don't know what, what other people were doing out there, you know, in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in a little place like that, halfway rural atmosphere. Was it--was it unusual for a girl to get pregnant in high school? Speaker 2: Actually, at that time I had a couple of other friends who had gotten pregnant at the same time. Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause I think-- Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: --I think you said your mother actually got married early and stuff right, right out of high school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother got married right out of high school, and so--but you know, she was what, twenty-one-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when she got married. And so--but at that time, as a teenager, it--you know, it was probably more of just being with different people who were doing the same thing. You know, they, they had come from the health department to the high school and shown us birth control pills. And some were responsible with them; some were irresponsible with them; some didn't use 'em at all, you know, but they talked about sex, you know. And so we just all talked about sex and who was doing it and who was not, et cetera. Not to influence any--influence each other, but it just became atmospheric. And so--and so I ended up getting pregnant, you know, at fifteen. I left school and at that time, you know, you, you kind of were kept at home. My mother kept me at home. And I had my son, who you see up here. My darling son I call him and, and-- Speaker 1: This would've been 1976 or '77 [1977]? Speaker 2: That was--he was born in 1975. Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 2: November 25th. He just had a birthday, he would have us all to know. And, and so once I came back to school 'cause--I'm getting to your question about mentoring and was there anybody interested in me. Story_ID: 645659 Speaker 1: Once I came back to s- well, some things happened when I was pregnant [with Monty Trice]. I had a vision of an angel. And one teacher--I wrote about the vision in English class, and a teacher, her name was Lillian Morris [ph.], a black woman, she said to me, "I, I believe God is trying to tell you something," because I wrote about that vision. And everybody knew about Hazel [HistoryMaker Hazel Trice Edney] had seen something. It kind of just got around town [Louisa, Virginia]--got around my household about this thing that I had seen. Speaker 2: Now what is this vision? Now this is a-- Speaker 1: It was a--I was pregnant. I was at that time, and I had run away from home, and my father [Norris Trice] and my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] had found me. And they brought me home, and I was in bed. That night I slept in the same bed with my two sisters [Queen Price (ph.) and Julie Price (ph.)]. And I was sleeping next to the wall, and I was--I mean, just--if you can imagine, you know, being pregnant at fifteen. You're--what you've done to your family; what you've done, you know, et cetera, and I could hear something. It was March, so I thought it was the wind, and I actually could hear something in the room; everybody else was asleep. And I started to turn over, and that's how the essay that I wrote for my English class--you know, it's like slowly she turned. And I, I began to turn over to see what this was that I could hear. And when I turned over, I saw an angel by my bed, and that's the only way that I could describe him. It was a man with long black--coal black hair, beautiful brown, bronze skin, white glowing clothing, and he was handing me a cross in his right hand. And all I could hear was this moaning, this--and, and I was like--it wa- I was--I couldn't move, and suddenly he just disappeared down by the bed and then suddenly reappeared again, handing me--even closer and urging with a white cross in his hand, and then I woke up. Now, I said wake up because I'm thinking was this a dream. I don't know. You know, as an adult now, I'm like--all of a sudden he was gone again, but I remember turning over; I remember seeing him in the room, and then I can only say--but then I woke up. I snapped out of it, because I called my sister and she was asleep. I said, "Did you see that?" You know, "Did you--did you see that?" And she was like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You all were in the same room, right? Speaker 1: --"See what?" Um-hm. Speaker 2: You're in the--okay. Speaker 1: We're in the same bed, my sisters and I. And, and she was like, "See what?" And so it was one of those occurrences that you can't explain whether it was a dream, whether it was a vision. I say it was more of a vision because, you know, I was already awoke when I turned over, and I saw everything in the room, and I saw this being. And so that's when the English teacher, when I wrote about it, she said, you know, "I think God is trying to tell you something." Story_ID: 645660 Speaker 1: And fast forward about two years later, I hadn't ended my delinquency. I was still very rebellious, still getting, you know, suspended from school, et cetera. And one day, and in English class, there was a teacher by the name of Judy Rude [ph.], who was teaching, and I was bored. I had been smoking herb and drinking beer, and just was tired. It was fifth period, the fifth period class. And it was like Charlie Brown, you know. You know when the teachers go, "Wa, wa, wa?" Although English was my favorite (laughter)--it was my favorite subject, you know, I was like oh, you know, I can't take this anymore because I was just so dried out from, from doing what I had been doing. And I began to demand to go to the bathroom, and she refused to allow me to leave class. And I got up and I stormed out, and I fully expected to be suspended again. I was so immune to punishment and suspension that I fully ex- it had become my way of life, the rebellion. And I came back in the classroom from the bathroom, and after class ended she called me to her desk. I thought surely she was gonna give me a referral slip to the office, but instead she, she handed me a book; she gave me a book. And she said, "Tomorrow when you come to class I want you to read this chapter." And I was like, what is this about? And so I went home and I read the chapter over, and it was so--you know, it just had all these rickety racks and tickety tacks, and the things that I loved to do that she apparently recognized. And so the next day I came to class and I read the chapter to the class. And she called me back up after the class, and she said, "There is going to be a forensics competition, and I think you're good enough to enter." And I recognized I had never heard those words said to me, the words good enough, and those words changed the course of my life. I entered the contest. I won first place in both poetry and prose. I began to enter writing contests. I won first place in the poetry writing contests. I became the vice president of the student body just by doing speeches. I be- was the, the lead character in the senior class play. I ended up getting three scholarships upon graduation [from Louisa County High School, Mineral, Virginia]. And I was also a soloist (laughter) in the choir. Story_ID: 645661 Speaker 1: What were your grades like in school up to the point that you met Judy Rude [ph.]? Speaker 2: Pathetic. Like I said, my, my elementary--the first through the third grade I was on honor roll [at Zelda Carter Morton Elementary School; Thomas Jefferson Elementary School, Louisa, Virginia]. I mean, the teachers would use me as an example to go before the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] members, you know, to boast on. But it just--I became mediocre, and my grades went down. You know, I became--I didn't get a lot of Fs except math. I did get Fs in math, but I, I was like a C, D student, occasional B student. Speaker 1: So was it--was it--'cause I don't know. I know we're, we're reflecting now and I don't know if you think--was it just that some of the trauma about, about the home or the--was it--was it the, the, the integration experiment, you know, being, being part, part of the early group [at Louisa Elementary School, Louisa, Virginia], or it could have been that you were bored with the material, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, I was-- Speaker 1: --after, after you learned how to read and write, and you were doing such a good job that you'd become kind of like hey, what's next out here? Speaker 2: I, I wa- I've always been sort of like outside of myself. And what I mean by that is there was always this--a sense that there's gotta be something more. There's gotta be something more. There's something within me that always craved for, for more, so part of it as probably boredom. Another part of it was probably very much the trauma, you know, that emotional trauma that I experienced. And don't get me wrong. My parents were incredible parents. They were loving and, and just wonderful. They were just strict in the right places; they were fun, but they had their times that traumatized us with some of the domestic violence that we witnessed from my father [Norris Trice] to my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice], and so I believe that some of that was internalized. And when you speak of the Civil Rights Movement, I really didn't know enough to be angry and to internalize that. But I was always a--an observant child, and a child who was emotional and, and took on things. And so that could have been influencing just what I saw on, on television. When Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, when J. Sargeant Reynolds died, for some reason these--those things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) After who, who, who's J. Sargeant Reynolds? Speaker 2: J. Sargeant Reynolds--actually at that time, I did not even--'til this day, I've forgotten what position he held. I believe he was the attorney general in Virginia [sic.]. Don't--you know, don't quote me on that, but for some reason his death affected me so much. The J. Sargeant Reynolds Community College [Richmond, Virginia] is now named after him. And so I'd forgotten--maybe he was lieutenant governor. I'd forgotten what position he held in Virginia, but when he died--I believe he died in a plane crash [sic.] if I'm not mistaken. But when he died, it just devastated me. And so-- Speaker 1: Wa- was he an African American? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: No, no. And the reason I bring that up is because I was just giving an example about how things affected me. I soaked things in that I heard. I did not totally understand them. I didn't totally get them, but I soaked things in and they caused great emotional upheaval in me. The Jonestown massacre [in Guyana]. Speaker 1: (Unclear) 1978. Speaker 2: You know, at, at that time I was eighteen years old, but still--I mean, that, that traumatized everybody actually. But there were things that I saw and heard growing up that stayed with me that I internalized and I just tend to respond to and, and, and act out. And so my grades, I think that they were affecting my grades per se, but I was a very emotional child. And for some reason I did not see my grades as being very important. When I was in the sixth grade I had an altercation with a math teacher, and he actually insulted me, telling me that--some- something to the effect that I couldn't learn math. And I cursed at him. That was the second time that I was suspended from school. I (laughter) gave him a few choice words for saying that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was that--the fir-- Speaker 2: --to me. Speaker 1: --the first time. Speaker 2: He was a white man too. Speaker 1: Wa- what happened the first time you were suspended? Speaker 2: I don't remember why I got into a fight with another girl-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that was in the fifth grade. But like I said, that was the first year of segregation--of integration rather, and she wasn't a white girl so I don't remember. It was just probably a playground altercation, but I was suspended for three days. That was in the fifth grade. But the rest of the time I was suspended, those, those were clear rebellions, rebellions against teachers, running away from home, et cetera. Story_ID: 645662 Speaker 1: So you had a group of friends that--now were you into music growing up? I mean, other than singing in church. Did you like popular music? Speaker 2: Yes, I, I sang in, in talent shows. I spoke a lot. I did the Martin Luther King speech [I Have a Dream] and won first place in that--but that was after Judy Rude [ph.]. That was after good enough. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But before then I would enter talent shows and I would--I would sing, and you know, we'd sing in church, and sing a lot around the house. My brother [Marvin Trice] was always in a band. But you know, my parents [Marie Jefferson Trice and Norris Trice]--we didn't get involved in singing with the band or anything, but we would always--there was always music in our lives. Story_ID: 645663 Speaker 1: What about news coming into the home when you were growing up? Did you get any of the black pa- papers at home? Speaker 2: I remember my father [Norris Trice] coming home once and putting an Afro [Afro-American Newspapers] on the couch--Afro newspaper, and I remember falling in love with it. You know, the headlines at that time were very--you know, they had a lot of huge headlines, and they were mostly about violence or something that had happened in the community. But if I'm not mistaken, there were a couple of times my father brought Afros home. Other than that we had The Central Virginian, which was--you know, which is the weekly newspaper there in, in Louisa [Virginia]. But my, my birth into--falling in love with the black press came with just discovering those Afros. I don't know where my father got them. You know, he was a--he just went all over the place, so he may have been Richmond [Virginia] and picked it up. But I remember looking at that newspaper and seeing that there's something different about this. You know, it's not--these are not just regular stories. These are stories about us. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, I just wanted to--so and you did watch the news events on TV and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 645664 Speaker 1: When you were a senior then in high school [Louisa County High School, Mineral, Virginia], are you in the--you're in a school play, you're doing better in school? You feel energized; you won the contest. What did your counselors tell you about college? Speaker 2: They didn't. I sought them out. I, I had to go and seek out the counselors. You know, I wa- I had been the bad girl and who had suddenly become, you know, sort of like the star. And, and everybody was watching to see what was gonna happen next, but nobody said, "You know what, let me sit down and talk to you about college." I just suddenly decided in a conversation one day with a government teacher, Mr. Clutter [ph.]. I had written a story--a paper about John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], and he was discussing the paper with me. It was something about it he disagreed with. Maybe I didn't do my research or something. It was something about he was scolding me. And I threw my head back and I said, "Well, I'm going to college" (laughter). And I didn't know--I, I don't even know why that came up at that moment, but--or why I said it at that time, but I--that was the first time I declared I'm going to college. And it was fra- and that was in the eleventh grade, and that's when I began to seek out the guidance counselors. And one of them told me actually about Saint Paul's College in Lawrenceville [Virginia], and they thought that I could possibly get in. And so in the twelfth grade I applied to Saint Paul's; and surely they accepted me. That was my, my bright--I always tell people that was my HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] cred. Story_ID: 645665 Speaker 1: So the graduation was memorable. Now you, you had a chance to make a presentation at graduation you said? Speaker 2: In high school graduation [from Louisa County High School, Mineral Virginia]? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Oh okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I got three scholarships upon high school graduation. I was vice president of the student government association. The president got to do the speech, and so I didn't get to do anything at graduation, but it was a great, as you can imagine, moment of pride. I spoke at the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] graduation. That was what I referred to-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --earlier. Speaker 1: So graduating from high school. Now you got--you got scholarships and you, you, you, you chose to go to Saint Paul's [Saint Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia]. So what was it like at Saint Paul's? Now, now you got a son, right-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --at this point. And is your mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] tak- taking care of your son? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What happened was--and it gets a little bit complex here and interesting--when I graduated from high school, I met a man in--at a summer job. His name was Eugene Edney, Jr. And I went away to college, and he followed me and ended up we got married that same year I graduated from high school. And so my father [Norris Trice] said, "Okay, we are gonna keep Monty [Monty Trice]." Monty was my son. You know, he said, "You get married; you go to college; Monty stays here," 'cause my father adored my son. And so--and my son likewise. You know, he loved his grandfather. And so, so in going away to college, I was also seeing this gentleman that I had just met, and I got married in that, that December. And so-- Speaker 1: That was pretty fast-- Speaker 2: --first semes- . Yeah, we met in July and married in December. And it was--it was--it was a whirlwind relationship. And I also got serious about the Lord. I got serious about God in my life in--at Thanksgiving--November that year. It was on Thanksgiving Day of 1979 was the day that I gave my life to the Lord, and that's a whole other story about how that happened. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you--now Mr. Edney, now was he--was he much older than you or was he (unclear)? Speaker 2: No, he was actually about three, three years older--four years older than me. Wasn't-- Story_ID: 645666 Speaker 1: And what was he [Trice Edney's ex-husband, Eugene Edney, Jr.] doing? Was he-- Speaker 2: He was college bound he--as well. He ended up going to Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia]. And we were an, an, an incredible power couple initially. He, he would--he was a speaker. He would encourage me to speak. He would hold rallies and marches and--from--for Martin Luther King birthday, you know, holiday [Martin Luther King Jr. Day]. We (unclear) for, for anti-apartheid rallies. When the children in Atlanta [Georgia] were being killed, we had a huge rally right there in Richmond [Virginia]. We had a black Virginians' unity day [Black Unity Day]. I mean, he was an incredible, incredible leader, and an, an amazing speaker. His mother wanted him to become a minister, but he never did, you know, at least not while I was married to him he never did accept that or, or you know, really desired that. But he was a leader. He was truly a civil rights leader. Politicians called on him to--you know, for endorsement. I have pictures of him and the mayor, you know, and I, et cetera. But, but we all have our--you know, our downfalls. And, and we didn't get along enough in the marriage to stay in the marriage. So after only four years of marriage we divorced. Story_ID: 645667 Speaker 1: You graduated from high school [Louisa County High School, Mineral, Virginia]. Just is-- just to recap the years here. In what, what year did you graduate? In seventy--? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay, 1979. And then you started at Saint Paul's in '79 [1979]. Now when, when you got married, did you drop out of school or did you stay-- Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: --you stay--you stayed, okay. Speaker 2: I--what I did was I transferred, 'cause he lived in Richmond [Virginia]. My husband [Trice Edney's ex-husband, Eugene Edney, Jr.] lived in Richmond so I transferred to Virginia Commonwealth University [Richmond, Virginia]. But all--it wasn't just because of the marriage that I transferred. I also wanted to major in--I wanted more experience in communications. I was doing radio in Lawrenceville, where Saint Paul's is. I was majoring in English, but there was for me not enough of a concen- concentration in the mass media. They just didn't offer that. But I was on the dean's list, and I was doing exceptionally well. I was freshman class reporter and was doing very well, but just decided to get married, and then I had to transfer. Speaker 1: Okay, did--well, did you have any special teachers or mentors at Saint, Saint Paul's? Speaker 2: I can't say--there was one woman by the name of--if I remembered correctly, it was Ms. Majett [ph.], and she was a great influence on me because I assisted--and, and as a part of my work study program I assisted with the newsletter--the Saint Paul's newsletter. And she's the one who got me involved in doing radio for Saint Paul's College on the local radio station there in Lawrenceville. And so she apparently, you know, saw my talents and decided to help to groom them as well. Speaker 1: Okay, so at Virginia Commonwealth--now so--well, you know, what, what was--now that's a little--that's a bigger school and-- Speaker 2: Oh yes-- Speaker 1: --more (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that's a huge street university. It's--as, as you know, it's a part of metro--the Medical College of Virginia [Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia] is now under Virginia Commonwealth, and it was totally, totally different. It was--there was--you know Saint Paul's is a small concentrated college. It was much like Louisa [Virginia], you know, a small town of Lawrenceville, Virginia. And so moving to Richmond, being a part of Virginia Commonwealth University, and also being married, it was just a totally different life. It was just going to class, coming home, being a wife, cooking, you know, et cetera, and trying to get my studies done. But the only involvement I had on the campus was working. I worked security and which meant I had a lot of contact with people that I'm still in touch with now. Story_ID: 645668 Speaker 1: The housekeeping staff there took me in when I was going through some incredible trials there in my marriage [to Eugene Edney, Jr.]. And I'm still dear friends with people like Ms. Sadie [ph.], who took me in at that time, 'cause I was a young student security guard, you know, trying to make my way. And she could tell that something else was going on personally, and would take me in and say, "Come on let's pray," you know. Speaker 2: So what, what were you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So she helped to groom me. Speaker 2: --were you a victim of, of abuse--physical abuse in the marriage? Speaker 1: I was. Speaker 2: Okay. So they--so I don't know what they--the psychologists trying to explain why people that see that at home, you know-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --end up marrying someone that do the same thing as that. Do you have any thoughts about that? Speaker 1: Yes, I, I can actually say because my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] stayed, I tried to stay. And even when I decided to leave with a broken nose in an ambulance, I went back. When I packed my clothes I made sure that he had dinner when I left. And I ended up living in a shelter for battered and abused women for about a month before they helped me to transition into my own apartment. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is how many--about three, three years into the marriage? Speaker 1: That was four years-- Speaker 2: Four years. Speaker 1: --actually right after I graduated from Virginia Commonwealth University [Richmond, Virginia]. It was the same month, in May of 1984. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay, that's May 1994--1984. Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 645669 Speaker 1: This must make it difficult to get through school having to deal with this--? Speaker 2: Oh, it was horrendous. And if it had not been for those ladies, you know, who recognized something is going on and, and teaching me--literally teaching me how to pray, and, and sharing with me some of what they've gone through, you know, in their lives. I don't know if I would have made it through. But through their encouragement and, and their taking me in and you know, just befriending me, I was strengthened by their presence and looked forward to working my little security job you know, part time, and you know, getting through my studies, you know, with their encouragement. But it was--it was emotionally traumatic. But what I had seen my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] go through probably also gave me a resolve. You know, 'cause I had been traumatized by seeing these things and then going through these things, emotional and physical abuse, you know, of course it was even more destructive going through them myself. But I believe that because I had seen them before, it gave me a resolve that I can make it through this. Speaker 1: Okay, now how, how are your grades during this period of time? Speaker 2: I, I never got a bad grade at VCU [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia]. I made A's, Bs and Cs; I never even got a D, and I rarely got a C. I got a few Cs (unclear), but they were not more than the A's and Bs, especially in my writing classes. In, in all of my writing courses I always made A's and Bs. And you know, some of the, the courses that I had to take, like biology, et cetera, I probably didn't do that well in; but I, I did very well in college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And--yeah. Story_ID: 645670 Speaker 1: When you graduated, what was your agenda? What was, what was next? Speaker 2: At the time that I graduated from college, from VCU [Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia], I was also a--an intern at a CBS affiliate, WTVR-TV 6 [WTVR-TV], and I had won a Black Advisory Council scholarship. And I was bent on doing radio, you know. Speaker 1: Now, now this is in Richmond [Virginia]? Speaker 2: This is in Richmond. Speaker 1: The CBS affiliate; and that's, that's W-- Speaker 2: WTVR, right there on Broad Street, yes. And it was a great beginning. I was with them for about a year, and I was actually with them when I suffered the domestic incident that caused me to leave. And I remember--'cause I had to get up at four o'clock in the morning and go to the newsroom in order to fix coffee and to queue up the tapes, et cetera, and write some of the scripts for the anchors--the early morning anchors. And that morning I didn't show up because I was in an ambulance and, and going to the hospital. And I remember the next day I came to work, and when you have a broken nose, you also have two black eyes, so I looked pretty bad. I looked horrific, and one of the reporters approached me and you know, I lied. I told 'em I had a car accident, and then finally, you know, I told 'em the truth of what I had been going through. And they wrote a letter. All of the reporters in the newsroom wrote a letter to the news director, just seeing what I had gone through. And they said you know, "We just need to tell you--," and I still have his letter. He--they said, "We need to tell you that of all of the interns we have ever had Hazel [HistoryMaker Hazel Trice Edney] has proven to be the very best we have ever seen," and--you know just in terms of being faithful. I missed that one day 'cause I was in the hospital, and I came back. Responsibility was great to me, and I think that, that really came from my father [Norris Trice] and my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice]. You know, like I said, they had their times, but when it came to their children, you know, they were really strict. And even when I was delinquent, even when I, you know, got pregnant, et cetera, they never let me go. When I ran away they came looking for me and brought me back, you know. And my father--regardless of the fact that I had a child [Monty Trice], my father still scrutinized my boyfriends, and still didn't let me go, you know, to the homecoming dance if he thought that I was not acting properly, et cetera. And so there was something that was instilled within us, you know, as children, that caused us as an adult, even to be away from home, to remember. And it's just something within us that says be responsible, be accountable, and be full of integrity. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now WTVR--so ha- how long did stay at this--at WTVR? Speaker 2: I was there for a year. First it was an unpaid internship, and then it became a paid internship. And I got a chance to actually co-host a talk show while I was there. That was just a--on one occasion, but I just approached the talk show host and said, "Can I co-host this talk show 'On Drugs' [ph.] with you?" And he allowed me to do that, and so it was a very, very good start for me. And that was all in 1984. And I think the internship ended at the end of 1984, and then I got a job at a radio station, where I really wanted to do radio, 'cause I started doing radio in high school [Louisa County High School, Mineral, Virginia]. And I really wanted to do radio, so I became news director at WFTH radio station [WFTH Radio, Richmond, Virginia]. And that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this, this was at the end of '94 [1994]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984], yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, '84 [1984], okay. Story_ID: 645671 Speaker 1: I've forgotten exactly when I started but it was--I transitioned. Speaker 2: WT-- Speaker 1: WFTH [WFTH Radio]. Speaker 2: --FTH, okay. Speaker 1: That was WFTH gospel radio station. Speaker 2: And that's in Richmond [Virginia] too? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I worked--I did everything there. I was the accountant; I was new- I was news director; and I was newscaster. I actually did afternoon newscasts for them. So it was--that was my--sort of my birth into beginning to news write. But that's when I realized, you know, I couldn't write enough, so that's when I knew that print media--newspaper--was going to be me. Speaker 2: Okay, so how long did, did you stay at WF- FTH? Speaker 1: I stayed at WFTH until about mid-1986, not really that long. They were having some layoffs, and they were about to lay off a young lady who had a child that she really had to care for. The child was with her, et cetera. My child [Monty Price] was with my parents [Marie Jefferson Trice and Norris Trice]. And I just said, you know what? Rather than to lay her off and put her in a situation like that, "Let her have my job." And so I, you know, decided to just let them let me go instead of laying her off. Story_ID: 645672 Speaker 1: And so I left [WFTH Radio, Richmond, Virginia] and then I was--I think I was unemployed for a season. And I went to work at--as a receptionist at the convention center [Greater Richmond Convention Center]. They were opening a new convention center in Richmond [Virginia], and I was the first receptionist, but at the same time, I began to freelance write with the Richmond Afro-American newspaper. So I worked as a receptionist while I was freelance writing at the Richmond Afro. And so one day as a receptionist I answered the phone, and it's the editor of the Afro asking me to come and work there full time. And I almost made a hole in the wall (laughter)--yes, like gone. It was actually only a few blocks away. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is in--this is in-- Speaker 1: In Richmond. Speaker 2: In eight--'86 [1986] still? Is this is '86 [1986]? Speaker 1: Oh yes, this is--the (unclear) is '86 [1986] me working at the convention center. I actually started at the Afro in March of '87 [1987]. So I worked at the convention center about a year. Speaker 2: Okay, so 1987 you go to the Afro. Okay, Richmond Afro. Okay, that's part of the Afro newspapers [Afro-American Newspapers] that-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, in-- Speaker 2: --originally in Baltimore [Maryland] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and Richmond was actually the oldest, yes. Speaker 2: Oh, was it? Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: It was the oldest. It started in the eight--late 1800s. Story_ID: 645673 Speaker 1: You said it started as the Richmond Planet, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm, it was John Mitchell's [John Mitchell, Jr.] newspaper, the Richmond Planet. The Afro bought it back in about 1890, and, and it was still going strong at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now what were duties at, at the Richmond Afro [Richmond Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers]? Speaker 2: Simply to report. I was staff writer, I was reporter, and I absolutely loved the civil rights--you know, the black beat. It was--you know, so. I would--it was a normal thing for me to have five or six bylines on the front page on a weekly basis. And you know, I just kind of--I, I don't know how I did it, you know, but I was able to do it. And so--and these were not bad stories. These were all stories and well researched stories. And so my primary responsibilities were to hunt down stories pertaining to black injustices, et cetera, and to--and to write them, or just general news. I remember one of the biggest breaking stories was, you know, I broke the story that said that, that the Marriott Corporation was pulling out of ownership of the convention center [Greater Richmond Convention Center, Richmond, Virginia]. It was something like that. I forgot exactly how it went, but it was like, how did I get this--how did she get this story? Because she works for the black newspaper, she's supposed to be paying attention to the black news, but I had connections. I had connections, very--you know, good connections everywhere, including in city government, on--I covered city council [Richmond City Council], et cetera. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so--all right now what--what was that--what in the demographics are Richmond [Virginia], I guess? Speaker 2: Richmond is-- Speaker 1: I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) predominantly black. Speaker 1: --in those--in those days. Speaker 2: At that time it as even blacker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, at that time it was like 56, 57, maybe 58 percent black; now it's only about 51. It's right on the verge now. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the ec- ec- economic--economics like in Richmond? Speaker 2: There were--it's like 'A Tale of Two Cities' [Charles Dickens]. There were so many--it's--there was--there was a lot of poverty. There were lots of housing--public housing developments. At that time Gilpin Court [Richmond, Virginia], you know, was--and it's, it's still there, but at that time it was going through some tremendous problems and you know, waste dumps. There were toxic waste dumps in black neighborhoods, et cetera. And so there was--there has always been a struggle, and there still is a great struggle with poverty in the City of Richmond. Story_ID: 645674 Speaker 1: So the Richmond Afro [Richmond Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] and your, your title is re- reporter? Speaker 2: Yes, staff writer, yeah. Speaker 1: Staff writer-reporter. Who else was there? Speaker 2: There--my first editor, the one who hired me, his name was Jerry Harewood [ph.]; he's deceased now. And there was a great reporter there by the name of Roxanne Wilkins. I think--I'm not sure if she use all three names, but it was like Roxanne Stinson [ph.] Wilkins. And there--at the time that I came, there was another reporter there by the name of Jerry Turner. But Jerry left shortly--only a few weeks after I came. I imagine that Mr. Hairwood knew that he was transitioning, and he went to another newspaper to be editor there. And so I became sort of like one of the lead writers. Roxanne did a lot of education writing, but I did the street, the--you know, the beat--you know, sort of like the street beat, the down and dirty--what's going on in politics, and what's going on out there with those people that nobody else is paying attention to, you know, the afflict the comfortable and comfort the afflicted kind of writing. Speaker 1: Did Richmond [Virginia] have a black mayor in those days? Speaker 2: It did. Yes, Richmond had a black mayor. Speaker 1: And who was it? Speaker 2: Actually, during that season the mayor was--let's see. I was still--I believe it was still Henry Marsh [HistoryMaker Henry L. Marsh, III]. Speaker 1: Right, I've heard of Henry Marsh (unclear). Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember if he was still mayor, but he was one of the black mayors. If, if I remember correctly, he was--he was probably still mayor at that time. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 645675 Speaker 1: I'm trying to remember, 'cause it's--you know, so, so many politics. If it comes back to me differently, I'll, I'll tell you. But the city council [Richmond City Council] was predominantly black at that time, and--but there were always fights. It was like constantly the Civil War over and over and over again. Speaker 2: I can imagine. Richmond [Virginia] is a place where the white community actually acts out Civil War values you know, in the open with monuments and programs and (unclear). And increasingly in the news there are stories of African American populations in the South resisting those kinds of-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: --displays in Memphis [Tennessee] and other cities, Savannah [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Yes. And, and there are humongous, humongous statues now on Monument Avenue, and you know, of course they tried to integrate it with the Arthur Ashe statue, which is nowhere near the magnitude of the Robert E. Lee's you know, and the--and the confederate statues there. It just came back to me that Roy West [Roy A. West]--Roy West was actually the mayor. He had overthrown Henry Marsh [HistoryMaker Henry L. Marsh, III]. Roy West was sort of like the white choice for city council--for the--for the mayorship. And so--and it was--and it happened in 1982 that Henry Marsh was--he was still on the council when I came, but he was no longer the mayor. Roy West had overthrown his mayorship. And he was mayor when I came in, in 1987. Story_ID: 645676 Speaker 1: What were some of the big stories in, in Richmond [Virginia] that you remember, or the memorable stories? Speaker 2: The memorable stories pertain to usually the, the, the pain and suffering of, of black people. There was a story, for example, about a, a food stamp line that stretched for blocks. You know, I wrote this story--that stretched for blocks in the wintertime, in, in the cold, in, in the summertime, in the sweltering heat, you had pregnant mothers. You had elderly women, et cetera who had to wait outside for their food stamps. And I would notice this line year after year, and finally I inquired, "What is this line?" It was in August that particular year. And I went inside the facility where they got their food stamps. There was no water, no air conditioning. It was like third world. I hate to use that term, but that's what it was like, literally. This was like--it couldn't be America happening. And so I wrote a story on it, and that story impacted the public policy pertaining to that particular food stamp distributor. The city manager at that time, who was Robert [ph.], Bob, actually cut the contract--ended the contract for that particular distributor and moved the, the recipients to another facility that--in which they could pick up their food stamps in a much more humane condition. And at the same time--and I don't take credit for this, but it just happened to have--happen at the same time. So it could have been my story that did it. Virginia went to like a stagger system in the, the food stamp recipients picking up their food stamps. They didn't all pick 'em up on the same day that caused that humongous line. And so a lot happened after that story broke that I, I believe brought hu- you know, humanity to the people who were suffering there. There were so many other stories. I remember doing a story on, on this--on seeing homeless people sleeping in paper--in cardboard boxes outside the shelter at night in the dead of winter. And we took pictures of these cardboard boxes with these people in them outside, and it was on the front page of the Afro [Richmond Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers]. And then the next day, it was on the front page of the white daily--the Richmond Times-Dispatch. And so in many instances the stories that we were doing were followed by the white press, and this is just at the Afro. This is before I'd go to the Richmond Free Press. And, and-- Speaker 1: Now this is the opposite of what happens in some of the cities that I know of where the black press seems to--you know, pe- people joke that they're actually reading a white pa- paper the night before, you know. Speaker 2: Yes, they'll say we--we're following--well, this is--it's always been opposite in--you know, for, for me. It's always been opposite. I--you know, I've always tended to say okay, this is the story that goes against the grain, but nobody else is saying it. Nobody was writing it, so I'm gonna write it. And it ends up, for example, in The New York Times, which happened when I was at the Free Press. And it ended up on the front page of The Washington Post, which happened when I was at the Afro. And so it's, it's just a matter of having a gut instinct as a journalist and saying, you know what? This is a story regardless of what paper; and other papers will follow you, 'cause it is a story. Story_ID: 645677 Speaker 1: Did it take a lot of courage to do that the first time, to take something that was im- important when other folks, the mainstream, didn't think it was? Speaker 2: It probably was courage, but I didn't recognize it as that. It was just me. I remember my first question at my first press conference. We were in a high rise building down on (air quotes) Main Street, and (air quotes) Main Street in Richmond [Virginia] is a buzz, buzz word for powerful white money, and they had called a press conference at Wheat First Securities [Wheat First Securities, Inc.]. And Jim Wheat [James C. Wheat III] was the president and owner of Wheat First Securities, and he was like a powerful white figure in Richmond politics in history. And he was there, and all of his, you know, associates. And they were announcing the development of what they called Twin Towers [Riverfront Plaza], which were two buildings, that were gonna come to Richmond, and they are actually there now. But I was begin- I began to wonder as I stood there and I listened to all of this fanfare about these two buildings, you know, what it was gonna do for us. You know, what about the black people? And so I asked the question, "How are you going to assure that there is adequate black participation in the contracting and construction of these buildings?" And, ah--I mean, of course I got the line. I got the line that says, "Oh, we're an equal opportunity employer." But the black politicians in the room were floored, the members of the city council [Richmond City Council], who had fought for so long for that kind of participation. They came over and they were like, "Who are you?" (Laughter) So I sort of became, at that moment, you know, somebody that they began to trust and would funnel stories to, et cetera. And then you know that in 1989 I was--that was in 1987 when I asked that question. And two years later, in 1989, was when the Croson decision was made by the U.S. Supreme Court, and that was Croson v. City of Richmond [sic. City of Richmond v. J.A. Croson Company, 1989], in which they challenged a 30 percent minority set aside that Richmond had. And Chuck Richardson on city council had actually put that paper in and fought for it to be passed. And so black contractors were doing much, much better at that time, since 1983 when it had first gotten started. But then the Supreme Court said that (air quotes) set asides were unconstitutional, and so it cut down set asides across the country. And that ended a whole lot of participation that we're still struggling to retain and to regain. Story_ID: 645678 Speaker 1: Now you were at the Richmond Planet. Speaker 2: The Richmond Afro [Richmond Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers], yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, Richmond Af- Richmond Afro. I'm reaching back too far (laughter). Speaker 2: Wow, it would be great to start a new Richmond Planet, wouldn't it (laughter)? Speaker 1: From, from '87 [1987] to-- Speaker 2: From '87 [1987] until '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: Okay and '91 [1991]. Okay, now you go to work as a staff writer for the Richmond Free Press then, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now is that the mainstream--main street paper in Richmond [Virginia]? Speaker 2: Anything but. It is-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It is the absolute total opposite of anything main street (laughter) and (unclear). Mr. Boone, is--I call him my father in the black press. And I actually studied Mr. Boone when I as at the Afro because Mr. Boone was a former editor of the Afro. Speaker 1: So this is Mr. Raymond H. Boone? Speaker 2: Yes, he was the person who was at the Afro during the time when the first majority black city council was elected, and Henry Marsh [HistoryMaker Henry L. Marsh, III] was elected mayor at that time. And he is an incredible, incredible radical black man who is for justice. And he's radical in a good way, radical for justice. And so I had studied him, and he was also studying me and I didn't know that. And he called me one day and said, "This is Ray Boone, and I'd like to meet you." And I'm like, "Mr. Boone--." He had actually met me before, but I don't know if we--either one of us really remembered, it was like a re-meeting. And he met with me and told me that he was going to be coming back to Richmond. He was living in Baltimore [Maryland] at that time, and he was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. He had been teaching at Howard in journalism, and that he was going to be starting the Richmond Free Press, and his first reporter. And not only was I his first reporter, but I was his first employee. And so I, I left the Afro in September of 1991 to join him. It was--you know, it's just like a leap of faith, but I believed in him, I had studied him, and I knew that he was serious. Story_ID: 645679 Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--did--were you supported at the Afro [Richmond Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers]? I mean, were your stories and your reporting supported at the Afro? Speaker 1: Yes. I, I won the--remember the first place, NNPA first place award at the Afro. That was for the Wilbert Lee Evans story. There were so many stories at the Afro that I could just tick off. There was a death row inmate named Wilbert Lee Evans, who I wrote about, his final hours. And that won a first place feature story award from the National Newspaper Publishers Association. The Afro, yes, they--we didn't make a lot of money. Nobody in the black press makes a lot of money--well, maybe some do (laughter). But at that time we weren't--but they supported us from the standpoint of if the--if anybody came against us, then they stood behind us. I remember one instance when Governor L. Douglas Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] was running for governor. And you know, at that time, of course, he had been lieutenant governor; he had been senator; and then he was running for governor against Marshall Coleman [J. Marshall Coleman]. And I interviewed Governor Wilder at a Richmond Crusade for Voters meeting, and the Richmond Crusade for Voters [Richmond Crusade for Voters, Inc.] was against the death penalty. And so I asked him, you know, "Are you for or against the death penalty?" He said, "I'm against it." Well, all I know is what he said and that my tape recorder was running. And so what happened was, you know, he was running for governor at that time, and it just went--I mean, that went all over the place, the fact that this reporter had written that Wilder was against the death penalty, when he's on the record of being for the death penalty. And it was like a--like major confusion. And so Marshall Coleman, on a, a few days before the election, called for the release of the tape. And the Afro stood behind me, because he was calling for that reporter to release the tape, and we said no, and the fact The Washington Post called me, and I happened to answer the phone. And, and you know, they call--they said, "Marshall Coleman is, is calling for you to release the tape." And said something like, you know, we won't play into his desperation. Because this is gonna be the first elected black governor of, you know, the Unites States, and so why would a black newspaper try to do him in. And I didn't e- I wasn't trying to do him in when I wrote the story. I just wrote what he said. I didn't know he had been previously for it. And he ended up for it in his administration because the Wilbert Lee Evans story, the one that, that won me first place feature story award for NNPA, was a story about a death row inmate that Governor Wilder allow to go to his death without ever even saying whether or not he would be pardoned. You know, they don't have to say anything, and so Governor Wilder never said anything. All that's gonna be in the book (laugher). It's like--he just never said anything. And, and that, that, that story is still--so much--so alive today. Someone recently called me actually and told me that they--they their father found a log in, in the old prison that was on Spring Street [Virginia Penitentiary, Richmond, Virginia]--that's where he was electrocuted--that had my name in it. They said wa- one of the guards was keeping a log that evening of all the phone calls that Wilbert Lee Evans was making on the evening that he was electrocuted, and that my name was in the log several times, in terms of some of the people that he was reaching out to. And so it's just that, that story is still, you know, kind of lives in my soul. But--and so--and, and the Wilder administration continued as I went over to the Richmond Free Press, of course, 'cause he had--you know, he had just been elected when I went to the Free Press in '91 [1991]. He had just been in elected in '89 [1989] and had served out his first year in '90 [1990], so we had plenty more coverage to do. And it ended up being a great relationship with he and I. Speaker 2: It was wa- wa- Wilder? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He took me on my first plane ride. I rode on the, the state plane to Memphis [Tennessee], you know, with him. And we just had a--you know, a great ru- you know, from a reporter and subject standpoint, you know, he, he was always very forthcoming, always responsive. That's also because he had known Mr. Boone [Raymond H. Boone] for so long, but he had known me from the Afro. Story_ID: 645680 Speaker 1: Both of these papers are in Richmond [Virginia], and I guess I was trying to figure out why you, you know, moved from Rich- the Afro [Richmond Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] to the Richmond Free Press then? Speaker 2: Because I--you know, I called Mr. Boone [Raymond H. Boone] my father in the black press. It was--you know, it's, it's a strange thing to be in the--in the building alone late in the evening, and you're studying the style of this person that you'd never met. And then people would come in and say, "You, your writing--I just had to meet you. You remind me of Ray Boone." I mean, I wasn't copying him, it was just that there was something about his, his style that was--that so resonated with me that I became like him. And so when he called to offer me an opportunity to work for him, there was no other choice, you know, but to say yes. I didn't want to necessarily leave the Afro. I was having a ball. You know, I was having a great time there, but you know, I was only making twelve thousand dollars a year, you know. At, at that time, I had been offered other jobs for twenty and thirty thousand. That was a lot of money at that time, but I decided I wanted to write for the black press, and I loved what I was doing. But there was nowhere else to go. Mr. Boone offered that, and in addition to that he offered his mentorship, and I couldn't turn that down. Speaker 1: Now he was different from a lot of other founders of papers. He had been a professor of--well, a professor at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. I'm, I'm thinking it was journalism, but (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, he taught copy editing at Howard, and probably other classes as well, but, but he taught there for ten years, yes. Speaker 1: So he was there when Sam Yette [HistoryMaker Samuel Yette] was there, you know. Speaker 2: Sam Yette was actually--Sam Yette and Mr. Boone are so close, Sam Yette was actually the godfather of Mr. Boone's only daughter [Regina Boone]. And so--and Sam Yette was also a columnist for the Richmond Free Press, and so--as was-- Speaker 1: Okay, this is-- Speaker 2: --Dr. Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] as well. That was--Dr. Ron Walters' first column, was in the Richmond Free Press, his first black press column. Speaker 1: This is starting to sound like an all-star team now. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, it--there's a great lineup, and it's just an awesome lineup. Speaker 1: Yeah, Samuel F. Yette, Y-E-T-T-E, we interviewed him-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and we interviewed Ron Walters. Speaker 2: Oh, did you? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Oh, that is absolutely wonderful. Speaker 1: Right, so this is something. So, so you're at the Richmond Free Press from '91 [1991] I take it until '98 [1998] or so? Is that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --true? Okay. Story_ID: 645681 Speaker 1: What were some of the high- highlights? You mentioned Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder], and anything else from that period of time that you, in mentorship and interaction and all that? Speaker 2: There's just so much. I mean, the, the stories that we did at the Free Press were quintessential black press stories. I was growing up then. You know, at the Afro [Richmond Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers], I shot from the hip; I did what I could; we did some damage now, to injustice; and we brought some equality to some situations, but it was so much more work to do. And so I was maturing, and Mr. Boone [Raymond H. Boone] was a tremendous help to that process. I actually called the Free Press a boot camp--a Marine boot camp for journalist, and so he beat me into shape in his own way. And we did many stories that were impactful, not just to Richmond [Virginia] but to the nation, you know. Like I said, on one story that I did, for example, was a story on how Wendy's restaurant [The Wendy's Company] was--had fired three young nursing students who had braids. They told the lie against black people that braids carry lice. And so I had to prove, you know, or disprove the lie by going to the Virginia code [Code of Virginia] and showing where not only does it say that braids are the--are, are clean, but that it's the recommended form of hairstyle for restaurant food handlers. And so then the--that was on Thursday, and the following--I believe it was the following Saturday or Sunday The New York Times comes with a picture of the same three young girls. And they report that because of the story in the Richmond Free Press, they had reinstated the young women, you know, to their jobs--you know, that story. Then there was a story about the--another national favorite of mine was the story about the Confederate flags that were emblazoned on the planes and uniforms of the Virginia Air National Guard--just absolutely amazing that this had been there since the 1940s, and here it was the 1990s and it was just being dealt with. And so I wrote the story. And the same day that the story came out, Governor L. Douglas Wilder wrote a, a--an executive order. Of course, you know, the governor is the commander and chief of the Air Guards of the states. And he wrote an executive order demanding that they change the emblem to the flag of the United States of America. They changed the emblem. I don't know if it was to the flag, but they had to wipe out the Confederate flag altogether on--in that particular unit. And so there was story after story like that in which we impacted public policy. And it's not--you know I--since I've--since I've left, they've done tremendous work. I mean, it is just the nature of the vision of Ray Boone that he's able to pour into reporters. They have now integrated the, the Virginia supreme court press corps. They did not allow black photographers or women photographers or for--well, let's put it this way, for--black women photographers from, from black newspapers. And so they just went with the--you know, the so called dailies--the so called (air quotes) mainstream. And so that was integrated a few years ago by the Richmond Free Press when Sandra Sellers and Mr. Boone went. And she was the first black reporter and woman reporter to actually cover a--an installation of the chief justice of the Virginia supreme court [Supreme Court of Virginia]. So there are lots of barriers that are still there. That was just a few years ago. Can you imagine that? There are lots of barriers that are still there in Virginia and, and so goes a- across the nation. And the, the stories on police brutality, the stories on race profiling, you know, the stories on, you know, that kind of institutional oppression, that's like every day, you know. You don't even have to name them; they're just every day, every week. Story_ID: 645682 Speaker 1: Right now we're covering the story of Marissa, you know, Alexander [Marissa Alexander] in, in Florida. And so it's, it's constant, you know at- you know, following Trayvon Martin, now we have somebody who fired a warning shot and got twenty years in prison. And George Zimmerman-- Speaker 2: This is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) killed somebody-- Speaker 2: --Marissa-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is Marissa-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in Florida. Speaker 1: Yes. And so I'm just saying that what was happening back then is still happening now. Speaker 2: It's a story that, that has been--has been on MSNBC. I know they've, they've cov- they've covered it too. They talked about it, but I first heard it in the black press--press, you know, who picked it up as a con- major contribution to what happened to George (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To George-- Speaker 2: --Zimmerman. Speaker 1: --Zim- exactly. And that's usually what happens. You know, the black civil rights leaders just begin to jump and down; begin to say foul; and then the black press picks it up; and then it goes national. It catches fire. And so now that she is out on bail, you know, there are those who, who are saying that we cannot allow her to go back. Story_ID: 645683 Speaker 1: So in '98 [1998] no- now, now you were awarded the William S. Wasserman Jr. Fellowship on the Press, Politics and Public Policy from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Yes, and that was after getting accepted to the Kennedy School [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. In order to get that fellowship, you had to first get accepted and go through the rigorous, you know, application process, and you know, pass the GRE [Graduate Record Examination] and all that kind of stuff. Now remember, I didn't do well in math in high school [Louisa County High School, Mineral, Virginia], so I scored idiot level on the GRE, but I did extremely well in the--on the writing part of the GRE. So they accepted my application, and they accepted me into the Kennedy. And upon my acceptance, I was awarded a full tuition scholarship, which was the fellowship of the William S. Wasserman, Jr.; and he was a great man. I got to--I know him now. He was a--he's a, a white Jewish man who absolutely loved community reporting. And this fellowship was specifically for the underrepresented reporters who are out there impacting public policy. And the fellowship was to study press politics and public policy at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard. But you know, getting there I--when you couldn't report; you couldn't write, so you find your other self. And my other self was activism. I got--I established an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] once I got there, and-- Speaker 1: In Cambridge [Massachusetts] or, or, or-- Speaker 2: I, I-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: --established the NAACP at Harvard on the campus. Speaker 1: In Har- in Harvard--oh, the campus. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: On the campus--and it was accepted into the Kennedy School, and the president of Harvard [Neil Rudenstine] accepted it, et cetera. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, so this fellowship lasted until--what was from '98 [1998] to '99 [1999]-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We graduated-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was an escalated, very intense master's degree program that started in the summer of '98 [1998] and ended in the spring the following year. And so I graduated in June of, of 1999 and was selected as graduate student orator. Speaker 1: Now what was your, your thesis? Speaker 2: Well, didn't have to-- Speaker 1: Did you have to write-- Speaker 2: We didn't have to write thesis-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as per se. We did--I did do an independent study, and my independent study was on the black press. And I compared two editors, one modern day with one historical black editor in those modern ed- those--the modern day editor was Ray Boone [Raymond H. Boone], and I compared him to John Mitchell [John Mitchell, Jr.] of the 1800s and, and their similarities, et cetera. But that was an independent study. But-- Speaker 1: Now who is John Mitchell? Tell, tell us something about him. Speaker 2: John Mitchell was a crusading editor of the Richmond Planet, which was the forerunner of the Richmond Afro-American newspaper [Afro-American Newspapers]. He's probably best known for his, his relationships that he had with governors. He influenced--he was a great influence of, of politics in the City of Richmond [Virginia]. He, he actually led a, a boycott of the streetcars. And there's a story about how the white supremacists hated him so much that they would actually send him manure through the mail (laughter). And he was not afraid of them. He would go and he would ride on a horse and with--they, they say--with two six shooters on his hips. And so he was ve- way out there in terms of fighting for justice and equality for black people. And so Mr. Boone reminds me so much of him in terms of this, this, this spirit of the black press, and the f- the--that fighting, you know, that courage. Story_ID: 645684 Speaker 1: Okay. Just a couple more questions about Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. The first one is, who were some of your--I--oh, oh, I was asking you about the attractions of Har- the other, you know, influences around that area that you--you know, that were going on when you were there. Were there any special speakers on campus at events? Speaker 2: Well, my favorite professor, who was, was Leon Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.], you know, who was a federal judge. And he was this--a tremendous influence on me, on us, on the, the class. He taught legal--the legal justice system and--in America. And he died the same year. We did not get to finish his class. We finished the class, but we didn't have him professor all the way because he, he passed away during the class time. And that made an incredible impact on us. I was--I was co-chair of the Black Caucus at the Kennedy School [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which meant I had to be very much involved in, in assisting, you know, with you know, the, the students and serving the family, et cetera. And so he sort of became--he was--he was--he had a tremendous impact on me. There were other speakers who came. Greenspan [Alan Greenspan] came, and actually, President Mal- Mandela [Nelson Mandela], who was at that time no longer president, but he, he came and he spoke. And when I spoke, I borrowed some from President Mandela's speech. But the person who influenced me most when I was there was, was probably Judge Higginbotham. It was during the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] trials and you know, the Monica Lewinsky and that and the impeachment, and so he had to go to Washington [D.C.] to testify for Clinton. And he would come back and he would talk about his testimony and show it to us on videotape, and you know, talked about the principles and--of justice and how they flowed, even in the midst of somebody's wrong, even if they might have been wrong. Clinton might--was wrong, you know, in what he did, but the good that he did always overshadows. You know, he taught us principles like that. And so and he--and besides that, he was also one of the--one of the people who was our advisor for the NAACP chapter [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and so. Speaker 1: Was [HistoryMaker] Randall Kennedy, [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were there, but I did not know them well. In fact, I didn't meet Dr. Ogletree until after--or Professor Ogletree--until after I graduated from Harvard. I did meet Randall Kennedy at one point, but I didn't have them as professors. And you know, their--but their legacies were great. I did meet Dr. Cornel West. I didn't have him as a professor either, but I was in his presence a lot. He was also one of the advisors for the NAACP chapter as well as Dr. Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.]. He was the third advisor. You had to have three. And so we had three mighty advisors for the NAACP chapter; and in fact, Dr. Gates allowed us to have our meetings in the Du Bois Institute [W.E.B. Du Bois Research Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 645685 Speaker 1: All right, now you were the graduate student orator for your class com- commencement there. What did you talk about? Speaker 2: I talked about my walk. The title of the speech was The Walk Worth Taking--A Walk Worth Taking [ph.]. And it was actually a--that was a quote from professor--from--I'm sorry--President Rudenstine [Neil Rudenstine], at that time who was president of Harvard. And when he introduced Nelson Mandela, he talked about how Nelson Mandela--President Mandela--had taken the walk worth taking. And so I used that theme to walk through my one year at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and all of the major strides that I had seen happen at the university within that one year. But there--but, but with me and with my--what I have been trained--in fact, one of my mentors had said, "Don't say trained," you know, "say taught." But what is engrossed in me is that you never, you know, give the praise without also giving the challenge. And so half of the speech was praising Harvard for all of the major strides that had happened there in that one year and sense the other separating of the centuries. This was the verge of 2000; it was 1999. So I was going, "Since 1900 this is--there's so much that's happened in this one year, much of it has happened, but then this is how far we have to go." So the second half of the speech was challenging Harvard to do eve- even better with its black professors, to do even better with its racial inclusion, and its inclusion of women, et cetera. And so it was a, a speech that ended with a challenge after also giving praise to how far Harvard has come. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so you ended up with a master's degree, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what is--what's it called, a master's-- Speaker 2: It was a master's degree in public--public administration with a focus in the press, politics and public policy. Story_ID: 645686 Speaker 1: Did you go back to the Free Press-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --from--okay. Speaker 2: No, I--my name is still in the masthead. My name is, is still as an associate writer of the Richmond Free Press, but I never went back full time. I came to Washington [D.C.] to serve as a Congressional Fellow [American Political Science Association Congressional Fellowship Program]. When I did that speech at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it was graduation day, and I was waiting to hear back as to whether or not I was gonna become a White House Fellow. I was a national finalist for the White House Fellows program. I had already been named a, a Congressional Fellow, and I did not get into the White House Fellows program, so I came to Washington to serve as a Congressional Fellow. And I'm so glad that I didn't get into the White House Fellows program because I would not have had the experience of meeting and working for Senator Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] directly, and even going to the Oval Office, as you see in the picture over there and--with him to meet President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]--you know, write a--wrote a for--floor speech and was responsible for a piece of legislation having been passed. And so he took me to the White House [Washington, D.C.] with him to--for the signage of a--of a--of that bill, which was a day of honor for minority veterans of World War II [WWII]. And so it was a--it was an incredibly high point in my life, the graduation from Harvard and then coming here to become a fellow in, in the U.S. Senate. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, so what was Ted Kennedy like? Did you have a chance to really (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I did; not often you know, as you imagine. I was--I wasn't an intern. I was a fellow, you know, and I didn't get a chance to interact with him on a day to day basis. But there were the occasions that I did, you know, get to frequent his office and speak to him. And on that particular occasion that I referred to when he took me to the White House was probably the closest that we had been, and as I had, you know, written the floor speech and the legislation. And he took me in with him to a pre-reception before the bill was signed. And he said to me, you know, "Stick with me," he said, "because I'm going to introduce you to all the important people." And so--and that's the kind of person that he was, such a warm and just a, a wonderful man. You know, what you saw was what you got. The passion that you saw on the Senate floor was the same passion by which he lived by--I mean, by which he lived. He actually meant he wanted equality for, for black people. You know, he wanted poor people to come up. And so he pulled me in that day and said, "I'm gonna do this," and he introduced me to Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]; he introduced me to Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.], who was at that time secretary of the army; and then we went into the Oval Office for the signing. And President Clinton had actually picked up his pen to sign and Senator Kennedy said, "Mr. President, before you do that there's somebody you need to meet." And I mean, the Oval Office was like, "What," (laughter)? He actually said, "This is Hazel Edney [HistoryMaker Hazel Trice Edney]. She is the fellow who is responsible for the bill that you are about to sign." And there's a picture of me somewhere with my eyes like walled back in my head and I'm about to faint. It was like so amazing. So the picture that you see here on the wall is after I had gotten it together and we were all just kind of posing for pictures, et cetera, together. But that's the kind of man he was. That's the kind of gentleman and, and--and to, to think of the--you know, of what it took for him to do that. It didn't take courage because, you know, President Clinton and him, they were close; they were friends. But it took something else for him to want to recognize someone in his office who had no official title, you know, who he had not worked around that much, but yet he knew what I had done in order to help to bring that bill to fruition. And so it was a major moment that says much more about him than it did about me. Story_ID: 645687 Speaker 1: Well, in 2000, if I'm on the right track here, you were hired by the NNPA, right? Speaker 2: I was. Speaker 1: The National Newspaper Publishers Association. And tell us how you were, were recruited and what happened. Speaker 2: At the end of my fellowship at, at Senator Kennedy's [Edward M. Kennedy] office, and it was a journalism fellowship for journalists to learn how to cover [U.S.] Congress from the inside out. I got a call from Benjamin Todd Jealous [Benjamin Jealous], who we now know as being president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. Now he's about to leave, but at that time he was executive director of the NNPA Foundation. And the NNPA Foundation was the umbrella organization over the NNPA News Service. And so Ben called me. He at that time was working for Jake Oliver [HistoryMaker John Jacob "Jake" Oliver], who was chair of NNPA, and Jake Oliver, his family owns the Afro [Afro-American Newspapers] so they knew me from way back when. So they not only knew me from this award winning reporter from the Afro [Richmond Afro-American], but Jake now knew that this award winning reporter from the Afro was back in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And so he sent Ben to say, you know, they were looking for their Capitol Hill correspondent for the NNPA News Service, and you know, they saw me as, as the one. And so they--I had dinner with Ben and he asked me if I would. I told him I would consider it, and I did, and I said yes. I had other options out there, but I said yes to the black press because that was my heart's desire. That's the reason that I went to Harvard in the first place, is because I knew I wanted to, to do something in the black press that was not just local in Richmond [Virginia], but was national in impact and in scope. And so he hired me for the, the Afro--I mean--I'm sorry--he hired me then for the NNPA News Service and I was there for the next decade. Speaker 1: Now tell us a little about the NNPA. What is it and how it's formed and-- Speaker 2: NNPA was established in the 1940s actually; and it was formed by a group of publishers who felt that publishers needed to band together in order to make a greater impact. Of course, it's a descendant of the first black newspaper, which was founded in 1827. And so when we celebrated the black press birthday, you know, we go back like a hundred and you know, eighty something years at this point. But NNPA is almost eighty years old. It's seventy something years old, maybe about seventy-five. I've forgotten exactly how old. But I was with them when they celebrated the seventieth year in, in New York [New York]. NNPA is a, a federation of approximately two hundred--more than two hundred black owned newspapers around the country. And the thought is that banding together of course you're more powerful as a unified body than you are just separate, just out there on your own. And so it, it, it boasts a certain level of authority and influence that some of the newspapers may not be able to boasts on a national (unclear)--level by themselves. Most of the member of NNPA, though, they carry major influence right there in their towns and cities and states where they are. By banding together they make a, a major national impact. You okay? Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm fine. I'm--yeah, I'm sorry. Well, it was founded as a National Negro Publishers Association. Now it's National Negro--I mean National Newspaper Publishers Association. Speaker 2: Yes, National Newspaper Publishers Association. Nineteen forty [1940] was the year that it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 2: --was founded. Story_ID: 645688 Speaker 1: These stories are carried all over the country-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --by the NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association] members. And what--what were some of the big stories in these ten years, from 2000 to I guess 2010? Speaker 2: Well, in 2000, my--one of my first assignments was actually covering the 2000 election. If we remember that debacle. I--and I will never forget waking up in the early morning after the election between Al Gore and George Bush [George Walker Bush], and hearing Ben Jealous [Benjamin Jealous] on the other end of the telephone saying, "You need to call Florida; you need to call on publishers in Florida; something is going on in Florida." And this is the morning after. The election has not been decided because of Florida. So I begin to call the publishers in Flor- in Florida. They began to talk about some of the complaints, about votes not being counted. Remember the chads, et cetera? And so that was my first--that was like my baptism into national black political reporting, to find that the audacity of what we perceived as a stolen election, you know, because of shenanigans, you know, behind the scenes. And, and then--but fast forwarding, a year later was September 11, 2001. That was probably my next major impactful story for NNPA. Speaker 1: Na- now, now the first story, though, just, just so people who are watching this will know it had--it had a--the, the stolen election had a particular significance to African Americans and tell, tell us why. Speaker 2: The particular significance to African Americans was the fact that most of the, the chad debacles, most of where the votes were stolen were in black neighborhoods, were in black precincts, you know, et cetera. Just like now, you know, what they're doing is they're going and making all these new election rules, et cetera that affect black people. And so the point was to steal the election by stealing the black vote. That was the whole point of what was happening in Florida. And so that's why it took the black press to do that kind of documentation, and to ask the hard questions, and to, to carry the ball, you know, there of course. And it was national story. There were stories all over the place, but the black press has a way of being the trenches. And for Ben to smell it the morning after--you know, he didn't say to--you know, to go to--you know, look at what the Associated Press was reporting or what The New York Times, et cetera, was saying. You know, he said, "Call our black--call our publishers; there's something going on," you know. And his point was there's something going on in the grassroots, in, in the black communities that, that is, is not smelling right. And it ended up, you know, being exactly what we thought. And so that was the story that will go down in history as probably one of the, the greatest civil rights violations. But you know they, of course, had their way for the next eight years. Story_ID: 645689 Speaker 1: Now you were getting ready to tell us about 9/11. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. But before even that, probably another story that was equal to the 2000 election was the story of when I went to South Africa to cover the World Conference against Racism [World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance], which is one of the greatest untold stories. It, it was just an amazing story of, of, of how--for example, how President Bush [President George Walker Bush] would not allow Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] to come and represent the United States at one of the greatest race conferences in the history of the nation and--or in the history of international relations, and how we were made fun of on the world stage there. People don't know because it was eclipsed by September 11th, 2001. But it was--it was absolutely an--an embarrassment to be there and to--and I still have it. It's somewhere in here, but I have--still have a, a drawing that was done for the Sowetan, which is one of the black newspapers--well, one of the newspapers in South Africa. And it was a drawing of Colin Powell in chains, and he was chained as a slave to the White House and saying, "Massa, can I go?" I borrowed it (laughter) from, from a tent that was--you know, because they had these NGO [non-governmental organization] tents; and you know, it was still there when the conference was about to disband, so I borrowed it and our--it's back here with me now. And nobody cared about it, and simply because it was--it was the norm for them. You know, somebody had blown this up, had blown up this cartoon in the Sowetan into a poster and had posted it. And this was my country; and this is my first time on foreign land, except for I had gone to Canada before. This was my first time in Africa, and this is what was being saying--said about us. There were marches in the streets. We didn't get to tell the story like we wanted to tell it because it was eclipsed. There were marches in the streets with signs that said, "The blood of our children is on the hands of President Bush," and they're talking about my president. And I was interviewed by--I believe it was an--I don't remember what network it was, but I was interviewed from America. Because a lot of the major networks they didn't send their people because Colin Powell wasn't going, so they didn't have any major national American figures going. And so I was interviewed by someone over the phone. And I said things pertaining to how embarrassing it was to be there, and my country is being spoken of this way; and some of it I had to agree with, and not knowing my brother [Marvin Trice] was listening. My brother heard me, you know, on the radio, or the TV, or whatever it was I was broadcasting. So it was a major moment for, for us all. And then, flying back into the United States we--my plane was about to land at JFK [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York]. And I will never forget the moment Ted Shaw [HistoryMaker Theodore Shaw], who at that time was the director counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense Fund and Educational Fund, Inc.], was on the plane beside me. As we were about to land at JFK, he showed me and a white South--South African gentleman, who was entering the U.S. for the first time, the World Trade Center [New York, New York]. Just as, as we were entering the horizon, he said, "You see those two buildings way across over there?" And I looked and I squinted. It was early morning. And I said, "Yes." He said, "That's the Twin Towers." And I was like, "What's the Twin Towers? What's the World Trade Center?" And he explained to me that it was--and to the white South African that it was a symbol of power in the United States. Well, you know, I'm yawning and going back--as we land. And only a few days later--that was a Friday morning, and if I remember September 11th was on a Tuesday morning? Or was it a Monday? I, I think it was a-- Speaker 1: A Monday [sic.]. Speaker 2: Oh, it was Monday morning that I got a call from a friend in Richmond [Virginia] who said to me, "Do you think it's because of what happened in South Africa?" And I'm like, "What are you talking about?" And he said, "You mean you don't know?" And I said, "What are you talking about?" He said, "Hazel [HistoryMaker Hazel Trice Edney]," he said, "the Twin Towers have been attacked and the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] right there where you are." Okay, I'm dropping the phone; I'm hanging up the phone, and all of a sudden I'm, I'm out the door and I'm at the Pentagon. I mean, I had my press pass and everything, and so--and I'm watching the Pentagon burn. I am milling about on the U.S. Capitol grounds [Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 645690 Speaker 1: I remember meeting Joseph Biden [Joe Biden] and interviewing everybody I could, could talk to. And, and, and I was interviewing black people as they were leaving--as they had--that had left, that had evacuated the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and talked about their experience, and what they had gone through. And then I got a call from Jake Oliver [HistoryMaker John Jacob "Jake" Oliver] and [HistoryMaker] George Curry. At that time, George was just coming on as editor-in-chief of NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association], and he as becoming my new boss. Because the time I left, he was--he hadn't been fully hired yet. Raoul Dennis was my boss when I left, I think, and, and George was just coming on. And they said, "Come back to the office." And they--you know, the, the thought was I had enough, and it's time to come back to the office and start writing. And so I came back to the office, and we wrote one story after the other in weeks to come from a black perspective. I remember one child. I don't remember his first name, but his last name was Dickens [Rodney Dickens], who had kill- who was killed on the plane, on the crash into the Pentagon. He was on his way to a National Geographic's exhibit in California, and, and he was killed. And so we, we, we found the black perspective in everything that we wrote. And I think one of the--the hardest hitting stories was written by George and Ben [Benjamin Jealous] together, and that was from the perspective of--if I'm not mistaken, it was [HistoryMaker] Eddie Bernice Johnson who asked the question, "Why do they hate us so much?" You know, "Why? Why do they hate us so much? There's a reason." And I sensed in the spirit realm as well as in the natural realm that I had the answer, because I had just gotten back from South Africa. I had heard the hatred. I had seen it firsthand. I had seen their claims of what was going on with their children. I didn't totally understand it all; you know, I don't think any of us totally do. But from their standpoint, they are being wronged, you know. And, and so that was im--that was engrained in my senses as I was hearing all these questions: "Why do they hate us so much," and, "Why are we--," and, "Who are we going to attack for this?" And then we ended up, you know, attacking Iraq when it wa- really wasn't--was--when--, "Why are we attacking Iraq?" And so it, it--things be--things got muddled and confused. And so fast forwarding from that place, the next greatest story probably was the story of Katrina, Hurricane Katrina. Story_ID: 645691 Speaker 1: We did a lot of stories in between, but the Hurricane Katrina story (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is, this is 2004, right? Speaker 1: Hurricane Katrina was actually 2006, wasn't it [sic. 2005]? I think it was--we have to double check. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah. I think it was 2006. And what happened was--you know. As the hurricane was approaching, I went to George's [HistoryMaker George Curry] office, and I said "George, I just, just really feel like these--a lot of black people are be--get killed." And, of course, it wasn't the hurricane. It was the levees, you know, that did it. And I ended up--George assigned me on an investigative piece to go to, to New Orleans [Louisiana] and to spend more than a week there. We spent eight days covering the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, as the people went back to their homes. And we went back with the people and, and discovering their home. What an incredible tragedy. So that story still lives. That story is, is still being told in terms of the people who are still out here, some of 'em who never went back, and how New Orleans will never be the same. Some people say for the better, but then there are others who would dispute that, because people are still in a sense homeless. And I meet students now at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] where I teach who are still looking for their cousins, who wanna know the child that they grew up with, the child that they played with, you know, at that time, whatever happened to him? Whatever happened to her? And so that story just is, is not--has not ended. Story_ID: 645692 Speaker 1: So Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], so the story that resonates in the black community because there's so many black people killed in the 9th Ward of New Orleans [Louisiana] that--is that the part of New Orleans that was devastated the most do you think? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Of course, the 9th Ward was the part that was, you know, literally destroyed and never will be the same, but there are other parts. I remember being in a place called Pontchartrain--if I'm--saying it correctly, Pontchartrain (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --Park [Pontchartrain Park, New Orleans, Louisiana]? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes, and that was sort of like the black affluent area, had a golf course and all of that. That was also devastated. One particular story, I remember going back into the home with a gentleman who, who treasured his mother's gumbo recipe. And I mean, this was a, a doctor, a, a Ph.D. professor at a local university. And as soon as he got back into the house, the first thing he did was go into the kitchen, and he opened the kitchen door--drawer. And the house was, of course, disheveled and had--you know, had been under water. And he pulled out this piece of paper, and sure enough the gumbo recipe was still intact. He could still see the gumbo recipe, and he cried; he shed tears--I mean, the things that are dear us, you know, that we learn, in addition to our lives. You know, pe- some people well, if you get away with your life you're fortunate. And that is--(unclear) truly a blessing, but there are other things that are just dear to us that we learn about in the time of tragedy. And so that was a, a wonderful thing to mention in the context of the story. One woman had a Christmas tree that she kept up year round, and--'cause you know, it was August. And when she went back in the house, the Christmas--everything else was like flo- had been floating all over the place, and the Christmas tree was still standing in the very same place, you know, where she left it. And so there were some--you know, some funny stories, and then there were some, of course tragic stories, very tragic stories, and some heroic stories. The greatest heroic story was one man that we met who, who--whose cousin had just had a baby, and the baby was only a few days old. And when he went outside after the rain and saw how beautiful it was and looked down at his feet and saw that there was like a little water under his feet, he went back in the house and came back and the, the water was higher, and he knew something is going on here; something is leaking into--you know, into our city. And so he began--you know, by the time the water was waist deep, he had begun to rescue his family, and he took the baby first. He took the baby to a church and laid the baby on the pew in the church, and he went back. And one at a time--one at a time he had to rescue his family. He--I think he rescued seven or eight people that day, and took them all to the church. And so, you know, what an amazing story. And then, of course, President Bush [President George Walker Bush] was flying around in a helicopter. And I got to interview [HistoryMaker] Bishop T.D. Jakes, who at that time I was--I'm doing some work pertaining to, you know, helping with, you know, ministering to the people and helping with the rescue, et cetera. And actually, I interviewed him a--maybe a year or two later about his perspective on things. Because at that time, he wasn't very critical of President Bush. He was--he was one of the people who was, you know, ministering to the president. And I don't remember whether he went up in the helicopter with him or what, but he was very much an associate of President Bush at that time, as he has been with Democratic presidents as well. But at that time, we were very sensitive, and we were going after and dealing with anybody from a black perspective on why they did not speak out more pertaining to the inequality that was happening with black people. And of course, you know, the answer is well, we, we had another calling. There was something else that we needed to do, and it was more important for people to be fed and people to be cared for than to--at that time be, you know, degrading the president. And so, that was the answer. Story_ID: 645693 Speaker 1: Also in 2005 you flew exclusively with the family entourage on the plane carrying the body of Rosa Parks-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --from Detroit [Michigan] to Montgomery [Alabama], right? Speaker 2: Yes, that was an amazing experience. And there's another picture on the wall of Cicely Tyson and I talking after we had arrived back here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. We were on the way to the [U.S.] Capitol where the body was to lay in state. But it was a, a great honor to have been invited to be on that plane. I was the only print reporter on the plane, and the only other reporter on the plane was I believe a TV reporter. And we flew from Detroit to Montgomery, with-- the body was right under the wing where I was seated. I saw that when they took the casket--was scribbled in like a Sharpie Rosa Parks on the box. And they put it inside--into the belly of the plane. And, of course, we covered the, the, the funeral and memorial services there in Montgomery. Speaker 1: Did you learn anything about Rosa Parks that you didn't know before? Speaker 2: At that time, there was--there was such a, a--I learned that she wasn't as meek, you know, as we had portrayed her as. You know, just from talking to people who knew her, and talking to Cicely Tyson, and listening to her best friend, who was that time in her nineties, and others, this was a powerful woman. She may have been quiet, but I, I, I, I just sensed from in death that we would learn more about her, and, and we did. It wasn't--she wasn't that, you know, oh, I'm just tired and I'm just meek, and you know, woe is me--kind of sort of the way that she was portrayed. This was a woman with great resolve. She was--she was a stately woman and obviously a very determined woman. And I think that listening to the messages that were preached in the memorials and talking to people who, who really knew her, I sensed that she was more of that kind of woman than someone who was just--you know, just tired, you know, et cetera. And so she was a very courageous human being. Story_ID: 645694 Speaker 1: Also in, in 2006 you wrote a--an article about African American women's rights and the contributions of Af- African American women. Speaker 2: I did. I remember that got quite a bit of attention simply because I made the point that there have been few times in history that women have actually led the major civil rights organizations, and even now. And some would probably dispute me, but when it comes to being paid to be president and CEO of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], usually those kinds of positions have been volunteer. They have not been president-CEO. There have been other organ--of course, Roslyn Brock [Roslyn M. Brock] is chair; that's a volunteer position. There have been directors and executive directors, et cetera, but with [HistoryMaker] Lorraine Miller, who is now interim executive--I mean, interim president and CEO--standing in the stead of--as the outgoing Ben Jealous [Benjamin Jealous], is the first time that a woman has actually been paid to be president and CEO. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The pos- the story that I wrote at that time was about why not. You know, it's about what is going on here, the reason that National Urban League, and the, the NAACP, and the major civil rights organizations are not recruiting and retaining women to be at the pinnacle of leadership. And that's still a question that's kind of sort of out there, even as Roslyn Brock and Lorraine Miller have said they don't--they're not interested in leading the NAACP from an executive perspective. Roslyn, of course, is the--at the top of the NAACP as chair, but from the executive position, which is the face of the NAACP, not--they're not interested. And so will there be a woman ultimately leading that organization for the first time in history as the--for the first time in history as the national face of the organization, and if not, why not? And, and this, this kind of question comes from my relationship with Dr. Height [HistoryMaker Dorothy Height] as well. You know, I interviewed her just before she died, only about--only a few weeks before she died. I interviewed her, if I remember correctly, it was in March--early March--and she died in March [sic. April] of that year. I took a group of young girls from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in to interview her, and she, she spent time with us that day. And you know, what she engrained in us is, is to stand, you know, and, and don't let you cut you out of the picture. And there are so many women who are still being cut out of the picture just as she was, you know. She was part of the Big Six. She would have made the big seven if they had given her respect. Speaker 1: Yeah, the NAACP has had--there have been a number of women who were at the core of the health of the organization--[HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson and-- Speaker 2: Hazel Dukes, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but none as paid-- Speaker 2: As president and CEO (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --and really the national--the sustaining national face of the organization. There have been like fill in, you know, here and there, now and then. But when it comes to the longevity and the national leader or an executive position, there has not been a woman. And there still has yet to be, other than Lorraine Miller, who was only interim, at this point. Speaker 1: And I don't think they can have a convention without Mrs. Bond [HistoryMaker Jane Bond Moore], who runs the back room of the--you know what I'm talking about? She's about eighty years old, Mrs. Bond, who runs the convention ba- basically (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know Mrs. Bond. Is she kin to Julian [HistoryMaker Julian Bond]? Speaker 1: We--no, he--she's not [sic.]. We interviewed her too. She's in the--I, I, I have to get the rest of her name. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: But her last name is actually Bond. Speaker 2: That's awesome. Speaker 1: Yeah, but she's--yeah, we haven't finished her interview, to tell the truth. We started it five years ago. We haven't finished it. Story_ID: 645695 Speaker 1: What are some of the other stories? Speaker 2: At NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And so after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina]--I mean, there was just--there's just so many. There's always, of course, the Congressional Black Caucus and you know, just following the Congressional Black Caucus, which was--which is a--you know, an honor in, in and of itself to be able to, to cover what black leaders from a political perspective is doing. And then there was in 2010, which was probably the next great story. It wasn't an American story, but yet it was. It was very much an American story, and that was the earthquake in Haiti. And notice I'm naming these stories outside of the civil rights and the injustices that still prevail in our country. These are stories of tragedy, which has been my legacy--has been covering one tragedy after the other on a national level, you know, from, from the tragedy, really, of, of the World Conference against Racism [World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance] and what was going on there, you know, to September 11th [September 11, 2001], and then Hurricane Katrina and, and you know, of course, and, and now the--what happened in, in Haiti and how they have yet to continue to rebuild. It's always a story of, of what happens to us and then will there be fairness? Will there be justice? And like I said, it was a Haiti story. It wasn't an American story, but yet it very much was. It was like, what are we gonna do? How are we going to help? These are black people. And that story sort of brought to light the, the importance of the diaspora, you know, and how black people (unclear)--black people everywhere. And everywhere there's a level of oppression of African people--of, of people of African descent. And the--there--the commonality within that is the, the white oppression. And we just have to say it, you know, the way that it is. The commonality is that--even when I went back to visit South Africa in the mid-2000s, I just went back there on an excursion with a whole bunch of reporters. And we noticed that even though apartheid was no longer, there was still a struggle with, with affirmative action. They had learned--actually learned the word affirmative action. And the coloured South Africans were a little bit intimidated by the fact that the blacks were coming up. But yet when we went to a restaurant, the blacks were servants, but the whites owned. And so there--that, you know, it's still pervasive that we have what appears to be justice, what appears to be equality, as in this country, and yet when you count the dollars, you know, when you count the land and you add it all up, you see that equality has a long, long way to go. It's still a long way off when you start to do the numbers, to do the math. When it comes to healthcare, when it comes to criminal justice, when it comes to economic justice or the lack there of, when you do the math, you will find how much further we have to go. But on the face of things, it looks like we have overcome. Even with a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] it looks like we have overcome. Story_ID: 645696 Speaker 1: I wanna ask you about that in a second too, but 2007 was an important year 'cause you were appointed editor and chief of the NNPA News Service and blackpressusa.com, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and it's also the year that Barack Obama was running for president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell us about that and on covering--you were cov- covering the White House. I mean--or you--were you--what were you--were you covering (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that--at that time, when I took on the task, my predecessor was [HistoryMaker] George Curry. And, and so I went from, you know, actually covering [U.S.] Congress to full fledge covering my first major presidential--presidential election. I kind of stumbled into the one in 2000 because I was just coming on as, you know, congressional or Capitol Hill correspondent. And, and so this was--as editor-in-chief, to cover the first black president, or possible black president, was like what do I do? And, and, and, and the answer was you do what you've always done. Fight for what you believe to be right. Tell the story of black people, as Mr. Boone [Raymond H. Boone] challenged me one time, because the story hasn't been told. And so--and actually going--covering--excuse me--Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton]--first it was that, you know, covering Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama and which one it was going to be. So I was able to track and, and see when, when black people actually flipped, because black people were actually for Hillary at first, 'cause we didn't believe--many of us didn't believe--half of the Congressional Black Caucus never even, you know, believed. You know, 'cause I, I did a, a survey of the Black Caucus, and it was half-half--half for Hillary, half for the Barack Obama at the time. And so it was really exciting to see at the--at the beginning of 2008 how things began to flip, how the tide began to change. And, and a little at a time we began to see the possibility. And so in covering that and in tracking that, it was just, just magnificent. And, and Hillary actually came to a, a forum that NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association] that I organized as, you know, editor-in-chief and interim executive director of the foundation [NNPA Foundation]. I was asked to organize a forum and for both of them to come, but Hillary decided she would come. He had spent much time with NNPA. He had, as a senator, he had come to our receptions, et cetera, and so he did not come to this particular event. I didn't think he wanted to have a debate at, at that time. But the, the black press was very entrenched and very much involved with this election and ultimately with the election of President Obama, as he actually did give us that credit once he was elected, once he got in and we went to visit the White House. He was NNPA's Newsmaker of the Year twice in a row, once when he was senator, and the next year when he became president of the United States. And so we, we, we went there and it was--it was amazing actually carrying the ball for, for that great moment in history. And as you know, I got to interview him on the whistle stop train tour. Story_ID: 645697 Speaker 1: Well what was your impression of him then; and, and, and what, what is your impression now? Speaker 2: My impression of him then was that--was based on what he said. And I had a lot of conversations with him over the phone, in interviews, and then I had the whistle stop train tour face to face. I was on the phone with him and other black leaders from across the country--Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], and P. Diddy [Sean Combs], and others who were supporting him. When he said on the night before the election I, "I will not forget." And he--and he promised that he would not forget our children. He talked about how our children are dying, how, how--and, and we knew he--this--these were black leaders, and so he was talking specifically about how he promised not to forget. The next day was Election Day. He was elected. Fast forward--what is it--seven years later, and--it's not that long-- Speaker 1: It was six years. Speaker 2: Six years later, yes (laughter). And my impression is still good in terms of what he represents and what he has been in the time of trouble. For example, when he spoke up--in the Trayvon Martin case; when he spoke up when Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] was erected--as e- arrested by the Cambridge [Massachusetts] police. However, as a reporter, I've had to deal with the fact there has simply not been enough of what he promised, and what he promised was that he would not forget. And the implication of--on the eve of the election wa- the--was that there would be more policy. Now we've got the healthcare policy [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010], and we're happy about that. But will that be his legacy? Will that be his legacy of what he will do for black people? When I look at the economics in America, and I look at the fact that regardless of where the jobless and unemployment rate is in America, black people are always twice that of whites constantly. And he, he actually has, you know, mentioned this. He's heard it so much that he--sort of like we force him to mention it in his speech on the fiftieth anniversary of the March on Washington. But what do you do? As president it's not always what you say; it's what--what do you do? And somebody asked well, what, what, what can he do? Well, that is what leadership is to answer. Of course, we can push and we can try to make some kind of resolve. Even from a black perspective we--and from a media perspective rather--even from a media, a journalistic perspective, we can come up with ideas and ask questions and write stories, but the bottom line is what is, is leadership doing? As we cover it, you know, what is leadership actually doing? And I remember the question that was asked of President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] early in his administration pertaining to black unemployment and the inequalities there. And he answered this. He said, the rising tide will lift all boats [sic.]. Well, fast forward, six years later, you know, the boats that are stuck at the bottom (unclear)--and some of us ain't got no boat--excuse my vernacular. But some of us are not in boats, and we are drowning. And so the rising--it hasn't worked. The rising tides have not lifted all boats, but then--you know, and so the push pull for the black press is to walk the fine line of fairness. Story_ID: 645698 Speaker 1: Reverend Joseph Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] probably said it best when I interviewed him and asked him this question; I said, "Reverend Lowery, how do we--how do black leaders deal with this president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]. He's just coming in. You know, what if he doesn't keep his promises to black people? You know, what if they're not satisfied?" His answer was this: "We must speak truth to power no matter what color power is." And I believe we failed in that area. I believe--you know, just from a journalist's perspective, speaking as a reporter, speaking as a journalist, when I ask the question of black leaders, okay, what can this president do better? There's always an apologist, an apologetic kind of answer to that where people are afraid to speak truth to power because it has become--it has come down to who's gonna get invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.], you know. And I have to just tell the truth about this. It's come--it's--it--it'll--it--it's about, you know, being afraid of losing access, or being afraid of not being invited, or, or not being in the in crowd. Some of the very people have no influence on this president, but they are happy to just be in the number, to get invited, you know, to the next reception or to be in the insider. But if the--it--but if you're not impacting black people and the plight of not just black people, but the suffering people in this country, then what good are you doing in your position? And so that is where I believe that we, and I, I you know, blame myself--I speak of myself as well--are a little too timid. And there's--most people would say, "Hazel [HistoryMaker Hazel Trice Edney], there's nothing about you that's timid," but I know the moments when I make the sacrifice, make the compromise just so hoping and waiting to give him even more chances to do this. But now we're down to what--three more years. And we're not just talking about black president, 'cause he's what--my second president cov- that I've covered the--you know, first two years--two terms with Bush [President George Walker Bush]. I mean, of course, we dealt with Bush when, when after September 11th [September 11, 2001], when President Bush had all of the so called minority reporters on one side of the East Room during his first press conference--primetime press conference--and all of the whites on the other side. Oh, oh, my goodness, we dealt harshly with him and. And we dealt harshly with him when he was on the phone talking to La- Latino reporters, and black reporters were on listen only mode. And so--and we wrote him up on that. So are we speaking truth to power no matter what color power is? Why are we letting this president off the hook when he said rising tides would lift all boats [sic.] and it hasn't? And so where are our black leaders? You know, the black press, we have--we have done some pretty strong articles just questioning what's gonna happen with this presidency and black people. So I can't put the blame squarely on us, but it takes a loud yell to wake a sleeping giant. And what's going on in America is systemic. It's not just--it's not the White House's fault or anything that one president can change; it's systemic. And so there's got to be a point where the entirety of this country, not just black leadership, not just black president, not just [U.S.] Congress, but all of America. White America has got to get involved. When we talk about Sunday morning being the most segregated hour in this country, what are the white pastors saying about racism in America? When is the last time you preached pertaining to not discriminating against black people, you know. And so that's what I mean when I say the trenches. All of America has to get involved, and we must write about that. We must hold us accountable, not just one person. Story_ID: 645699 Speaker 1: Now 2010 you launched the Trice Edney News Wire. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, now why did you leave a nice job like NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association] and (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was nice and it was cushy, and it played--it paid plenty of money, and I actually loved the black press. I love NNPA, but one day I'm sitting at my desk and I'm saying you know what? What I'm doing here now I've been doing for almost thirty years and I can actually do for me. It's like, how long do you stay in one position and you, you--and it's family, but all families have squabbles; all families have disagreements, but yet they still love. And--but some--at some point, somebody's gotta move out and decide what they wanna do in their household. And so my decision was that I needed to go and establish my own news service where I can carry out my vision for the black press in America, for black people in America and what that should look like from, from my standpoint. And so that was the decision that I made in September of, of 2010, and it was the--one of the best decisions I've ever made in my life. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so to work for yourself basically? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, to, to have my own news wire, which is now the only black owned and woman owned news wire that is fully credentialed by the U.S. Congress press gallery. Speaker 1: Huh, the only--okay, the, the only female owned and the first (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And black owned. Speaker 1: --black owned. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, now what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) News wire. Speaker 1: What's the mission of the Trice Ed- Edney News Wire? Speaker 2: To speak truth to power. It is actually to--you know, as I said earlier, which is really a quote I believe from Joseph Pulitzer [sic. Finley Peter Dunne], and that is to afflict the comfortable and comfort the afflicted. It's the--it's the mission of the black press. You know, it's all about moving black people forward unapologetically, which is you know, a part of our, our mission statement, which is a part of our mantra. And we, we want to make impact on this nation and make sure that we do damage to injustice, that we do damage to, to racism wherever it raises its head. And so it's the same mission as the black press. It's the same thing that I've been doing all the time, but I just happen to own it. Speaker 1: Okay, "To plead our own cause." Speaker 2: Um-hm, "To plead our own cause," yes, "for too long have others spoken for us" ['To Our Patrons,' Samuel Cornish and John Russwurm]. Speaker 1: Right. Excuse me one second. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 645700 Speaker 1: Since you got started, I mean, have you--I know the news is about getting there first--and getting the news. Had you had any scoops with the Trice Edney News Wire? Speaker 2: I got one now. Yeah, I've had plenty of them actually. I've had exclusive interviews and I--you know, what--I have full access to the White House. (Unclear) I have a hard pass, but I never applied for one. And I was over there the other day. I can come to the--to the briefings, but I just don't have the time because, you know, slim staff, new business, so you're all over the place. But you know, I have full access to you know, the Reverend Jacksons [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. And the other day I had a wonderful interview with Dr. C.T. Vivian [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. C.T. Vivian], who, of course, just received his, his Medal of Freedom, his, his Presidential Medal of Freedom. And so I interviewed him the next day, which was, you know, an exclusive interview. And he's talking about how black people that elected Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] need to stay together and not stratify, and to stick together for future elections, et cetera, which is something that others are talking about we need to now mix in, et cetera. That's a whole other story. But, but there is a major story that I'm--that I'm working on now from an investigation standpoint that I can't really talk about, but it has to do with presidential security. And that's all I'll say for now, and it's probably gonna be out in a couple of weeks. And that is I think gonna be quite impactful. Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'll be-- Speaker 2: But, but, but the scoops I have been--you know, when I interviewed president--you know, when I--when--like Laura--[HistoryMaker] Lorraine Miller, you know, et cetera, the new president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] interim president. You know, our, our gift is maybe, maybe I would think access, you know, at this point, actually being--just having access to pretty much anybody that we wanna talk to. And we talk to people like [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree, et cetera, on a regular basis. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, how, how many people do you employ? Speaker 2: We have--oh, let's see, (unclear) about four--about four people that we use on a regular basis. And that's the webmaster. We have Fatima [Fatima Bartee], who runs the national news releases. She just sends out news releases. And we have two graphic artists, who on a regular basis have to do, for example, advertising designs for some of our clients who, who want to reach out from the communications standpoint to black community. So that's the communications firm [Trice Edney Communications, LLC]. That's not the news wire. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, there two different things going on? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, the communications company is--does a lot of things that has nothing to do with journalism and the news wire. I'm on the news wire side. Story_ID: 645701 Speaker 1: Twenty-twelve [2012] you were elected president of the Capital Press Club. Now this, this is a--that's a big deal, isn't it? This is important. Speaker 2: Yes, we're about to celebrate our seventieth anniversary, and that's incredibly exciting to me. The Capital Press Club was founded in 1944, and it--it's, it's been very tedious because there is so much work that is required any time you deal with journalists, any time you deal with communications people, but we're excited. We're actually in a couple of weeks--or actually next week we're gonna be having our annual holiday party with the Washington Association of Black Journalists and Beepers [ph.], which is the communications executive organization. And, and so just moving--just moving forward and dealing with issues that pertain to, to communications professionals is what we're about and going toward celebrating that seventieth anniversary. It's, it's been a long journey for the Capital Press Club, and it was founded because they refused to accept blacks and women into the National Press Club (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --and back in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Right now are you a member of the local NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] chapter? Speaker 2: I am not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, that's an interesting question. The reason I've never joined NABJ, I've never have seen it as for me. I can't speak for other black reporters who work for the black press, but MA--NABJ was founded by black reporters who needed the camaraderie of other black reporters who are working in so called mainstream newsrooms. I've never worked in a mainstream newsroom to that extent, and so I, I didn't--I never thought I needed it. I've spoken at N- NABJ conferences. I've spoken at their fundraisers, et cetera, but I've just never joined the organization. I think I will. Speaker 1: Okay, I mean oth- oth- other black newspaper pe- people say the same thing. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That--and, and you're right. That's--it was formed to form that association with other black--but you know, from the outside you know, you get the impression that all black journalists should be in this or should be in something, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: I, I agree. I, I agree. I mean, that's why I guess I'm president of the Capital Press Club. But at the same time, being a part of NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association], you know, but being a part of NN-people like to be where they're understood. And although I believe that I am understood by other black reporters who are my colleagues in the white press, there is a, forgive the word breed, of journalists that works for the black press and that makes his or her career in the black press that will never be totally understood. My mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] used to sing a song that says there's something within me. There's just something about being called. It's, it's more than being driven. It's not driven; it's like a calledness to deal specifically with black people from a black perspective. And you can't do that when you are owned by whites. You can't do that when your root goes back to people--that might be goodhearted people--but I learned--I learned when I was a fellow in [U.S.] Congress even in Senator Kennedy's [Edward M. Kennedy] office there was a different--there was a different way that he wrote a paper from a white liberal standpoint than what [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr. was writing. You know, it's just different. And so that's the same thing. It's--and when you're writing from a black perspective, and you are coming strictly from the black community, it's different than when you are at, you know, a mainstream daily newspaper. And you're trying, but you may not be able to even use the words or the verbiage that you need to use because of the strings that are attached. Speaker 1: Well said. Story_ID: 645702 Speaker 1: Now you teach at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: --right? Now are you--I mean is it a-- Speaker 2: I'm an adjunct professor. I teach-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --two classes a semester. Speaker 1: And how, how long have you--have you been teaching at Howard? Speaker 2: Since 2006. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a pretty long time. Speaker 2: Um-hm, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 2: --love it. Speaker 1: Okay, you have any stories about your students or, or-- Speaker 2: Ones that I can tell (laughter) 'cause students everywhere are so incredibly challenging because they are so young and inexperienced. And I find sometimes it's, it's woeful to me sometimes to, to see that the older I get the more frustrating I get--the more frustrated I get with students who, who, who, who can't identify, for example, you know, a picture of the attorney general--the first black attorney general [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] (unclear). You know, and that's--like I said, students everywhere, young people everywhere simply because until they get to Howard or until they get to an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], they don't really recognize the importance of knowing who these people are, the importance of knowing your history. So that's why sometimes I'm like woe is me. It's simply because fortunately they're at Howard, but then the job is to not just pour into them why they need to know their history as journalists, but to make them want it, you know, to make them desire it, hunger and thirst for it. That's the challenge. And sometimes, you know, it'll make you wanna holler and throw up both your hands. I'm serious, because somewhere along the way before they go there they've been taught it's about money; it's about your career; it's about you; it's about where you can get a job. We got a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] now. We have overcome. You can do anything you want, you know. And until they get into the system, they won't know why what we're telling them it's so important, that you need to know your history so that you'll recognize this thing when you see it. Because once they get out there, they graduate, and they get into the--this real world where the systemic racism is still incredibly pervasive--we just talked about the numbers--then they won't know the importance of it. And so that's why we, we and--we--you know, we push it, and we push it, and push it. But it does become frustrating because like I said, it's not just about getting them to learn, it's about getting them to want it. Story_ID: 645703 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Loving themselves. There--there's, there's such a pride that is potential in the black community that I, I, I believe that we have failed at. We see the failure when it comes to our young men killing themselves. And when I say killing themselves, I don't mean suicide. I mean killing each other, which is like killing themselves. They go out, the lives are not valued. It is incredibly as, as a self-destruction that we have yet to fully address, to see another young man and just take the life of another young man. And I've done stories on this. I've counted the numbers, and, and there're enough to fill up entire cities, the numbers of young black men who have been shot and killed in street violence since the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] began to count them in around 1975 or so. And so that is one of my number one concerns, it's just the self-destruction in the black community. But of course, the overriding that is, what brought us to that point, you know how did we get to there? And how we got there was because of racism, was because of--people will say, "Oh no, you can't blame that on slavery." Well, yes you can, you know, the way black men were denigrated, and, and, and black men are still denigrated. The systemic racism is like, when you look at the unemployment numbers why aren't people--why are black males the highest in the unemployment rate, you know? Is it because we're not looking for jobs? No, because black men are looking for jobs, but there's something in the system that denigrates--that, that deflates the, the black man in particular. And so that has been a major concern for me. People have said, "Hazel [HistoryMaker Hazel Trice Edney], you," one of my mentors said, "you can't say black men." I used to--, "Hello Hazel, are you still trying to save black men?" (Laughter) That's, that's what I get sometimes from my mentors. It's not about saving black men. It's about saving America. It's about saving our country. Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said, "Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere" ['Letter from Birmingham Jail']. And so to the extent that black men and women are denigrated, you know, in this country, then this country is denigrating itself. You know, and until this country realizes that, we will be the great country that is on paper, you know, that we claim to be, and that we have decided that we want to be. And so it all goes back to--you know, the least of these, those who are hurting, for me that's always my number one concern, and it remains a concern. And right now those of who are hurting most are African American people, and the black man is hurting in a significant way when you look at--when you look at the numbers. And so that is where we will continue to, to--you know, the pressure point against racism and injustice in America is where the greatest racism and injustices are found. Story_ID: 645704 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major--anything major that you would go back and redo or undo, if you could? Speaker 2: No. All of the pains, all of--some of the suffering that I've gone through, you know, even some--you know, even the violence that I, I spoke of earlier, some of the heartbreaks have brought me to become who I am becoming. And had it not been for those things, I probably wouldn't be as happy as I am now. And everything is not perfect now, of course. That's not what I'm saying, but I--what I'm saying is that--you know, I'm like the sum total of everything that I've gone through. And so if I went back and changed something, I would change--I would alter now. I wouldn't be sitting here being called a HistoryMaker by an organization that I have loved and admired for so long. (Laughter) And so I wanna change this. So no, I don't wanna--I won't change that. I wouldn't--there wasn't--there's nothing that I would--that I could or would wanna change actually. Story_ID: 645705 Speaker 1: Likewise, if you, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there--what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy, if I had to describe it as be- is, is, is loving black people. It's, it's very specific, you know, loving hurting people. And those who are hurting the most in this country--of course, there, there are whites who are hurting and impoverished, et cetera, but when you look at the masses, it's African American people who have been most damaged in this nation. And that is a very simple legacy for me, and that is simply telling the story of black people because the story has not been told. And, and I put it that way because that was one of the ways that it was put to me by Mr. Boone [Raymond H. Boone], that every day just to a second ago, since I just spoke--the words I just spoke, another black man was killed in the streets. Somebody else is being discriminated against. Somebody else is right now being jerked around by a cop simply because of their race. That story has yet to be told. And so my legacy will be to tell those stories that are not being told by others in a consistent and a powerful, and I hope meaningful way. Story_ID: 645706 Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about your family. I know you have a son [Monty Trice]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And we know about the one. Is--are there any others or (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I just have that one son, and he's a great man. He works for Lowe's [Lowe's Companies, Inc.]. He's a builder. He is incredibly gifted with his hands. I remember giving him logo [sic. Lego] building blocks when he was two years old. And now he's out there. He builds decks; he has a home improvement business on the side of his own. I'm so proud of him. On September 11th, 2001, I tell people that's the day that I knew that he was a man; and that is when everybody thought the world was being destroyed. And he called me and he said, "Mama, I'm coming to get you." And the perception at that time--he was living in Richmond, Virginia--was that Washington, D.C. was under fire, was you know, about to--you know, was being--was being pummeled, you know, et cetera, by airplanes and bombs. Everybody had this perception, but yet my son was like, "Stay right where you are. I'm coming to get you." And that--so that was the day that I knew that my son was a courageous man. And you know, fast forward, I'm still so incredibly proud of him. He has been a wonderful young man. My entire family--you know, my nephew, who is now a, a drumming student at Berkelee University--Berkelee--Berkelee College of Music [Boston, Massachusetts]. My, my darling niece, who is just an amazing young woman, and she just graduated from J. Sargeant Reynolds Community College [Richmond, Virginia] with a degree in early childhood education. They are the pride and joy, you know, of my family, the young people, the youth, of my family. I've spoken of my sisters [Queen Trice (ph.) and Julie Trice (ph.)] and my brother [Marvin Trice] and my mother [Marie Jefferson Trice], who is the queen, you know, of us all. And you know, my--we were blessed with great parents. You know, the parenting that we received from my father [Norris Trice], although he was strict, just despite all, you know, we are because you know, they were and because of their tremendous love and guidance. And so my family--and now my niece and nephew and you know, my son are benefitting from all of that. Story_ID: 645707 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Oh, you mean as a finale question? I wanna tell about (laughter)--I don't why, but I just have an urge to tell about this. When we were in my early childhood years, and I wanted--I want to--it's just like--it was a pivotal for me was the moment that I--that I first encountered the N word. And, and I'm gonna say it in a second 'cause it's--I need to say it straight out not the N word; there's no euphemism for that. It was when we had just moved to the house in the picture that you see there. And it was nineteen sixty--May '64 [1964], '65 [1965], and I left home just to go and check out the neighborhood 'cause we were new and everything. So there was this little boy at the top of the hill, a little white boy named--we asked him his name. He said, "Robbie [ph.]." We said, "What's your last name?" He said, "Robbie," so we called him Robbie Robbit or something like that. But anyway, one day I went up, and he was playing in the sand with a car, and I could hear his mother inside the house and the clink of dishes in the kitchen. And I began to play with him and to talk to him. And I heard his mother yell out and she said, "Robbie, what are you doing?" And he sat up and he looked back toward the house, and he said, "I'm playing with the nigger." And that was sort of--that was 1964 or '65 [1965]. I wasn't sure exactly what that word meant, but it resonated as something that I should not stay there for (laughter) or to hear the rest of, 'cause I heard her footsteps coming toward the door. And so I left and I went back. You know, I was barefooted and ashy legged, and I, I went back home. And there was something that started there that--to the extent that I still remember it today in such vivid detail. But that was my first encounter with that word. My second encounter was doing a story. And there are three encounters that was directed to me. Doing a story on Halloween where a man was--had been hanging a black man in effigy--a particular black man in effigy on Halloween--was offending black people. I went to his house. He said, "I don't even call you black people. I call you niggers." That was number two. But the third time was at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. It wasn't on Harvard's campus per se, but I was on my way to the dorm right there in Harvard Square. There was no provocation, no reason, simply walking down the street, and a white man sitting on the side of the sidewalk as I'm passing by, just with all of the venom that he had in him said, nigger to me. And I wanted to tell about those three times because it's like no matter where you are in this country--I think it was Carter G. Woodson, you know, who, who, you know, talked about how it is that regardless of what so- society you find yourself in, from the ashy legged little back girl being called a nigger by a little white boy, you know, to the midlevel professional on a reporter's beat being called a nigger by a white man, to Harvard University, Harvard Square, student at Harvard. Regardless of where you are, that word will try to find you. And I believe that that is one of the driving forces behind why I stay in the black press. It is not to just fight that word. It's not about the word. It's the--it is the mentality behind that word. From the least of these, to that little girl, to black professionals, to every level of this society, to plead to the cause of black people is, is what I'm called to do. Story_ID: 645708 Speaker 1: Well the last question (clears throat) is similar to legacy, but a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Pause) The words come to me, and they're very simple and basic: she did all she could. You know, sometimes I feel like--I'm like, you know, I wanna die empty because I gave all that I could. My mother [Marie Jefferson Trice] sometimes call me and she says, "When do you sleep?" (Laughter) I'm like, "Mama, you know, I sleep." "Well, why don't you just go to bed like other people, and get up, and then go to work and do what you gotta do? Why," you know, "are you up at all times of the night?" And, and you know, the answer is because there's so much to get done. With every honor that I've received, with every award that I've received, I've never seen it as a, a--you know, a place it's--you know, ooh, this is for all that you've done. It's a place of encouragement for how much more you wanna do? And so--and how much more needs to be done for the cause. And so the way that I would want to be remembered is that she finished the course. She did all that she was called to do. She did all that she could because she gave all that God had placed in her to give. And I don't want anything to be left. I wanna give it all and then for it to be finished. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 645709 Speaker 1: We are in the Oval Office with President Kenne- I mean--I'm sorry. We're in the Oval Office with President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] on the day of honor, to honor black and minority veterans of World War II [WWII]. At that time, I was a fellow in the office of Senator Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy], and President Clinton was signing the bill for the honor that day. And so in that picture were members of the staff of Sheila Jackson Lee, who sponsored the twin paper from the House side [U.S. House of Representatives]. In the background you see to the far right Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]; you see to the far left, I believe that is--no, I don't know who that is. That's a veteran I believe. And so they are members of Sheila Jackson Lee's staff. To the--to the right of Clinton is Menda [Menda Fife], who represents--who represented for Senator Kennedy the veterans issues. And of course, I'm standing there to his left and another member of the staff of Sheila Jackson Lee. And then there's Senator Ted Kennedy, and we were celebrating. Speaker 2: Next, keep going. Speaker 1: In this picture I am interviewing Cicely Tyson, after trying very hard to interview her. She--we were coming back from the funeral and the memorial service of, of Rosa Parks. And at time we were on the way to the U.S. Capitol [Washington, D.C.] to see her lying in state. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: The year that Rosa Parks died. Yes, that would have been 2005 I believe. Speaker 2: At that picture is 1999. I am on the stage at the Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] commencement speaking to thirty thousand as the graduate student orator, selected by, by Howard Uni- I mean, Har- Harvard University professors. Speaker 1: That is my darling son [Monty Trice], born in November 25th, 1975. He has grown to be an extraordinary young man. He now works for Lowe's [Lowe's Companies, Inc.] and he's also a home improvement expert. Speaker 2: That is my father. My father at that time was a corporal in the United States Army during the Korean War. He tells a story of having been wounded during the Korean War and has yet to receive his Purple Heart. His name is Corporate Norris B. Trice [Norris Trice]. And we expect him to receive his Purple Heart posthumously. Speaker 1: That's me and my siblings. From left to right: my brother, Marvin [Marvin Trice], who is now a minister; that's me. I'm also a minister of Greater Mount Calvary Holy Church [Washington, D.C.]; my younger sister, Queen--(unclear), my youngest sister. She is a pastor. And my oldest sister was a deaconess and office administrator. I didn't call their names but. Speaker 2: Oh, well, (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, from left to right that's Marvin Trice; that's Hazel Trice [HistoryMaker Hazel Trice Edney], at that time, Queen Trice [ph.], and Julie Trice [ph.]. Speaker 2: That is my dear mother who is a singer. And you know, she's lost a lot of weight. In that picture--should I have another picture of her, 'cause she is now like--she's lost so much weight now. But anyway, that is my mother, Marie Trice, whose maiden name is Jefferson [Marie Jefferson Trice]. Speaker 1: That is the home where I grew up since I was about four years old until the time that I was nineteen and went away to college [Saint Paul's College, Lawrenceville, Virginia]. In the top picture to the left, you see the house from the hill where the road leads down to the house. At the top right you see my mother. She's going to the back porch of the house. It looks like she's maybe carrying in wood. We had woodstoves; we had no indoor plumbing or running water. In the center there you'll see the outhouse on the left. That was the toilet that we used growing up. That was the only bathroom that we had. We took baths in a tin tub, and that was also a place where I actually sang and, and, and did mischief, like drink as a teenager, et cetera. On--in the house next to that, that little building, is a chicken house where we raised chickens. And there was a pigpen right beside that. At the bottom is the hill leading down to the spring. We had to carry buckets of water up that hill from this spring. And the bottom right is the spring itself where we got our water to--you know, to drink, and cook with, and to bathe in. Speaker 2: That is a picture of me as a (unclear) reporter, my first reporter's--print reporter's job at the Richmond Afro-American newspaper [Afro-American Newspapers]. As you see, I'm standing by a--an--a typewriter that is manual. You see the phones, so you can see what year it was. It's a dial phone. And you see the [HistoryMaker] L. Douglas Wilder on a sign on the wall that says it is a--about to be elected, the first black elected governor of the United States. Those are some of the--one of the stories I was covering at that time. Speaker 1: That was the year 2009 actually on the eve of the inauguration of [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama as we were on the whistle stop train tour. I was given a--an exclusive interview with him on the stop. And the next day he was to be inaugurated as president of the United States...