 Story_ID: 443913 Speaker 1: Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is David Steele Ewing [HistoryMaker David Ewing]. That's S-T-E-E-L-E, and the last name spelled E-W-I-N-G, and I have a G on the end of my name which I'll tell you a little bit more later about how my grandfather didn't-[paternal] great-great-grandfather did not have a G on the end of his name. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well you can tell us now. This is a-- Speaker 2: Okay sure. Speaker 1: --story yeah about the names. Speaker 2: Well thank you for number one coming to Nashville, Tennessee. We're filming at our house here at 2126 Blair Boulevard in Hillsboro Village near Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee]. I'm very interested in genealogy, very interested in these projects. The slave narratives were very important for America back for researchers then and now they are extremely--sorry gonna turn this off. The slave narratives were very important part of our culture and our history and I think it's important to document these stories. When I was growing up here in Nashville, my father whose name is Richard Albert Ewing, III [Richard Ewing, III] was a surgeon and went to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], went to Saint Augustine's Episcopal college, black college [Saint Augustine's College; Saint Augustine's University, Raleigh, North Carolina] and he died at the age of thirty-seven of a heart attack. So I really didn't know my father. I was two years old at the time. Speaker 1: Now I don't want to get into the history so much, just a name. Speaker 2: Oh the name okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Probably the name story. Speaker 2: Okay, the G- Prince Albert Ewin was my great-great-grandfather was a slave here in Nashville. He did not have an E--a G on the end of his name. His name was spelled E-W-I-N. And the reason from oral history that his part of the family didn't have the G is they lived out in Hermitage, Tennessee, which is near [President] Andrew Jackson's Hermitage and they said that the white people who were also named Ewing out there, the mail was getting confused so they wanted him to drop the G and my relatives say the real reason they wanted him to drop the G and he did, was they didn't want people know that they were related. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: So to this day many members of my family spell their names E-W-I-N, the ones that still live out in Hermitage or comes from that area of the family. The people that didn't live out in Hermitage either moved to downtown Nashville or moved out of state they had the G on their name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And since my great-grandfather Richard Albert Ewing [Richard Ewing, Sr.] lived in Nashville downtown near the capitol [Tennessee State Capitol, Nashville, Tennessee], he had the G. Speaker 1: Okay, so we're gonna get a little more in depth in that in a minute. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: But and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March 29th, 1967 born at Meharry hospital [Nashville General Hospital, Nashville, Tennessee] which is still there and we lived a couple streets over on Albion Avenue [sic. Albion Street], 24th [Avenue] and Albion (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. And you hold a position with the city--with the-- Speaker 2: I've worked for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Chamber of Commerce [Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce]? Speaker 2: --worked for the Chamber of Commerce. I work for Gaylord Entertainment [Gaylord Entertainment Company; Ryman Hospitality Properties, Inc.] doing political lobbying and other kind of work like that in the city. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Educated at Vanderbilt law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is March 17th, 2007, St. Patricks' Day. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in our house in the living room actually, 2126 Blaire Boulevard. We have lived in this house for about six years and we like to entertain in this house a lot and we have lots of book parties for my wife, Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Randall]. We have Christmas parties and you know various people have been in this house from our Governor Phil Bredesen, Senator Lamar Alexander to many other kind of our Congressman Jim Cooper. We have lots of and diverse group of friends you know we like come and have kind of salons and have all sorts of interesting people interact here. Story_ID: 443914 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that management compels me to ask of everyone-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Okay well probably pizza. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like fall. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying? Not sure if I have a favorite phrase or saying but no, not really. Story_ID: 443915 Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history now. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and your father's [Richard Ewing, III] side. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Florence Evelyn Steele Kidd [Florence Steele Kidd]. And Evelyn, E-V-E-L-Y-N, Steele, S-T-E-E-L-E and Kidd, K-I-D-D. Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Alabama, actually Tuskegee, Alabama, September 25th, 1941. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you gonna say something about the Kidd name or? Speaker 2: Oh that was the name of her ex-husband. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Mother's side of the family is kind of interesting have Alabama roots and also New York [New York] and Trinidad roots. My mother's mother Corrine Perdue Steele, that's, P-E-R-D-U-E, they were from Montgomery [Alabama] and she was born in Montgomery along with her sisters and brothers and they moved to Tuskegee when her father went to go work on the faculty with Booker T. Washington. My mother's father was named Frank Evelyn Steele [Frank Steele] and he was born in the West Indies in Trinidad, came over here in the United States at age five. They came to America and his father was the first licensed black plumber in New York City and he learned his trade of plumbing on the boats that used to come between Trinidad and the United States back and forth and so he had a plumbing business in New York. He was very successful, he was a marshal, he was involved in politics in Tammany Hall and he would buy old brownstones up that people had stolen the pipes and copper pipes and refit them and sell them for a profit. And like I said was very successful up in New York. Speaker 1: Okay and he came; he came to New York about what year (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They came to New York around 1905. Speaker 1: Nineteen o' five [1905]. Okay. Speaker 2: I think there were a couple of times they came initially and then they went back and again but my grandfather went to Textile High School [New York, New York] which was in the Garment District. I think it's called--the building is now the Fashion Institute [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]. It was--and it was mainly Jewish students that were there because it was kind of in lower part of Manhattan [New York] and he had a car that drove him to school every day was apparently embarrassed by that and have a driver drop him off a few blocks away so he could walk. You know they were I guess some of the more prominent African Americans at the time in New York and my grand (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is, this is Frank? Speaker 2: Frank, Frank Steele, yes. Speaker 1: Steele. Okay. Speaker 2: Yes my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he went to Textile High School. He was educated and he was interested in going to college of course like his classmates and he went to this tiny little arts college in Upstate New York called Alfred University [Alfred, New York] where he played basketball and he was actually the first African American to go there and graduate. They I don't think considered him African American since he was from Trinidad. They considered him foreigner and so they let him in. They probably didn't take blacks at the time but they took him since he was out of technically born somewhere else. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He then went on although he looked at Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts] and some other medical schools. His father gave him advice that he was gonna be a black doctor you need to go to a black medical school, so he went to Howard [Howard University College of Medicine] in Washington, D.C. and he graduated from Howard University. Now he wanted to go back to Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center] in New York where he was from but there was a real bias toward West Indians so he couldn't get a job--a residency basically there and so he went back to one of his administrators at the--at Howard one of his faculty members, Dr. Jones [Eugene Kinckle Jones], who is one of the founders of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] and he knew someone in Tuskegee so he picked up the phone and said, "I'm sending you one of my students." And that's how my grandfather ended up down in Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: He worked for the veterans hospital [Tuskegee Veterans Administration Medical Center; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay. They had a big veterans hospital (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, they did. Speaker 1: --in Tuskegee? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 443916 Speaker 1: What about your [maternal] grandmother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Yeah and he [Ewing's maternal grandfather, Frank Steele] also practiced medicine in Opelika, Alabama, we lived across the street from the Darden family who wrote that--the kids wrote that book 'Spoonbread and Strawberry Wine,' ['Spoonbread and Strawberry Wine: Recipes and Reminiscences of a Family,' Norma Jean Darden and Carol Darden-Lloyd] very prominent kind of family there. My grandmother like I said she grew up in Montgomery [Alabama] then they moved to Tuskegee [Alabama]. Her father was on the faculty at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], was one of Booker T. Washington's students, built a lot of buildings on the campus, put the clock on Dorothy Hall, built most of the buildings. There's this wonderful kind of old story that this was--this must have been around 1885, 1886 Booker T. Washington had just come to Tuskegee and my great-grandfather was there too and he's, he was passing a house on the way you know into Tuskegee that was on fire and it was, it was not The Oaks but it was where Booker T. Washington was living before he built The Oaks and you know basically ran in there and kind of rescued him from you know this horrible fire and they were very close ever since. Interestingly enough you know he taught carpentry, he taught you know, Booker T. Washington really believed that, you know, students could work with their hands as well as their minds but their hands were very important too and it was very interesting that he had gone to Tuskegee and he dropped out so a lot of his he had many, many siblings, had about eight siblings so some of them could finish college and he went to work and when he was later hired to teach at Tuskegee you know he didn't have a college degree and there was always you know this you know kind of I think drama around during graduation time or at least drama for the administration not for him you know would you know Jailous Perdue, which was his name, what would he show up in commencement. And they of course since it was a commencement they wanted to show up in caps and gowns and all this other stuff but since he didn't have a degree he didn't wanna show up in caps and gowns and so he would wear his overalls and bring his tools with him and march down the aisle like everybody else but with tools of his trade. So that was very interesting. One of the other interesting stories that my grandmother Corrine Steele [Corrine Perdue Steele] used to tell about Booker T. Washington and you know she died a couple years ago, she knew all five presidents of Tuskegee. She was very proud of and she was a little girl when Booker T. Washington, I think she was born in 1911, but she was a little girl when Booker T. Washington was still at Tuskegee but one of the things that she told that her father told her that you know Booker T. Washington was very proper, he was very adamant about you know raising these black students in a proper way that they can kind of fit into society and be gentlemen and ladies and do the proper things. A person came around the turn of the century to Tuskegee's campus trying to sell stock and you know Booker T. Washington heard about this person and basically shooed him off campus because he didn't that this product was decent or suitable for African Americans because this product was something, not the product itself, but how the product was served was something he didn't believe in and he didn't believe that African Americans should drink out of bottles and of course this is from someone from Cocoa-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] in Atlanta [Georgia] right in the early, early days of the company so of course you know lots of fortunes could have been made but that was Booker T. Washington. That's what kind of person he was and you know it, it carried over to every part of his life. Story_ID: 443917 Speaker 1: Now, did she grow up in Tuskegee [Alabama] I guess? Speaker 2: My mother [Florence Steele Kidd] grew up in Tuskegee but she was sent to boarding school in Vermont at this place called St. Johnsbury Academy [St. Johnsbury, Vermont] which was almost in Canada. She was the first African American to attend there and it was a boarding school and you know the high schools during segregated South and Tuskegee were not very good so my grandfather [Frank Steele] who of course was educated up in the Northeast sent his daughter up there too and as opposed to--and my mother applied to you know the schools kind of like, my grandfather was going to to schools that were popular then. She applied--he applied--she applied to like you know Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York] and all the little schools that people were applying in her class but she decided you know she graduated from high school in 1960 and the Civil Rights Movement was just kind of starting in the South and kind of probably her father probably echoed the advice that his father had given him about going to a black school [HBCU] so she came back and attended and enrolled in Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] in the fall of 1960 and of course Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] is across the street and that's where she met my father [Richard Ewing, III]. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: They met just you know students--Fisk students would study over Meharry and vice versa so you know I think they ran into each other in the library and they started dating and they got married shortly after she graduated in 1964. Story_ID: 443918 Speaker 1: Now can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Father's full name was Richard Albert Ewing, III [Richard Ewing, III] and Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T, E-W-I-N-G. And like I said he was the third. My brother is Richard Albert Ewing, IV [Richard Ewing, IV] and he has a three almost four year old now, which is Richard Albert Ewing, V [Richard Ewing, V] believe it or not. And interestingly enough I remember I was telling you about my great-great-grandfather, my brother's--my nephew would have been the sixth if it weren't for my great-great-grandfather his name was Prince Albert [Prince Albert Ewin] and so he, I guess for whatever reason, didn't like the word Prince but he called his oldest son Richard Albert so kind of interesting. My theory why Prince Albert was called Prince Albert, he was born March 28th, 1849. He was a twin, identical twin brother named Taylor Genius Ewing, G-E-N-I-U-S, Ewing [Taylor G. Ewing, Sr.]. Speaker 1: What's the first part of the name? Speaker 2: Taylor. Speaker 1: Taylor Genius Ewing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) T-A-Y-L-O-R, T-A-Y-L-O-R, and in 1849 and I think this was kind of an irony that probably Prince Albert and Taylor's mother you know named her kids this way. In 1849 the two most powerful white men in the world, one was the president of the United States, who was [President] Zachary Taylor, and the other was on the throne in England, Prince Albert [Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha]. So here are these born slaves in Nashville, Tennessee, on March 28th, 1849 named after the two most powerful men in the world, kind of interesting. I was born on March 29th [March 29, 1967]. I always thought I should have been born on March 28 because that was the birthday of my great-great-grandfather. Speaker 1: So, instead of naming him Zachary Taylor, he named him Taylor Genius? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. So is there a story about you know? Speaker 2: Well I don't think Taylor probably liked that name because he mainly in his professional career and they were both lawyers went by T.G. Ewing or just Taylor G. Ewing. The only way I found out what the G stand for it kind of reminded me of 'Sanford and Son' which you know if someone is watching this a hundred or two hundred years from now the little black sitcom in the early '70s [1970s] about a junk dealer but he--Fred Sanford would always, it was Fred G. Sanford and depending on the scenario or the joke that he was telling, he'd always change the name of what the G stood for and so for many, many years I was doing genealogy and I didn't know what the G stood for and I finally--Taylor had a son who is a lawyer and fought--tried or tried to fight in War World I [WWI] and he was forty-one when he signed up and I think they basically, he went to Kansas City [Missouri] which was where the African Americans were sent for officer training. They basically told him, "You're too old," you know. But he was considered a veteran after that and in one of the documents that I got from the St. Louis [Missouri] archives, I saw an application for some sort of pension or some sort of benefit that he filled out and that's the only place I ever seen the word Genius not on--and Taylor's, Prince Albert's brother Taylor had a lot of things that he signed, property conveyances, documents that I've seen, advertisements for his law firm, never seen the G explained anywhere so for whatever reason, he might not have liked that name or not been that proud of that name. Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very unusual name needless to say. Speaker 1: Taylor Genius Ewing. Story_ID: 443919 Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, so they're twins-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and now, and did they, so they grew up here in Nashville [Tennessee]? Speaker 2: They grew up here in Nashville. They were born on, there's a plantation called Travellers Rest and it was run by John Overton. John Overton was one of [President] Andrew Jackson's law partners and close friends. He was a person that really encouraged Jackson to run for the presidency and it's about eight miles south of Nashville, the city of downtown Nashville, and the interesting thing about Travellers Rest today, I served on their board, I'm the first and only African American on their board so it's kind of an ironic twist but Taylor [Taylor G. Ewing, Sr.] in one of the books written about African Americans around the turn of the century says he escaped planned--'Life of the Progress of the Race' by Crogman [sic. 'Progress of A Race,' John William Gibson, William Henry Crogman, Booker T. Washington, and Fannie Barrier Williams]. He escaped and came to Nashville and he said he escaped the horrors of slavery and he helped build the Fort, Fort Negley [Nashville, Tennessee] which is the Union Civil War fort here in Nashville. And he also said he fought in the, in the Union Army during the war. He was in the fourth heavy artillery division of the Ohio U.S. color troops. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Prince Albert [Prince Albert Ewin], from what I understand I guess was just still there. You know never found any reference to him escaping or anything like that. The interesting thing is after the Civil War and I always wonder kind of how if one person had escaped and the other stuck around, after Civil War, Prince Albert was sent to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] by his former slave owners, graduated 1871, was really one of the first African Americans or the first students to graduate from Fisk and he also became a--immediately the first thing he did after he graduated from Fisk, was he taught in the newly formed colored schools in Nashville. Taylor actually went to Fisk later on and opened up a school, the Taylor Ewing school but I think back then there were a lot of little schools kind of mom and pop schools that you taught students. And so he taught too and then he was a tax collector and then he had a coal business then he went--now Prince Albert studied law before law school started, he studied law under a lawyer by the name of Ed Baxter [Edmund Dillahunty Baxter]. The Baxters and the Ewings on the white side were very close and Ed Baxter was later one of the first three faculty members at Vanderbilt law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee], which was started in 1873. So I always like to say I graduated from Vanderbilt law school that my great-great-grandfather got a Vanderbilt education, although he didn't go there because he was taught law by one of the first faculty members at Vanderbilt. So he became a lawyer. I actually have a copy of his law license from 1871, one of the first black lawyers in Nashville. And then his brother became a lawyer in around 1880 and they practiced law together side by side. And the interesting thing about--I talked to an older relative of mine that said that they looked like the guys on the Smith Brothers Cough Drop box. They had long beards, very distinguished, very kind of, very fair skin too, mulattos clearly, and they practiced together and another wonderful oral history story and these oral his- this is why these are so important because some stories just don't get recorded and it's important that these great stories get passed on. They were identical twins, people couldn't tell them apart at all and so since they were both lawyers, if one had to be out of town or if one was sick, the other would take care of his clients and just stand in and never tell them and they would just think they were talking to you either Prince Albert or Taylor and they couldn't tell the difference, they were that identical. And since they were both lawyers that was no problem. Speaker 1: Okay, so they could make each other's court dates if they had to (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, exactly. Story_ID: 443920 Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down as to how black lawyers were treated in the courts in those days? Speaker 2: In Nashville [Tennessee], it's a very interesting story. When I first started this whole genealogy movement because I didn't know my father [Richard Ewing, III], and actually when I graduated from Vanderbilt law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee] in 1992, I thought I would be the first black lawyer in my family. Little did I know there were three and they were all educated here in Nashville and if I had probably looked at certain parts of the law school library, I would have found references to them but I really didn't know growing up much more than my grandfather [Richard Ewing, Jr.] because my father had died and my mother [Florence Steele Kidd] had married into the family and didn't get to know the Ewings as much so. Speaker 1: So that was I mean that's, that's quite a history to, you know, to stay buried like that, you know. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: For that long. Speaker 2: It was there. I have lots of cousins that still live in Hermitage [Tennessee]. You know Prince Albert [Prince Albert Ewin] bought the piece of land in 1872 or '3 [1873] family still lives out there and going to family reunions just talking to people and oh did you know this, and have you seen this picture, and have you seen this document? They provided a lot of good documents including that license to practice law. He was one of the first black judges in Nashville, too. He was elected justice of the peace three times. I've got his certificate where he was elected. Speaker 1: This is Prince Albert? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was signed by the governor. He was also a notary public which was a big deal back in the 19th century and we had voter registration cards from the 19th century and poll tax cards which were you know two dollars back then which was quite expensive. Now the irony of irony, Prince Albert's wife was named Isabella Watson Ewin, E-W-I-N, and she could not vote for Prince Albert when he was running for office. And one of the most--the documents I'm most proud of which I shared with the city and they have reproduced it on the courthouse square in granite is a voter registration card for Isabella from 1920, from October of 1920. Tennessee was the last state to pass the Nineteenth Amendment and if Tennessee hadn't of passed it, it passed by one vote women would not have gotten the right to vote anywhere. And so Tennessee passes. So she surely was one of the first African Americans to register to vote and to participate and even back then you still had to pay a poll tax but obviously it was very important to her and she did that and so that's just a very good story of kind of how the elective process was to them. Now the court system, now what I think what happened in the 1890s when Jim Crow came about there--we had a decent amount of black elected officials in the 1880s and then just kind of all went away. There was hardly anybody. Speaker 1: Okay. I was gonna ask you if he was elected after the--I guess the pull back of Reconstruction (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he was not. After Reconstruction was over you know I think it was just very, it was a different world out there. Story_ID: 443921 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I have some books, some law books that belong to my [paternal] great-great-grandfather [Prince Albert Ewin] which were rescued out of his house about ten years ago and they're contract books and books on Tennessee law and it's just very fascinating to hold the same books that he used as a lawyer, particularly now that I'm a lawyer and the other thing that was kind of interesting about the legal practice is there were three criteria to be a lawyer, a black lawyer or any lawyer, you had to be twenty-one years old, you had to be a good moral character, you had to be recommended by an existing lawyer and then you were a member of the Davidson County Bar. Now I remember when I first started researching, someone said, "Oh if you had a lawyer from back then, you should go down to the courthouse and read the resolutions that they did for all the deceased lawyers that the bar association did." So I very excitedly run down there and you know these resolutions talk about where the person went to law school, their family, all the little things that they liked and very detailed stories going back a long time for the National Bar Association, but then I realize this is for the Nashville Bar Association which did not allow black lawyers until about 1965 so there was nothing in those records from those days. Speaker 2: So you talking about the American Bar Association? Speaker 1: No, the Nashville Bar Association. Speaker 2: That's the black group. Speaker 1: No, no, Nashville. Speaker 2: Nashville. Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 1: Nashville. So they, you know, for their members, they--every time a lawyer would die and they still do this today, there's a resolution that passes and they have all these glowing things about what kind of lawyer he was, his family, his wife, to her husband, kids and it's all in the record and put down in the book. Now when I passed the bar, there's a book that I found in the courthouse right around that time I was looking for these resolution books that every single lawyer used to sign when they were admitted to the bar. Now we have so many lawyers, they don't even sign the book any more. It's like, "Here's your license." And so I found this book and I asked if I could borrow this book for when I was sworn in and I could sign the same book because it's been like fifteen years since someone had signed the book and I looked through there and Taylor [Ewing's paternal great-great-uncle, Taylor G. Ewing, Sr.] had signed that book and so I--my signature is in that exact same book and I put it back in the courthouse and now I think it's in the archives that he signed when he was admitted to practice law in Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was wonderful. Story_ID: 443922 Speaker 1: --So your, your father [Richard Ewing, III] didn't practice law (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he was, he was a physician and like I said he went to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] like I said, died way too early, had a massive heart attack. I think he smoked a couple packs of cigarettes a day, it wasn't heavy or anything like that. Sadly heart disease is a problem in our family. His father, my grandfather, Richard Albert Ewing, Jr. [Richard Ewing, Jr.] died of a massive heart attack on Easter Sunday and-- Speaker 1: Was he a lawyer? Speaker 2: No, he was a teacher. Speaker 1: He was a teacher. Speaker 2: And a preacher. He died of a massive heart attack on Easter Sunday. He was out visiting his daughter in the Los Angeles Coliseum [Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, Los Angeles, California] Easter Sunday services, the (unclear) and died of a heart attack. He was educated at Pearl High School [Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee] which is the black school here in town and then later taught math at Pearl High School for from about I think when he graduated--he graduated from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] in 1931 and then got a master's [degree] in I think chemistry in 1933, later went on to get a Doctor of Divinity at Yale University [Yale Divinity School, New Haven, Connecticut], started off as a kind of junior minister at First Baptist Church, Capitol Hill [Nashville, Tennessee], my old church here in town and then was the minister at Howard Congregational Church [Howard Congregational Church United Church of Christ, Nashville, Tennessee]. So he was a minister, he was a school teacher and just kind of did people's taxes, did a lot of just kind of jack of all trades a lot of African Americans back then did. So I did not go to Fisk University. Had I'd gone to Fisk University, I would have been fifth generation Fisk because Prince Albert [Ewing's paternal great-great-grandfather, Prince Albert Ewin] graduated from Fisk, Taylor [Ewing's paternal great-great-uncle, Taylor G. Ewing, Sr.] graduated from Fisk, they were in the same generation, my great-grandmother Cornelia Young Ewing, who was married to the original Richard Albert [Richard Ewing, Sr.], she graduated from Fisk in 1908 and my grandfather [Richard Ewing, Jr.] graduated from Fisk and then my mother [Florence Steele Kidd] graduated from Fisk. I graduated from high school, the University School of Nashville [Nashville, Tennessee], the former Peabody Demonstration School in 1985 and Fisk was having financial woes. They were threatening to cut off the heat in some dorms and I wanted to go away to college so. I did not go to Fisk but it was--I went to Connecticut College in New London [Connecticut]. Story_ID: 443923 Speaker 1: Your father [Richard Ewing, III] was, and your mother [Florence Steele Kidd] met in Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. When you look at their personalities, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Probably my father, even though I don't look alike you know people know my father and they say I look like my father which is true and I think he was just kind of easygoing, real smart and just you know. I talked to someone a couple years ago who believes my father saved his life because he came to his office which was on Buchanan Street near Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and he had gone to some other old doctor and doctor he had some sort of pain or indigestion and doctor said, "Just go home, you're fine." And my father did some tests on him and he had you know a ruptured appendicitis and so immediately took him to the hospital and operated and all that and saved this little boy at the time, but apparently he was just very kind of mild mannered and nice and so I probably take after my father. Story_ID: 443924 Speaker 1: Do you have any brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have a brother, Richard Albert Ewing, IV [Richard Ewing, IV], who lives here in Nashville [Tennessee], lives in the area Bellevue and his wife Alexandria Ewing [ph.]. They have two children, Richard Albert Ewing, V [Richard Ewing, V], as I earlier said, and then Madalyn Ewing [ph.], who was just born, Madalyn Aniece, A-N-I-C-E-E, I mean A-N-I-E-C-E, which was my [maternal] grandmother's middle name, Corrine Aniece Perdue Steele [Corrine Perdue Steele]. She was named after her. Story_ID: 443925 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Probably my earliest childhood memory, we lived on a house on Drakes Branch Road [Nashville, Tennessee]. It was a house with a kind of slanted roof almost at a 45 degree angle and the upstairs part we had two twin beds on either side and we had a desk that would you know the house I don't think was leveled, the top part of the bookshelf would always kind of fall down and I just kind of remember that house with a spiral--a rod iron staircase. It was a very 1970s kind of architectural house, just very kind of modern on the inside and modern on the outside and just kind of being in that house is probably some of my earliest memories and just this kind of starkness of the kind of avocado green refrigerator that was kind of popular. It looked like kind of like 'The Brady Bunch' house on the inside. Story_ID: 443926 Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood? Now what part of town would you say your neighborhood was in, I mean (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here or growing up? Speaker 1: Growing up. Speaker 2: Growing up north Nashville [Tennessee] which was considered the kind of ivory coast you know when African Americans used to be--live around Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] which was the house I was brought home from the hospital on Albion [Street] and 24th [Avenue] which interestingly enough when I came back to Nashville to go to law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee], I have a uncle that still owns that house and so I lived in the basement of that house during law school. Now the neighborhood was not very good. There were some--there was a duplex in the back and those people sold drugs, actually crack [crack cocaine] and so I just kind of minded my own business and it was the neighborhood it kind of dipped, needless to say. So in the '70s [1970s] you know kind of moved to suburbia you know further north in Nashville there were these areas that were built. Bordeaux [Nashville, Tennessee] was where we grew up and we didn't live on the house on Drakes Branch Road too long and then we bought--we built actually a house on West Hamilton Road, 4148 West Hamilton Road another very modern house. It looks like a kind of cube on the bottom with a hat on the top with kind of a window and just kind of top floor that's kind of little narrow and it's kind of slanted. Dr. Hank Foster, Henry Foster [Henry Foster, Jr.], who was one of Bill Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] surgeon general nominees and later was the interim president of Meharry, lived two doors down. We're very close to their family, hung out with them. Their kids went to University School [University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee], Wendell [Wendell Foster] and Myrna Foster, and we you know spent holidays, we'd rotate with three families between Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year's dinner and that was the Ewings, the Fosters and the Perrys. Helena Perry, who is now deceased who was one of the good friends of Lea McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], who I know you all interviewed and her husband Red [ph.]. Helena was actually in my father's medical school class at Meharry so families go way back and like I said her kids, David [ph.] and Robert Brown [ph.], also went to University School with us and it was just kind of this network and this very close knit neighborhood of you know there were quiet streets and you could ride your bicycle and you could walk you know across your neighbor's lawn to or you can walk maybe a half a mile away to your friend's house and it was just a safe time to be there. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is on what side of Nashville is this? Speaker 2: North Nashville. Speaker 1: North Nashville? Speaker 2: Just past MetroCenter and across the Martin Luther King bridge [Martin Luther King Memorial Bridge] and like I said, it's the area called Bordeaux. Speaker 1: Bordeaux, okay. Story_ID: 443927 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Some of the sights and smells of--well the sounds like I said it was just a real kind of quiet area over there. Most of the sounds were probably just kind of people playing outside and just kind of riding their bikes around. Video games were, you know, just kind of coming in vogue so we would have Odyssey [Magnavox Odyssey] which was I think the very first video game with Pong, Atari (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, I hear that the Pong is like two electronic-- Speaker 2: --the two paddles and the little ball goes back and forth like kind of a tennis game. Atari, the original 2600 system with the cartridges you could buy a cartridge and put it in there and you have a joy stick that kind of controlled a very crude, very early video games but needless to say entertained us for hours and most Friday and Saturday nights we would be at a game room called House of Pizza and Games on West End Avenue, which is now a Renaissance--it's a Courtyard by Marriott Hotel [Courtyard Nashville Vanderbilt/West End, Nashville, Tennessee] so we would play, we'd just hang out and video. Half of the video game was like a pool hall, beer hall and then the other half was the game part. So you have the kind of adults drinking beer and shooting pool and then you have the kids on the other side playing the video games. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So very fond memories of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Anything else? Any other sights and sounds or smells? Speaker 2: Not really. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). All right pretty quiet, quiet neighborhood for the most part? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes. Story_ID: 443928 Speaker 1: Tell us about what you like to do-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --when you were growing up? I mean-- Speaker 2: I like--I was a collector at heart. I liked to collect coins and baseball cards. Baseball cards where I started really collecting baseball cards probably 1981 and we have just gotten cable since we lived in near MetroCenter. MetroCenter was where the cable company started and this is in the early '80s [1980s] or late '70s [1970s], actually. We were the guinea pig neighborhood so we were on a first five hundred houses. We got a little plaque signed by the mayor to get cable in Nashville [Tennessee] 'cause they didn't want to roll it out to the other neighborhoods before they figured out on this black neighborhood if it was gonna work and it was close and so it just made sense that they put cable over there. So seemed like Black Entertainment Television [BET] in its early days I mean they--there were these video music shows and they only had about six or seven videos that they'd show all the time same ones over and over again over again. Bad sets you know nothing high tech but it was the early infancy days of cable, same (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that, 'Video Soul'? Donnie Simpson? Speaker 2: --yeah 'Video,' Donnie Simpson, 'Video Soul.' There was this one guy called the Reverend Eldorado [Virgil Hemphill] who was just kind of look like a pimp basically and he was wearing glasses, a hat and cheap plastic plant behind him and you know he would just introduce all these videos and so we'd watch that, watched lot of CSPAN back then, ESPN, CNN and so just kind of grew up on cable and video games, really. That was kind of what was going on and kind of booming in America at the time. Cable also provided you know Chicago Cubs baseball which I was a fan of you know when WGN [WGN-TV, Chicago, Illinois] you could see the games but start collecting baseball cards and back then but now if you want to collect baseball cards, you could go to Target or a grocery store or something and buy the whole boxed set all at once for thirty dollars. Well back then they didn't sell a complete set so you had to put it together, package by package or buy it from a dealer and the fun part was putting the set together yourself. So I really enjoyed collecting coins and, and baseball cards and Cocoa-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] memorabilia too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Pieces of Americana, baseball, Cocoa-Cola, coins. Speaker 1: What about comic books? Did you collect (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I collected comic books, too. Most of my friends were collecting like the Batman, Superman kind of super hero comic books. I liked the kind of Disney cosmic books, Richie Rich, Harvey [Harvey Comics], which was a--I think made Richie Rich, Baby Huey, Little Dot, Little Lotta, I collected the more kind of cartoony comic books and they're still somewhere in my mother's [Florence Steele Kidd] basement. Story_ID: 443929 Speaker 1: What about--now I know movies are big-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in those days. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you like to go to the movies (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I like, liked the movies. Dr. Foster [Henry Foster, Jr.] a couple doors down had one of those huge VCRs that you bought, the top loaded thing. One of the first VCRs and so we watched movies and of course back then to buy a movie was $89.99 no matter what movie it was, very expensive. Now you could buy a DVD for you know $12, $15, $20 but any sort of movie was very expensive and they weren't that really many rental places either. There was a movie theater--we would go see movies all the time too. I remember 'Star Wars' ['Star Wars: Episode IV - A New Hope'] came out in '77 [1977], 'Rocky' came out in '76 [1976] and I remember the first probably R rated movie I saw was 'Blazing Saddles' at the Belcourt Theatre [Nashville, Tennessee] which was right down the street, which ironically now I'm on the board of the Belcourt Theatre which is a old historic movie theater in Nashville [Tennessee] where the Grand Ole Opry was and now it's home to a lot of live performances but yes we did see lots of movies and you know I remember seeing a lot of rap movies too. There were all these rap movies that were coming out when I was in high school [University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee] and college. There was 'Breaking,' there was 'Breakin' 2: Electric Boogaloo,' there was 'Krush Groove,' with Run D.M.C., which was a poorly acted movie but I begged my friends, I, I'll never forget this, I begged us to go in this movie theater called Fountain Square [AMC Fountain Square 14, Nashville, Tennessee] which was in MetroCenter and they were--and the movie had just opened. It was like maybe day two or three of 'Krush Groove' and so we go into the movie theater and there's nobody in the theater, we just all break out laughing and like oh no and then finally I think two other people showed up and of course 'Krush Groove' was an awful movie so but I did like hip hop music. I went to a lot of concerts when I was in high school, the Municipal Auditorium [Nashville, Tennessee], there was Fresh Best One, Two and Three [ph.] and rap music was just coming on the scene. It's kind of our generation's rock and roll that it was a new form of music. It was sung differently. The people looked differently and it was different and I remember going in this auditorium and seeing probably the father of rap Kurtis Blow, we had been out for a while and they were kind of booing him because I guess people were tired of Kurtis Blow. This was probably 1982 or '3 [1983] and LL Cool J was there who was just coming on the scene. People liked him, people liked The Fat Boys. They did not like this group that was in military fatigue with oozies and there's this guy walking around with his baseball cap turned backwards and a clock around his neck, it was Public Enemy and you know we saw one of the greatest rap groups of all time in the early, early days when people just didn't appreciate them. It was quite interesting. Seeing lots of rap shows from--seeing most every single major rap act that I liked you know growing up from Run D.M.C. to the Fat Boys to Whodini, Big Daddy Kane, Boogie Down Productions, LL Cool J. My rap taste kind of stops around 1989 when I graduated from college [Connecticut College, New London, Connecticut]. I kind of liked people from the early days don't really listen to a lot of that, but I listen to all type of music from rap to blues, to country to opera. I'm on the board of the opera here so but it just kind of reminds me of my kind of high school days and- Speaker 1: Now did--I always wanted to ask this question. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It, it seemed to me that coming down into the South in the early '80s [1980s] it seemed to me that popular culture in the South was trailing what people in the North were doing in the '70s [1970s]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but when cable TV hit, it was even steven everybody was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Well ironically I remember hearing Chuck D who's the leader of Public Enemy speak at Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] about ten years ago and he was speaking not rapping. I actually wanted him to rap but it was good to hear him speak. And he said that rap was black people--was, was basically black people's CNN. If you wanted to know what was going on in the Bronx of New York [New York], around the West Coast, you listened to rap and even if you lived somewhere else you could know what's going on and so that's exactly right. You just--everything kind of caught up now. I remember when I was in high school my mother [Florence Steele Kidd] had a high school--a college classmate that lived in New York City. I got the first pair of Air Jordans the black and the, and the red ones way back when and a lot of the other kind of Nike [Nike, Inc.] things that people didn't have you know now like with the Internet and big box retailers, there's parody, but back then if you had some Air Jordans or if you had something that you know there's certain things that you just couldn't get here and so I had those back in the days and people wore their little fat laces on their shoes and things like that. Story_ID: 443930 Speaker 1: All this other stimuli, now did, did you like to read too? Speaker 2: I liked to read, mainly kind of history, business books and history, nonfiction when I was in high school [University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee]. I loved biographies of people particularly in the banking and world of finance too so this was before The Biography Channel and a lot of other things so yes I did like to read a lot. Speaker 1: Now you were reading biographies of bankers and people in finance (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Yeah and I-- Speaker 1: At what age? Speaker 2: --in high school, you know. Speaker 1: High school? Okay. Speaker 2: Thirteen, fourteen and you know getting Fortune Magazine back then you're reading about this guy Bill Gates and Microsoft [Microsoft Corporation] and my brother [Richard Ewing, IV] was reading computer magazines. It was funny, there was a magazine called Creative Computing and these were early days. We had--my brother was very into computers and Dr. Foster [Henry Foster, Jr.] of course had one of the first computers in the neighborhood. I'm sure the first it was a TRS-80 and back then I remember I got on the--what was--what we now know is the Internet back then in the late '90s [1990s], in the late 1970s and I remember communicating with someone about the Chicago Cubs that was somewhere else and it was basically over what was you know kind of the Internet back then and you know got into this kind of argument over something I didn't know who thought the Chicago Cubs were horrible. But we got an Apple II and Apple you know they had those big kind of floppy diskettes and we would record--we would you know play a lot of games on there and also do some programming. There were these adventure fantasy playing games, one was called Ultima which I really liked. It was about you were--it was done by this guy Lord British and you were kind of back in medieval times and you had to kind of rescue people and kill people and collect things too. It was a very popular video game at the time. My brother and his friends were part of a group called the Byte Busters, B-Y-T-E, Busters, who basically took software protection off of games so you could copy them without paying them--paying for them which is now of course illegal, but they would pride themselves in breaking you know when bought a video game that cost like forty-nine or fifty dollars and if you knew how to reprogram it or take the code off of that, you could easily copy them onto diskettes and so back then you know if you buy a bootleg DVD or CD now, any fool can copy that or download something but people back then in those days took pride off of being able to break the code. So you would not only be able to copy it, you would sign it very prominently with your name so when you boot up--booted up the disk, here it says broken by the Byte Busters and I thought that was kind funny. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he was a real big computer person. Speaker 1: Now this is in the early '80s [1980s] you said? Speaker 2: Late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Late '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s]. Story_ID: 443931 Speaker 1: Where did you go to school? Speaker 2: I went to a school called Peabody Demonstration School, which later became University School of Nashville [Nashville, Tennessee]. There weren't too many options if you're African American in Nashville [Tennessee] to go private school that is. There weren't too many options if you're African American in Nashville to go to private school that is. That were a lot of private schools started after busing and desegregation and they were basically all white, mainly Church of Christ schools, and of course had zero black people and then there was a couple of Catholic private schools which took blacks but you know since we were Catholic we didn't go there and then there were the kind of old line white schools, Ensworth [Ensworth School, Nashville, Tennessee] and Montgomery Bell Academy [Nashville, Tennessee] where Bill Frist and many other people went. And they weren't taking blacks back then so almost by default go to University School, all of our friends go to University School, it was affiliated with Peabody College [George Peabody College for Teachers] back then where before Peabody College it was affiliated with Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee] so it was a melting pot of African American students, Jewish students, international students, Asians, Indians and went there, started in nursery school and graduated there in twelfth grade. The school in 1975 was gonna be closed by the Peabody College. They didn't wanna have a demonstration school any more where their students would go and observe students for their doctoral work or their master's [degree] work and so they were gonna close down the school. The parents reincorporated it as University School so I went there for fourteen years. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now was that the public schools in-- Speaker 2: That was from 1971, I graduated in '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: Okay. So the public schools were considered-- Speaker 2: Not very good where we lived (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) All right. And they were--were they basically all black by the time you went to school? Speaker 2: Yeah. The school that I would have gone to was Haynes Elementary [Haynes Elementary School; Haynes Middle Health/Medical Science Design Center, Nashville, Tennessee] where ironically my mother [Florence Steele Kidd] was a kindergarten teacher out there but none, none of these schools were not just where they should have been back then. There were still a lot of white flight and just very still segregated 'cause the white students wouldn't come to the black schools. They would just go to these other schools. Speaker 1: Did the school budget suffer as a result or--okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They did. They did. In the University School a lot of people entered in the nursery school and kindergarten stayed throughout the whole time. It was very common back then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now people jump around to two or three schools and maybe four before they graduate but back then you entered and you just kind of stayed. Speaker 1: Okay. Now that's pretty steady, the same schools from the nursery school to-- Speaker 2: And then I went to college in New London, Connecticut at Connecticut College. It used to be a women's college called Connecticut College for Women and then ironically when I came back to Nashville, I went to school basically across the street from University School at Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee] to go to law school was on 21st Avenue so I spent seventeen years of education really on the same street. Story_ID: 443932 Speaker 1: Now in grade school [Peabody Demonstration School; University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee], now did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: Grade school, favorite subject? I probably--I mean I liked social studies and kind of history that was my favorite subject. I had wonderful teachers over there. Ms. Dickinson [ph.] taught the first grade and Ms. Pangles taught the third grade and she was just a whiz at math and pop quizzes and things like that. I think I have a picture of me during my college graduation [from Connecticut College, New London, Connecticut] that they came by and they were--they're still both living and they were just wonderful, wonderful teachers and they're the type of teachers that after you graduate, you come back and visit them and there's a wonderful story actually about me going to Vanderbilt law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee] and you know when I was in third grade, I'd see these older students come back in the classroom, it was like wow when I'm that age, I'm gonna do that too. And so I go back to Ms. Pangles' class and I did that one year and when I was in college and I--she asked me what I was doing? I said, "Oh, I'm applying for law school." And she said, "Well that's interesting. One of my very best friends is dean of admissions, Anne Brandt," and you know, she said well I'm gonna tell her what kind of student you were and that you should--third grade student okay. And I thought she was joking, but I ran into Anne Brandt I think shortly after I got into law school, maybe after I'd started, and she said, "Well David [HistoryMaker David Ewing], I've gotten lots of letters of recommendations over the years. I've never gotten a letter of recommendation from someone's third grade teacher," (laughter). Speaker 1: She actually did. Speaker 2: She did. Speaker 1: Okay, wow that's something. Story_ID: 443933 Speaker 1: Were you involved in clubs or organizations in school or? Speaker 2: I played basketball for two years in ninth grade and tenth grade, wasn't very good. My brother [Richard Ewing, IV] was the basketball star. He was 6'11" tall, about 190 pounds in high school, he later filled out. So needless to say he was a basketball star, was recruited by about 225 schools including Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], all the big schools at the time. But he wasn't recruited by Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] interestingly enough, but you know Terry Holland was at UVA, [HistoryMaker] Ralph Sampson was and then Patrick Ewing, of course we're not related to, was at Georgetown and he would have been going the year Patrick Ewing graduated. It was kind of interesting that John Ponzen [sic. John Thompson] the coach of Patrick--Patrick Ewing's coach at Georgetown came to our house and came to our living room and sat down and said you know basically, "We want your kid come to Georgetown, be very good but you know if you wanna see your kid in four years, you're gonna have to turn on TV, he's mine for four years." My mother [Florence Steele Kidd] really didn't like that but you know that's how these basketball powerhouses stayed good and keep good and he ended up going to Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut] but it was kind of everyday we'd get telephone calls and three or four letters in the mail, just kind of people wanting to--there's a, there's a whole big event at University School [University School of Tennessee, Nashville, Tennessee] when he announced where he was going--we had like an assembly for the whole school so they could announce where he went to go play basketball which was kind of interesting. We were involved in--I was involved in politics and things like that. It was funny one of my very, very close high school friends whose name is Mark Thompson who has a show on XM Satellite Radio, that's on the power, and Mark actually was very interested in politics back then so we would talk about Ronald Regan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] and neither one of us liked Ronald Regan too much so we would, we weren't Republicans so we would just kind of make fun of you know kind of how everything was going and and Mark was very politically active and so what ended up happening, he went up to Washington [D.C.] and got hugely politically active. Now like say he's got this radio show, every time I turn on CSPAN there he is. We went down to Selma, Alabama, a couple weeks ago for the forty-second anniversary of the march [Selma to Montgomery March] on Bloody Sunday, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], we marched across the bridge with Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], of course there was Mark and he was leading a lot of the speech part of the programs so-- Story_ID: 444078 Speaker 1: Did you run for class officer or anything like that? Speaker 2: Didn't do anything like that in high school [University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee], I did it in college [Connecticut College, New London, Connecticut]. I remember it was on the judiciary board the freshmen year I think about fifteen people ran for two slots and I was fortunate enough to get elected but in high school I volunteered for campaigns. Al Gore ran for [U.S.] Senate in 1984 and volunteered on his first campaign and of course the Mondale [Walter Mondale], Ferraro [Geraldine Ferraro] campaign in 1984. I remember working--I skipped school that day to go work on the campaign, hand out literature all day. I remember coming back to the headquarters and before I would be even to drop my bag or put down my material, you know seven o'clock the polls had closed in Tennessee, there was Dan Rather saying that Ronald Regan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] had won another four years and even before the polls on the West Coast had closed so that was kind of a little disappointing. I had just gotten in the--you know think--oh it's over already? And, and in college I worked for Joe Lieberman Senate campaign, worked for the Dukakis [Michael Dukakis] campaign. It's funny I was looking through some old photographs and on the bumpers of cars there's a Dukakis bumper sticker from college, there's a Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] bumper sticker from law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee], so it kind of chronicles a lot of my political interest in careers. One of the pictures that I have is from 1992 when I was helping Clinton, Gore rally. It was at the Grand Ole Opry house [Nashville, Tennessee] in the summer of 1992 they had come to Nashville [Tennessee]. And I was concerned that basically we wouldn't get a crowd of people and the Opry House holds almost four thousand people and we had publicized it and so I had gone to the Opryland Hotel [Gaylord Opryland Resort and Convention Center, Nashville, Tennessee] and pushed all these fliers underneath these doors which I'm sure was against hotel policy and of course ironically I went to go work for that company later on after law school just to get people there. And we very fortunately had a full house and I think they had actually turned away four hundred people and it was my job to meet the motorcade when they came in. So the first motorcade was Al Gore and Tipper [Tipper Gore], and who I of course knew, and then Clinton and Hillary's [Hillary Rodham Clinton] motorcade comes up. I had met Clinton before at some other event but not Hillary Clinton and so I'm supposed to take them from the curb to the little holding room where they go before their speech. And so Clinton--Gore's introducing me to Clinton and you know Clinton's like, "Oh last time I been here, I heard a singer by the name of Holly, what was her name Holly Hunter?" And I was like, "Oh I think you mean Holly Dunn, Mr. Governor." He said, "Oh yeah that's right." And so we're walking down so it's just Hillary, Bill, Al, Tipper, me and a bunch of [U.S.] Secret Service people and we're winding our way back part of the Grand Ole Opry house and I get in this room, same thing, Hillary Clinton, Bill Clinton, Al Gore, Tipper Gore, me and about four other Secret Service agents and I've got a camera, not a digital camera of course, back then I did too, and I'm thinking, hm, I really want a picture, and I know enough about Secret Service agents that you don't ask Secret Service agents to take picture and they never hold anything. So one hand supposed to be on the gun the other hand supposed to be push someone away. So it'd be rude to ask Tipper or Hillary I mean who do you ask? So I'm looking down the hall and I spot Karenna Gore, one of Al's kids and I motion to her and she comes in and takes this picture which I'm in the middle of and on one sides Hillary and Bill on the other side Al and Tipper. It's just kind of a funny little picture and of course they became president and vice president and of course Hillary Clinton who knows she might become president too so part of my political and I did a lot of volunteer work for the campaign. Speaker 1: How did you get involved in politics as a, as a teenager? Speaker 2: Just in high school working for campaigns I guess the first real (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean did you have a mentor that kind of brought you into that or did you--or were any relatives in your, in your? Speaker 2: I just liked politics--no, not since Prince Albert [Ewing's paternal great-great-grandfather, Prince Albert Ewin] running for office. I just liked politics liked you know maybe it was the influence of CNN in the house and CSPAN that you know you had all of this and so in high school history classes and things like that and so when we had this big election coming up in 1984 I was very involved and loved that. Speaker 1: So you just on the phone just call them up and say I wanna volunteer? Speaker 2: Um-hm and yeah the Clinton--the Mondale, Ferraro campaign was a few blocks away from school and very convenient and I just you know I stuffed envelopes, I made calls. I just did little of anything I could to, to help out. Story_ID: 444079 Speaker 1: What were your ambitions as a teenager did you--what did you wanna pursue as a career, you know, in college [Connecticut College, New London, Connecticut] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Back then I probably wanted to be a banker and go into finance from reading all those business magazines and interestingly enough that was my intention when I went to college you know. I took some government classes, I took some economics classes and the year between my junior and senior year, I had applied for all these banking internships and that was the summer of 1987 when the stock market crashed. And so most internship programs were canceled or severely cut back and so I applied for one at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York [New York, New York]. About a thousand people applied for eighteen slots and I was very fortunate, I got an interview and I was one of those eighteen and out of the eighteen you had like four people from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], three people from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], two people from Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and so it was a very competitive program. I worked in the banking studies department that summer and we did a lot of policy work. There was a hostile takeover that summer. The Bank of New York [Bank of New York Corporation] had try and take over Irving Bank [Irving Bank Corporation] and so we looked at from a policy standpoint how would that affect the deposits and the customers and I worked a lot with the legal department and that's how I got interested in actually the law and applying to law school because it was a fascinating case and so after I graduated they offered me a job to be a research analyst at the banking services department which was actually Alan Greenspan's first job when he worked at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in that same department but-- Speaker 1: This is after you graduated from high school [University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: --from college. Speaker 1: From college. Speaker 2: Um-hm and I didn't think working for twenty-five thousand [dollars] in New York City [New York, New York] was very appealing even though I was living with my aunt on 460 140--145th Street, Dorothy Spencer [ph.], who was my grandfather's youngest sister. I just felt that I wanted to come back south, go Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee], go to law school. Story_ID: 444080 Speaker 1: I really enjoyed New York City [New York, New York] and particularly being in Harlem [New York, New York] during the late '80s [1980s]. That was during the whole Tawana Brawley kind of incident who was--who turned out falsely accused some white police officers of rape and you know Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] was around, all these other attorneys (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Al Sharpton and Vernon [C. Vernon Mason]? Speaker 1: --Maddox [Alton H. Maddox, Jr.]-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah Maddox. Speaker 1: --and reading the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] and all the front page editorials and just being around Harlem back then it wasn't very safe and you know I remember walking down the street and I would take the A train down to Lower Manhattan [New York] to work for the Fed [Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York] and I was wearing a suit and I carried a little briefcase and I remember coming back, going to work and there was this little boy coming along his way to school and he stops me and he's kind of staring at me and I was like, "Hi, how are you?" And he just says, "Why are you wearing a suit? Are you going to a funeral?" And I thought to myself, you know well here in Harlem there's just no role models around the people working in Lower Manhattan. And of course you go to 145th Street today, there are multimillion dollar condos on 145th Street and you know it's kind of gotten a little gentrified, but back then it was pretty rough. I remember one time I was just driving through on my way back from Connecticut College [New London, Connecticut] to Nashville [Tennessee], I stopped to see my Aunt Dorothy [Dorothy Spencer (ph.)] and you know it was around one o'clock in the afternoon and I had a Cadillac 1980 Coupe De Ville and someone stole a hubcap off my car and I had locks on it too and I was just there for like half an hour, an hour and I came back and there's no cap, gone. It was like oh my, Harlem. Story_ID: 444081 Speaker 1: Now we didn't talk about Connecticut College [New London, Connecticut]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: We didn't talk about-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --how you chose it-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --or what happened there so. Can you tell us how, how (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: --you managed to choose Connecticut College? When you graduated, did you get any honors or anything when you graduated or were you? Speaker 2: Oh from school, yes. It was funny. It's kind of probably like my mother [Florence Steele Kidd] and my grandfather, they applied to schools that their friends were applying to or they looked at schools and at University School [University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee] my classmates were mainly going to liberal arts northeastern college. My brother [Richard Ewing, IV] was at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and a lot of other people were in school in Connecticut, Massachusetts, Rhode Island and all my friends so I thought you know be up there with all the people I know and I--and someone came to recruit now because I really had not heard of Connecticut College and I really liked the recruiter and I went to visit and it's a small school which University School is about eight hundred people for thirteen grades so I didn't want a huge school and I just really liked the feel of Connecticut College. People were very extremely friendly which reminded me of the South and so I applied, I got in and I, I went and it was just a wonderful experience. Like I said I was on the judiciary board my freshmen year. I rowed on the crew team for four years in college. Now rowing is a very northeastern kind of elitist WASPy [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] sport. It was interesting how I got to row crew on my dorm freshmen year it was called Plant dormitory [Plant House] named after the founder of Connecticut College and I was upstairs and somebody who's an upperclassman thought that I looked like a rower and I said, "Rower, I'm from the South. I've never rowed before," and she just nagged me and nagged me. Her name was JoAnne Schreiber [ph.] and she ended up saying well you should go down to open house. You should just go look at the crew and you--so I humored her and I went down there and they had a boat out and some of the older players and was like this looks kind of interesting. And I knew I wasn't gonna play basketball because I wasn't that good at basketball and so I end up doing crew and I end up doing for four years. We had a very good team. We beat Yale our freshmen year. We had a very--Bob Gillette was our coach; he was just such a hard nose guy that you know believed in hard work. He would yell at you if you didn't do well and you know it was kind of like boot camp if you will for four years. Actually he was only there for three but under him it was just, he was, he was a real deal and there's this t-shirt that we had in college it said, "I Can't, I Have Crew," and basically that says a lot because you had to get up at 5:30 in the morning and walk down to the river. Put that cold boat in the water and row on the, it's called the Thames River. It was spelled like the Thames, but since we're New London [Connecticut] instead of London [England], we call it the Thames and this was during Cold War. Across the river in Groton, Connecticut, there was nuclear submarines being built by Electric Boat, General Dynamics [General Dynamics Electric Boat], and if we got too close to some of those submarines, there would be some kind of little submachine gun come out to the end of the sub and kindly tell us that we're rowing too close and that we should to back to the other side of the river. Of course we were always looking for calmer water so sometimes that's why we ventured so close. I remember when we bombed Gaddafi [Muammar Gaddafi] in Libya that day. We were out practicing, saw about twenty subs take off for the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean], it was just really unbelievable but I could always gage how if I was gonna be late for class or not because when we were rowing on the way back, they would always play the National Anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] at like seven o'clock in the morning right before we got off the water and so depending on where we were kind of coming in, you could tell if you're gonna be late. If you're way up--you know sometimes your coach will have you keep on going if you're not doing right or turn around and keep on going and so every morning it was such a great feeling, you're rowing on the river and there's the National Anthem and you see this beautiful you know kind of area and the nuclear subs I mean you really felt like you were a part of something. But Thames River is also the home of the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale crew race which was the oldest intercollegiate sporting event in America. They never want to row on each other's home water, so they kind of met halfway so they actually had nicer boat houses that, than we did that they use for all about two weeks down the river from us. Story_ID: 444082 Speaker 1: What was your major in, in college [Connecticut College, New London, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: Government and economics. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So very kind of similar of what I was interested in and loved both of those kind of areas. Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers or mentors there (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Bill Cibes [William J. Cibes, Jr.] who was a government--one of my government advisors. He later became, he later ran for governor of Connecticut. He was lieutenant governor. He was--funny thing about him he must have weighed about 350 pounds. It was my very first class in college and he walks in, he's got these old kind of 1960s style you know kind of horn rimmed glasses and this big guy and you know this class of about thirty people so he passes out these little index cards and he says, "Write your name on there," and kind of gathers them up and he reads them and has everyone raise their hand when he reads their name. He's looking around the room, he looks around the room and after about a minute he puts them down and then just kind of names everyone's name just after just a minute of doing that. It was like, wow. The other teacher that I really liked, Wayne Swanson [Wayne R. Swanson]. He was--I took a couple classes from him in government. He had took a seminar on civil war and took a class on [President] Abraham Lincoln. What a fantastic teacher he was. And matter of fact in 1994, CSPAN had a reenactment of the Lincoln, Douglas [Stephen A. Douglas] debates and in Jonesboro, Illinois, which was the closest site to Nashville, Tennessee, about three hours away in southern Illinois. I decided well I should drive up there and be a part of this and so I looked at my map and you know they said if you're a reenactor you dress in period clothes, you get to sit closer. And so I was thinking what will an reenactor be looking like me either like a runaway slave or you know some sort of you know person that you just kind of escape to, to be there. And so I had to borrow a pair of overalls. Never worn a pair of overalls in my life, with a straw hat, a little bandana, didn't have any shoes and so I just kind of walked through the town like that and people were stopping me and they were like, "Wow where you from?" They were taking pictures with me and it was funny I--they showed me on the debate many, many times and they interviewed me afterwards and afterwards they asked me a question, like, "Why are you here? What made you come here?" And I mentioned my professor Wayne Swanson again and of course he was watching back in Connecticut way back when and he said he almost fell out of his chair. He--I saw him later on after that and so he was very inspirational for me as well. Speaker 1: Okay, that's some-- so when they replay that on CSPAN-- Speaker 2: Oh yes I'm there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you're there, you're there-- Speaker 2: Yes, I'm there. Speaker 1: Okay. So we have to look for you. Story_ID: 444083 Speaker 1: Any other activities in college [Connecticut College, New London, Connecticut]? Speaker 2: In college, we had an organization called SOAR which was Students Organized Against Racism, which I was involved with. I mean my main big thing I did was crew. I mean crew just took up--you had to row, you know you had to get up at like you know we had to be on the water basically around 5:30 and we'd have land practice in the afternoon. I would listen to the radio, 'Imus in the Morning,' which of course WNBC [WNBC Radio, New York, New York] I could either barely get it from southeastern Connecticut so I could listen to that in the morning and now it's funny he's on MSNBC and everybody knows him but you know I listen to that. I just mainly did crew and you know that was it. I mean crew was a little bit of student government but crew was my major, major activity. Speaker 1: Now was there a black student organization? Speaker 2: There was and I was involved with that as well and they had a house called Unity House on campus which they had a lot of parties. A handful of students lived there. I never lived at Unity House, I liked in Plant [Plant House] my freshmen year and I lived in Blackstone [Blackstone House], which was across the way and then I lived in Jane Addams [Jane Addams House], which was on the south part of campus and then I got flexed and lived in Morrison [Morrison House], which was a modern kind of dorm that looked like an old Howard Johnson hotels which they've actually fixed up now. They look much nicer than they did. So the president who was there was Oakes Ames who was this kind of very New Englandy kind of button down kind of older guy which reminds you of somebody's uncle and then he left and then we had this woman Claire Gaudiani [Claire L. Gaudiani] who is this very kind of Italian dynamic, totally opposite of Oakes Ames. It was kind of interesting. Story_ID: 444084 Speaker 1: You came out in 1989? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989]. Leonard Lauder [Leonard A. Lauder] spoke at our graduation and either gave one of the most brilliant graduation speeches or the worst because it was just one of these kinds of things that just went over everyone's head, it was kind of stream of consciousness and everyone was, "Oh do we know what he just said?" And we're like, "No." You know of course now he's a billionaire but it was kind--and it rained during part of our graduation so when they got to about the letter I think G or, or L you know they stopped the ceremony and moved it into Palmer Auditorium [Connecticut College, New London, Connecticut] of course the people that've gotten their degrees beforehand they didn't go into so it was kind of slightly disjointed kind of event. Story_ID: 444085 Speaker 1: When you graduated, did you know you were going to law school right, right away (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I knew I'd been accepted but I did go back to New York [New York] to work at Chase Manhattan Bank [JPMorgan Chase and Co.] the summer before-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --and that was quite an experience and got another summer at Harlem [New York, New York] and the great thing about being in New York and once again with the rap music kind of coming on the scene, I've just heard some great music and saw some great things that summer in New York, saw Fats Domino who I had never seen before. He played at a little club and wow I mean everything was going on and there were clubs in New York called Mars [ph.] and the Tunnel [New York, New York] and there just--I mean remember I had to get up early in the morning to catch the train to go to work at the Fed [Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York] and at Chase and you would go to a New York club, people didn't start coming until after midnight and I would leave around 2:30 or 3:00, there'd be more people at 3:00 than there were at midnight. I was wondering, what do these people do? I've gotta get up in a few hours and they're still just going, going, going. It was, it was a great time to be in New York City and it was you know during the Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] years and Rudolph Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani] was a prosecutor and you know all that and that kind of rivalry back and forth and back and forth, it was quite interesting. Story_ID: 444086 Speaker 1: You came back to Nashville [Tennessee]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you went to Vanderbilt law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Went to Vanderbilt law school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes and the interesting thing I was wearing one of my Connecticut College [New London, Connecticut] wind shirts, rowing jerseys around campus and somebody said, "Oh did you row in college?" I probably said, "Yes," and "We've got a crew team here." I'm thinking, crew team where? Vanderbilt? Well apparently they rode out on Percy Priest Lake [J. Percy Priest Lake] and so he invited me come out to watch the team. Oh that's interesting, I like crew and they had a rickety boat, we had a very nice Boston Whaler in college where we he had nice boats, expensive boats and oars and things like that. It was varsity sport, it was a little club sport and basically they were trying to talk me into coaching the team which as a volunteer during law school and they were the bad news bears of crew, truly. They were splashing around, they didn't have form, they weren't in good shape, they didn't have good equipment and I'm thinking to myself, well why in the world would I wanna do this? This is just a lost cause. And just because I love the sport and I thought well maybe I can do this, I decided that I would be their coach, both men's and women's team. They had never won a race before matter of fact, it was just pitiful. They were using wooden boats and wooden oars, which was equivalent of using wooden tennis rackets or golf clubs today you know it's--so I had to raise some money. We urgathons which the rowing machine during parents' weekend, we were kind of round the clock so parents felt sorry for all of their students and rowers and they gave us money. I went to some local people that I knew from growing up here in Nashville and so got some money there too and we bought some used boats, not some new but at least they weren't wooden, better oars too. And had a very strict routine of working off water. We borrowed a video tape--video camera from my mother [Florence Steele Kidd] and we taped them so they could see their stroke and see their form and basically men and the women won their first races in history, in the five year history back then when I was coaching. It was great because most of the teams that they beat were varsity programs or funded well and we beat this team University of Tennessee, Chattanooga [University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, Chattanooga, Tennessee] the women beat them, their coach rowed in the Olympics and I think got a bronze medal and was this just kind of big tall imposing guy and they have great water to row in downtown Chattanooga [Tennessee] you know we just really took them by surprise and so it was a great experience for me to kind of coach that team and just kind of take them to a different level and I really enjoyed it. Story_ID: 444087 Speaker 1: Who were some of our professors in law school? And, and what what did you focus on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. The dean of Vanderbilt law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee] then was C. Dent Bostick it was kind of like the G for genius. What the C stand for? And it stand for Charlemagne [ph.]. Charlemagne Dent Bostick very southern guy. He wore you know French cuffs all the time, always wore a suit. He was very old school in his teaching style and the funny thing about being old school in the old days of law school, if you got called upon in the, in the Socratic Method you would have to stand up from your chair, rise, and so most every professor had gotten rid of that except Dean Bostick and so when you went to his property class as a first year, he called on you, you had to stand up and you had to and his logic was when you're a lawyer and you're in a courtroom, you're gonna have to stand up and argue on your feet, you gotta learn this right now. So I liked him. Donald Langevoort was our contracts professor. He taught the most amazing, one of my favorite classes, he was an old attorney for the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission] and he was just--he was smart but he was able to teach student, first year students every year because I'm sure he's just some teachers get tired of these stupid questions if you will or questions that are just like how could you not know that, you are supposed to be smart people. But he would just take--he'd be patient and take his time explain it. Had a wonderful torts professor named David Partlett [David F. Partlett] who was from Australia, had the Australian accent. He's now the dean of Washington and Lee law school [Washington and Lee University School of Law, Lexington, Virginia] and we just had really good faculty members when I was in law school. Our wills and estates attorney was Jeffrey Schoenblum who had written our book on wills and estates and you know everybody and when you just really respected these people and you had smart students. Vanderbilt wasn't a cutthroat law school that you really friends as opposed to colleagues when you go to law school. Some law schools are just like yeah I went to school with those people but I don't really like them. But people had real friendships and in my class probably about we had eighteen people, nine pairs of people marry out of our class which was considering class was about 180, large numbers so you look to your right, look to your left you know you might be married to some of these people one day--those people. Speaker 1: Instead of they won't be there. Speaker 2: They won't be there anymore, yes. Story_ID: 444088 Speaker 1: Did you specialize in any form of, one form of law or, or did-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --you concentrate on business law? Speaker 2: Yeah business law, corporations and taxes and things like that, it's just kind of a general education which is, which was very good, which I enjoy. And I was later involved on the alumni board of the Vanderbilt law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee] and so we helped with their building campaign and you know they built, they expanded the law school and remodeled the law school. Sadly they tore down this little auditorium that we used to have some of our events in called Underwood Auditorium which is where in the '60s [1960s] Vanderbilt law school and divinity school [Vanderbilt University Divinity School, Nashville, Tennessee] was different from the rest of the school which was very conservative and anti-civil rights if you will, and the law school had invited this speaker to Underwood Auditorium despite the chairman of the board and board of trustees not wanting this happen, they invite him anyway and he spoke there and like I said sadly this Underwood Auditorium where the law school expansion isn't there any anymore, but it was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and the matter of fact there was a rule that Vanderbilt law school passed shortly after that that a school could not invite a speaker without the permission of the chancellor's office which actually survived until a few years ago. I remember talking to the dean and he said you know I was gonna invite somebody and I got this kind of oh you need the permission of the chancellor's office. I was like what in the world is that? And so he had some student research it and it was like well this doesn't make any sense (unclear), but it goes back to those days. Story_ID: 444089 Speaker 1: Where did you, what did you do when you graduated from law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: I worked a little in the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] campaign. I was thinking about going to Washington [D.C.] but I decided not and stay in Nashville [Tennessee]. I-- Speaker 1: So did you come out in 1991 or? Speaker 2: Two [1992]. Speaker 1: Two [1992], okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. And did a lot of volunteer work and decided not to go and I would have been pitching the failed healthcare plan actually in Washington and then I went to go work for the Tennessee Higher Education Commission where I was their lawyer for about five years and they were involved with this federal desegregation law suit called the Geier lawsuit and it just recently got settled a couple of years ago. Basically that the institutions--the state institutions of higher education were not doing what they should be you know under the federal guidelines of desegregation and so we were still in federal court all this time. And then after that I went to work for Gaylord Entertainment Company [Ryman Hospitality Properties, Inc.] that owns Grand Old Opry [Nashville, Tennessee] and the Opryland Hotel [Gaylord Opryland Resort and Convention Center, Nashville, Tennessee] and I did kind of political work and lobbying for them and diversity work for the company and then I went to go work for the Chamber of Commerce [Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce] which is a business organization and I did work related to their education initiatives, their downtown initiatives, organized their big annual trip of a 138 business leaders and the mayor, people like that. We went to Chicago [Illinois] last year, the year before we went to Boston [Massachusetts] so it's a really big trip to organize and also organize a trip to Washington. We sat down with our [U.S.] Senate majority leader then Bill Frist in his office for about half an hour with about twenty-five of our people so just things like that. Story_ID: 444090 Speaker 1: This lawsuit with that, the higher education commission [Tennessee Higher Education Commission] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Geier-- Speaker 1: --yeah Geier lawsuit-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --tell us a little bit more about that? Speaker 2: Well the lawsuit was basically that you know Tennessee was although some schools were desegregated, they were kind of moving back toward patterns that were segregated. Matter of fact University of Tennessee, which was our big state school based in Knoxville [Tennessee], they had just opened up a campus in the '70s [1970s] in downtown Nashville [Tennessee]. A lot of people thought that that campus was trying to take away students from TSU [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], particularly white students that would have and so they went back to federal court and they ordered that basically UT not only can't have that campus it was gonna be merged into TSU a historically black college [HBCU] so there were all sorts of things like that going on in the state and funding issues that UT would get all the appropriations from the legislature and TSU their campus wouldn't have new science buildings or new gyms or things like that so it's been a long process. Story_ID: 444091 Speaker 1: Tell us about Gaylord Entertainment [Gaylord Entertainment Company; Ryman Hospitality Properties, Inc.], and for those of us who are not from Nashville [Tennessee]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --like, I'm not, I don't, I didn't know-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yeah. Speaker 1: --what it was. Apparently, apparently everybody around here does so. Speaker 2: It's a hospitality company. It has roots in an insurance company that was started around 1901 called National Life Insurance Company [National Life and Accident Insurance Company] and National Life Insurance Company in 1925 operated one of the first radio stations in Nashville called WSM [WSM Radio, Nashville, Tennessee] which stood for, We Shield Millions, part of their insurance. Again outreach, if you will, in marketing and a few months after WSM went on the air at 6:50 a.m. clear channel, they hired a program director from Chicago [Illinois] to start a kind of barn dance radio show which later became called Grand Ole Opry [Nashville, Tennessee] and Gaylord National Life was taken over by American General [American General Coporation] in early '80s [1980s] and then they auctioned off the non-insurance proceeds which included Opryland theme park [Opryland USA, Nashville, Tennessee], WSM, the Ryman Auditorium [Nashville, Tennessee], the Grand Ole Opry house and the Opryland theme park and the Opryland Hotel [Gaylord Opryland Resort and Convention Center, Nashville, Tennessee] and the Gaylord family from Oklahoma bought all that and so since then they been kind of refocused on building half a billion dollar convention center hotels in other cities. There's one outside of Orlando [Florida], one outside of Dallas [Texas], they're building one that's gonna cost about $800 million in Prince George's County [Maryland] outside of Washington [D.C.] and one of the last things I worked on at Gaylord was getting a tax incentive for that hotel by the local city council down there. And they've broken ground and it will be open I think early 2009. Story_ID: 444092 Speaker 1: What about the Chamber of Commerce [Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce] now, what, what-- Speaker 2: Chamber of Commerce, business organization you know government affairs and community outreach doing things related to you know education our K through 12 [kindergarten through twelfth grade] education, gotta improve that here in Nashville [Tennessee], I've been advancing that. Our downtown initiatives, you know getting things built, whether it be you know proposed parks, new hotels, new entities that will just condos that will make downtown vibrant again. My [paternal] great-grandfather Richard Albert Ewing [Richard Ewing, Sr.] lived on 8th Avenue right next to the capitol [Tennessee State Capitol, Nashville, Tennessee] and one of the first urban renewal projects in America kind of took out all those houses and the churches that were there including First Baptist Church, Capitol Hill [Nashville, Tennessee], my old church, and they moved kind of down the hill a little bit more but people are now living downtown again and it's a popular place to live and it used to just mainly be African Americans about sixty or seventy years ago and street cars came and people were just moving out to the suburbs, African Americans were kind of left in the city. Speaker 1: Okay. Is Nashville growing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's growing, it's growing by-- Speaker 1: --by, you know-- Speaker 2: --it's growing in population, it's over 600,000 now, it's growing in kind of prestige, we have all sorts of corporate headquarters have moved here in the last four or five years, the chamber's very proud that you know CareMark [CVS Caremark] has moved here which is a medical primary--prescription benefits company, Asurion [Asurion, LLC] which insures cell phones and pagers moved their corporate headquarters here, Nissan [Nissan Motor Company Ltd.] moved their corporate headquarters from Southern California to Nashville and they're gonna build a, a headquarters down in Williamson County [Tennessee] in a couple years so we're very hot right now. Good time to be in Nashville. I'm a ninth generation Nashvillian so you know it's just kind of nice to see all the new kind of new people and the growth that's coming here. Speaker 1: Okay. Now as--I don't know one of the big attractions for Nashville is of course country music-- Speaker 2: That's true, yes. Speaker 1: --has black history grown as a (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're trying to build an African American museum here in Nashville. The state has given the land for it but now the group has to raise about $25 or 30 million for the--we're the only major Tennessee city that does not have an African American museum and there's such a rich history between the Civil War and civil rights and all the people like Wilma Rudolph and Oprah Winfrey and all the great people that kind of come through Nashville. Even Jimi Hendrix played on Jefferson Street when he was stationed up at Fort Campbell [Kentucky] and so we've, we've got our quite a bit of black history here, very unique. Story_ID: 444093 Speaker 1: I want you to just kind of slow down a minute and just give us a, the, the rundown-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --of this and you're--now you collect materials-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and you're on the boards of--are you on the board of the new museum or are you part, part of the group (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was on a little advisory group you know. I'll probably be involved particularly when it gets a little bit closer. The boards I'm on or (unclear) Cheekwood [Cheekwood Botanical Gardens and Museum of Art, Nashville, Tennessee], which is an art museum. I'm on the board of the Belcourt Theatre [Nashville, Tennessee]. I'm on the board of hospital which is owned by Hospital Corporation of America called Summit [TriStar Summit Medical Center, Hermitage, Tennessee]. I'm on the board of a for-profit bank called Capital Bank and Trust [Capital Bank and Trust Company]. I've been on that board for about four and a half years. We just sold to a bank in Mississippi called Renasant [Renasant Bank] and we're kind of gonna change our name so that's been kind of interesting, kind of brokering a sale of a bank and I'm on the board of the Friends of Warner Parks [Nashville, Tennessee] too, which is a large park system in the kind of west part of the city. But the African American museum you know needs money from city and private foundations to really kind of start to take form so hopefully we'll be able to do that. Story_ID: 444094 Speaker 1: So I was asking you to kind of run down some of this history, you know. As you got illustrations on the walls here in your home-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --of the Battle of Nashville. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, I guess take it from the Civil War-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --maybe just a little review of who, who and you know who and what is famous here. Speaker 2: Nashville [Tennessee] is an interesting city, even during the time or before the Civil War because it was a major city, their transportation hub, we had rivers here, we were centrally located in America, we still are obviously, and you know we were famous before the Civil War really for [President] Andrew Jackson, our seventh president of the United States. After Civil War you know Nashville was not decimated like Atlanta [Georgia] or some Vicksburg [Mississippi] or some of the other cities, it was basically occupied by the Union Army during most of the Civil War so it wasn't kind of destroyed or burned or something like that so their recovery shortly thereafter was pretty steady and people moved back and we had lots of entrepreneurs here in town and the population (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now before we go too far, too deep-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --into this now wasn't there like a dramatic participation of black soldiers in the Battle of Nashville? Speaker 2: There were including my ancestor who was involved with the Ohio fourth heavy artillery and the Battle of Nashville, there were black soldiers on the union side it was a very important battle in Battle of Franklin, Battle Murfreesboro so by that time the Confederacy was definitely kind of falling and slipping, they probably weren't the most important battles of the Civil War but had they gone the other way, they would have given some momentum to the other side. The other thing that really helped to kind of firm Nashville's role in the African American community, happened right after the Civil War an American Missionary Association started a school for former slaves called Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] which is the oldest college in the Athens of the South. It was started in 1866 and of course the world famous Jubilee Singers [Fisk Jubilee Singers] the former slaves that went all across America in the world to raise money for this newly formed school that you know if it weren't for them the doors would not have stayed opened because they were struggling, they still are struggling sadly. The other school that was started here shortly after Civil War was called Central Tennessee College [Walden University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Central Tennessee College had a medical department, had a law department. Their medical department was called Meharry [Meharry Medical Department of Central Tennessee College; Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and their law department was very famous. It's where Taylor Ewing, Jr. [Taylor G. Ewing, Jr.] went to law school. He came back and gave a commencement address to the law school in 1907, actually--but the thing about the Central Tennessee College too, there was a woman by the name of Lutie Lytle [Lutie A. Lytle]. She was on the faculty there in 1890. She was the first not only African American but first female instructor of law in America, right here in Nashville and so Nashville-- Speaker 1: And her name is Lucy-- Speaker 2: Lutie Lytle. Speaker 1: Lutie? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: L-U-T? Speaker 2: L-Y-- Speaker 1: L-Y-- Speaker 2: T-T-E. Lytle. That's like L-Y-T-T-L-E [sic.], and she she was on the faculty and she taught law. It's kind of interesting that you know Nashville is home to a lot of firsts and that school was also later renamed Walden University. It was near downtown. It was actually on the--there's a college called Trevecca Nazarene College [Trevecca Nazarene University, Nashville, Tennessee] which is on the site of that. It went under in the '20s [1920s] and before it went under Meharry had broken off and moved to their present location across from Fisk which was a good thing, they became independent because Meharry probably would have been taken down with them had they not, and so Nashville did have a black law school, very briefly. Story_ID: 444095 Speaker 1: You'd mentioned the, oh, the civil rights history at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] right, that's-- Speaker 2: Very rich history. It's not only the Jubilee Singers [Fisk Jubilee Singers] you have the Harlem Renaissance that literally came through Fisk, Aaron Douglas the famous painter taught my mother [Florence Steele Kidd] art at Fisk and he was on the faculty for many, many years, you had James Weldon Johnson who wrote the Negro National Anthem, 'Lift Every Voice and Sing' lived on campus, taught at Fisk University. The African Harlem Renaissance author Arna Bontemps lived on campus, [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin was educated at Fisk, of course W.E.B Du Bois was educated at Fisk. So Fisk has a wonderful history during that period of time and then you fast forward to the '60s [1960s] when my mother was there, the Civil Rights Movement. There's a book by David Halberstam called 'The Children' which chronicles a lot of their efforts that basically the sit-ins that were had downtown at the lunch counters were basically led by Fisk, Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] and American Baptist College [Nashville, Tennessee] students that kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Diane Nash. Speaker 2: --got the conscience of the city. And yes Diane Nash-- Speaker 1: Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel]. Speaker 2: --Bevel all those, [HistoryMaker] John Lewis who was educated at Fisk. Speaker 1: James Lawson. Speaker 2: Yes. So that's a wonderful story, too. Story_ID: 444096 Speaker 1: You've collected some materials yourself? Like, just tell us about some of the things that you've, you have personally collected. We were speaking-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --in the car about a copy of 'Imperium in Imperio' [Sutton E. Griggs] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Imperio. Speaker 1: Imperio-- Speaker 2: Yes. One of my favorite kind of collecting stories was in kind of searching for Taylor Ewing, Jr. [Taylor G. Ewing, Jr.] who I didn't know about until I started researching this and I ran into a legal document recorded in our courthouse in Nashville [Tennessee]. It talked about a Taylor Ewing, Jr. in Vicksburg, Mississippi, and that's all I knew about him. If I go, I gotta go to Vicksburg. I didn't know Taylor [Ewing's paternal great-great-uncle, Taylor G. Ewing, Sr.] had a son. Maybe he's got some descendants whatever. So I called the little historical society down there and there's I find out the cemetery and they go out and read the grave, the plot that he owns. It's he and his wife Lucille Hampton [Lucille Hampton Ewing (ph.)] and he died in and he was born in 1873 died in 1944 and Lucille Hampton died in 1951 and she was I think born around 1880 and there was nobody else in the plot and so I go down to Vicksburg, drive down there, and find his old house which was on Main Street and I found out that the godson, Taylor's godson, had a son of the godson had just died and that was part of the estate that had the Dillon Funeral Home [Dillon-Chisley Funeral Home, Vicksburg, Mississippi] and this house. The house was boarded up, graffiti on the outside. It looked kind of dangerous actually so I go to the funeral home and I was like, "I came all the way from Nashville, Tennessee. I'd love to see the inside of that house." He was like, "You don't wanna go in there. It's like you know a lot of gangs in there. It's been used as a crack house. They tried to burn it down." "But I drove all the way from Nashville. I gotta see inside this house." He was like, "Okay," so they send someone out with me who digs ditches, digs graves, not ditches, for this funeral home, take the boards out of the house. There's no electricity on, it's just ransacked on the inside and you have to remember this was probably around 1996 and Taylor had been dead since '44 [1944], his wife since '51 [1951] so there's a lot of stuff in there that people lived in there and did things and of course the vandalism that gone there every since then. And then there was some clothes and busted furniture and things like that and so I just spent hours and hours and hours. They took the front boards off the window so you could--the light could come in so I could see. I found checks that belonged to Taylor. I found legal stationary that belonged to Taylor, I found a bust of Longfellow [Henry Wadsworth Longfellow] that belonged to Taylor which was on a little pedestal, and I found a bookshelf, a lawyer's bookshelf full of not legal books but Paul Laurence Dunbar, W.E.B. Du Bois, Sutton Griggs [Sutton E. Griggs], Hawthorne [Nathaniel Hawthorne], Longfellow, books on the French Revolution, books on Napoleon [Napoleon Bonaparte] and these were Taylor's books and they were all on a nice little bookshelf and it was funny because the rest of the house was ransacked but they--the people that were in there didn't really touch these books for some reason, these thugs, these gang members, so I go back-- Speaker 1: So there's a theory behind that you know. We don't-- Speaker 2: --in there I found his World War I [WWI] button that used to be on his uniform so I go back to the funeral home. I'm thinking okay I can't leave without the stuff. I gotta buy the stuff. He was like nope, I'm not gonna sell it to you. I'm thinking well how much I have to offer I say this is--they didn't know Taylor existed. They were junior and you know if I don't this stuff, I'm never gonna get it and was begging this guy. And so he was like, "I'm not gonna sell it to you, I'm gonna give it to you. If you don't take it, the crack heads will," and so I took the books, took the bookshelf. Story_ID: 444097 Speaker 1: I came back later on, like a week later, there's in our front hall, there's a wardrobe of double edged mirrors that belonged to Taylor [Taylor G. Ewing, Jr.] it was his own and they're kind of rest of the story as Paul Harvey used to say--is like a month later, they sold that house and so it would have been all cleared out and so had I come down later, I would have found nothing. So I was able to kind of find Taylor if you will and be in this house that he lived in to when he died. And he was a very successful lawyer in Vicksburg [Mississippi] and matter of fact he was one of the founders of the bank down there called the Union Savings Bank [Vicksburg, Mississippi]. He--his mentor down there was a lawyer by the name of W.E. Mollison who was affiliated with the Lincoln Savings Bank and Vicksburg was a place where African Americans went who were young and educated and successful around the turn of the last century around 1900 and Taylor lived there too. And the funny thing about that was Mississippi was just a horribly racist place so most of these people left in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] because even black people didn't have black lawyers because you would just automatically lose your case. Taylor for whatever reason stuck it out, and when he died in 1944, there was only one other lawyer W. Moon [W.L. Moon] in the whole state. There was one other black lawyer in the whole state when he died. And it was funny I did meet a lady down there who used to answer phones for Taylor when she was in high school when I went down there. And she remembered that he was kind--in the notes that I got from the veterans hospital kind of talking about his condition later on in his life and how feeble he was. That definitely verifies all this. She said she had--they had to hire this kind of boy from high school or somebody from the city to come out there and literally lift him up out of his chair because he was just kind of so weak and so he could go to court. He really couldn't stand up on his own and so his last few years of his life he was just very frail. Speaker 2: That's quite a story, you know, quite a search with a reward you know at the end of it. Speaker 1: And there's a book called 'Balm in the Gilead' that Sara Lawrence Lightfoot ['Balm in Gilead: Journey of a Healer,' Sarah Lawrence Lightfoot] wrote and she talks about Taylor's wife Lucille [Lucille Hampton Ewing (ph.)] who used to play at the Baptist Church down there and she taught Sarah Lawrence Lightfoot's mother, who that book is about, piano lessons. So it's kind of interesting to kind of have all that kind of tied together and have other people write about your family that you didn't know. Speaker 2: And that's about, that's Lucille Hampton? Speaker 1: Hampton yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Who was from New Orleans [Louisiana], her family was from New Orleans. Speaker 2: Okay. She was Lucille Hampton I guess-- Speaker 1: Ewing. Speaker 2: Ewing, yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. That was something. Now you have quite a few Civil War prints in here. So I mean where do you find these items (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Auction houses, antique dealers, shows you know. That's--they're becoming scarcer and scarcer to get and more expensive but you know we like to decorate our house with historical memorabilia and things that are specifically related to African American experience or Nashville [Tennessee] or both if you're lucky. Story_ID: 444098 Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: That we continue to move forward, continue to be educated in the ways that Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] would have liked it. And even Booker T. Washington would have liked, and to remember and honor our history. This is very important. I wished that there was more of this during the 19th century where people that were slaves to tell their stories. We still have very limited kind of knowledge about what happened then and some of the real firsthand stories, I love Frederick Douglass' books, because it's basically the African American version of the diary of Anne Frank if you want to know how horrible slavery was, you read those Frederick Douglass books, particularly his second book, 'My Bondage, My Freedom' ['My Bondage and My Freedom,' Frederick Douglass] it talks about all the horrors that he went through and all the beatings and all the things he had to deal with trying to escape. Story_ID: 444099 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, you're still a young man-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, is there anything that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Oh I mean, genealogist always say oh I wish I would have started this earlier because I would have talked to so and so because they would have been alive or I would have gone to that place when that person was around, but no I mean to protect and to document and to you know I'm still you know I probably started off ask about social study being interesting for me in high school [University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee], young age because a lot of people start genealogy when they were retired or they were kind of looking backwards as opposed to looking forward in life you know. You go to these genealogy places most of the people are in their sixties or seventies, they're really into genealogy, not a lot of younger people really. But I just--the legacy of you know Prince Albert and Taylor [Ewing's paternal great-great-grandfather and his twin, Prince Albert Ewin and Taylor G. Ewing, Sr.] is just weighing on my mind and just kind of what they went through they're--you know--literally they lived in the same city, they were in the same profession as I was and just kind of trying to recreate their steps of what they did. You know Prince Albert had nine children you know so it was very interesting you know Richard [Richard Ewing, Sr.] and Margaret [Margaret Ewing (ph.)] and Steven [Steven Ewing (ph.)], Willie [Willie Ewing (ph.)], George [George Ewing (ph.)], Perkins [Perkins Ewing (ph.)], LaLa [LaLa Ewing (ph.)], they just--every student, I mean every, every son and daughter really kind of I think Prince Albert was very proud of his family and you know most of them got educated and you know I think he'd be very proud of his legacy here in Nashville [Tennessee]. Story_ID: 444100 Speaker 1: What today do you see as I guess what kind of legacy are you trying to build I guess? Speaker 2: One that just documents in history and just kind of preserves what we have and tells the story. One of the things that I want to do, hopefully I'll get to do, is all those black lawyers that were missed between 1964 and back that never got recorded in the bar association [Nashville Bar Association] minutes or books after they died to kind of recreate their lives in biographical form and write up you know some of them I might be only have to do a paragraph or two but to kind of put that in the record and kind of honor them as they should have been honored. Speaker 1: Okay. I know I seen a site called Arkansas Black Lawyers online when they did it in Arkansas-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --so it's possible to do-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and I hope, you know, can do it. Story_ID: 444101 Speaker 1: Tell us about your family now-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you, you're a, a-- Speaker 2: My wife is [HistoryMaker] Alice Randall, who you of course talked to earlier. I have a stepdaughter Caroline Williams who's a freshman right now at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and this is our house. This is where we live and Nashville [Tennessee] is quite interesting place. We got married in April 20, 1997 after a big gala called the Swan Ball here in town which is a big fundraiser for Cheekwood [Cheekwood Botanical Gardens and Museum of Art, Nashville, Tennessee] where I'm on the board and the Swan Ball up until the early '90s [1990s] was an all-white event that had been going on since the early '60s [1960s] and Lea McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] who you actually talked to earlier was on the board of Cheekwood and not getting invited to the ball and paying money and so she basically opened the door to the ball and they started to invite her but then that was not enough for her and so in 1997 they had about thirty African Americans attend this ball. The New York Times even wrote an article about it shortly thereafter and I was quoted in that article so it was kind of a funny it's a very Old South, old money event, very elitist, it's hard to get an invitation if you're white number one and so we went to that event and we got married at two o'clock in the morning after the ball on Vanderbilt's campus [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] at St. Augustine's Episcopal church [St. Augustine's Chapel] by Becca Stevens [ph.], one of our friends. Story_ID: 444102 Speaker 1: As a lawyer I know your wife [HistoryMaker Alice Randall] went through a big lawsuit about-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --the book she wrote. Speaker 2: Yes, 'The Wind Done Gone,' [Alice Randall] and the Margaret Mitchell estate suing us for $10 million. Speaker 1: Do you have a lawyer's perspective and a husband's perspective on this lawsuit? Speaker 2: I do. I, I didn't think it was a lawsuit with any merit but that doesn't mean that you don't have to go through the motions. I was surprised that the lower federal court judge enjoined the book from publication just went against all kind of intellectual property law and the Pentagon Papers and all that but you know we--I knew that either the next quarter or even if I have to go to the supreme court, they would you know lift the injunction and they did. It was kind of interesting we went into federal court, it was a three judge panel and normally when you go into federal court you know both sides have you know five minutes one side, five minutes other side and you have a small rebuttal. And so they--the judges normally--you have to usually wait a few weeks or maybe a month for them to write their opinion and so the three judges kind of looked at each other afterwards and just kind of shook their--you know kind of whispered and shook their heads. It reminds me of this old game show called, 'To Tell the Truth' and at the end of a show you'd have to guess who--there were three people claiming to be John Smith, you would have to guess who the real John Smith was. And there would be this kind of drama of the three people. You don't know which one was gonna get up and they were kind of all looking at each other and so it reminded me of that. And they had a piece of paper in front of them and they all kind of agreed and they said, "Here's our order, we're lifting the injunction." They had basically written the opinion before the arguments. They so disliked what the lower court did. They didn't even pretend to go back and deliberate. They lifted it immediately which was a total rebuke for the lower court judge so we walked out of the courtroom and you know there's all this press and photographers and the AP [Associated Press] had a picture that was on the front of the Chicago Tribune and a lot of it ran in newspapers all over the country and of course every story deserves a photo op so you had like that little decision I was kind of waving it around you know. Little three page decision lifting the injunction so that was quite interesting. Story_ID: 444103 Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't asked you you think we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Let's see, I think the most probably interesting thing about kind of me is just long ties to history and plantations here you know. Isabella [Isabella Watson Ewin], Prince Albert's [Ewing's paternal great-great-grandfather, Prince Albert Ewin] wife, was one of [President] Andrew Jackson's slaves and their marriage was at Tulip Grove which is another plan--mansion on the Hermitage site [Nashville, Tennessee] and so we've always heard that you know there's very strong ties to the family and that there might even be some sort of relationship to Andrew Jackson and our family to release the oral history of our family says if there is you know there's lots of circumstantial evidence that you know Jackson mentioned about four or five slaves in his wills including one of our relatives and gave one--didn't free any of the slaves but gave a couple slaves to like keep, his son and some other nieces and nephews and the other things that were very interesting is you know the family lives still very close out there and that there's always been this kind of I don't know kind of liking of the Hermitage and just back and forth with our families and ties. You know I used to be on the board of the Hermitage so I think that's good well be some sort of actually blood lineage to Jackson of course he didn't any white children of his own because his Andrew Jackson, Jr. was adopted. Speaker 1: Okay. Isn't there a story about three of his slaves being the only ones that were baptized by him or something? Speaker 2: Yes. In the church there were three and they were either baptized in the church and it was interesting because-- Speaker 1: It was a young woman and two children right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And it's usually you didn't baptize you know you didn't teach slaves how to read or write, you didn't let them have religion critically not in your white church but so I just you know you're never gonna find the smoking gun document, "I fathered these black children da, da, da." But you could find just a whole lot of circumstantial evidence to go along with the family oral history that people were saying you know we were related to Andrew Jackson over these years you know through Isabella's family and Isabella's grandmother was named Hannah which was one of Andrew Jackson's famous slaves. There were two slaves Alfred and Hannah which were kind of rivals if you will. They both lived to almost 100, Hannah lived to a 100. I think Alfred lived until about 92 and Alfred stuck around the plantation for the last fifty years of his life and kind of gave tours. He's related to the family through marriage and Hannah was also you know kind of trying to be playoff of her ties to Jackson even when she was elderly she was talking about how she was Jackson's favorite and actually was very helpful for some of the Jackson biographers including Parton [James Parton] who wrote a book ['Life of Andrew Jackson'] because one of the most famous Jackson stories there's this gash on his head from when he was a child when the British came over here and asked him to polish his solders' boots and he refused and they took out a sword and whacked him over the head and Hannah knew that because Hannah was you know Jackson was a lawyer and the lawyer in east Tennessee near Johnson City [Tennessee] they couldn't pay for his services so we say, "Oh well I have a young slave girl, will you take that as payment?" And she was five years old, Hannah was, and so he rode up there on his horse and carried Hannah all the way back into Nashville [Tennessee] on horseback in his arms and Hannah was kind of one of his favorites and one day she was combing his hair and noticed this gash on him so that's how we got that story that's very famously repeated by Jackson biographers. It's a lot of the, it's kind of like this. You know Jackson wasn't around and a lot of--he died in 1845 a lot of the later stories that we knew about Jackson came from his slaves and the people that firsthand were there. So it's a very interesting kind of documentation even in the lives of presidents when you look back at their lives that a lot of the stories that we knew were repeated by the slaves. Story_ID: 444104 Speaker 1: --Our last question-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --is similar to legacy. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It's, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well I would like to be remembered as someone that made a real difference in Nashville [Tennessee], the city that my family has called home for two hundred years plus and to really improve this city to make it better, to improve quality of life for everybody, educational opportunities and you know take care of the institutions that we have an to create new good ones. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you, sir. Speaker 2: Thank you. Thank you for being here. Story_ID: 443961 Speaker 1: This is my father, Richard Albert Ewing [Richard Ewing, III]--Dr. Richard Albert Ewing, III and me on our house--on the couch of our house on Albion Street. Like I said when I was in law school. I lived in the basement of that same house. Speaker 2: Same house on Albion Street in the kitchen and my brother Ricky [Richard Ewing, IV] is feeding me right there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is my brother Ricky and myself playing in the couch you know and my mother used to dress us alike. Speaker 1: September 1968 taken on the porch of the house on Albion. Once again we're dressed alike and that's my mother who has just gotten her master's degree from Tennessee State University [Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is September 1969, we're dressed alike in these little sailor suits at the national airport where in the late '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] you'd go out on Sunday and you eat there which one of the first restaurants that were desegregated in Nashville [Tennessee]. Of course by then all were, whereas the airport restaurant and you'd go to watch the planes take off. Speaker 2: This is us on the house on Drakes Branch Road. This picture was probably 1971. It's myself and my brother. Looks like we're dressed up to go church or somewhere and that's the modern little front doors on the house. Speaker 1: This is July 1972 summer in Tuskegee [Alabama] and actually this is Opelika, Alabama, across the street from the Darden house and me and my brother are just in my grandparents back lawn. Speaker 2: This is my friend Matt Berman [ph.] and I in college probably circa 1987. This is the car that I--a 1980 Coupe de Ville that I have with the Michael Dukakis for president bumper sticker so it might be 1988 but that's my friend Matt Berman outside of my dorm senior--actually outside my senior year dorm which I don't think I lived at that year. Speaker 1: This is me in 1985 in June at my high school graduation [from University School of Nashville, Nashville, Tennessee]. From the-- Speaker 2: Me in the top left hand corner. My brother's right sitting right below me, my aunt Duchess Zelma Ewing is next to him and then Gia Remos [ph.] is next to Aunt Duchess and then next to me is Geno Remos [ph.] and then Ruth Ewing and Russell Ewing, the first cousins. Speaker 1: This is me and my brother who you can tell is much taller than me and my mother's car to the right and then my Cadillac to the left outside of our house on West Hamilton Road. Speaker 2: This is my graduation from law school. My brother's on the left, I'm on the right. My third grade teacher Ms. Pangle is in the green and Ms. Dickinson [ph.] my first grade teacher is next to her. Speaker 1: That's my room junior year in college in Jane Addams [Jane Addams House] dormitory, Connecticut College [New London, Connecticut], next to my fish tank, my stereo, my compact disk which were just coming on the scene then and a lot of Cocoa-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] memorabilia. Speaker 2: My senior year picture and it's me in front of a Cocoa-Cola sign. I think that I took this to possibly put in the yearbook but I used another one. Speaker 1: This is me outside Vanderbilt law school [Vanderbilt University Law School, Nashville, Tennessee] wearing a Vanderbilt crew sweatshirt which I designed actually and a Connecticut College crew hat. Speaker 2: Some of my men's crew team that I think just won a race and these are undergraduate Vanderbilt students and I'm in the picture with the blue hat. Speaker 1: This is me and Al Gore at Vanderbilt law school around 1989 he spoke at the law school. Gore went to the law school for about a year and a half and dropped out. Speaker 2: This is the last year I think of the Cadillac before it died on 1710 Linden Avenue where I lived in law school with my brother and you can see the Vanderbilt, Connecticut college sticker in my fraternity Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] which I just pledged, graduate chapter, Tau Lambda [Delta Tau Lambda]. Speaker 1: This is me outside the same house and graduate school on Linden Avenue, Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] bumper sticker on the car. I bought this car in Alabama. It's still got the Tuskegee license plates. Speaker 2: During my graduation at Vanderbilt law school. Speaker 1: This is our wedding reception at Travellers Rest where of course my ancestors were slaves and myself, my mother's in pink, there's Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Randall] wearing white and Caroline [Caroline Williams] is in front of us. Speaker 2: This is me and my Aunt Naomi Hunter [ph.] at her retirement center and I think this was probably her 89th or 90th birthday. Speaker 1: This is my brother and his wife Alexandria [Alexandria Ewing (ph.)] and of course me and Alice. Speaker 2: This is me and my nephew Richard Albert Ewing, V. Speaker 1: This is my mother and her parents, Frank Steele and Corrine Steele [Corrine Perdue Steele]--yeah, Florence Kidd [Florence Steele Kidd]. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Tammany Hall group from 1934 at the Commodore Hotel [Grand Hyatt New York] in New York [New York] and in the picture is my great-grandfather right there and about four other African Americans around him. That's Jailous Perdue. I mean I'm sorry, Jailous Steele. I mean Javan, Javan, I'm sorry, J-A-V-A-N [Javan Steele]. Speaker 1: This is Jailous and Corrine Perdue sitting down and at the top part it's from the right that's Sol Perdue [Solomon Perdue], Ruth [Ruth Perdue], Corrine, Naomi [Naomi Perdue] and Walter [Walter Perdue]. Speaker 2: This is the Steele family younger sister Dorothy [Dorothy Steele (ph.)] to the left and then Javan the father, Frank the son, Margaret [Margaret Steele (ph.)] the wife and then Bailey [Bailey Steele (ph.)] the youngest son. Speaker 1: Yes. This is me with Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], Al Gore and Tipper Gore the summer of '92 [1992] before the election at the Grand Ole Opry house [Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Great-great-grandfather Prince Albert Ewin. Speaker 1: This is Prince Albert's house and his farm with his sons. Speaker 2: African American teachers in front of the state capitol [Tennessee State Capitol] in 1897 in Nashville...