 Story_ID: 641425 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers; our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: And am I looking to you? Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. I'm Tracey Elaine Edmonds [HistoryMaker Tracey Edmonds], T-R-A-C-E-Y, E-L-A-I-N-E, E-D-M-O-N-D-S. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth was 02/18/1967, February 18th, 1967. And my place of birth was Harbor City, California [Harbor City, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I carry a few titles and so I have three active companies right now. And so, I'm the president and CEO of Edmonds Entertainment [Edmonds Entertainment Group, Inc., Los Angles, California]. I'm the president and COO of Our Stories Films. And I'm also the president and CEO of Alright TV. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is November 19th, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are inside my residence in Beverly Hills, California. Story_ID: 641426 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: They're sort of a warm up. The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I do have a favorite food. I love Mexican food. So, I'm big on burritos and tacos (laughter) and enchiladas and all that. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I do have a favorite color. I love neutral colors. So, I, I love beige. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year is the holiday season so, I'm big on Christmas and Thanksgiving and, and the holidays. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I do have a favorite vacation destination. My favorite vacation destination is Europe. So, Paris [France], Italy, South of France. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I think the phrase that I've always lived by, and it's pretty basic and pretty simple is: do unto others as you would have others do unto you. Story_ID: 641427 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [George McQuarn] side separately and then we'll put 'em together. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Jacqueline Yvonne McQuarn [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn]. And Jacqueline is spelled J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E, middle name Yvonne, Y-V-O-N-N-E, last name McQuarn, M-C-Q-U-A-R-N. Speaker 1: And what was her maiden name? Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Moten, M-O-T-E-N. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is August 15th, 1942, I believe. And she was born in Houston, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and were there any stories about what they were doing in history? Speaker 2: My mother grew up in Houston, Texas. And so, both of her parents are from the Houston and Huntsville, Texas area. And her mother's maiden name, I believe, was O'Brien, I think it's O, apostrophe, B-R-I--I think it's Bryant, O'Bryant, B-R-Y-A-N-T. And her, her father, her mother, her name is, I'm trying to remember, I'm sorry, bear with me. I'm trying to remember the first. Oh, okay. It's Molly O'Bryant. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Molly O'Bryant, I believe, is of mixed ethnicity and so I was told that Molly O'Bryant's father may have been of Irish descent. Speaker 1: There's a good chance (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). And, and Molly's mother, you know, I believe was African American but I don't know if she was mixed with anything else. Now, my mother's father [sic. grandfather], I believe, was, let's see, I think he was, I think African American and Native American. And his name was Joe [Joe O'Bryant]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he's Joe Moten? Speaker 2: No. And, you know, what I'm getting, let's see, why did they use the last name O'Bryant? And it's okay if I just kind of ramble a little bit, right? Speaker 1: Sure, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah (laughter), okay. What was his, I'm gonna have to check for you on that why his last name was, I don't know what his last name was to be honest with you. Yeah, yeah, 'cause Moten comes from my, my grandfather's side. So, my grandfather's name is Leon Moten. And so, my mother's father is where the Moten side comes from. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, not quite sure how the O'Bryant thing works out (laughter) so. And I know that Molly O'Bryant who had--I'm sorry we're going back to great-grandmothers now. Did you say my mother's mother or my mother's grandmother? Speaker 1: This is, you were talking about your mother's grandmother-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. I did say that correctly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, yeah, so my mother's mother, Versie Moten [Versie O'Bryant Moten], who was Versie O'Bryant before she got married, she came from a family of thirteen children. And so, Molly and Joe from, you know, from Houston had thirteen children. And so, my, my grandfather, Leon Moten, I believe he just had one other sibling, he had a sister. And so, and her name was Faye [ph.], I don't know if that was short for anything. And so he grew up more so in the Huntsville, Texas area. But he went to high school at, I think it was Houston High [Sam Houston High School, Huntsville, Texas] with my grandmother, Versie. And my grandmother, Versie, and my grandfather, Leon, met in high school, they were high school sweethearts. And they had a baby, I think when my grandmother was eighteen, I think either right after her senior year, and they got married and they've been married ever since. And they're still alive, and they've been married all these years. Story_ID: 641428 Speaker 1: And when my mother, who is their first child, Ja- you know, Jacqueline [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn], when she was five years old, that's when they moved from Houston [Texas] to Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Is there a story as, as a, as a why, about why they moved to-- Speaker 1: Well, I know that, you know, again, my grandmother, Versie [Versie O'Bryant Moten], you know, she had, you know, it was thirteen siblings and they were all living in a really small house, you know, in the Houston area. And as each, you know, child became of age, you know, one by one they started moving. And so, I believe, two of her older siblings were the first to move out to Los Angeles and then she moved out to Los Angeles, you know, after my mom was five. Now, my grandfather, Leon [Leon Moten], was in the [U.S. military] service and so, I believe, he was part of the Korean War. And so, he was, he was on service duty when my grandmother decided to leave Houston and move out to Los Angeles. So, she always tells the story of how she had my mother, age five, and then my mother's younger sister who was a baby at the time, and I guess somehow they got on the bus and went from Houston to L.A., and, you know, she made the decision on her own I guess while my grandfather was, was in Korea and just said, "Hey, it's time for me to leave Houston and, you know, I'm gonna, you know, go, you know, see my sisters out in California and see what this California thing is all about." So, she bravely as a, you know, mom with two little daughters packed up, got on a bus, and, and moved out to, to California and started her life all over, you know, in, in California while my grandfather was in Korea. Speaker 2: So, when he got out of the war did he--I mean, did he join her here in, in California (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So, when he got out of the war he, he joined her in L.A., and apparently they were living in the projects, and so I think they were living, you know, in Compton, California, or some place and, you know, she was living in the projects. I know from the stories that I was told she had two jobs, you know, where she was having a tough time, where she had one job by day and then, you know, a night job sometimes too and so she was working as a nurse and then she was also working in some type of cannery where, you know, they, I don't know if it was--they did vegetables, canned vegetables or something but she used to, I remember being a little kid she used to tell stories about how cut up her hands were from, from the cans that she, that she had to work with. And so, you know, her--hearing the stories, I mean, I could only imagine how tough it was being a, you know, a mom at the time with, without your, you know, your husband to support you and then, you know, having these two daughters, being in a new city, and trying to figure out, you know, how you're gonna get the bills paid while you've got these little, little girls. So, I think her two sisters that were already out in L.A., I think they kind of helped her watch over the girls while she was at work but it sounded like it, you know, it was a lot. And she's, but she's got a very courageous spirit and that, I think, kind of, you know, trickled down to my mom's spirit and to my spirit where, you know, she's always been very fearless, you know. And so, the idea again of like, you know, this mom being, "Hey, I'm taking my two little daughters and we're going to, you know, California and, you know, I'll figure this out," you know. So, she, you know, I really have always respected her spirit. Story_ID: 641429 Speaker 1: What did your mother [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] say about growing up in--now, now she was in Los Angeles [California] proper or, or in Compton [California], which one? Speaker 2: She grew up in Compton. Speaker 1: Compton, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so, so, yeah, so she grew up, it was just the two girls, and so she had a sister that was five years younger. My grandparents, I don't know how they did it. They ended up, they kept, you know, working, working, working, they just had regular jobs but they worked so hard, they, you know, they both had multiple jobs. Never, ever did welfare, you know, just worked to get themselves out of the projects as quickly as they could. And then they bought, you know, two houses, they bought their first house in, in Compton after getting out of the projects. And then from there they moved up to, what at the time was an upscale area, called Carson [California]. And so, I know they tell me the story of the, the part of Compton that they moved into and bought their first house when they left the projects was actually predominantly white at the time. And so, they were, you know, one of the few black families that figured out a way to actually buy a house. And so, they, you know, they bought their house in, in Compton and then just kept working, working, working and upgraded again and moved into Carson, which was like again a step above Compton. And they moved into a new development in Carson and they bought a two story house, which to me growing up, it felt like a rich person's house. And so, my grandmother [Versie O'Bryant Moten] always had expensive taste. And so, she was always looking at House and Garden or, you know, Home Beautiful [sic. House Beautiful] or, you know, all of those magazines and dreaming of a big life and working as hard as she could to try to emulate, you know, that life that she, you know, that she dreamed about and to give her girls the best clothes. And so, the house that they bought in Carson, which was a two story house, it was actually a really big house, you know, like for the '70s [1970s]. And so, when I would go over to visit them, you know, on summer vacations--and she, you know, she helped us a lot, she helped backup my mom, like if my mom had to work, you know, we'd go over there after school and I loved being there 'cause I felt rich. And so, she had beautiful chandeliers and, you know, crystal lamps and she collected antiques and she always had beautiful flowers and, you know, she always found a way to get beautiful jewelry, you know, and but it was all through hard work, you know. And so, she always bought nice things. They didn't believe in credit cards and so they just were thrifty and smart, you know, about how they spent their money. So, for me she had one of the prettiest houses, you know, in, in the neighborhood and I was so proud to--I'm gonna get teared up, but I was so proud to, you know, to go see her, you know, all the time because I, I had so much respect for her. And she taught me a lot. She taught me a lot about being a lady. And, you know, always maintaining class and grace and, and dignity. And, you know, I'd sit up in the bed with her and, you know, as a little girl and, you know, she would just tell me about life and, you know, "You make sure you always carry yourself this way," and, you know, "You make sure you don't ever let me anybody do this to you." So, we had a lot of good talks when I was younger that molded me, you know, into the lady that I, that I am now. And, you know, she was great. I mean, she was the first person I remember having a Cadillac (laughter) so. And again, I don't know how they did it, you know, she working that nursing job and the cannery and stuff and they just saved their little money and stuff and, you know, and drove one of the, you know, one of the first Cadillacs in the neighborhood. You know, she had the, they had the, the refrigerator that had the icemaker, (laughter) you know, in the door and that was a big deal in the '70s [1970s], you know, and I was like, wow, that's really cool. She had the first push button phone, you know, everybody else had the dial phones and stuff. And so, she was always a hard worker, you know, forward thinker and stuff and so, you know, I, you know, love her to death and she's still around. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, now, what did your grandfather [Leon Moten] do for a living? Speaker 2: My grandfather he worked for a power company, so it was, he did something with, you know, I can't remember if it was Edison [Southern California Edison Company] or Department of Water, Power [Los Angeles Department of Water and Power], it was something in power. And so, a great man too, who, who loved, loved his kids. He was a, you know, still is an awesome grandfather. You know, he used to, again, you know, they used to help take care of us a lot. And so, a lot of times they'd be the ones that would pick us up from school, you know, if my mom was at work, you know. My grandfather cooked also. My grandmother was an amazing cook. And so, like in Houston [Texas], you know, there's like a family restaurant and so she learned how to cook, you know, from that. And so, she, you know, was incredible and would bake these amazing cakes and I'd sit on the counter and watch her make these cakes. And, you know, and made the best fried chicken. And my grandfather was, his, his dish was spaghetti, he was the--and chili. So, so, he was, he was great too. He's much more soft spoken than my grandmother, and so people would always joke and say that my grandmother ran the house, you know. So, she just had this vivacious, you know, personality that would just, you know, pull everybody in and she was articulate and, you know, and my grandfather, you know, was a hard worker too, but he kind of sat back a little bit and kind of let her run things a little bit. Story_ID: 641430 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn], did, did she have any stories about growing up and-- Speaker 2: She (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or what it was like when she--? Speaker 2: --she does. Now, my grandparents [Versie O'Bryant Moten and Leon Moten] again, I don't know how they did this but they just really wanted the best life for, you know, for their girls and stuff. And so, you know, by hook or by crook, they put both of the girls in private school. And so, they went to a private Catholic school and so my mother and her younger sister went to St. Anthony's [St. Anthony High School] Long Beach, California. And I believe they were probably the only two African Americans going to that school. And so, and, you know, I know my mom said she was voted best dressed. And so, but my grandmother again, it was all about, you know, just working, working, working to just give her family the best life that they could possibly have. And so, so, yeah, so she, she, her stories, you know, that my mom often tells are about being the only black girl, you know, at St. Anthony's, being the only cheerleader. And there was still a lot of racism back then and so when it came time to--school dances and things like that, you know, no one would ask her because she was African American. And so, she'd get overlooked 'cause, you know, none of the white boys would wanna take a chance, even though they'd have a crush on her, but they wouldn't wanna take a chance and go public and, you know, go someplace with, with an African American girl at the time. So, she met my father [George McQuarn] when, when she was in high school. And so, my father ended up being the one that took her to her, her prom and so he was going to a public school in the area. And my dad was a really, really handsome man. And so, you know, he was kind of, he almost looked like an actor or something back in the day. It was, you know, very hard to tell what ethnicity, you know, he was. He was tall and had really straight dark hair, you know. Very, very striking looking. And he was also a, a superstar athlete in the neighborhood. And so, my, you know, my father, he went to Centennial High School [Compton, California], which was a public high school, and to look at his yearbook, I don't know how he did it. It was like okay, you see my dad playing football, he's on the basketball team, he's running track, and playing baseball, (laughter) you know, and he's got varsity letters in all of them. And I'm like, "Well, don't all those sports overlap?" You know, "How did, how did you do that?" So, you know, but he had tremendous drive also. So, he grew up in Watts [Los Angeles, California]. Story_ID: 641431 Speaker 1: Now, what is his full name? Speaker 2: His name is George Harold McQuarn [Edmonds' father, George McQuarn], so G-E-O-R-G-E, H-A-R-O-L-D, M-C-Q-U-A-R-N. Speaker 1: And he was born in 1941, right? Speaker 2: Yes, I believe so. Speaker 1: Okay. Right. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born, I mean, I guess, oh, actually, you know, what? He was born in Fresno, California. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, he, yeah, he was born in Fresno and then they moved to, to Watts [Los Angeles, California] and the Compton [California] area when he was really young. Speaker 1: Now, are there, are there any, how much do you know about his side of the family? Do, do you have any history from that side (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm gonna, I'm gonna be honest with you about his side of the family. His mother, I believe, her maiden name is Tejada, and I think it's spelled T-E-J-A-D-A. And her name is, you know, it was Mary McQuarn [Mary Tejada McQuarn] but I believe Mary Tejada, I think, was her, her maiden name. Speaker 1: So, so, she is Mexican American or Chicano or (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, what, it's, you know, she passed away before I had a chance to really ask the questions that I wanted to ask. And so, I went on ancestry.com one time and tried to trace the tree or whatever, the only clue I had was this Tejada name or whatever. And, I believe, she was born in Louisiana and I was told she was Creole. And so, you know, to look at her she definitely looks like she's mixed or something. And so, looked like she was, you know, half black and, and half white although I came across this Tejada name. Now, when I traced the Tejada name it just kind of traced back to Spain, you know, ultimately when I took the, the name all the way up. Now, my father's father, that he knew to be his father, and that is Luther McQuarn, M-C-Q-U-A-R-N. And I'm gonna be honest in this interview, he never looked anything like my father. And so, he was African American but very dark skinned man, he was not very tall, you know, my father was a tall man. And, you know, he died, let's see, my Grandfather Luther, passed away when I was probably about ten. And really wonderful man, hard worker also. But I remember being a kid and being a teenager and always hearing rumors that he may not have been my father's biological father. And so, so, that's kind of where the family tree breaks down a little bit, is that no one has ever gone on record to talk about who my father's real father is. We have heard rumors that my father's real father may have been in Fresno and may have been of Latin American, you know, descent, you know, either Hispanic or, or, or something like that, which would make sense, you know, if you look at the way my father looks, he definitely looks like he might be Latin, you know, or something. And my father came from a family of three siblings. And so, it's my father and an old, no, two younger, two younger sisters. And his two sisters look nothing like him. And so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --his two sisters look, they're much darker, you know, in skin tone, you know, their hair texture, everything looks completely different. And-- Speaker 1: And he's the oldest, right? Speaker 2: He's the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so, the story was that he may have had a different father from the other two sisters. And so, growing up for my father, you know, in Watts looking the way that he did and having two sisters that looked entirely different, you know, he was, you know, teased a lot when he, you know, when he was very young, you know, because, you know, people on the street would say, "Hey, your daddy's clearly different from, you know, your sisters' daddy," and you know, that kind of stuff. And so, he, you know, he grew up, you know, having to defend that and insisting that he had the same father but, you know, I don't know if he really truly believed that or not. And so, and, you know, the younger my father was he definitely didn't even look like he was African American, you know. And so, he just stuck out like a sore thumb, you know, in the, in this family 'cause it's like, "Where did he come from?" (Laughter) You know (simultaneous). Story_ID: 641432 Speaker 1: What did his mother [Edmonds' paternal grandmother, Mary Tejada McQuarn] look like? Speaker 2: His mother still looked, she looked Creole, you know, so it still was kind of, you know, well, okay, maybe, maybe he just kind of took after, you know, that side of the family but there was just such a striking difference between--and I've got a picture, I don't know if you've seen (laughter) that picture yet, there's a picture over there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, is that, okay. Speaker 2: --of my father and his two, and his two sisters, well, you'll, you'll see that he just looks, looks completely different. And so, knowing that and then hearing, you know, there's this story that my mom always tells me that my father's mother's sister pulled her to the side one time and said, "Hey, you know, Jackie [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn], you know, you know, George's [George McQuarn] father is really different, you know, but they don't wanna talk about it," you know. So, I don't know. I've tried to ask my father a couple of times, you know, if he knows, you know, anything about that 'cause I, I did tell him I was trying to trace the family tree and he just, you know, didn't really wanna talk about that. So, so, that, that's kind of hard. But I know my, my brother [Michael McQuarn] had his, his DNA tested and I think, you know, we've got a huge, you know, percentage of Latin, you know, or something that's running through our blood. So, it could be that it's coming from my father's side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So, often the children with a different father are the last ones that actually know (laughter). Speaker 2: I know, yeah, exactly (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause and that's how-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, and then, you know, my father's father that he knew, Luther [Luther McQuarn], was such an amazing man and did such a great job raising him and was so hands on that, you know, my father was like, "No, well, I don't care what any of these other people say, this is my dad." So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, that's the only father he ever knew? Speaker 2: That's the only father he ever knew and that he acknowledges; and he don't even wanna hear anything about any rumors or, you know, urban legend or, or anything. Story_ID: 641433 Speaker 1: Now, your parents met when your, your father [George McQuarn] was at Centennial High School [Compton, California]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Centennial must be famous for sports or something, I've heard of that name; is it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is, yeah, like, yeah, they're, yeah, they were very big for, you know, for, their athletics and stuff. And so, like I said my dad was, he was very busy on all the, you know, the sports teams and stuff. And then he ended up getting a scholarship to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angles, California]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, now that's big time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know, as a baseball player. Speaker 1: Now, that's big time sports-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --when you get a scholarship to UCLA. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, so, yeah, so he, you know, and he, you know, and I'm just, I'm not just saying this 'cause he was my dad but he was, he was a legend, you know, in the neighborhood [Watts, Los Angeles, California] 'cause of the way he looked and the fact that he was this athlete and the fact that he made it out the hood and, you know, got this scholarship to UCLA and stuff. But he went through a lot, you know, my father, you know, tells me stories that always make me tear up about, because of the way that he looked, you know, there was so much harassment and bullying, you know, from everybody in the neighborhood, you know, when he was a kid. And, you know, and he just tried to, he had to stay as focused as possible on sports, you know, and, you know, keeping his grades up to just get out of it. Because, you know, the gangs came after him all the time and so, they wanted him to join, you know, the gangs and stuff. And so, and he tells me this story about how they harassed him so much to join this gang, you know, that finally they were like, "Look, the only way we're letting you out of this and we'll leave you alone is you gotta pass through this belt line." And so, so, he has this story that he's, he's told me where, you know, he had two rows of gang members and they had baseball bats and chains and belts and my dad had to walk through that and be hit and beaten, you know, with, you know, the chains and stuff, you know, and, and make it through there so that they would finally just leave him alone. And so, once he did that, they just left him alone and let him just do his thing with sports and, you know, and graduate and go to UCLA and, and make it out of all that. Speaker 1: That's sounds like something out of a Daniel Boone movie (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's like, I mean-- Speaker 1: 'Cause that's really a, a gauntlet. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, I mean, it's like this, you know, it, he's a really, really strong person and, you know, the, the stuff that he had to go through because of the way that he looked and stuff is just, you know, it's hard, you know, it takes a lot, 'cause a lot of people would have just given up and, and folded, you know, and be like, okay, I can't take this anymore, what you need me to do? You know, so. Story_ID: 641434 Speaker 1: Your parents met in high school and, you know, when, when your mother [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] needed a date (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: And, you know, so did they, so I take it they stayed together, you know, from that moment on (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, they did. My mom always tells the story of again, you know, my, my dad apparently was this legend, you know, where, you know, all the girls in the neighborhood [Watts, Los Angeles, California], "George McQuarn, George McQuarn." "Oh, my god, did George McQuarn talk to you?" So, so, my mom, you know, was going to the prom with George McQuarn and so she was so proud. And so, so, she tells the story about, I guess, one time she was in like the ladies room or something and she just wanted somebody to say, "Who are you going to the prom with?" (Laughter) So she could say, "George McQuarn." And so, somehow the prom comes up or whatever and so, so she's like, "You know, yeah, prom, prom, prom. Yeah, you know, I'm going with George McQuarn." And so, so, two other girls were like, "Oh, well, he just took me to my prom yesterday." "Oh, really? Well, he took me to mine" (laughter). So, so, she really kind of realized that, you know, he was quite the ladies' man, (laughter) you know, but ultimately she snagged him and got him. And so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, he, they both graduated, he ended up going to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]. And, you know, my [maternal] grandparents [Versie O'Bryant Moten and Leon Moten] always complained that they tried to get my mom to go to college but she just wanted her first car and wanted to start working. So, so, she chose to just work instead of going to college, and she bought her first car so she could drive up to UCLA and see my dad all the time 'cause she was still living at home with my grandparents. So, so, she'd come up and, you know, go to his games and visit him. And I don't know how, how many years later they got married. I think they got married when, when my father was still in college. Story_ID: 641435 Speaker 1: He was primarily a baseball player, I guess, at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a baseball player. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a catcher. And so, ultimately he didn't go on to play professional sports 'cause he had really bad eyesight and so his eyes kept giving out on him. So, so, after college he went and became the director of parks and recreation for the City of Compton [City of Compton Parks and Recreation Department], so he was kind of in charge of, you know, all the parks out there and, you know, and in creating youth programs and sports programs and all that kind of stuff for the, for the parks system. And then he went from that into becoming the head high school basketball coach at Verbum Dei High School, which was a Catholic high school in Watts [Los Angeles, California]. And he did such an incredible job there. He made history. He put Verbum Dei High School on the map. Speaker 1: What, what's the name of the school again? Speaker 2: It's Verbum Dei High School. It's, V-E-R-B-U-M, D-E-I, High School. And so, if you ever kind of Google, during the time that my dad [George McQuarn] was coaching he created this superstar basketball program where they won the state championship like, it might have been like ten years in a row. And so, so, I was a little girl at the time and I, you know, I kind of grew up in basketball gyms. And so, we were always going to my dad's practices and his games and stuff and, you know, we had this family room that, you know, became the trophy room 'cause he got so many trophies and stuff 'cause they would just win everything and then he would win like coach of the year and, you know, all that kind of stuff. And so, my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] ended up working, I think, it was mainly voluntarily, she worked at the high school also, she worked in the front office and so, and she was also in charge of putting the cheerleaders together (laughter). So, so, she was handling the cheerleaders for the team 'cause it was an all-boys school and so she recruited cheerleaders from an all-girls Catholic school and so I think that the school is called Regina Caeli [Regina Caeli High School, Compton, California] or something. So, she got the little cheerleaders together, they would cheer at my dad's, you know, basketball team, I mean, basketball games and then, you know, my brother [Michael McQuarn] and I would go to all the basketball games and stuff and so, so it was fun. You know, they were a really beautiful, sweet couple, you know, in their younger days. And so, they were, you know, kind of picture perfect, you know, family that you'd see like on the TV shows and stuff. They bought their first house together. And my mom, you know, she cooked and she made cakes and, you know, tutored us after school with homework and taught me how to read when I was really young so I ended up going to school one year earlier than I was supposed to; I think I started kindergarten when I was four, you know, or something 'cause I knew how to read (simultaneous). Story_ID: 641436 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, I, I always this question: when, when you consider your parents' looks, their personalities, their sense of humor, what they're interested in, their talents, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: You know, I get a little from, from both. My dad [George McQuarn] is probably, and this is no disrespect to my mom, but my dad's probably more cerebral like me. And, you know, I have a very nerdy side that, you know, people don't even know. I, if I was not doing, you know, if I wasn't doing entertainment I could be a student for the rest of my life and just keep getting degrees and learning and researching and stuff. And, you know, and you'll discover later on in our conversation but, you know, I also wanted to be a psychiatrist 'cause I've always been fascinated by the mind and stuff. And so, so, I was a, you know, was a special kid when I was young and I was always gifted with a high IQ and so I, you know, the entire time I was in the school system they always put me in these special gifted, you know, programs and stuff. And so my dad is really smart. And so, he, you know, he's very, very political. He's the kind of guy that goes to see--he reads a lot, he goes to see independent movies, he loves, you know, travel and, and that kind of stuff. And so, and he's probably, he's probably even more practical than I am. I'm always, I'm a planner and so I always, like right now I'm planning for retirement, you know, (laughter) already so I'm always planning ahead and I got that from my dad. But I'm not quite as cautious as my dad. My dad's, you know, he's amazing, like he is another guy that doesn't believe in credit cards. Like he has one credit card, he has American Express [American Express Company], but it gets paid off, you know, every month. He has no mortgage. And so, and he's got a savings and stuff and so he always, you know, planned everything, you know, very, very well. Now, my mom, you know, is more of the wild card, you know, of, of the family and stuff but that's, you know, it's good. She takes from my [maternal] grandmother [Versie O'Bryant Moten] so she was the more adventurous, you know, risky one. And so, when my parents split up, and they split up a couple of times as I was growing up, the first time they split up I was in fourth grade and so we moved from Carson, California to Long Beach, California. But she packed my brother [Michael McQuarn] and I up and got us a little apartment, you know, got a job and, you know, just started working and raising us and, you know, she still dated, you know, and she still, you know, she tried to have a, a full life. Now, the reason that they had, you know, kind of issues as they got, you know, older and older is, was because, you know, my mom likes to spend money. And so, she loves fine things, you know, so she loves expensive clothes, you know, cars, you know, all that kind of stuff. My dad's very practical. And so, you know, as a coach my dad was always on a fixed income and, you know, my dad would try to create a monthly allowance and a monthly budget, and so my mom discovered credit cards at a young age (laughter) and discovered the idea of revolving credit and stuff. And so, so, she just started, you know, she'd go shopping every single weekend. Like my childhood is like, you know, the weekends we'd be at a shopping mall every weekend. So, that was just part of life, you know. So, we'd be at the Del Amo shopping mall [Del Amo Fashion Center, Torrance, California], Cerritos shopping mall [Los Cerritos Center, Cerritos, California], we'd be at Bullock's, all these stores that were big in the '70s [1970s] and stuff and we'd be shopping, buying clothes, you know, grabbing lunch, you know, and then the bills would come in and, you know, and they kept getting higher and higher. And, you know, my poor mom, I remember her like trying to hide the bills when they came in and trying to get the mail before my dad could (laughter) get the mail and stuff so my dad wouldn't see these bills and stuff. And so, you know, a lot of times, you know, when I was little my memories are them arguing over the bills, you know. And my dad finally, I remember my dad one time just, he said, "Jackie [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn], give me all the credit cards. I want every single credit card." My mom is crying, "Here, here," my brother and I like (makes sounds), you know. And he took the scissors and cut up all the credit cards and stuff and my brother and I we're over in the corner just crying for my mom and feeling so (laughter) bad for my mom. And that was, it was really shortly before they had their first breakup you know, so. But, you know, she just had, you know, she had a big lifestyle, you know, that, that she, you know, that she had in her head that, you know, that that she wanted and, you know, fair enough, you know, they were just different, they wanted different things. You know, my dad was fine having a conservative, secure, safe, comfortable, you know, lifestyle and stuff. And so, so they split up, you know, when I was in fourth grade [at Progress Elementary School, Long Beach, California]. Story_ID: 641437 Speaker 1: And then my dad was recruited to be the assistant basketball coach in Las Vegas [Nevada] at UNLV [University of Nevada, Las Vegas] under Jerry Tarkanian. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: 'Cause, you know, he was, here he was this kind of superstar high school basketball coach [at Verbum Dei High School, Los Angeles, California] and UNLV was becoming bigger and bigger and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, about what, so, so about what year is this? This is-- Speaker 1: That was around 1976. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, this is when UNLV starts really becoming big as a basketball (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this is when, yeah, the Runnin' Rebels-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --and, and all that kind of stuff. So, Jerry needs, you know, a hotshot, you know, assistant basketball coach, here you have this young guy, George McQuarn, that's winning all these state championships. And he's like, "Hey, come over to UNLV." So, my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] and dad, we were, at that point they had been split up for two years but, you know, it was kind of a loose arrangement where, you know, my dad had us on the weekends and, you know, sometimes he'd come over and spend the night, you know, at the house with us and stuff and so they were still kind of, kind of trying to get back together and my brother and I, you know, we just prayed every night that they would get back together and we'd have our family back together and stuff. So, my dad gets offered this big job and he comes back to my mom and says, "Hey, let's try to make this work. Let's all move to Las Vegas." And so, we're like (makes sounds). And, you know, my mom was excited 'cause, you know, Las Vegas in the '70s [1970s], you know, that was an exciting town. And so, and being part of UNLV, you know, back then, I mean, you were a rock star if you were connected to that program and stuff. And so, we lived in, in Vegas and we got a chance to go and eat at all the hotels all the time and, you know, my dad would just sign his name and, you know, everything was free. You know, and so they were just like, "Oh, you're part of UNLV, oh, no, we can't, you, you can't pay this, you know, we're not gonna have you pay for this check." And so, we'd see all the Vegas shows and go to all the fancy restaurants and stuff. And so, my mom got that big lifestyle that, you know, that she always, you know, dreamed for and stuff. And so, so we moved there for, for a few years and then they split up again. So, then they, you know, still, you know, a few years later weren't getting along again and we ended up moving back to Long Beach [California]. And when I was in tenth grade I, I went to Long Beach Wilson public high school [Woodrow Wilson High School; Woodrow Wilson Classical High School]. And so, my parents had split up again. And then my dad came back to Long Beach and tried to make it work one more time. Speaker 2: So, was he, did, did, did he leave the job-- Speaker 1: He (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) with Jerry Tarkanian? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, he stayed, he stayed for a little bit behind us, you know, in, in Vegas and then he was recruited to become the head basketball coach at Cal State, Fullerton [California State University, Fullerton, Fullerton, California]. So, when they offered him a chance to come back to Southern California now as a head basketball coach, you know, you know, it was again, "Okay, hey, let's try to make this family work." So, then he moved back in with us when I was in high school so, from tenth through twelfth grade they tried it again and, you know, moved back in together and stuff. And then the end of my senior year they finally got a divorce. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, that would be 19--what? Speaker 1: I graduated in '83 [1983], so. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, yeah, sometime, it was, you know, either '82 [1982] or '83 [1983], I can't remember what part of the school year it was. Speaker 2: Okay, so--wow. So, so--well that--so I mean, so-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think you were asking me too like so, okay, so, what'd I get from, from my mom. So, what I get from my mom is probably, you know, her courage, you know, and so her kind of risk taking, you know, spirit. So, because during those times that my parents were separated, the first time she took a banking job but the second time she started her own business. And so, she had had experience working at a mortgage company and doing home loans, so by the time they split again, she's like, "You know what, I'm gonna open up my own business." And so, so, she opened up a mortgage company. And so, it's that kind of entrepreneurial spirit that that I think, you know, got from my mom, you know, and a little bit, and we'd have to go back to, tracing back to my [maternal] grandmother [Versie O'Bryant Moten], a little bit of like the, you know, the loving clothes and, (laughter) you know, that kind of stuff and being in, you know, being a lady and getting your nails done and, you know, and all that kind of stuff and keeping yourself up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, I know, the way you talked about your grandmother earlier being such an anchor and you loved going over there was it 'cause I, I guess it was a lot more stable in some ways than the other, I mean, at home (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was, yeah, it was. And actually, you know, she was the stability when they would go through their issues and stuff. And so, you know, there were times when, you know, she would keep us for a while, so that they could resolve their issues and try to work through their issues and stuff. And then also too even when we lived in Las Vegas the summers were so hot in Las Vegas 'cause, you know, you're dealing with a hundred ten degrees temperatures, so the routine was, you know, summer comes we'd go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], my grandmother takes care of us during the summer, my parents work in, in Las Vegas but they wanted us in a cooler environment. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Now, now, you're the, the oldest? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, and you have like-- Speaker 1: Just one younger brother. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's two years younger, Michael [Michael McQuarn]. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, now what does he do now? Speaker 1: Michael's in the entertainment industry also. And so, he's a, a director, producer, he does a lot of reality TV. Story_ID: 641438 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Probably, I mean, I have early insignificant, you know, childhood memories but the, I think this, the earliest memories that are just really, really vivid for me were my, my dad [George McQuarn] again was always big on these family vacations. And so, he, I always tell him, he, he was like Chevy Chase in those vacation movies [National Lampoon's] (laughter) or whatever. Like he would love to like go to the automobile club, get the map, take a highlighter and map out this whole little trip that, you know, that he was gonna take and, you know, it could be us going back to see relatives in Houston [Texas], you know, it could be go, us going to the Grand Canyon, and going to Yosemite [Yosemite National Park, California], you know, whatever, but the trips were like really, really big for my dad. And again, but being thrifty, you know, we took our trips in a Volkswagen and so we had a Volkswagen Bug. And so, (laughter) it was like not much room, you know, but I don't know how we got all of our luggage and everything in there but, you know, we would do these, but we'd have so much fun. And so, it would be like, you know, going, he loved to drive up the coast, so it would be like, you know, going from L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to San Francisco [California] and stopping at all the little cities along the way or the Grand Canyon or Yosemite. He also too, I guess, it must have been when he was in high school or college, somehow during the summers he used to be like a, a camp counselor or something too. So, he knew how to do all that kind of stuff. So, camping, you know, and all that kind of stuff was big. Again, when I flashback to those memories, my mom hated those trips (laughter). So, I remember the camping trips and literally my mom crying, "I don't like it, there's bears and there's spiders, I mean, now, why can't we stay in a hotel." And my dad was like, "Jackie [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn], we can't afford a hotel," you know, we can only, you know, and so it was constantly that, you know, battle over my mom wanting bigger and my dad only being able to afford, you know, certain things. And even like the Volkswagen Bug was a big, you know, a big deal because, you know, she wanted a nicer car, you know, and my dad loved his Volkswagens and stuff and that was a big thing, he thought that was the best car on the planet, you know, the Volkswagen Bug. And I remember one time my mom, somehow she showed up at the house with a brand new car and she had bought a Monte Carlo [Chevrolet Monte Carlo]. And so, and, of course, as kids we're like, "Oh, my god, we got a Monte Carlo," you know, we're all excited and it was this big car and much flashier than the Bug that we had had or whatever. And that was the biggest argument, one of the biggest arguments ever because that was also during the gas crisis, remember they had the gas crisis (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, in the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It was the same-- Speaker 1: Under, under Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], yeah. Speaker 2: Exactly, it was the same year of the gas crisis and stuff and my dad was like, "Are you crazy getting this big gas guzzler, you know, and gas," da, da, da, da, da. So, we got to keep the Monte Carlo for a week and she had to turn it back in. So, (laughter) so, we were sad. But yeah, but yeah, the, yeah, the, the most vivid memories are, are the, you know, the, the family trips and stuff those were a lot of fun. Speaker 1: This-- Speaker 2: And listening to Beatles music on the family's trip, yeah. We, I mean, my dad was a Beatles fanatic which is why I am, my boys [Brandon Edmonds and Dylan Edmonds] are, you know, and so he taught me all about The Beatles and how important their music was. Believe it or not he was also an Elvis Presley fanatic, and so I knew every Elvis Presley (laughter) song there was and that was in the '70s [1970s] when Elvis was huge. So, my parents would go see him, you know, at the Las Vegas Hilton [Westgate Las Vegas Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], you know, all the time. So. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: It sounds like they had a, two different aspirations in some way, I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They did, yeah. Speaker 1: --personalities but they, they seemed to really-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they did a lot though. Speaker 1: --care for each other but couldn't (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they, they really did. They just were two different people, you know. And, and I, you know, my mom, I mean, they ultimately got a divorce and stuff but I always tell her and she always agrees, I said, "You know what, Mom, you guys didn't work out but boy, don't you have some really good memories. You know, we, we did do a lot, you know, even though you guys were two different people or whatever, you know, when you were young and you were supposed to do the whole family thing and, you know, have your first house and do stuff together as a couple, you did." Yeah. Speaker 1: So, they're, they're both still alive? Speaker 2: Yeah, they're both, yeah, both are still alive and believe it or not, you know, they get along great, you know. In, in fact, just last weekend we all had dinner together and stuff. And so, my dad has gone on and remarried. The person he remarried has a personality very much like he does, you know, she's very thrifty, (laughter) yeah, very conservative, very comfortable with being safe and at peace and they live like in a little, you know, a little condo in Long Beach [California], you know, or whatever. But, you know, he's at peace; he's been with the same woman since, you know, my parents got divorced. Story_ID: 641439 Speaker 1: Now, where did you start school, di- what was your first school? Speaker 2: I went to Broadacres elementary school [Broadacres Avenue Elementary School]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in Carson, California. Speaker 1: And what, I assume you liked school; right? Speaker 2: I did, yeah. I, again, I just was this crazy nerdy, you know, kid that at home you would see me in a corner reading books all the time. And I would actually, I was such a nerd I would read encyclopedias. And so, my, my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] bought me this thing called 'Childcraft,' which was like children's encyclopedias and I would sit there and just read encyclopedias all the time. And I always teaching myself stuff. So, and I had a pretty serious book collection. You know, by the time I hit, (laughter) hit junior high school, I was reading some pretty sophisticated concepts and stuff, you know, at a, at a young age. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So. Speaker 1: So, you started at, at Broadacres? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, and then the family moved to Long Beach [California] or-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went to Progress Elementary School. So, that was a private school that I went to fourth and sixth grade 'cause they skipped me fifth grade. So, so, yeah, it was a little tiny private school in, in Long Beach that had a really great afterschool program. Speaker 1: So, so, so you said you tested at high on, on tests when you were, and, and tested out as gifted. Now, was this, was this part of the result of, of being gifted going to-- Speaker 2: It was, well, I mean, it was like-- Speaker 1: --Progress? Speaker 2: --well, when I went to Broadacres they tested my IQ and I had a high IQ and so they kind of sequestered me in these little gifted programs at Broadacres elementary. The reason that we went to Progress, my brother [Michael McQuarn] and I, was because of the afterschool program 'cause my mom was working and they had such a great afterschool program they took care of your kids for you and, you know, had special afterschool activities and stuff. And so, but that was definitely monumental in terms of forming my mind because the whole reason why it was called Progress was 'cause they let you progress at your own level. And so, so, you didn't, you know, if you were, you know, you know, testing out, you know, they would let, you know, create your own curriculum designed for you, you know, in, instead of keeping you where the other students were and stuff. And so, so I, you know, learned to speak Spanish in fourth grade, I was typing in fourth grade. And then they just skipped me into sixth grade from fourth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. So, just skipped fifth grade altogether and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So, so, after Progress where did you go? Speaker 2: After Progress that was when we moved to Las Vegas [Nevada]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was around '76 [1976] or whatever that we moved to Las Vegas. So, I went to, oh, and I think we forgot to put that, I went to, what was it called? Oh, my goodness, I'm a have to give you the name of the, the elementary school, I'm drawing a blank right now. It starts with, oh, Woodbury Junior High School [C.W. Woodbury Junior High School; C.W. Woodbury Middle School]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There it goes, Woodbury Junior High School. It was a public high--I'm sorry, it was a public junior high school in Las Vegas and I went there seventh and eighth grade. Now, they had a special program called A.T. that they put me in and it was called, it was, it was, I think A.T. stood for like academically talented or something. And so, so, I was put into that program in that junior high school and again that was another monumental, I had a teacher that again I also credit for just helping me formulate who I am. There was a guy named Lou Harris [ph.] that was head of the A.T. program. So, I would spend, you know, an hour or two with him every day in his special program and he just, you know, he would expose us to concepts that other kids wouldn't even know about. Like I remember he did this thing where on the chalkboard, you know, each day he'd write a word and you'd have to go home and figure out what it is. Like he would write the word apartheid, you know, and, you know, I'm ten years old, I'm like apartheid? You know, and that was before you had computers or anything and you're like trying to look in the dictionary and trying to figure out what is apartheid, you know. Or he'd put the word renaissance, you know. Like concepts that he felt--or George Orwell. You know, things like that, you know, where he was trying to like really expand our minds, you know, at a young age and stuff. And so, and then he'd, you know, he'd let you work on whatever project you had, if there's anything you're passionate about you could create this project and work on this project all year and then at the end we'd get a chance to present our projects and stuff. There were some brilliant kids. There was a kid in this program with me that had a vision of creating a monorail that, which they now have, that would go all through from downtown to the Las Vegas Strip [Las Vegas, Nevada]. And this kid designed, (laughter) he designed the whole thing, created the model or whatever and that was his presentation and I was like and the kid was ten years old. And, and then now, you know, I'm in Vegas and there's this whole monorail system that, you know, but, you know, it's, it was, it was fun being around kids like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oops. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, now, you were, so you liked science and math as--too; right? Speaker 2: You know what, I didn't, if I were to say which subject I was least favorite of, I was the least favorite of math, you know, but I still did well in math but I didn't like it so much. I was really gifted in English, you know, I, you know, I was a good writer, you know, I was a good writer and I had really great English teachers. Loved language and, yeah, I did, I did like science, I didn't like solving equations, like (laughter) when you get to like physics and chemistry the solving the equations part is not fun but I loved the concepts. So, I love scientific concepts and things like that. You know, the equation stuff, nah. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not so much. Story_ID: 641440 Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: So, okay, so we, I went to high school, ninth grade at Bishop Gorman High School, and that was in Las Vegas [Nevada]. So Woodbury Junior High School [C.W. Woodbury Junior High School; C.W. Woodbury Middle School, Las Vegas, Nevada] only went up through eighth grade. Then I went to Bishop Gorman High School, which was a Catholic high school for ninth grade. And then we moved back to Long Beach [California] after that and then I went to public high school at Woodrow Wilson High School in Long Beach [Woodrow Wilson Classical High School]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, I only went to Catholic school for one year which was a different experience for me because to be quite honest with you we didn't really grow up going to church very often, you know, we talked about God in the house but we didn't really go to church. So, you know, I get, you know, put into this Catholic school and everybody that had been in this Catholic school, you know, had a history of going to church regularly. And so, I remember like, you know, it was like literally the first week, you know, we were sent to the chapel to do Communion and I was the only person that didn't know what that was. And so, you know, I see everybody else kind of going up and they're putting something in everybody's hands or whatever and I didn't know what that was and it was the host, you know, or, or whatever and so, you know, and I did, I saw the, the priest hold the, the host and I didn't know what I was doing and so it looked like a piece of bread or something or a cracker, I didn't know what it was, so I grabbed it and I stuck it on my tongue like everybody else did and I remember the priest looked at me like are you crazy? (Laughter) And--'cause I, and I didn't know what I had done wrong and I didn't even know what they were doing. And so, we all finished chapel and we come back into class and the same priest was our teacher and he says, "Some of you really need to learn proper protocol," you know, (laughter), "during, you know, Communion," da, da, da, da, da. And he's totally directing it at me and, you know, I remember going home going, "Mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn], wait, what did I do?" And she's like you, "You--Tracey [HistoryMaker Tracey Edmonds], you weren't--." I said, "Well, why didn't you tell me?" So, that was my Catholic school experience. Story_ID: 641441 Speaker 1: Most of these schools are, are, are they, are the schools like integrated with, you know, different kinds of students or are you the very small minority? Speaker 2: Gorman High School [Bishop Gorman High School, Las Vegas, Nevada] was pretty integrated. So, Gorman High School had a strong athletics program. And so, it was pretty integrated, so you had a lot of black athletes. And, and Woodbury high school was pretty integrated, I mean, Woodbury Junior High School [C.W. Woodbury Junior High School; C.W. Woodbury Middle School, Las Vegas, Nevada] was pretty integrated also. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, now, Woodrow Wilson High School [Woodrow Wilson Classical High School, Long Beach, California] was integrated but segregated. And so, that was a, a different experience for me 'cause I, I started, you know, Woodrow Wilson High School tenth grade and that's when you started high school in, in Southern California. And we lived in the white part of town of Long Beach [California]. Now, they had a busing program where they bussed in the African American students from the North Long Beach [Long Beach, California] area, which was the black side of town. So, so, we had, you know, I would say, I don't know, 60/40, you know, 60 [percent] being white, you know, 40 being black. But-- Speaker 1: But the black students didn't live there in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: They did not live in the neighborhood. And, you know, I remember getting to that school the first day and seeing how segregated it was and it really bothered me because, you know, we all ate lunch in this courtyard area and the pretty part of the courtyard where the grass and the trees and the benches were, you know, was populated at lunchtime by all the white kids. And then the black kids were over on the other side of the yard by the trash cans and they were on the concrete, you know, and that's where they would huddle up, you know, to, to eat lunch. And, you know, and I got there and I was like this is like totally segregated and totally divided and that was not my experience, you know, growing up, you know, in, in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], you know, at junior high school and at Bishop Gorman or whatever. And I got there and I was like I quickly said, okay, these white kids run the school here. And I'm like I'm not sitting over there in the hood by trash cans, (laughter) you know, eating next to trash every day. I'm not gonna like, you know, treat myself like that, you know. I'm going to have lunch, you know, in this pretty courtyard area, you know. And so, I didn't know anyone, you know, 'cause, you know, at school everybody had, you know, from Wilson High School had all kind of gone to the same junior high school and tracked all the way through and so the first day of school I didn't know anybody. And there was a Jewish girl that didn't really know anybody either and so her name was Joy Goodman [ph.]. And so, a really smart girl. And she coincidentally basically had the same exact class schedule that I did so she was real ambitious like me (laughter) so, I was like on a mission to go to college and so was she so we were taking the hardest classes together. And so, we instantly became friends and so we decided that we were gonna sit in that nice part, you know, of the courtyard and have lunch together every day even though we didn't know anybody. So, we found our little spot, you know, every day and the two of us would just have lunch by ourselves, you know, amidst all of the, the popular white kids that were the cheerleaders and the jocks and, and all that kind of stuff. So, so, we decided that we were gonna try to integrate, you know, that area and, you know, we wanted to be kind of one of them, you know, I wanted to be a cheerleader and I wanted to be popular and, you know, and all that kind of stuff. And so, I'm like okay, I'm a stay here every day and have lunch until these people start talking (laughter) to me. And so, sure enough like, you know, by the time we were there so much then, you know, the other kids finally started talking to us and I became a cheerleader and, and all that kind of stuff. But the sad part is that the rest of the school was still, you know, segregated. Story_ID: 641442 Speaker 1: Progress at Woodrow Wilson High School [Woodrow Wilson Classical High School, Long Beach, California]. So, you, you become a cheerleader. So, you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, I become a cheerleader. And so, I was what was called a pepster, which was a song leader so I had the, the pompoms and we'd do all the routines at the rallies and the football games and the, the basketball games and stuff. And it was nice because I was the only black, you know, only black pepster. And they had this whole thing at Wilson High School called a Zygoma. And so, a Zygoma is an honor you get by the time you reach your senior year and it is the twenty most active girls at school. And so, you get to wear these really cool sweatshirts, it has a big Z on them, and then you get a nickname, it's almost like this little cool sorority type thing. And so, again, when I first came to, to Wilson High School I'm kind of, you know, checking out how this whole school operates and stuff and I see these girls running around with these Z, you know, sweatshirts that are really cool and I'm like, "Who, who are they?" And they're like, "Oh, those are the Zygomas, those are like twenty of the most popular active girls and stuff." And so, I'm like, "Well, what do they get to do?" "Oh, well, you know, every, you know, at all the pep rallies they get to do this and they get to do that and then you get to, you know, when you graduate you get this diamond Z." And I'm like, "Ooh, you know, I wanna be one of those, you know, you know, one day." So, sure enough I was, I mean, I was very active, you know, in, in high school and so I was a pepster and then I did a little bit of student government and then I was a part of the advanced dance program. So, I end up choreographing the, the dance concerts and stuff at, at school 'cause I loved dance, I grew up doing ballet, tap and jazz. And so, I graduated and got my little gold Z--I mean, my little diamond Z that I was really, really proud of and stuff. But it was great. Story_ID: 641443 Speaker 1: It was tough because there was still a lot of covert racism that, that went on, you know, even though people didn't really talk about it. I made a lot of noise, when was that? My junior or senior year [at Woodrow Wilson High School; Woodrow Wilson Classical High School, Long Beach, California] 'cause we had a Sadie Hawkins dance and the girls got to ask the guys, you know, to a dance and there was a boy that we used to flirt back and forth and he was on the tennis team and stuff, and I had crush on him and he had a crush on me and, you know, I kept trying to get up the nerve, I was very shy, you know, when it came to boys and stuff 'cause I was two years younger than the other kids and stuff. And so, and my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn], especially my mom, yeah, my parents were strict, you know, because of my age and so my mom like didn't like me to go to, I, I wasn't, couldn't go to the school parties and, and that kind of stuff 'cause of my age. So, so, when it came time at the Sadie Hawkins dance, I really wanted to get up the nerve to ask this, you know, this tennis player to, you know, to go to the dance with me and stuff and so he was blond hair, blue eyed and stuff and here I was this black girl. And he used to come to all of our pepster practices and stuff and I'd, you know, he'd watch us practice and stuff and I'd, you know, kind of wave (laughter) at him and he'd kind of wave at me. So, I'm like, okay, well, maybe I can ask him to this dance. So, I asked him to the dance and he said yes and it just sent the school in an uproar. And so, everybody was like, "I can't believe Tracey McQuarn [HistoryMaker Tracey Edmonds] is going to the Sadie Hawkins dance with Bobby Simsky [ph.]. Can you believe that, can you believe that?" And so, I'd be at my locker and these white kids would be like, "Are you really going to the, you know, the dance with, you know, with Bobby Simsky?" And I'm like, "Yeah." "See, I told you." You know, it was this big huge uproar. And so, by the time, it put so much pressure on me and Bobby that, you know, we were nervous, you know, to even like go to this dance together. And so, he came to pick me up 'cause he could drive and so he came to my house and picked me up and my dad [George McQuarn] was there and my mom was there. And my dad, he was a little conservative too about interracial, you know, dating and stuff but he was nice, you know. But I can't say he was like the warmest, (laughter) you know, person to Bobby either when he came to pick me up so the poor kid I could just tell he was so nervous, you know, coming to this black household and, you know, picking me up, especially after all this hoopla going on at the school and stuff. And then, you know, we went to the school dance together and we walked in and, you know, everybody's staring at us and stuff. And so, it's really weird 'cause the rest of the night is literally it's a blur like, you know, when I try to remember it's, it's a blur 'cause I think it was just so much tension, you know, and stuff. And so, we go to this dance together and that's the last time we ever spoke because there was just so much white, black, you know, pressure and stuff going on. And so, we didn't speak again until finally we had the end of our senior year and it's time for people to sign yearbooks. And we sign each other's yearbooks and I remember he wrote something, you know, very touching, you know, and sweet, you know, about me and I wrote something very touching but it was stuff we could, could never say to each other, you know, we could only write it (laughter) in each other's yearbooks and stuff. So, so, yeah, so, there was a lot of, you know, a lot of racism, a lot of, you know, people talking about me behind my back because they didn't wanna see me, you know, succeed in anything 'cause I was black and, you know, so it, it, you know, it was kind of hard, you know. And I remember going to, I was in, they had this one sorority that I was the only black girl of the sorority or whatever and we had a little dance too and, you know, the, the fraternity that was all-white kind of co-hosted the dance with the sorority and I remember like, you know, you had to, the guys would come in and grab a sorority girl and, you know, take you by the arm and escort you in and I was the last one on that wall, (laughter) you know, and it was like, I remember just kind of being on the wall, you know, waiting for somebody to come and, and grab me and I was the last one and that was not, you know, not a fun feeling. So, so, yeah, but, you know, I end up finishing school and, you know, did well (simultaneous). Story_ID: 641444 Speaker 1: Did you have any si- significant relationships with the black students from Long Beach [California]? Speaker 2: You know what? It was really hard because when I say they were segregated, I didn't have any black students in my classes. And so, the kids that were bused in from North Long Beach [Long Beach, California], they were put into, and it might have been by choice I guess 'cause you pick your class schedule and stuff but we had this one building that had all of the, what do you call it? It was all like the wood shop classes and, you know, those kind of, I forgot there was a name for it back then of that type of curriculum, you know. But it was the craziest thing, you go into that building and it was all black. And so, like the, everybody taking those classes and stuff, you know, were all black. And so, the class track that I was on where I was trying to take the honors and the AP [advanced placement] classes and stuff, I mean, sadly enough I was the only, you know, the only black girl. And then at lunchtime everything, you know, was, you know, was separated and stuff. And so, what I did, you know, what I was able to do is, you know, my senior year, you know, they had pepster tryouts again for song leaders and stuff, and so when you're a pepster and there's all these girls trying out, you're able to kind of like mentor or shepherd some of the young ones that are coming in to try out or whatever. And I worked with the, you know, with the African American girls and stuff and I was their, you know, teacher and teaching them the routines and, and that kind of stuff and the, the blessing is sure enough like the next year there were two black girls, you know, instead of one, you know, that became, you know, pepsters, and stuff. But, you know, sadly enough it was hard, you know, to really, you know, kind of, you know, bond, you know, with, with, any of the, the kids, you know, the African American students at, at the high school [Woodrow Wilson High School; Woodrow Wilson Classical High School, Long Beach, California]. Although outside of school, you know, I had African American friends that I had been friends with since Carson, California, and stuff that I stayed in touch with that were my, you know, my friends outside of the school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I, I wondered, that's a, yeah, that school really sounds like, well, I've heard, you know, the, where, where busing has failed or some, you know, I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --it really failed to achieve the objective. Speaker 2: Yeah. It, yeah, it was like, I mean, it was, really frustrating and, you know, I almost wanted to like go over and be like, "You guys, why are you sitting here? You know, don't sit here." You know, but, you know, it-- Speaker 1: But, but more than that, I mean, I don't think they all necessarily chose to be in the, I mean, I, I, I just don't, I, I think if they were at a school in a black community you would have more diversity in terms of what classes they would take-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and what they were doing. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, yeah. Speaker 1: So, there's a, it's, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause you kind of-- Speaker 1: --it's not just their fault-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I mean, you know, that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you flashback and you kind of go well, you know, what were their counselors telling them? They didn't encourage them to take any of these other, you know, classes so that they can go on and go to college? They're trying to encourage them to just go on to, you know, those, again, I can't think of the name but it's like, you know, whatever-- Speaker 1: So, it was-- Speaker 2: --it wasn't, yeah. Speaker 1: --it was almost like busing created a few more layers and obstacles for them to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --penetrate. Speaker 2: Exactly. Yeah. Speaker 1: And they-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so, yeah, so that was it. And then I graduated and then I went to, to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. I had, after I finished high school, you know, when I was applying to colleges I decided I was, you know, I was only sixteen and so I really wanted to stay in California. Speaker 1: Yeah, so, you're sixteen years old graduating from high school. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And did you graduate with honors? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I wasn't valedictorian or whatever and I was the, (laughter) the girl that got valedictorian she took the easy classes. And so, I, you know, I had like a, I don't know something like a 3.9 [grade point average] something, something, something she had a 4.0. And I think I got bumped because of a chemistry grade or something. But, but, yeah, so I applied to only California schools; and I applied to U--USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], Stanford, and I think that was it. Story_ID: 641445 Speaker 1: Did you have counseling? What, or what or what kind of counseling did you have? Speaker 2: I, you know, what? I, I, I was, you know, I was this crazy nerd. You know, like it, it was all, it was just in me. You know, it was just in me where I just was so ambitious and I don't know what put that in me but, you know, I didn't even really, even need to talk to the counselor or whatever and get advice or whatever I just was always reading, okay, what do I need, when do I take my SATs? I was always just trying to like learn what I needed to do. I knew when I got to Wilson High School [Woodrow Wilson High School; Woodrow Wilson Classical High School, Long Beach, California] that the college applications would look to see all of your activities. So, as soon as I got there in tenth grade I joined every club I could think of. I just knew like what, what my application needed to look like so I was like, you know, by the time I filled out my college applications I was a member of all these clubs and societies and, you know, advance dance, concert direct- you know, I knew how to do all that stuff so I'd have a good, you know, college application and I think I just read it some place. And then also too I had that that the girl that I told you was my best friend [Joy Goodman (ph.)], but we were, you know, very competitive. You know, we literally had the same exact schedule and so, you know, when it came time to us, you know, to get our exam grades, "I got a 99 [percent] what did you get?" (Laughter) "Oh, really? I got a 97," you know, it's like, you know, we were like always, you know, secretly even though we'd study together and stuff there was a little bit of like a, you know, competition thing. And so, both of us knew, she was in the same exact clubs. The only thing that would happen is we split, I mean, we literally stopped being friends sadly enough senior year because I got to be a pepster and she tried out and she didn't get to be a pepster. And in her head she thought because we were best friends that we should have stuck together and I should have dialed back and not been a pepster because she didn't make it and we were supposed to have been like that (gesture) and we were supposed to stick together. So, so, we had a falling out over that. And then, and then by the time we got accepted, we applied to all the same colleges, and then except for she applied to Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. So, she didn't get into Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], she got into Berkeley. And she made a comment to everybody on campus that the only reason I got into Stanford was because I was black. And so, and that was the last I, you know, I even spoke to her, you know, whatever 'cause I'm like, okay, you really aren't, you know, any kind of friend (laughter) so. So, yeah, so, so, that's, you know, those were kind of my, my high school years. Story_ID: 641446 Speaker 1: Stanford University [Stanford, California]. This is nineteen eighty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's see, I started '83 [1983], I guess. Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983]. Speaker 2: That was my freshmen year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and your, you're a, your, your major, did you choose a major right away? Speaker 2: You know what, I always knew I was gonna be pre-med. And so, so, at Stanford you took the, if you were on the pre-med track you took this thing called the HumBio Core, which is human biology core. And so, you took all the biology, and the human biology, and the chemistry classes and stuff and then you could kind of design what area and so I chose this area called psychobiology 'cause I wanted to be in, I wanted to be a psychiatrist, I really did, and so that's what I really thought I was gonna do. And, and then I volunteered and I was a, they had this counseling center where you could counsel your peers, it was called the Peer Counseling Center [Bridge Peer Counseling Center, Stanford, California] and so you could volunteer hours and so I'd have like, you know, two or three hours every couple of days where kids would come in and tell me their problems and stuff and I'd try to counsel them and stuff. And then I was part of a, I was a, you know, on scholarship, so I was also a work study student so I had to do work study hours and so I was working in the research department for psychology, so I was a research assistant, so, I, I did that. And then I was a, I worked in the financial aid department processing student scholarships and stuff. And so, I had to work through, through college and stuff because, you know, my parents were divorced, you know, by then and, you know, my scholarship covered room, board, tuition for academics but it didn't cover things like books, you know, and, you know, things like that. So, I'd have to figure out 'cause my, you know, my, my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] was, she was struggling at that point so she was, you know, barely had enough money to pay, you know, her rent, you know, and then that kind of stuff. So, anything extra like, you know, "Mom, I gotta buy all these books," you know, or, "Mom, I gotta," you know. And my dad [George McQuarn], you know, didn't really have, he was on a fixed income too. So, so, I did, I worked a lot of jobs through college to, you know, pay for things. And, you know, and I went to school with a lot of rich kids. So, you know, I remember like going through experiences, like we had a food club and you had to like pay for your--and that's where you would eat your meals. And so, at the top of each quarter you gotta pay for your food club tuition, you know, in order to eat there. You know, and so otherwise you weren't allowed to eat 'cause you needed like this little bracelet thing. And, you know, I remember there were a couple of times when I hadn't paid for the food club thing 'cause I just didn't have the money, and my friends, you know, would try to sneak me in there without having my, you know, my bracelet, you know, or whatever so I'd, you know, be able to eat and stuff. And I remember getting caught, you know, a couple of times where the person running the food club was like, "Tracey [HistoryMaker Tracey Edmonds], we still don't have your check and you can't eat here," and it was embarrassing (laughter) so. You know, so, it was things like that you kind of, you kind of go through, you know, whatever, it's embarrassing, you know, or whatever but, you know, I just kept working, finally got enough to write that check and pay that food club bill and, you know. So, but, I mean, it was, Stanford was one of the most amazing experiences ever, ever, ever and, you know, I get teared up because I'm very blessed to have had that opportunity when I was, you know, when I was a kid to be there at sixteen years old and to like, you know, have the kind of professors that I had, you know, teach me and expand my mind, you know, the way, you know, it was expanded. Story_ID: 641447 Speaker 1: I studied overseas; I was in Florence, Italy, you know, when I was eighteen (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When did you go--yeah, yeah, when did you go to Florence? Speaker 1: I went there when I was my junior year. And so, you know, so I'm eighteen years old and my boyfriend at the time, both of us got accepted into Stanford's [Stanford University, Stanford, California] program in Florence and, you know, I didn't have any money, you know, he was from a wealthier, you know, family and stuff. And I remember getting those student credit cards, you know, they try to get you to get, you know, at an early age, so I had a student MasterCard with a five hundred dollar limit, a student Visa with a five hundred dollar limit, right before I went over to Europe because I remember asking my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] like if she had any cash for me to go before I went to Europe, she didn't have anything. I mean, my dad [George McQuarn] didn't have anything so I lived off those, you know, those credit cards and stuff. And so, you know, so I went over there and, I mean, again, just, I get teared up because just the most amazing experience for a kid, you know, for a black kid, you know, to be able to go over there and see the world. You know, and I was like, you know, learning at, you know, the Stanford campus in Florence and then on the weekends, you know, use my little credit card and we'd get those Eurail passes and, you know, I'm in Paris [France], and I'm in Germany, and I'm in Greece, and, you know, you know, and I'm just like seeing the world, you know, and expanding my mind and I'm going to museums and I'm learning about Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci and, you know, all that kind of stuff. And it was just, I mean, just unbelievable. I came back a whole different, you know, person and stuff. And so, so, but it, I mean, it was great, you know. And Stanford was very liberal, there was no black/white racism, you know, at that campus at all. Everybody, we're all brothers and sisters. And, you know, the boyfriend that I ended up having, you know, was Jewish and, you know, and came from a, you know, obviously, white, you know, and nobody thought anything of it at all. And so, I, you know, I dated white, black, you know, whoever I felt like I, you know, I clicked with, you know, back then. But everybody, you had really beautiful spirits and stuff at that school and stuff and so I made a lot of friends that are, you know, my lifelong friends. My best friend, you know, has been my best friend since I was sixteen, she's my best friend from freshman year. Black girl, she was in my calculus class and I remember, you know, I walked into the classroom and I remember seeing her and, and she saw me and I remember kind of waving and stuff, and she's been my best friend ever since. Story_ID: 641448 Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers and mentors at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]? Speaker 2: You know, I was lectured by, there's a guy in psychology, a very famous guy named Philip Zimbardo. And so, he did this famous thing that, he's famous for the prison experiment. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Where he took these students and divided them and half of them were prisoners and half of them were prisoner keepers and, you know, before they knew it, people forgot they were playing roles and, you know, and really started, you know, acting out, (laughter) you know, and, and abusing, you know, people and stuff. And so, he was probably (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was covered on, on network television-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --on '20/20'-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or one of those, one of the, the magazine shows. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think 'Nightline' covered it and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, you know. So, he was very memorable for me. And we also, what is Dr. Leakey's real name? John Leakey, I forgot his, his real name. Speaker 1: Richard-- Speaker 2: Richard Leakey. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, Richard Leakey taught us for a while too in the human biology core where we had an anthropology section and so he taught us, you know, about Lucy, you know, and evolution (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is the Richard Leakey that went over there-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he came-- Speaker 1: --and was on the cover of-- Speaker 2: --yeah, he came-- Speaker 1: --National Geographic. Speaker 2: --he came, yeah, he came in and taught, you know, taught us for a semester and stuff. And so, you know, it was a couple of people like that that, you know, I can't remember all my teachers' names but, you know, I just remember like, oh, my gosh, you know, I read this book, you know, this is Richard Leakey, you know, so, so that, you know, that was pretty cool. Speaker 1: Now, did you take any courses from [HistoryMaker] Clayborne Carson? Speaker 2: I don't think so. No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. I took lots and lots of psychology classes and science and stuff. And then, the other thing to, the one regret that I had is freshman year we had to take this class called humanities, and it's where they, you know, they expose you to, you have to read Plato, you have to read Aristotle, you have to read Dante's "Inferno" ['The Divine Comedy,' Dante Alighieri], you know, all those, you know, those important classic, you know, books and stuff. And some of the books I read all the way and some of the books I didn't. And so, like you discover like, you know, the concept of CliffNotes [CliffsNotes], (laughter) you know. And so, so, like when you're a freshman, you know, and you've got your boyfriend for the first time and you're also like partying 'cause I had never, you know, I, I, I lived under lock and key, you know, when I was in high school and stuff. And so, so, I was enjoying, you know, being a student and stuff and so, you know, they'd assign these books that were this thick, you know, and really dense, you know, topics and stuff. And I'd read, you know, maybe half of it, you know, get the CliffNotes to understand the themes and stuff and never finish it. Now, I'm just like, god, I wish I really would have, you know, read through. But I, I understood enough, like, I mean, again, I mean it's such, they expose you to Darwin [Charles Darwin], you know, all of the important, you know, scientists and philosophers and stuff that you should know that you'll hear about later in life and stuff, they expand your mind and so, pretty cool. Story_ID: 641449 Speaker 1: Psychobiology. Now, so, so what, they were trying to do wed, I read neurobiology with-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) psychology? Speaker 2: --psychology, yeah, exactly. It's like the, the science part with just kind of the, the more psychological part. Speaker 1: Now, I think in popular culture we started, I, I think people started to understand that, you know, brain chemistry had something to do with how people react to situations. Is it, is it, was that, was that part of the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean, it's really, you know, on the science side of things and stuff like you're really learning, you know, concepts like, you know, neurotransmitters and, you know, I mean, really the body is, it's, you know, electrical, it's almost like, you know, electrical currents traveling from one part of your body up to the brain. And like if you get burned, you know, there is like a neurotransmitter that goes up to your brain and goes, "Ouch," you know, like, you know, "I felt fire," you know. And so, it's, you know, the body is almost like a computer, you know, in a way. And so, you know, so we learned a lot about that, you know, as well on the psychology side of things you learned how experiences, you know, influence your personality and your fears and, and things like that. And so, if you're traumatized when you're a kid you can hold on to that and, you know, react a certain way and have a certain personality when you're an adult. And so, you know, so kind of just studying both, both sides of things. Speaker 1: So, so, now, now, you were considering medical school, right-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I-- Speaker 1: --at one time? Speaker 2: --when I hit senior year, I was trying to figure out if I wanted to go to medical school and become a real psychiatrist or if I wanted to go in the Ph.D. program and become a psychologist, you know, either way it meant, you know, quite a few more years of school. And so, like, you know, the whole, if I became a doctor it was gonna be at least another what? Eight, ten years by the time you finish residency and all that kind of stuff. And then the Ph.D. program was at least another four years and stuff. I was accumulating a lot of debt, you know, at that point, you know, being a student and now student loans and all that kind of stuff. And again, I was working my way through college and so I was like, you know, waiting tables and all that kind of stuff. And so, graduated and I said, you know, I'm gonna just take a break for like a year or so and then really figure out which direction I really wanna go into. And so, I did that and then I just never went on. And so, I took this break and I got my broker's license 'cause at that point my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] again was kind of doing, she had her little mortgage company business. And my summer vacations, the thing I should mention too is that like ever since I was thirteen I always had to work during the summers so like 'cause we needed that extra income, you know. So, like my mom would have me be the receptionist for the mortgage company she was working for or, you know, something like that just so we can get an extra paycheck and help pay the electric bill or, or whatever. And so, so, I, you know, like was working around the mortgage business, you know, a lot when I was a teenager and, you know, I went from answering telephone to understanding how to process people's home loans and figuring out debt ratios and, and all that kind of stuff. And so, when my mom did her mortgage company she had a guy that was acting, you needed to, you needed to have a broker to operate a mortgage company or someone with their broker's license. So, she had a guy whose broker's license, you know, she was using in order to operate her mortgage company and I just decided to get the broker's license so that we could, you know, keep it all in the family and stuff. So, I got the broker's license and I became the broker and then we expanded it into a real estate sales company too, so I did that for, for a couple of years out of college [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. And then, and then I met my ex-husband [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds]. Story_ID: 641450 Speaker 1: Considering what, what you do for a living today, you know, how much attention did you pay to popular culture entertainment? I mean, music, the TV, video? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know what? The only thing I can tell you that gave me a flicker, you know, of, of what I was doing, 'cause I didn't even realize I was--I didn't even, I never would imagine that I would have ended up in the entertainment business, excuse me, entertainment business. Now, my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn], I remember her wanting me to be an actress and so there were times when I was growing up that we'd be shopping and somebody would ask me if I did any modeling or acting or anything and my mom kept, you know, she, she kept saying, "Well, you really should do that." And I was like, ah. So, I did a little tiny bit of modeling where I got a couple of jobs when I was in high school and stuff but I never really considered that. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you, you are tall? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And a nice looking woman. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: And so that that-- Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: --so I can imagine people-- Speaker 2: So, I did-- Speaker 1: --(unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, I was approached, I was approached a few times. Now, what I did like doing though and I didn't even realize that it might have been like a premonition, you know, or whatever, is, remember I was telling you how I went to this school called Progress [Progress Elementary School, Long Beach, California] that had a big afterschool program? Well, until our parents picked us up, which was really about three hours, you know, in the afternoon, we'd have to figure out how we were gonna entertain ourselves. And so, I was always, I was a dancer, you know, so I was doing ballet, tap and jazz, and stuff and I always wanted to like put on shows. And so, so after school, I was the girl that would be, you know, would wanna put on a show. So, I would kind of create shows and create little dances and create skits and kind of produce little shows, you know, back then or I would say, "Hey, let's play, 'Charlie's Angels,' okay. You should be this character, you should be this character, you should be this character. And I'll go tonight to the grocery store and I'll get some badges for us and I'll get some guns," and I was even bringing in props, you know, (laughter). "And, and here's the story, okay, so, Charlie calls us," and da, da, da, da, da, da. And, you know, I was creating these little scenarios and then we'd play it out for the, you know, for after, our afterschool activities. So, I was putting on these little shows and not even realizing it, or I'd be like, "Okay, let's play the news. Okay, you can cover sports, you can do, you do the weather," and, you know, and, you know, we were putting these little things together and, you know, and I had no idea back then, it's crazy that I'd grow up and be a producer, and when I was a little kid I was doing these little things and almost like producing these little shows and just didn't even know it. Story_ID: 641451 Speaker 1: I was asking about, you know, popular culture and di- now did you, you grew up, you were a little kid during the era of what they call the blaxploitation film era. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I think it's unfortunately named, but a lot of, you know, movies, feature length movies, were being made with a lot of black people. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And did, did you see all the 'Super Fly' movies and the, that sort of thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, yeah, I did, (laughter) yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My family used to go to the drive in a lot. And so, we would get in that little Volkswagen Bug and my dad [George McQuarn] would say, "Hey, let's go to the movie." And so, we'd go to the drive in. And so, my brother [Michael McQuarn] and I would be in the backseat, my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] would always make food, so she would make either fried chicken and pound cake or burritos. And then, and we'd watch those movies. And so, those movies that were playing in our neighborhood, it was usually like it was the 'Super Fly' movies, it was 'Cooley High.' I remember seeing 'Claudine,' which was my favorite, favorite movie and which I saw a million times as a kid and as an adult. 'Mahogany,' you know, 'Lady Sings the Blues,' all those movies and stuff, yeah, we grew up watching all those. And so, that was, that was a big deal for us. And then my parents I remember would make us cover our eyes if there was any like, any nudity (laughter) or any-- Speaker 1: There was always a little bit (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, anytime someone's about to get romantic or something my mom would be like, "Cover your eyes." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know, so I remember having to do that (gesture). The, yeah, so, but, yeah, that was fun (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a typical experience at the, those movies. I know-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --a lot of people had the same thing, cover your eyes, yeah, you know, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And then also during those movies too, I mean, during that time period to Disney [The Walt Disney Company] movies were big for us too, but it was kind of like the, the Disney, it was the Kurt Russell movies, I don't know if you remember those at all, it was, and then the Herbie the Love Bugs ['The Love Bug'] and 'Now You See It, Now You Don't' and, and 'World's Greatest Athlete' ['The World's Greatest Athlete'] and all those kind of things. So, my dad would take us to go see those. A lot of matinees, so on the weekends, you know, matinees would be Disney stuff and then evenings would be the blaxploitation movies (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, and you were saying the music, you know, was dominated by The Beatles and Elvis Presley; right? Speaker 2: But, you know, what? We, I mean, our, our house was half and half and so like as much as my dad liked The Beatles and Elvis Presley, my dad's taste was very eclectic. He loved The Isley Brothers, so lots of Isley Brothers music; Earth, Wind and Fire, we had every single album, I knew every Earth, Wind and Fire album cover. So, every time they came out with a new album, you know, that was a big deal. Rufus, so Chaka Khan, Minnie Riperton was huge. My mom loved Minnie Riperton, my mom loved Deniece Williams, big Diana Ross fans and stuff. My parents would go see Diana Ross, in, in Las Vegas [Nevada] and stuff. So, we grew up, you know, listening to a lot of soul music too: Commodores, my dad loved The Commodores too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right. So, I just wanted to establish that before--'cause I didn't ask about that before. Story_ID: 641452 Speaker 1: I have a note here that you and your mother [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] moved the office from, from, from Long Beach [California] to Los Angeles [California], is that, is that it or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, what? What happened was so after I finished college, you know, we started this, this mortgage, real estate office, it was actually in Corona del Mar [Newport Beach, California]. So, when I graduated from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] I moved to Newport Beach [California]. And so, and that's where my mom was too. So, so both of us had apartments actually in the same complex (laughter), in, in, in, in Newport Beach. And then we opened up this, this office in Corona del Mar. So, we lived by the water and our office was by the water and so, you know, I kind of tried to create a, a market in, a marketing campaign and a brand for myself where I was kind of the waterfront specialist. And so, so, I was kind of selling homes and then we were also doing the home loans and stuff and so we did that in the Newport Beach, Corona del Mar area for a couple of years but I really, I didn't enjoy living there at all. And so, again, you know, my, my whole life I felt like a lot of times I've been like the, the black girl, you know, in the white area, you know, and not quite totally fitting in and, you know, and so it was that same dynamic again, where everybody around me, you know, in Newport Beach looked different from, from how I did and didn't quite feel like I, I fit in, I felt like I was missing out on something. And so, I would actually drive up to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] on the weekends a lot of times and so I'd work, you know, Monday through Friday and then on the weekends I'd visit my friends that lived up in L.A., you know, people I would date would be, you know, L.A. based and stuff. And so, so, I finally decided I was tired of driving back and forth and I just told my mom, "You know what? I'm just gonna, I wanna move up to L.A. I don't wanna, you know, live here anymore." And so, my mom said, "Well, you know, you're not leaving me." She's like (laughter), "If you, if you move up to L.A. I'm moving up to L.A." And I said, "What are we gonna do with the office?" And so, we for a little while moved up to L.A. and made a backwards commute, you know, where we were, you know, working in Corona del Mar and living up in L.A. and then it just became, just too much and again probably like our crazy, fearless attitude was like okay, let's just relocate the offices, you know, up to L.A. and that's gonna mean that we have to reapproach our whole strategy here, we can't be the waterfront specialists (laughter) anymore. We gotta start all over again, you know. And so, and we did that, you know, we started all over again and opened up an office on La Cienega [Boulevard]; and did the same thing in, in L.A. Story_ID: 641453 Speaker 1: But I kid you not, no sooner did I make that decision to move to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], the weekend that I moved to L.A. was when I met Kenny "Babyface" Edmonds [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds]. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: And so, and then, you know, my whole life changed and, you know, from the first time, our first date, you know, we just kind of became inseparable and, you know, and started dating. And then I stayed in real estate for a little bit longer, but the more I got kind of pulled into the world of, of entertainment and, you know, the more I was curious about the business side of things and I learned what music publishing was and all that kind of stuff and then I segued from real estate into entertainment. Speaker 2: So, I, I heard that you, that you had, somehow you got a role in one, one of the videos and, and you were-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you got the, the chickenpox or something? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, it's, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, February, when was that? I think it was February of 1990, yeah, it was February 'cause it was my birthday. So, so, my family always had this, we had this little tradition where if it's my birthday and my brother's [Michael McQuarn] birthday we'd go out to eat and we always liked trying L.A. restaurants. And so, my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] would always kind of like figure out, okay, what's the new hot restaurant or whatever and so let's celebrate Tracey's [HistoryMaker Tracey Edmonds] birthday up in L.A. So, so, we were up in L.A. on my birthday and we were at the Beverly Center [Los Angeles, California] kind of wasting time before dinner, and I'm at Ann Taylor trying on some shoes and Pebbles [Perri "Pebbles" Reid] is in there and she's there with another lady. And I, (background noise) my stomach's growling, excuse me. So, Pebbles came over to me and I'm trying on shoes and she asked me, she said, "Excuse me," she was like, you know, "I'm Pebbles." And she said, "You know, I just wanted to introduce myself, myself." And I said, "Oh, hi," you know, "nice to meet you, I'm Tracey." And so, she said, "I, you know, are you doing any acting, you know, or modeling, or anything?" And so, my mom speaks up, "Yes, she is," (laughter) so. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: "Yes, she is. And, and I manage her and how can we help you?" And so, she said, "Oh, well, you know, I work with, you know, this artist named Babyface and we're getting ready to cast his video and I don't know if she'd be interested in auditioning for his video, she'd be great for his video," blah, blah, blah. My mom was like, "Okay, cool. Where do you need her to be? And, you know, she'll, you know, just give us the information." And so, sure enough I auditioned for his video and again always feeling, a fish out of water, I come to the, you know, I didn't know what I'm supposed to dress like, auditioning for a video, so I had on like, you know, some little business blazer on or something and I'm at the audition, it's like a cattle call of like a million girls and they all have on like tight little skirts and, you know, looking like they're going to a club or something and I look totally out of place. And I remember going into the audition and, you know, and it must have been fun for Kenny being Babyface back then because he was the man back then. And so, he was inside this conference room and it was at a hotel and it was he and L.A. Reid and a couple of other guys. And so, they had the girls come in one by one and you had to like stand up in front of this conference table and turn around, you know, and then they ask you a few questions, you know, whatever. And so, L.A. did most of the talking and stuff. And so, Kenny asked me a couple of questions or whatever. And so, so, he asked me where I lived and what was I doing and stuff and I just told him, I, you know, I lived in L.A. and, you know, all this kind of stuff. I mean, lived in Newport Beach [California] at the time. And so, so, I left and not really--never in a million years would I have expected what ultimately would have, you know, transpired from that, you know, I just thought, oh, I'm not gonna get called, you know. I told my mom, she was like, "How'd it go?" I was like, "Ah, it didn't go very well. I was like, I totally wore the wrong thing, there's no way they're gonna pick me, you know, if you'd seen the way these other girls were dressed and stuff that's, you know, I'm not the right look, you know, for this," or whatever. Sure enough, you know, we got that call and they wanted me to be in the video and stuff and so, I was supposed to do the video, let's say I was supposed to do the video like on a, I don't know a Friday or a Saturday or something and it was Monday. And by Wednesday or Thursday all these things were popping up on my arms (laughter) and neck and face and I had never had any of those childhood diseases before at all. And I'm like what is this? You know. And so, I go to the doctor and it's chickenpox. And so, my [maternal] grandmother [Versie O'Bryant Moten] had been raising these two little foster boys and, you know, a week or so prior I had gone to visit her and I'm playing with one of the little foster boys and he had chickenpox and I didn't know about it. And so, he gave it to me and I got it, you know. And we don't know how this whole music video world works and so my mom playing the manager role, says, you know, "I'm really sorry, you know, but Tracey can't do the video on Saturday, can you please push it 'til Monday?" Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: "You know, she has," (laughter) "she has chickenpox and, you know, we're gonna need to see if you can push the--." And they're like, "I'm sorry, ma'am, you know, we gotta, the show must go on, you know, tell her to get better," and basically have a good life, you know. And so, you know, I really thought that was the end of that. Story_ID: 641454 Speaker 1: So, that was February of 1990, by May is when I made the decision to move up to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. And so, the weekend of our move we're unpacking and I'm in sweats and a ponytail and we decide to take a food break from moving and we go to KFC [Kentucky Fried Chicken] to go get some food and stuff and we're coming back to our new office and stuff and, you know, there's a lot of traffic on Santa Monica Boulevard, my mom [Jacqueline Moten McQuarn] detours and goes on a side street and there's a, some kind of studio on this side street and so out, you know, comes Kenny "Babyface" Edmonds [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds] walking out of this studio and we're driving, you know, and she's like, "Isn't that that guy Babyface you were supposed to do the video with?" And I said, "Yeah," I said, "I think that's him." She goes, "Well, you should go say hi to him." I go, "Mom, I don't look good, you know, like I'm dirty, no." And so, she was like, "Well, I don't care what you say, I'm driving." So, she pulls into the parking lot or whatever and rolls down the window and, you know, Kenny is dressed in a nice suit and, and everything and so my mom is like, "Hey, are you Babyface?" And he's like, "Yeah." And she's like, "You know, my daughter, Tracey [HistoryMaker Tracey Edmonds], was supposed to be in this video with you but she got chickenpox. There's Tracey," and he's like, "Oh, yeah," you know, and I'm just like (laughter). And so, he's like, "Yeah, you know, we were wondering what happened to you." And I was like, "Yeah, I got sick," you know. And she's like, "Well, she just moved up here and she doesn't know anyone, so, here's her card," you know. And he's like, "Oh, okay." She's like, "You guys should get together," you know. And so, he's like, "Okay." And I was like, you know, we drove off. And I was like, "Mom," I was like, "that is so embarrassing." I'm like, "Why did you do that?" And so, but sure enough like, you know, he got the card and I think I got a phone call (laughter) in the next hour or so, where he called me and invited me to, to dinner. And so, so, we had dinner at The Cheesecake Factory in Marina del Rey [California] and, you know, the rest is history. And so, we just, you know, we dated for, I think a year and a half and then got engaged and, you know, got married a couple of years later. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then my, my life changed. Speaker 2: Yeah, and apparently his did-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --too because, you know, he wrote that you really pushed him, I mean, you know, in terms of what, what his ambitions were and what he was trying to do you, you were, you give him a, a push. Speaker 1: Oh, I never knew he said that. That-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, we got a quote in here. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I don't wanna read it but, but there, yeah, he actually said, he said this to--anyway. Speaker 1: Is that from a interview he did for something or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, yeah, he said, "She, she pushed me in ways I needed to be pushed. She encouraged me to try new things, things I had never done before." Speaker 1: Oh, wow. That's, I mean, that's really sweet. We, Kenny and I are still to this day, we're very close friends. And so, I have a lot of beautiful, beautiful memories with him. And, you know, when we talk about how my mom, I always told my mom how she was blessed to be young and to have had that real young love and, you know, and, and, getting your first house together and having kids together and all that kind of stuff, I had that with Kenny which was beautiful. You know, and so, he was like my first young love and we, I mean, we had an amazing time, we grew together. And so, we did the house, buying our house and fixing up, and finding furniture, and fixing rooms, and having, you know, our babies together. And, and then I always, you know, I had this travel bug and he--in me and he knows that's just my character so I'm always, you know, I was the person to take him to Europe for the first time and so I was like, you know, always the one kind of planning these experiences and these memories that I wanted us to have together. And so, so we did our first Europe trip together, we saw China together, we saw Japan together, we climbed through pyramids of Egypt together, Thailand, Australia, we went all over the world together, you know, as we got older and experienced life and, and stuff together. And so, you know, and he was, you know, both of us, I think, you know, he really supported me in my ambitions and I did whatever I could to, to support him too behind the scenes too. And--yeah. Speaker 2: Now, he grew up in Indianapolis [Indiana] right? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: That's, yeah, 'cause (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, he--yeah, he grew up in Indianapolis. But we did, you know, we did a lot of things together. Like when I decided that I wanted to go into film, you know, and become a producer and stuff and created Edmonds Entertainment [Edmonds Entertainment Group, Inc., Los Angeles, California], he supported me and I found the 'Soul Food' movie and I said, "Hey, well, let's do this together," you know. So, I produced the movie and then he did all the music. So, it was, it was fun 'cause, you know, we flew out to Chicago [Illinois], I had just had Brandon [Brandon Edmonds]. And we're staying in this, you know, hotel, I think it was like the Four Seasons Hotel [Four Seasons Hotel Chicago] or something, I'm on the set every day producing the movie, he's got a little studio set up inside the hotel room and he's writing all the songs as we're shooting the scenes and stuff. And so, so, we did that a few times on movies together and stuff and then we created a management company [Edmonds Management Group] and stuff. And so, I really, you know, I was inspired by--like I read this Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] book when I was in, in college [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and it was kind of, you know, about the art of branding yourself, you know. And then we saw how Trump branded himself and put Trump all over the hotels and all that kind of stuff. And so, when Kenny and I got married I was like, "Okay, let's be like, you know, one of those big families and let's brand ourselves and stuff," and, you know, and I said, "And let's do Edmonds Entertainment," and, you know, and then we bought a, a, a building together and so I put a big E at the top (laughter), at the top of the building for Edmonds and-- Speaker 2: Well it-- Speaker 1: --you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I think that all that worked. Story_ID: 641455 Speaker 1: I just wanted to go back a little bit to how you first got started in the music business; just because you married him didn't mean you were gonna be in the music business but-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --but, but it kind of, it, it, your involvement or your involvement in management of entertainment did come as a direct result of you being married to an entertainer, so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'cause, I mean, what happened was the more serious our relationship, you know, became, Kenny [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds] was very quiet when I first met him. And so, he's very, he was, you know, everybody knew him to be very shy and he didn't talk a lot. And so, a lot of the artists, you know, that he'd be working with or their managers or whatever, they would talk to me, you know, a lot and they would kind of like use me to kind of, you know, get information to Kenny or to find out if Kenny liked stuff or, or not and then I'd kind of like say, "Hey, Kenny, you know, Johnny Gill wants to know," (laughter) you know, whatever, you know. And so, I bonded, you know, with, with the artists and, you know, the record label executives and their management and that kind of stuff. And the other thing that started happening is that Kenny was so busy, 'cause he was, you know, he was on fire and so everybody wanted a Babyface song. And so, and they were all coming to me, you know, to try to talk Kenny into, you know, giving them a song. And so, I had all these platinum artists and stuff that were all kind of vying for, you know, Kenny to write them a song or whatever and he didn't have enough time. So, I came up with this idea of starting a publishing company 'cause I understood now how music publishing works and if you, you know, the copyrights, you know, a song, you know, or whatever the publishing to a song, you know, you make money off of radio play as well as sale, you know, album sales, and record sales, and then you can put it in movies and all that kind of stuff. So, I understood that concept. So, I decided to start a music publishing company and then sign young writers and all these artists that were coming to me for these Babyface songs, I had access to all the writers, I mean, to all the artists and I could take these artists, I mean, these writers' songs and place them on these artists and then build a big publishing company. And so, so, I did that and, you know, found these really talented writers and this one guy named Jon B. that was like the first writer that I signed, turns out he also wanted to be an artist. And so, the publishing company it grew really fast and so we had a lot of great songs on, you know, platinum and multiplatinum artists and stuff. And then Kenny already had a relationship with Sony Music [Sony Music Entertainment], so then it caught the attention of Sony Music that I was doing this publishing thing and then-- Speaker 1: So, this is Yab Yum Entertainment (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, exactly, yeah. Speaker 1: So, can you say it? Speaker 2: Yab Yum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Y-A-B, Y-U-M. Yab Yum Entertainment. And so, so, then Sony said, "Hey, you know, why don't we do this joint venture with your publishing company," and, and, so we did that and then they also expanded into record labels [Yab Yum Records] so I could sign the artist Jon B. and so I just kind of kept growing into that. And from that I started doing a little bit of music supervising, so I was music supervising, you know, some smaller films and then that kind of gave me the film bug. And then, and then I found the script for 'Soul Food.' Speaker 1: Okay. Now, now, I'm gonna have you back up again a little bit. So, where, where did the name Yab Yum come from? Speaker 2: You know, what? When I was trying to find a name for my publishing company I came up with like a hundred names and nothing would clear. And so, all the, you know, like Hit Co. and, you know, Music this, you know, all the typical names you would think about, couldn't get anything cleared and I was reaching the point where I needed to register a song or something and I needed a name quickly. And so, true story, when I was in Florence, Italy, you know, as a student [at Stanford University], there was a club that we'd always go to called Yab Yum, and it was like some goddess of love. And so, so, I was just like, okay, maybe I'll just come up with something, some random crazy name to try to get something to clear. I'm like Yab Yum Entertainment, and then it cleared. And so, so then, you know, stuck with that name (laughter). Story_ID: 641456 Speaker 1: So, Yab Yum [Yab Yum Entertainment] grows and, and some, at a certain point you, you make a partnership with Sony [Sony Music Entertainment] or you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And then, and you were producing TLC, Toni Braxton, Diana Ross? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had songs on, on all those projects. And so, we had, you know, we had a lot of good, you know, publishing, (laughter) you know. You know, we were building a, a strong publishing company. And so, I was really blessed. And, and, and then I was also too kind of getting the writers of these songs, representing them as producers so that I was getting them the production work as well, so they were producing, you know, they're own, own songs also so they were, you know, becoming profile producers as well as writers and stuff. And so, so, yeah, I mean, it was fun to, you know, be able to go and, you know, we did stuff for New Edition, you know, back in the day and, you know, and Diana Ross and hanging out in the studio with Diana Ross and, and people like that. And so, you know, I was early twenties, you know, doing that and, you know, learning the music business and stuff and it was really fun. I have a lot of, a lot of really great memories. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were there any other African American women involved in, at, at the level that you were at this point? Speaker 2: You know, what? There were African American women that were working at record labels. I think the difference for me is I always stayed independent, you know, and so I never took the corporate job, I just never wanted to, I always wanted my freedom to do whatever I wanted to do. So, back at, you know, at, in the day then, you know, you had people like Sylvia Rhone, and so--who ultimately, she was, I can't remember where she was when I first got started but she was at Elektra Records, you know, once I hit the middle of my, my music career and stuff. And so, Sylvia, you know, was making a lot of noise back then at the label, on the label side of things. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But there weren't a lot back at the time? Speaker 2: No, I mean, it was really, you know, back in the day, it was really kind of just me and Sylvia. And so, Sylvia was just kind of doing the label thing and then I was just kind of doing more of the independent, you know, company type thing [through Yab Yum Records]. And me and Sylvia actually, you know, we had lunch a few times and compared notes and then we did a little bit of business together. Like I'd have some of my songs on her label and, you know, that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: During this period of time, what, what was your most successful, I guess, song or, or artist? Speaker 2: Well, we had, my most successful artist was a guy named Jon B. And so, back in the day, you know, Jon sold 2 million [records], you know, and so that was, that was a big deal for us back in the, you know, back in the day. He was, he was a white recording artist and he was basically, think of Robin Thicke back in the day. He was the white soul boy. And so, he was my writer and producer that was producing all the New Edition stuff and Johnny Gill and working on all the, the black urban projects and stuff 'cause he had that much flavor. And then he decided to go ahead and do his own album and stuff and so, so we had a really big hit called 'They Don't Know' which Chris Brown actually recently sampled 'They Don't Know' and Chris has a new song out called 'They Don't Know' [sic. 'Don't Think They Know'], which features a sample of, of Jon B.'s song and stuff. And so, so, he was probably my, you know, my biggest artist. But, you know, there are things that I did too like I was, you know, executive producing soundtracks as well and so like the 'Soul Food' soundtrack, you know, I worked on that with, with Kenny [Edmonds' ex-husband, Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds], and helped put that together and, and did a couple of other things. And I did the 'Hav Plenty' soundtrack that did well. And I did the 'Light It Up' soundtrack too. And so-- Speaker 1: Okay. I'm (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --I just wanted to hit 'em one at a time, I mean just kind of get these-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, yeah. Story_ID: 641457 Speaker 1: I think, the first movie you're associated with was 'Tuesday Morning Ride,' right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the music supervisor, and that was a little independent short film that got nominated for an Academy Award [Oscar]. Speaker 1: Okay. This is in '96 [sic. 1995] and the same year was the year that you formed Edmonds Entertainment [Edmonds Entertainment Group, Inc., Los Angeles, California], right? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So, what happened to Yab Yum [Yab Yum Entertainment]? Speaker 2: I kept it, I still have it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, Yab Yum, it's still a publishing company. Now, it's just like a, you know, a passive publishing company where I still own the, is it copyrights? I'm like, I've been in the film business for such a long time. I, I own the publishing for-- Speaker 1: Rights, um-hm. Speaker 2: --you know, yeah, X number of songs or whatever and I just collect royalties now on, on the songs. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the movie, the, the you, you, you mentioned 'Soul Food,' this is a, now, how did this project come to you and, and, and, now, this, this is a big project. It's, it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, so. So, I had done 'Tuesday Morning Ride,' so I had done some music supervision and, and I remember telling Kenny [Edmonds' ex-husband, Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds], I said, "You know what?" I said, "I really wanna get into film." I said, "I really wanna start producing films and stuff." I had such a cool experience working on the 'Tuesday Morning Ride' and film and stuff. And so, I reached out to William Morris, to the William Morris Agency [William Morris Endeavor], and I called them and I said, "Hey, you know, really wanna get into doing film, you know, I'd like to meet with you guys." So, so, I took a, a meeting over at William Morris and they sent me over the script for 'Soul Food' and so, after the meeting. And so, they were having a tough time, the writer, a guy named George Tillman [George Tillman Jr.] who ended up being the director also, he was having a tough time getting it set up, you know, at any of the studios. And so, they sent me over the script to see if I'd be interested in doing the soundtrack for the movie so that they could attach, a hot, hot soundtrack to the movie and maybe try to, you know, set it up that way. And so, when I read the script, I said, "You know what?" I said, "I actually, I wanna produce the, you know, the, the movie. I think, I really know how to put this together and I can still help with the music but I want a, an even bigger involvement and help put together the film." So, then, so George and I met and, you know, he was really cool and the film was based on George's life and so the Ahmad [Ahmad Chadway] character was George when he was younger and, you know, the three sisters were his aunties. And so, so, I, you know, I love family stories and I'm very close with my family so, so I knew that it was something creatively that I, you know, I would know how to help put together. So, my idea was to kind of do things a little bit differently and attach talent, you know, to all the roles before we went back out to all the studios. And so, so, I had just picked up the phone and called, you know, everybody I had a relationship with and so I called Vivica Fox [Vivica A. Fox] and sent her the script, I called Nia Long, sent her the script, I called Vanessa Williams, sent her the script. And just started putting the whole film together without even having a casting director or anything. And then, you know, I knew we could, you know, do a soundtrack, you know, and everything. So, I had this little package together and, and then I went out to all the studios and said, "Hey, you know, here's this great script, here's all the talent, you know, involved and we think it would be a great movie, it's family, it's got universal themes." And so, basically every single studio passed. And so, they were like, you know, at that point, the only black film that had done well, you know, during that time period was 'New Jack City' which was kind of like a-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, a gangster, you know, type film or whatever. And so, the studios didn't really have anything like 'Soul Food' to compare it too. And so, they were really, you know, kind of, well, and cautious, you know, "Well, I don't really know who your audience is and, you know, who's gonna go see this." And so, you know, they all passed up until we hit Fox. And so 20th Century Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation], there was a woman, who has since passed away, her name was Laura Ziskin, so she's a, a brilliant producer who was running Fox 2000 [Fox 2000 Pictures] at the time. Laura has a, she produced all the Spider-Man movies and 'Pretty Woman.' And so, so, I pitched the project to Laura and she immediately got it. And so, she read the script and called me right back and said, "Tracey [HistoryMaker Tracey Edmonds], I read the script, I love it, I get it, you know, this is about family, you know, it's not just about a black family but it's about family. I love your cast. Let's do it." So, when I pitched it to Laura I was, I think I was like maybe six or seven months pregnant with, with Brandon [Brandon Edmonds], my first son. And by the time she green lit it she wanted me to go and shoot it immediately. So, I, you know, was out in Chicago [Illinois] shooting 'Soul Food' right after I delivered Brandon. And so, I had just had a baby, nursing, and, you know, produced my first film and stuff like all, all at the, all at the same time (laughter). Story_ID: 641458 Speaker 1: What was the reception of 'Soul Food'? Speaker 2: We were, we were really blessed 'cause, I mean, 'Soul Food' was, became a huge hit, you know, and, and a brand. And we had no idea what to expect and so it's one thing when you make your first film and, you know, you feel like, you know, we've got, might be on to something and, you know, you watch the, the rough cut for the first time and you're like wow, you know, I really like it, well, I hope everybody else, you know, sees what I see, but you don't know. And so, so then to sit through the first test screening in front of an audience and you're on pins and needles and stuff because now you've got, you're at a real movie theater that's packed full of people. And this is something you've been putting your heart into, you know, for the last year or so and you don't know if they're gonna like it or laugh at the funny parts or, you know, like these characters or anything. And so, you know, I'm sitting in the back of the movie theater and the film's rolling and I know the parts that are coming up that are supposed to be humorous and stuff and I'm just kind of like, keeping my fingers crossed. And, you know, sure enough, you know, they're laughing at the right spots and, you know, and you could tell that the energy in the room they were feeling, feeling good, you know. And so, so, it was great to sit there as a filmmaker and see people, you know, seemingly enjoy the film. But then the next hard part happens is then you do the focus group afterwards and like, you know, you pull twenty people and, you know, you ask them really specific questions about what works and what didn't work and so we did pretty well there. And then the final step happens where they now ask everyone to rate the film and stuff and then you get your scores back. And so, it's like getting a test back. And so, on a scale of 1 to a 100, you get graded. And so, so, we came back with a 96, which was really, really exceptional. And so, and but I didn't even realize 'cause that was my first film just how great that, you know, that test score is. And so, I'm with the, you know, the studio executives and that 96 comes back and they're like, "Tracey [HistoryMaker Tracey Edmonds], you just don't understand, it's rare," (laughter) you know, when you have a 96, you know, and, you know, and they were like, "We're ecstatic right now." And so, so, it felt really, really great because when you, your film tests well, then that means that the studio is gonna get behind the marketing and the promotion and stuff. And so, so, we did great and, and people really seemed to love the film and love the characters and love what the film stood for. And it was really kind of the first film, you know, of its kind, you know, to really kind of be, you know, all about family and family values and sticking with family and, you know, themes that were very universal. And so, it was beautiful to, you know, to be out at a restaurant and, you know, the movie comes up and you're with someone that's, you know, Latino and they're saying, you know, "Oh, I love 'Soul Food,'" you know, or, you know, someone white and they're like, "Oh, I love 'Soul Food,' it reminds me of my family." You know, and I'm like, you know, it's great that that it resonated universally. Speaker 1: Yeah, so many aspects of 'Soul Food' seemed to have a, a universal kind of application. I, I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --and, and well, well, even, the, the, the things that resonated in black families like the uncle that something's wrong with him and he's (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: That, every family, I've got someone like that. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: We, we, we had one in our family and I think every families got someone like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I know, yeah, I mean, we had-- Speaker 1: Some relative that has that-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. We had so much fun making that movie. I remember like we had, like I think it was like one of the family dinner scenes and stuff and we were like oh, we need to make the kids put on a little show 'cause every family, (laughter) every family holiday, you know, meal the kids gotta put on some little show, you know, so we were just kind of like pulling up stuff that all of us, you know, had experiences with and everybody was like, yeah, we have to do that, you know, we did that too. So, it was, it was really fun. Speaker 1: Did the actors feel that, feel that they were doing something authentic when (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and it was, two, I mean, really two times in my career I, I felt, you know, this way. And so, with 'Soul Food,' just being on set with the actors we knew, we really felt like we were doing something special, and we felt like a family. You know, we were all in Chicago [Illinois] and we were all just tight, you know, and having a good time making the movie and, you know, when we'd wrap, we'd all go eat together. And, you know, it just felt special and it felt like a beautiful labor of love. It was a low budget movie, you know, but we didn't care, you know, we loved the script, we loved the story, we loved the characters, and, you know, it was just something that we all believed in. And had a very similar experience working on 'Jumping the Broom.' Story_ID: 641459 Speaker 1: The show, the--I mean, the movie was a landmark movie at the time, which becomes a television series on Showtime. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Which I think breaks some records-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) on Showtime. Speaker 2: Yeah. We, afterwards, after we did the movie, you know, I was getting all these letters and people were like, you know, "We want more of these characters." "Are you gonna do a sequel, you know, can you do a TV show?" "We wanna see more of the, this family, we wanna be in their lives even more, we don't want it to stop." And so, so, the studio wasn't really interested in doing a sequel and so then I said, "Okay, well, will you let me develop it as a TV show?" So, you know, so we were connected to Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation] and the first attempt for us to do it as a TV show was through Fox. And so, but the only thing is that Fox, the Fox network [Twentieth Century Fox Television] at the time, they were only doing half hours. And so, we had to develop it for Fox as a half hour comedy. And so, you know, so we did our best but it wasn't really what we wanted to do. It, you know, kind of lost a little bit of the flavor and stuff. And so, we wrote out the pilot, never shot the pilot, Fox decided to not, not to move forward with the pilot. So, I said, "Okay, you know, you guys aren't gonna do it, can I take it to another network?" And so, they're like, "Okay, you know, see what you can do." So, I shopped it around and I took it to Showtime. Now, this time I, you know, because it was Showtime I knew that we had the ability to do it as a one hour and structure it more tonally like what we had in the film. And so, we were, you know, kind of pitched it as, as a dramedy, tonally very similar to, to what we had in the film. And so, had a, a really great writer that, that I brought on board, her name is Felicia Henderson [Felicia D. Henderson]. And, you know, we went out and, and Jerry Offsay, who was running the network at the time said, "Let's do it." And, you know, we put together the cast and, and before we knew it we were shooting in, in Toronto [Canada]. So, we went on and did 'Soul Food' for five seasons. And, you know, we won all kind of NAACP Awards [NAACP Image Awards] and, and different kinds of awards and got a lot of critical acclaim for our actors and our directors and the stories and our writers. And, and it was something that I was really, really proud of, you know, to have been a part of. We ended up, you know, at, at Showtime, it was probably, I think we were their number one rated show when the show was canceled. But the economics and the business model of one hour all African American dramas are difficult because historically they don't sell off, you know, internationally. And so, the upside, you know, for networks is not as lucrative as it is if you're doing like a one hour mainstream or all-white show. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, was, was George Tillman [George Tillman Jr.] involved in the, in the TV series too? Speaker 2: He, he was working on other projects and so, he wasn't hands on but he, he was an executive producer on it. Speaker 1: I've often thought that Tyler Perry was influenced by 'Soul Food,' you know? Speaker 2: I wonder, I don't know. I've never asked Tyler. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And though he has his own style of doing things but-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --I, I, you know, the whole, the whole family genre, I think, there's a-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I think after 'Soul Food' the movie there were-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --these, all these plays, these family oriented plays. Speaker 2: You know what? You're right. Yeah. Speaker 1: That hit the circuit-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, of the black theaters in different towns. Speaker 2: Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Speaker 1: I think that you struck a vein with 'Soul Food.' Speaker 2: Well, you know, it would be nice. I haven't really thought of it that way but, you know, maybe so. Story_ID: 641460 Speaker 1: Now, the next one though that you did from what I understand is 'Light It Up'? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Which didn't have the same kind of success. Speaker 2: Right. What happened with 'Light It Up' is we, we got the script for 'Light It Up' and it's about an urban high school that had some very deprived conditions, you know, which was very typical of what still goes on in, in disadvantaged communities. And so, the kids don't have the books that they need, they don't have the tools that they need to, you know, to really, you know, succeed. And kids get upset and decide to hold a protest at school one day, the protest gets out of control and, you know, before we know it, there's a, a gun that goes off. So, so, that film, you know, we had a first look deal over at Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation], they loved the script. The guy that wrote the script, Craig Bolotin, wanted to direct it. And very similar to what I did in, you know, with 'Soul Food' kind of just called, you know, you know, some people I had relationships with, Forest Whitaker and Usher. I was managing Rosario Dawson, you know, at the time and so I kind of put together this, this cast. And, you know, part of the vision a little bit was to kind of do an urban version of 'The Breakfast Club,' you know, which was, you know, kind of a, a, a classic movie and stuff. Now, what happened is we finished the movie and shortly before, I would say a good month or so before the movie is scheduled to come out, Columbine happens. And so, the Columbine incident [at Columbine High School, Columbine, Colorado] happened and it just rocks, you know, the country, you know, where you've got, you know, this high school and, you know, someone coming in and shooting up students in high school and, and all that. So, when that happened, you know, everybody involved with the film from the studio side of things, from production or whatever, we were all in shock and we were like, "Oh, my god, this is so close to the story that we're telling, this is kind of eerie," you know. And so, I remember having the conversation with the studio and saying, "Hey, should we just shelve the movie, you know, for a little bit, you know, until all this blows over or what are we gonna do, you know, because this movie is gonna be compared to, you know, to Columbine now and we're in trouble." And so, so, the studio decided to keep the movie on schedule, but basically release it with no marketing, you know, or, or promotion which, you know, as a producer, I'm just like oh, my gosh, you know, we're, we're doomed. Nobody is gonna even know when this movie is coming out because they didn't wanna like really run commercial spots about students shooting, you know, and stuff when you had Columbine going on or whatever. So, so, I was still pretty young, you know, in my producing career, you know, at that time and, you know, I'm getting this news and I'm just like, oh, my gosh, we're gonna have to release this film, no marketing and promotion, it's going to do horrendous at the box office, no one's gonna know that we even exist, and it's just gonna be devastating. What am I gonna tell the cast? You know, and so, 'cause I felt like, you know, everybody was involved in this film because, you know, of my relationship, you know, I knew Usher and Rosario and I'm like, I'm gonna have to tell this cast, who's all excited about this movie, that this film is not gonna have any promotion, you know, or whatever and it's probably gonna tank. And so, so, I kind of prepared them, you know, for that. And, and then, you know, it's just the worst feeling like as a producer 'cause you get, you get closer and closer to your opening weekend and they have, you know, these tracking reports which tells you how many people are aware that your film is even coming out. And we were like (gesture), at the bottom (laughter). So, no one knew we were coming out. And so, so we were tracking like nothing, you know, at all, and didn't have any commercial spots running or anything and I'm just like oh, my gosh. And so, so it's like, you know, it's like impending doom that, you know, is coming, you know, it's just like okay, I gotta brace myself for this opening weekend, you know, or whatever and so, so, yeah, so I knew it was gonna be bad. And, you know, honestly what I did is I just wanted to get away, I just, I didn't even wanna be in town, you know, when the opening weekend, you know, box office came out or whatever. So, no joke, I actually packed my bags and we went to London [England]. And so, (laughter) I was like I don't even wanna be in town feeling it, you know. And so, I went to, I went to London, you know, for the, you know, for the weekend and stuff and I was like I don't wanna talk to anybody, you know. And then, you know, I, I came back and just kind of like, you, you know, got my strength back and stuff and then-- Speaker 1: This is 1999, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, so, yeah, so I came back and, you know, you know, had, you know, had the calls and stuff with the, you know, the cast and stuff, and they, and they understood it was just really, you know, just bad timing, nothing you can do. And so, now, the older that you get, you know, the industry, you just realize that's part of the business, you know, but the first time it happens to you, it's a lot more emotional, you know, you just feel responsible, you know, and it's, it's a, a harder hit the first time, you know, that it happens and stuff. And then, you know, the more you're in the business, you just know it's like this (gesture); you know, some things are gonna hit, some things aren't, you know, and you just keep, keep making it, like, you know, keep making it happen. Story_ID: 641461 Speaker 1: Now, your third movie project though was--had kind of a different kind, it wasn't a big hit but it was a, a, a good movie, a lot of people thought it was a good movie. Speaker 2: Which one is that? Speaker 1: 'Hav Plenty.' Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. So, 'Hav Plenty' was an independent film and so I went to the Acapulco Black Film Festival [American Black Film Festival] and the film was screened there and it's a little tiny, tiny film. The initial budget for the film was sixty thousand dollars. And so, I loved the film so much that I acquired the film at the film festival. And the film had all unknowns, you know, it was a guy named Christopher Cherot [Christopher Scott Cherot] that wrote, directed, he produced the initial film, edited, you know, did it all, you know, played the, the lead character and stuff but I just thought, you know, it was something special, very unique, you know. I love independent films so I just, you know, appreciated the, you know, the uniqueness of, of his vision for the, you know, for this film. So, decided that, you know, I was gonna put this other little ending on to it so that we'd have a few names and stuff. And so, we spent thirty thousand dollars and shot this little ending. And so-- Speaker 1: So, the ending cost more than the movie? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the initial movie was sixty, the ending was thirty, you know. And so, but again I just called my friends and like Chilli [Rozonda Thomas], Lauryn, Lauryn Hill, and, you know, I think, it was, was it Nia [Nia Long], I can't even remember who all was in the, was in the ending, Shemar Moore, you know. So, I called everybody, we had like a day of shooting in New York [New York] and so we shot this little ending so that we now had all these little names that we could at least attach to, to the movie or whatever. Put it together, now we had a ninety thousand dollar movie. And so, screened it at the Toronto Film Festival [Toronto International Film Festival], Harvey Weinstein saw it and loved it. And so, Harvey actually bought the film from me and distributed it through Miramax. So, the great thing is that like for me I made a huge profit (laughter) on the, on the acquisition. And so, so, you know, so he, you know, released it kind of like as an indie film and so like box office wise with indie films, you know, you're not looking or expecting, you know, a huge box office, you know, success or whatever 'cause you're only on, we platform released it, and I think we were only on, I don't know at the most two hundred screens or something, you know. There, you know, if, if that, we were either on fifty or two hundred screens at the most. And so, and it was a limited release. So, but, you know, we did get a lot of critical acclaim and so, and it became, you know, kind of this cult classic and so people, you know, to this day, you know, are like, "Oh, my gosh, I love 'Hav Plenty,' that was the coolest movie." And so, so that, that's one, that, you know, that I really, really love. And so, as a business model for me, it actually worked well 'cause we were able to kind of flip it, you know, as an acquisition. Story_ID: 641462 Speaker 1: Now, you were involved in the production of another movie about black gay life called 'Punks.' Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was, was that--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And so, that was another, a little indie movie that we did. And the idea, you know, I'm very pro-gay rights and so I have a lot of friends in the gay community. And one of my executives that worked for Edmonds Entertainment [Edmonds Entertainment Group, Inc., Los Angeles, California] at the time, this guy named Patrik Polk [Patrik-Ian Polk] had written a script and he wrote this script called 'Punks.' And, you know, it was a, it was a romantic comedy. And so, and the script was really well done. And, you know, Patrik wanted to direct it. Ultra, ultra low budget, you know, project as well, a la 'Hav Plenty.' And so, the idea was, you know, not to like, you know, make a fortune off of it, but I believed in it as an independent film and I believed in the director's vision and in the story that he was, you know, that he was telling. And so, so, we, you know, we did 'Punks,' and again got a lot of critical acclaim with that, it was a, you know, a favorite at Sundance [Sundance Film Festival]. And we never released it theatrically, you know, it just kind of became, you know, a festival film. You know, and so we never really did, you know, we released it, we had like a two city, you know, release where we had like a day or so in New York [New York] and a day or so in, in Los Angeles [California]. And so, but it was really more to get Patrik's voice out into the marketplace. And Patrik actually went on to, to write, produce, direct, his own series on the channel Logo [Logo TV]. He did something called 'Noah's Arc' which was a series which ran for a couple of years on Logo and it was their breakout series. And so, for me, you know, it was a matter of supporting, you know, the vision of an indie filmmaker that, you know, hopefully helped open the door for him to do the series that he did, you know, on Logo. Story_ID: 641463 Speaker 1: As we go, go into the 2000s you're, are, are you enjoying being able to actually choose pro- I mean, having more control -trol over choosing what you wanna do? Speaker 2: Yeah, because I'm able to kind of do things that I feel passionately about. And so, I became, you know, really, I started doing as much in the TV world as I was doing in, in the film world. And so, I was able to just kind of keep expanding, you know, my horizons, you know, in, on, you know, different, you know, just different avenues of the entertainment business. And so, while I was doing all this, I had, you know, a management company that I was building and so, again, I had talent, talent like Rosario Dawson, I had Donald Faison from 'Scrubs,' I had Loretta Devine, I had Kimberly Elise, I had Mekhi Phifer, you know, Isaiah Washington. I had some of the, you know, the most talented, you know, African American talent in, in Hollywood whose careers I was managing through the Edmonds Management company [Edmonds Management Group] that I had created. So, it was, you know, that was going on, you know, I still had the record label [Edmonds Record Group], you know, going on with Jon B., I had the film side of things going on and TV, and so, my idea was really kind of creating this multimedia company that had a lot of different arms and so that's, you know, kind of, you know, what I was doing. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, you sound like you were really, really busy. Speaker 2: I really was. And so, ultimately it became overwhelming to be honest with you, and so ultimately I ended up deciding by my choice to sell off the management company because I just couldn't handle all the clients anymore. And so, I hired other managers, you know, to become part of Edmonds Management but I, I felt like I was letting the clients down because they signed with me thinking that I was gonna be involved in, in their career and, you know, I was off, you know, producing movies or TV shows and, you know, they're calling me to ask me about this project or if I can make a phone call and I just, I was spread too thin. So, so, ultimately I decided to just kind of take the business that I had built and I sold it to, to another company. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then that way that allowed me to just kind of free up and focus on, you know, what, what was really bringing me the most, you know, enjoyment which was TV and film. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when was that, when did you sell, sell off that? Speaker 2: You know what? I have to look to see-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when I sold the company, I can't even remember. Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, I have a note here that, now, now, you were, you were divorced in 2005; right? That's, that's-- Speaker 2: I think that's correct, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm bad at my years. Speaker 1: So, was it, was, was all the activity part of the, you know, I mean, being so busy, was, was, was that a part of what, what broke it up? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I, I, I'd have to say it might have contributed. I mean, Kenny [Edmonds' ex-husband, Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds] and I ultimately grew in, in different directions. But I'm sure, you know, and he would probably say if he was on, so I'm sure it wasn't easy, you know, me being so busy. I mean, you know, it really truly was overwhelming for me, you know, at a certain point, you know, because I was a mother, you know, also. And I mean, the, my message logs at the office were just insane with all the phone calls that I was getting and then emails and, you know, and there just wasn't enough time in the day, you know, to, to get it all done. And so, I, I did have to start making some hard decisions on, okay, what can I, you know, eliminate; and so the first thing was the, you know, it was the management company. Story_ID: 641464 Speaker 1: All through this period you were receiving awards from all the different black organizations and the (unclear) everybody, you know. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, honorary doctorate degrees. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And so, you produced some, a series with Little Kim [Lil' Kim], right, little on, on BET [Black Entertainment Television] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean, one of the things I was doing is I, I really wanted to, you know, I had 'Soul Food' that was going well on Showtime. And so that was the era when reality TV started taking off. And so, I looked at the television arena, I'm like okay, what's missing? Okay. There are no African American reality shows. So, so, I approached BET and they were not doing any original series at the time. They were mainly doing music videos and gospel oriented programming. And they may have had like '106 and Park' or something, you know, just a music video, you know, talk show format. And I said, hey, you know, and it was Stephen Hill at the time that was, you know, kind of heading things up and I said, "You know what? You guys really need to consider doing some original programming. I'm like, you know, everybody else, MTV [Music Television; MTV] and everybody else is like really moving at lightning speed with these reality shows. You guys are BET. You need to do an African American reality show and I have a show for you." And they were like, "Okay, what?" And I said, "Okay, got this show called 'College Hill.' So, let's, you know, let's go to HBCU college campuses [historically black colleges and universities], let's find, you know, eight students, you know, a little a la 'Real World,' you know, and let's put 'em all together and, you know, and, you know, follow them for, you know, a school semester," you know. And so, so, they're like, "Oh, that sounds interesting. You're gonna have a treatment for it?" I'm like, "Yeah, I do." "How much do you think you can do it for?" I'm like, "Well, how much do I have?" And so, they had no money at the time. And so, we were really an experiment for them. So-- Speaker 1: So, you, you mentioned 'The Real World,' there was something, 'The Real World' and the 'Road World' [sic. 'Road Rules'] or something like that on MTV? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That-- Speaker 2: --show called 'Real World' on MTV. Speaker 1: --featured mostly white kids doing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --things together. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It was white kids all living together, you know, but nobody was doing anything, you know, African American. Story_ID: 641465 Speaker 1: So, Stephen Hill and BET [Black Entertainment Television] they said, "Okay, the, this 'College Hill' thing that you just pitched sounds really interesting. We only have this amount of money." And I was like, "Are you serious?" And they're like, "Yeah, and we need thirteen episodes. Can you do it?" And so, for me, you know, I've done a lot of things, as I'm sure you see, that's not always about making money. It's just about like taking things to another level for African American entertainment or opening a door or proving a point. And so, so, I said, "Okay, all right. I have this amount of money, you need thirteen episodes. Okay, I'll do it." And so, so, again, me being really hands on with everything, so I went out, I found a university that let us do it, Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College], Baton Rouge, Louisiana. And, and I grabbed Chris Cherot [Christopher Scott Cherot] who I had done 'Hav Plenty' with because I knew Chris knew how to make stuff for no money (laughter). So, I'm like, "Chris, I have X number of dollars, we need to do thirteen episodes, okay. Can we get our guerilla reality making going and lets me and you go out to Southern University and shoot this reality show, and can you direct it and help me put it together?" So, he was like, "Okay, let's do it." So, so, we went out and shot our first season of 'College Hill.' Now, so sad compared to how all these shows are properly done. I mean, the only location we had were the kids' college dorms themselves. And so, nowadays, and in our subsequent seasons we got to put them in more, you know, better locations, a real house, and all this kind of stuff. First season we were actually just inside the dormitories having to shoot in these little tiny rooms and, you know, we had no story producers, nothing, so it was just me and Chris and it was all about casting. So, it was all about finding eight kids with really strong personalities that-- Speaker 2: Really different personalities. Speaker 1: Yeah, really different personalities. Speaker 2: I, I know one, Jabari Roberts from Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: He is exactly the way he is in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --on TV and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --and people probably think that he's acting or doing something. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: He, he's exactly like that. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: He was the nerdiest kid in the-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: That's him. Speaker 1: And we were really the realest reality show out there. We never scripted anything, we never pushed the kids to do anything, you know, it was all about strong personalities and, and the right casting and stuff. So, so, we did the show at Southern, they put it on the air and it broke all their ratings, you know, history. You know, like we, you know, we were the, had the highest ratings in the history of, of BET. And so, everybody went crazy, you know, over this little show, you know, or whatever and so I was like okay, cool, cool, yay, okay, well, we showed that there's an audience out there. So then, so then, we got picked up, you know, for another season. And then slowly, the second season they gave us, they increased our budget a little more, and then finally BET got bought out by Viacom [Viacom Inc.]. So, once that Viacom money came in they were really able to give us a proper budget, so that we were able to look like, you know, the competing shows, we were able to look like a, you know, a MTV show [Music Television; MTV], you know, or whatever. And so, so, we had six seasons always, you know, the number one top, top, top show. And it was really interesting because, you know, early on that first season like nobody knew what our budget was and everybody was like, "Well, how come your show, I love it, but how come it don't look like, you know, the other shows on, you know, why it gotta look like that?" I'm like, if you only knew (laughter) how much money, you know, we had to, you know, to shoot with, you know, it was, you know, pennies. So, so, yeah, so, we did six seasons and, you know, we were their number one rated show and then unfortunately we were put on pause because the regime changed and so to this day I've been trying to get them to unpause us and let us continue on, you know, with the show. And I get a million tweets 'cause it's on Netflix and, you know, everybody is like, "Oh, my god, Tracey [HistoryMaker Tracey Edmonds], when are you bringing back 'College Hill'?" You know, "What's going on with that?" And so, still talking to the network about it. Story_ID: 641466 Speaker 1: There was some feedback, you know, you got from some of the colleges about the show, it's almost like watching sausage made, once you see it (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --(unclear). Now, people got, there, there were some upset, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, I mean, it was an interesting process, you know, making 'College Hill,' especially in the early days when we were actually affiliated with a particular school or we were shooting on the campus because, I mean, our, our show was the realest of reality shows. And so, we did not tell the kids to act a certain way, we didn't set up, you know, scenarios, we just let the kids be who they really were. And, you know, college kids just like, you know, anybody else, they can act up. And so, so, you had, you know, kids that, you know, sometimes were using profanity, you know, you had kids that, you know, may have had, you know, romantic or, you know, may have hooked up with other cast mates, you know, you had kids that would argue, you know. And so, the kids were not always, you know, displaying themselves, you know, as perfect. And so, and I think that, you know, a lot of times when you have a school board, they want their students looking perfect. And so, so, there were times when we would send cuts over to the school board to take a look at and, you know, they'd ask us to water things down or, "Oh, let's show them studying but, you know, I don't like that argument that these two students," (laughter), "just got into." And so, and I was on the phone with them a lot of times and I'm like, "Okay. Let me explain to you that, you know, we need to show the kids being themselves, I mean, that's what this show is all about, you know. We can balance and have some studying scenes and stuff but no one's gonna watch this show, you know, if it's a half hour of the kids in a classroom or if it looks like a public service announcement, it's just, you know, it's just not gonna happen." And so, you know, so those were, you know, there were the battles. And so, then, you know, you had, you know, some episodes where, you know, the kids may have gotten into a huge argument. Of course, those are our highest rated episodes but, you know, those are the episodes that, you know, maybe the school board, you know, wasn't so happy with and so. Speaker 1: Well, well, what did you think was the most entertaining thing that ever happened in 'College Hill'? Speaker 2: The most entertaining thing in terms of what reality entertainment style 'cause it's-- Speaker 1: I guess, so, I mean, I, you know, but-- Speaker 2: Well, I mean, we had a lot of, we had a lot of interesting characters and I mean one of the things too that we explored was, I mean, we explored a little bit of kids in college that are repressing their sexuality to an extent, you know, and that are afraid to be, you know, who they are and so we had a couple of cast members on the show that were on the quote down low. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know, and finally decided through the show that they were gonna show who they really were, you know, and sometimes it might have been the parents first time, you know, discovering this information. And so, so, those were some of our more provocative, you know, story lines, you know, that, you know, were emotional for, you know, for the kids that appeared on the show and for, for their families and stuff. And so, we never did it, you know, to be exploitive, you know, the kids came to me, you know, and said, "Hey, I really feel like it's time," you know, 'cause the kids, you know, all were excited about doing the show and they really wanted to just be themselves. And so, you know, on two occasions, you know, cast members came to me and said, "Hey, I really want my parents to know who I really am, you know, and I wanna do it through the show." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, yep. Story_ID: 641467 Speaker 1: Let me kind of fast forward to something, well--oh, what, well, tell us about 'Jumping the Broom' now, this is a, this is a 2011-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --production. Speaker 2: 'Jumping the Broom' was a romantic comedy that I did through Sony Pictures [Sony Pictures Entertainment, Culver City, California]. It's a story that is very, very close to home with me because it was kind of loosely based on some experiences that that I had been through, going through wedding ceremonies where you have two families that maybe have completely different styles that, you know, are trying to all get along and blend for the sake of this couple, you know, but, you know, really discover some clashes along the way. And I think that's one of the biggest tests that a couple can go through is really the wedding. And so, that can either make or break you, you know, depending on the families and depending on, you know, really how strong you are in terms of your unity as a couple. And so, so, I wanted to really explore that, you know, through 'Jumping the Broom' and so I worked really closely with our writer, Elizabeth Hunter, you know, on the script and kind of, you know, loosely shared with her some things that that I had experienced in, in my weddings that I had actually been through. And so, the character of Paula Patton [Sabrina Watson], you know, was very close to, to me and so there's things that Paula said that I may have said, you know, before, in some of my wedding experiences and stuff. And so, it was a, a modestly budgeted movie, again, very close to the 'Soul Food' budget. And so, so, we end up shooting the film in Nova Scotia [Canada]. And so, went out there, took my kids [Brandon Edmonds and Dylan Edmonds] out there, you know, one summer and shot the film. But it was another film that I was just very hands on with, you know, and so from casting and me calling Paula and saying, "Hey, Paula, you know, I got this script that I think you would be great for," you know, to hiring the director, who ended up, who was Salim Akil, who had been our showrunner for 'Soul Food' the TV series for years and so, you know, I really felt it was time for Salim to have his first feature film and so, so, I really kind of put him up, you know, to the studio as, as our director, hand picking the casting director. And then really kind of getting out there and because of our budget we didn't have, you know, really proper money for wardrobe and all that kind of stuff so I mean, it was really a labor of love so like, you know, when it comes time to the, the clothes that the girls wore, you know, that's me, you know, late at night online on my computer trying to find cute outfits and stuff (laughter) and ordering them and having them shipped to Nova Scotia. You know, hair and makeup, be in the hair and makeup trailer, you know, helping to design what the wedding would look like and, you know, picking the, the color. And I, I told you before I like beige and creams so, you look at the color scheme for the wedding it's cream and, you know, so. So, it was a, I mean, it was really fun. You know, I loved working with Salim Akil. He did an amazing job as a director, our writers were incredible and our cast was awesome. And so, Paula and Laz [Laz Alonso] and Angela Bassett and Loretta Devine, everybody was really incredible. But it was again one of those experiences where, you know, it was all of us up in Halifax, Nova Scotia. Speaker 1: Now, now, why Halifax, Nova Scotia? Speaker 2: You know, we, we needed a city that could mimic Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. And so, there's a little part on the outskirts of Halifax that looks like Martha's Vineyard and so, so we found this house, you know, in Nova Scotia that doubled for Martha's Vineyard, so the house that you see, you know, is really us shooting in Nova Scotia. So, so, we, you know, we were out there for a couple of months and, you know, we were very tight, you know, as a unit and again same scenario where we worked and on the weekends we'd go out and eat together and explore, you know, Halifax and stuff. And so, it felt very special when we were making the film. And Mike Epps was incredible and Julie Bowen was incredible and so it felt good, you know, while we were making it. And so, it was one of those things where I just couldn't wait to see, you know, work with Salim on getting the rough together. And then very similar experience with, with 'Soul Food' where, you know, you feel like you got something special, you hope it's something special, you test screen it and again our test scores were really high for the film; and so, so it all- you know allowed us the blessing of having the studio get behind it. Story_ID: 641468 Speaker 1: Since 2006, you've been the chief operating officer and president of Our Stories Films, right? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And this puts you, this, this is a--organization was founded by Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] and Harvey Weinstein, right? I mean, the, this company was, right (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean, it's kind of misleading, it was really Bob Johnson that-- Speaker 1: Bob Johnson, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that founded the company. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, at one point we were gonna do a distribution deal through Harvey, but we decided not to. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But it puts you in a unique position to green light films. So, what I understand is that you're the first African American to have this kind of power with this kind of a budget to be able to green light, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm gonna be honest with you, unfortunately, the true story is that I really thought we were gonna be able to do that. And so, when we started Our Stories Films back in, was it two thousand-- Speaker 1: No, it's-- Speaker 2: --eight [2008]? Speaker 1: Six [2006], '6 [2006]. Speaker 2: Two thousand--yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was before the market crashed and so we, as we were getting ready to launch Our Stories Films, we really, you know, were on the brink of closing this huge deal to have a big film fund, you know, a pool of money that would be sitting there, that would allow us to green light our own films. And so, the market crashed and the money was not available. And so, we unfortunately were not able to really execute, you know, the vision that we had and so we ended up having to use distributors money to be quite honest with you, to, you know, to fund films like 'Jumping the Broom' and, you know. So, it's, it's our goal and I know certainly Bob's goal one day to go back and raise the money and, and create that pool of money that would allow us to, to do that. But right now the market is still as you know, like Wall Street and, you know, and the market still isn't where it should be, you know, economy wise. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But is there a big project you're looking at now or, or, or one that you would really like to do that, that's coming up? Speaker 2: I mean, we're, we're working on the sequel for, you know, for, for 'Jumping the Broom' and there are a couple of other scripts that I can't announce just yet that that we're looking at, that'll go into production pretty soon. We've got one actually set up at Fox Searchlight [Fox Searchlight Pictures] that has been announced already. So, I'm doing a film with Shaunie O'Neal through Our Stories Films. It's a film about the lives of basketball couples and so, you know, it's loosely, right now we're calling it 'Basketball Lives' [ph.]. And so, but it's really getting a behind the scenes look but a very real look at what really goes on, you know, behind the scenes, you know, in the world of professional basketball. Speaker 1: Is, is it, I think a, a cable show called 'Basketball Wives' that's out but this-- Speaker 2: Yes, but this has nothing to do with-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --with that. Yeah, so, yeah, this is gonna just be--it's richer, deeper, characters and, and very rich stories and so and it's an empowerment piece (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what's your (unclear) in the, I know the TV series is a comedy but this is-- Speaker 2: Well, the TV, the TV series is a reality show. And so, yeah, so, so it's really kind of like focused on, around a group of women alone and so this is really, you know, following couples. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I think, I think I was thinking about 'The Game,' the one about the-- Speaker 2: Oh, 'The Game,' yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --the football wives. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause that's a comedy that goes-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Story_ID: 641469 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change something? Speaker 2: I mean, I think with every project that you have, you know, there are, what we call mistakes that you make along the way but they're lessons learned. And so, I think, you know, any person that, you know, makes a film, kind of like looks at your product and you go, god, I wish I would have done this a little tiny bit differently or, or maybe I should have cast this person instead of this person, you know, or whatever. So, you can, you know, take any project that you have and you can pick it apart and, you know, but with every project you have you just, you learn something and you get better and better along the way. And, you know, you get more confident in your work and so, you know, through the experiences that you've been through that probably the best thing too is to follow your intuition. And so, there is a lot of things that you may do that you may not feel are the right choices internally but you get pressured by, you know, external people whether it's the studio or whoever and you go against your gut sometimes and you realize that you should have followed your gut. And so, that's probably the biggest thing is that, you know, there are a couple of things that, you know, are projects that I've had in my career where I knew I should have gone in a different direction than I went into and, and then ultimately, you know, it played out the way I was worried it was gonna play out and I was like darn it, I should have just gone with my first instinct. And the ones that you, when you're working on it, the ones that you feel the best about, you know, that you really feel represent who you are and, you know, your intuition usually at least with my career have been my best pieces of work. Story_ID: 641470 Speaker 1: Now in terms of young pe- people coming into this line of work, I mean, do you, do you feel strongly to mentor people? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: It's, it's funny like most of the peo- people we've interviewed involved in production, film production and--got into it kind of serendipitously, they didn't-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --they didn't plan, they didn't, they couldn't envision it, you, you said it a few times yourself, you couldn't envision yourself doing this when you were in college [Stanford University, Stanford, California] (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, have you tried to cultivate or mentor, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I, I mentor people regularly and so Ed- Edmonds Entertainment [Edmonds Entertainment Group, Inc., Los Angeles, California] and Our Stories Films, we have interns. And so, we have an internship program and so I, you know, I work very hands on with the interns, a lot of times. With the boards that I'm on, especially the Producers Guild board [Producers Guild of America], we have a mentorship program that's attached to that board as well and so every year I mentor at least one to two people through that board. And then I also co-chair the Produced By Conference and so, so, I've done that for the last two years. And I actually do what we call a mentorship roundtable at the conference where, you know, for a day, you know, for a couple of hours, you can come and, you know, sit at my table and ask me whatever question you wanna ask me about the industry, you know. And I will do my best, you know, to give you, you know, my assessment of what I've been through, what I've learned about this particular issue and, you know, and guide you, you know, the, the best way that I can. So, yeah, I mean, I, I really do enjoy mentoring people. Speaker 1: Are, are you invited to college campuses to speak very often? Speaker 2: I am and so, in fact, I'm gonna be speaking at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], I think in March. Now, most of the time I just don't have time to do it and so but, you know, I love Spelman and they've asked me like three years in a row and I've, I've always been in production on something and so finally this year they're like, "Okay, I know last year you said you were launching Alright TV, we see it's launched now" (laughter), "so, all right, how about us this year?" So, I'm like okay, so, I'm gonna go to Spelman and speak to the ladies of Spelman. Story_ID: 641471 Speaker 1: Tell us about Alright TV, I didn't ask you about that maybe I should, you know, before we (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so, Alright TV is my latest venture. And so, it is our YouTube channel, it's a YouTube premium channel which, you know, there's a gazillion YouTube channels out there but there's only about a hundred of the YouTube funded channels, and so we're one of those 100 channels. And so, we are an inspirational faith friendly, feel good channel in that all of our content in our shows are designed to be uplifting and make you feel good when you're watching them, but also make you laugh as well. And so, we've got anything from scripted comedies to, we have some talk shows, we have some self-help, we have beauty, fashion, lifestyle, just really everything to encourage a healthy, mind, body and soul. But we're working with some of the best, you know, Hollywood actors and writers and directors and stuff. And so, we had a show called 'Walk This Way' with Michael K. Williams from 'Boardwalk Empire' and, you know, it featured a lot of, you know, TV and film actors as guest starring. I had a chance to work with Issa Rae who just did this huge YouTube show called 'Awkward Black Girl' ['The Misadventures of Awkward Black Girl'] that was a big YouTube sensation, and so she wrote a show for us called 'The Choir,' that's a really great scripted comedy about the behind the scenes going on inside a church choir. So, so, we have altogether we launched Easter Sunday of this year and so we've produced about twenty shows and so they're all kind of, you know, digital web based shows. Some of them are gonna spinoff and become television shows. But I'm really excited like we're really growing a big audience and, and a community and--of subscribers and stuff that I'm really proud of. Story_ID: 641472 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, some of my concerns for the African American entertainment community is the fact that I don't think that we're making progress, I think we're actually regressing. And so, I'm concerned on the television side of things that there's still a lack of African American scripted shows, and when I say African American, I mean African American casts, not just one African American character, an entire African American cast. And so, when I was growing up as a child of the '70s [1970s] but even in the, you know, the '80s [1980s], you know, at least there used to be, you know, I grew up watching 'Sanford and Son' and, you know, 'The Jeffersons' and, you know, 'What's Happening!!' and 'Good Times' and watching, you know, entirely African American casts and stuff and family stories and all that kind of stuff. We don't have that anymore. You know, and even in the '80s [1980s], you had UPN [United Paramount Network], you had 'Family Matters,' and it is 'Family Matters' right with Urkel [Steve Urkel]? Yeah. You had all those shows and stuff, we don't have that anymore. And so, the closest we really have is we have reality TV and a lot of times, I don't, I'm not proud of the representations that we have of our people depicted in reality TV. And, you know, now, I mean, thank god that BET [Black Entertainment Television] is starting to at least go into scripted TV a little bit so there are some opportunities available there. But in terms of the regular broadcast networks, you know, they, they need more work, we need more diversity on, on those channels. And so, the same thing with films, like at the studios and stuff there are less and less slots available for African American films than there were, you know, when I was coming up. And so, you know, we used to have a plethora of studios that we could go to, to choose from. Like as a filmmaker I used to be able to go to Warner Bros. [Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc.], I could go to New Line [New Line Cinema], I could go to Fox [Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation], I could go to Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation], I could go to Universal [Universal Pictures]. Now, we have about two distributors that that we can go to. And so, and one is strictly in the Tyler Perry business, and so that leaves the other one, you know, that only does, does maybe one or two films a year and we're all fighting for those one or two slots. And, you know, now I keep seeing, you know, one or two other studios, maybe once every four years do an urban film, you know. So, but we need more slots and so--because we need the ability to, to tell more stories. Story_ID: 641473 Speaker 1: When you look back again on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: I think my professional legacy is going to be that, I don't know, I think, I may be one of one or two females that has, you know, been able to at least carve a way and make some noise in, on a multimedia level, you know. I've been blessed to have been successful or at least made some noise on the, the music side of things, you know, in television, in film, and now in digital. And so, and, you know, it's been an amazing and a very blessed opportunity for me to keep, you know, to being allowed to expand my horizons year after year. And like if, you know, I'm like okay, I wanna, let me, so I see all this YouTube stuff going on, let me create a YouTube channel [Alright TV], let me see what, you know, what I can do there. I see all this reality stuff coming on, you know, let me, let me see what I can do there. And, you know, I've even been blessed enough I've done live theater, you know, before too and so it's been great, you know, I've been, you know, I've really, really enjoyed, you know, growing and evolving as, as a producer and as an entertainment entrepreneur; and, you know, I tell everybody, you know, as a door opens for me I'm gonna continue opening doors for other people. Story_ID: 641474 Speaker 1: Tell us a little, little bit about your family. Speaker 2: A little bit about my family? You mean-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --my, my kids? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, I'm a single parent mom and I'm blessed to have two amazing boys. Brandon [Brandon Edmonds] is seventeen years old, Dylan [Dylan Edmonds] is twelve. And they're incredible. Brandon is, he's a really deep thinker and so he's got a very curious brain like me, you know. And so there's like stuff, and I always knew Brandon was like wise beyond his years like, you know, when he was a baby, I used to look in his eyes and go, okay, I see there's so much wisdom, he's got an old soul, there. And, you know, before I knew it he was the kind of kid that was always asking questions and reading and learning and looking up stuff on the Internet and stuff. And so, he's very creative. He is a really gifted guitarist and so like he loves, you know, Jimi Hendrix and Eric Clapton and Led Zeppelin and people like that, and so he studied them. And Brandon, you know, he's, he's got crazy talent. Like he, you know, not only is he writing and, and doing licks and, you know, things like other people can't do but then he loves the flash of Jimi Hendrix and he plays behind his back and with his teeth and-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --you know. So, he has a lot of fun with it. And so, he's in a band now and, you know, so it's, it's fun for me to be at home and, you know, hear these jam sessions going on in my house and I'm like, "Oh, my god, that's my son. They sound good." So, so, that's, that's Brandon. And, you know, Dylan, is, he's just like the sweetest kid ever. Like Dylan's the kid that never says anything mean about anyone and so like he's the kid that if two kids get into a fight, he tries to make peace, you know. And he likes basketball. And he's starting to get into music also, so he plays a little bit of piano and he plays guitar also. But they're, I mean, they're just a joy. And when I'm not working, I don't even really, I don't, I don't go out very much, you know, at night or on the weekends or whatever like when I come home I just wanna spend time with my kids. And so, I love talking to my kids and hearing what, what's in their mind and what they're learning and what they're thinking about life and stuff. And so, and I love traveling with them and so I've been really blessed, you know, I've shared with you how much I loved traveling when I was younger and stuff and so I've taken my kids all over the world. And so, my kids, you know, every year they're like, "Hey, Mom, where are we going this year?" So, I'm like, "Okay, we haven't been to Alaska yet. Let's, let's go check out Alaska," and, you know, or, "Let's go, all right, we're, let's go to Scotland," you know, or, "Let's go to London [England]," you know, they've been all over the world with me. And so, as a result, you know, they have a really broad perspective, you know, on, on life and other cultures and, and other people; and, you know, and I love that. Story_ID: 641475 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Something I didn't raise that we ought to talk about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not that I can think of. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, the last question, similar to legacy but a little bit different, ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That's always a hard question (laughter). You know, what? I, above everything I'm not, I'm not into accomplishments, you know. I'm not, you know, the kind of person that cares about a scorecard or credits or bio or anything like that. Like I'm here for a broader purpose and I really feel like, you know, I'm only just beginning, and so I feel like the entertainment industry and, and I'm starting to segue in, into that through Alright TV. I, I believe that the reason that God allowed me to go into the entertainment industry was to at least create, you know, a brand or a name that at least could, people would listen to a little bit, you know. And so, through that I really want to take the next chapter of my life and use this platform to help people even more. And so, you know, the reason for creating Alright TV is to help people feel better about themselves and about their lives and to become happier people and learn how to be happy with who they are and where they are right now and understand themselves better. And so, so, I really as I go into the next ten years of my life, I really want to expand that side of, of my career and my life and whether it's through writing books, you know, or whatever, I really wanna open that side of me and my ability to touch people even more in that capacity...