 Story_ID: 373418 Speaker 1: My name is Shawn Wilson. I will be the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. This is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer. We are being observed by four of your favorite people. Speaker 2: (JAMES SALNAVE): James Salnave, S-A-L-N-A-V-E. Speaker 1: (LOUIS SAAVEDRA): Louis Saavedra, S-A-A-V-E-D-R-A. Speaker 2: (LISA ALGARIN-ALEMANY): Lisa Algarin-Alemany, A-L-G-A-R-I-N--A-L-E-M-A-N-Y. Speaker 1: (JANELDA BRITO): Janelda [ph.] Brito, B-R-I-T-O. Speaker 2: Thank you very much, and I will have you introduce yourself and spell your name out for me. Speaker 1: All right. [HistoryMaker] Lez Edmond, E-D-M-O-N-D, first name Lez, L-E-Z. Speaker 2: Today's date? Speaker 1: Today's date is October 10,, 2006. Speaker 2: The location of this interview? Speaker 1: The St. John's University [Queens, New York] and we're in the provost's conference room. Speaker 2: And your occupation? Speaker 1: I am an associate professor at St. John's. Story_ID: 373419 Speaker 1: Okay I'm gonna start with five basic questions, short answers--your favorite food? Speaker 2: Everything except I don't eat red meat usually. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Anything except winter. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I have traveled extensively. I love the parts where it's warm. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I believe in peace, justice and truth. Story_ID: 373420 Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna start the interview by having you give me your mother's name, your mother's date of birth and we'll just start with your mother's name. Speaker 2: Her name was Ruth McArthur, and she was born Oct September 10, 1912. Speaker 1: What recollections do you have of your mother? Speaker 2: She was a very dark skinned, beautiful woman. I think she pampered her children a little too much, and we were just ordinary people. I was greatly influenced by her father because she was the youngest of twelve children, so therefore she was the last one to leave home and all of us were the youngest of all of our cousins and everything and I remember the first day that she took me to school. I remember that very well 'cause I didn't wanna stay (laughter). Speaker 1: Well let's go back, where was she born again? Your mother was born in? Speaker 2: My mother was born in Florida. Speaker 1: What city in Florida? Speaker 2: Jacksonville. Speaker 1: Jacksonville, Florida, so in 1912 she was born in Jacksonville, Florida. Did she ever talk to you about what her childhood was like in Jacksonville, because it was during the Depression [Great Depression] that she really grew up? Speaker 2: Did she talk about that? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: We didn't talk about that too much. I think what she really talked about most was the family and she talked--spoke very highly of her grandfather. Speaker 1: What was her grandfather, what was her--well let's go, let's just go to her father first. What was your grandfather's name, your mother's father? Speaker 2: My mother's father's name was Will McArthur [William McArthur]. Speaker 1: And do you know his date of birth? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: His place of birth? Speaker 2: No (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Well tell me what you know about your mother's father? Speaker 2: When I came along he had retired; he had worked on the railroad and I'm about the same size he was, only he was about ten pounds heavier and very dark, distinguished looking man with gray hair, and my hair today is cut the same way my grandfather's were cut, and he was farming, you know, that's what he--he was always planting things and he pampered me because he use to take me out with him when he was planting. He taught me how to tell time by the sun and if I got tired he would put me under a tree and things of that sort and he just taught me many things. I can remember--one time I really remembered when he was letting me make my own dipper to drink out of, and he didn't say anything and I sawed it open and did all of those things and he didn't advise me to wash it out very well and let it sit in the sun and I started drinking out of it (laughter) and it was very bitter (laughter) so I remember that and he just laughed he thought it was very comical. Speaker 1: What's a dipper? Speaker 2: A dipper is a drinking dipper when you're outside and you have water. It could be in a pail, it could be in a well and then you have this dipper that you use, and everyone had their own private dipper that they drank out of. Speaker 1: Now was a dipper basically a can that you sawed in half or--well how was it made? Speaker 2: Oh no, no it was a piece of--it was, it was a plant and you let it dry out and then you clean it all out and everything and that's and if you bake it in the sun it was just like making a piece of pottery or something. Speaker 1: So this also happened in Florida? Speaker 2: All of this is in Jacksonville. Speaker 1: Okay you were born in Jacksonville as well? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Great, I didn't get your date of birth though? Speaker 2: My date of birth was May 9, 1932. Story_ID: 373421 Speaker 1: Okay so just going back to now, we--you spoke a little bit about your [maternal] grandfather [William McArthur]. You said that your mother's [Ruth McArthur] grandfather was really important to her? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So this would be your great-grandfather? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And his name was? Speaker 2: I don't know his name; at least I don't remember it. Let me be very honest, I don't remember his name. Speaker 1: Now he must've been born into slavery because now we're-- Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she said he was very mysterious. He would show up because they celebrated--what is it? Jubilee, the holiday for the freeing of the slaves, they celebrated that and they killed animals and she remembered that when she was a little girl that he was always at the house on holidays, but she never knew where he went after he left. Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about him talking to her about slavery about anything you can remember about what his life may have been like? Speaker 2: The only thing I can really remember what she said, because my grandfather was the same as his father. He didn't want white people to come on his land, he barred 'em off his land and the reason he did that is because he had a lot of daughters and he always said that he didn't want to have to kill someone over his daughters. Speaker 1: Do you know how the land was purchased, how they got the land in Jacksonville [Florida]? Speaker 2: No, I do not, but however I know that they had quite a bit of land. Speaker 1: How much? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't it was quite a bit (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Acres, and acres and acres? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was quite a bit of land. Speaker 1: Now did the land stay in the family? Speaker 2: Some of it did. Speaker 1: And so over the years they sold, sold parts of it off. Speaker 2: Parts of it off, in fact part of our land and I'm old enough to remember this, I asked 'em not to sell it and today there's a big United States post office on it. Speaker 1: So speaking, you can't remember your great-grandfather's name; do you remember what anyone called him though? Was that their nickname that they called him? Speaker 2: Nope, I do not remember. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's your mother's side of the family? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 373422 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your--we talked about the men, let's talk about the women. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Let's talk about your [maternal] grandmother, what was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Roxie McArthur. Speaker 1: And do you know where she was born, in Jacksonville [Florida] also? Speaker 2: No, I don't know where Momma was born, all I know is that she was a beautiful woman, a very nice looking woman. Speaker 1: Dark skinned or light skinned? Speaker 2: She was kind of light skinned and she always wore her hair in a ball, you know how women use to take their hair--they had long hair and she would roll it up in a ball. Speaker 1: And she--any stories about her that you can remember and with you being a child anything stands out with your grandmother? Speaker 2: What really stands out to me about her--she was kind of strict, and she knew an awful lot about different roots because I could be playing with the other kids or something and she would--says to her husband "Will [William McArthur], get me some such and such a kind of root or leaves," and she would boil 'em up and give it to us. That's what I remember. Speaker 1: Did you, do you remember your great-grandmother? Was she still alive when you were a child? Speaker 2: On my mother [Ruth McArthur] or father's side? Speaker 1: On your mother's side still. Speaker 2: No, I do not know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 373423 Speaker 1: So now moving to your father's side. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Oh, but, but before we do you said that your mother [Ruth McArthur] is one of thirteen? Speaker 2: Twelve. Speaker 1: One of twelve, do you know the other sisters and brothers names, can you put 'em in order? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: 'Cause many of them had left home by the time I was born. Speaker 1: Did any of them, are there any significant stories about any of them that you'd like to share with us? Speaker 2: Yes, her youngest brother. Her youngest brother had gotten into some trouble. In other words in the South, I'm from a Confederate state as you well know, and some fellas thought they would just have some fun with him and he beat 'em up. So the sheriff came to the house and just told my [maternal] grandfather [William McArthur], asked him to let my Uncle Ali [Ali McArthur (ph.)] just leave town and he left town. He went to Cleveland [Ohio] first and then he came to New York [New York], and he was very significant in my life because as I said my mother was the youngest and she was always around grandma and grandpa, so what they did they would take my oldest sister and myself because I'm the oldest male and they would invite us to New York and we would spend the summer up at 155th Street and 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard] and I thought it was cool because the building had an elevator in it and--it was really a nice area and on Sunday everyone got dressed and they walked down Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] or 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and they would give you enough money to buy ice cream. So you would walk down to about 135th Street and you would walk back. I remember that and anything else about him? Well. Speaker 1: Well, go ahead. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was significant because he knew an awful lot of people and he use to take us out a lot and by the time I was thirteen I had seen every big act you could name and when I say that I'm talking about all acts, people like even Maurice Morocco [ph.] and--oh what's his name, Ted [Ted Lewis] something that sang. His theme song was, 'Me and My Shadow.' I've seen all--Carmen Cavallaro, Benny Goodman. I've seen all of the big acts and naturally you see all of the big acts if you go to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], which means I saw Ella [Ella Fitzgerald], Lady Day [Billie Holiday] and all of those folks. Speaker 1: So you were coming to New York for the summers when you were a child living in Florida? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now do you know where they got the name Ali from, I mean it's? Speaker 2: No, I do not. Speaker 1: But, 'cause it's a Muslim name right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well did the family--were I mean your mother and your father were they Baptist, or Episcopal or--? Speaker 2: No they were Seventh-day Adventists really. Well some of 'em, not everyone now. My grandfather would go to church but he was not Seventh-day Adventist. That's my mother's father, he was completely outta the loop on that. That's my mother's father, he went, he went completely outta the loop on that. Speaker 1: So going back to your mother's mother, we talked about her. Speaker 2: Roxie McArthur. Speaker 1: Roxie. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you, your great-grandmother--you didn't know. Speaker 2: I did not know her mother. Speaker 1: You did not know her. Speaker 2: And I can't rightfully say anything about her 'cause I don't remember her. I don't even remember them talking about her. Speaker 1: Now of the other brothers and sisters, is Ali the only one that stands out for you that made significant contributions to your life? Speaker 2: No, I had another uncle and his name was Lovie McArthur [ph.] and he owned a restaurant, mostly all of my family owned some kind of a business and it--in other words I lived like in a captured community. When I was little they didn't take us downtown. I mean I use to think they were punishing us but that wasn't what it was about at all. They just didn't want us to re- you know, see that harshness of the place and so I was reared basically around people that looked like me. Story_ID: 373424 Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your father a little bit, your father's date of birth, do you know that? Speaker 2: All I remember is that he was born a few years before my mom [Ruth McArthur] and it may have been around 1907 something like that. Speaker 1: And what did your father do for a living? Speaker 2: He had a business, it wasn't a big business, he had a store on Davis Street and-- Speaker 1: What kind of a store? Speaker 2: He use to sell all kind of, all kind of odd things, including candy, cigarettes you know the regular things and cigars were very big so he, he may have specialized in cigars because cigars are very big. Speaker 1: So you said Davis Street, was that the main strip for--? Speaker 2: Davis Street was one of the main streets and like most men in the South when they own a business, they sit outside on a stool and so I'm accustomed to seeing him sitting outside on the stool. Speaker 1: Now what about his father, your grandfather on your father's side? Speaker 2: Now, I didn't ever get to know him that well, all I can really say about him is that he worked on a train also. Now he actually worked on the train, when I say that like a--? Speaker 1: Porter? Speaker 2: Or whatever, yes he was working on the train. My mother's father [William McArthur] did not work on the train, he worked on. Speaker 1: On the railroads? Speaker 2: On the railroad, in fact he was a lineman, like ones that go out and change the rails and all of that, that's the kind of work he did, so he must've been something 'cause that's rough work. Speaker 1: So would your--the porter, the one who worked on the train have been around with A. Philip Randolph and the Pullmans, the porters you know sleeper car (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, had to be. Speaker 1: So then he--but he never spoke about the sleepers, the, the sleeper porters or any you know, joint trying to start a union or any of that political stuff at home, or did he? Speaker 2: Well I can say this, I have in my possession that hard cover rules and regulation book for the porters on the train and it tells them, it instructs them on how they must act in each state. I have that book, yes. Speaker 1: Well what does it say about states like below the Mason-Dixon Line? Speaker 2: Some terrible things that you'd have to be very courteous and careful (laughter). Speaker 1: So he was actually a porter then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And worked on the--do you know what ever happened to his uniforms or any of his other artifacts from that time? Speaker 2: To be truthful with you, no. Speaker 1: Okay did he--do you ever remember any stories about his travels? Did he meet any movie stars or? Speaker 2: My family knew quite a few important people like that, Ray Nance use to come to our house all the time, the trumpet player with Duke Ellington. We knew Cat Anderson, Mr. Carney [Harry Carney] and whom else? That's about all I can remember. Story_ID: 373425 Speaker 1: We were just talking off-camera and I want you just to repeat a few of those things. You were talking to me about the, the porters' etiquette, like you know the bags they had? Speaker 2: Yeah, well that was my grandfather on my father's side and he was a porter on the railroad. I have his porter's book and he always mentioned different places he was going, you know he would go to Chicago [Illinois] a lot, places like that he would mention things of that sort. He--I thought he was very sophisticated, because I think traveling will make you polished, I really believe that. Speaker 1: So during the big migration of southerners moving north, did anyone in the family move from Florida maybe to Detroit [Michigan], Chicago? Did any of the family migrate north? Speaker 2: Sure, quite a few of 'em. One of my, two of my cousins were very well known in Harlem [New York, New York] (laughter). One of 'em was George Hanna [ph.], and the other one they called West Indian Joe Baker, those were my cousins but they were much older than we were and Joe knew Malcolm [Malcolm X] and he was a number banker along with George, so I knew you know, and they used to look out for us and didn't want us to get into trouble and all of that kind of stuff but they were very nice to the entire family. Story_ID: 373426 Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of your childhood in Jacksonville [Florida], the earliest? Speaker 2: Earliest? I knew that, I remembered that the elder children had to take care of the younger children, I remember that and they could discipline you and everything. However, if something happened to you, they got a beating, 'cause I remember one day I hurt my leg, in fact the scar is still there, on the wagon and they all got a whipping (laughter) you know, I don't think it was funny but it happened. I remember that and I remember I broke the window one time playing--I broke the window and I remember that my grandparents didn't get angry or anything and my grandfather just replaced it the next day. Story_ID: 373427 Speaker 1: Describe for me the community [in Jacksonville, Florida] that you lived in. You said it was all black? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Describe it for me. Who were the people, who were the neighbors next door, who were the movers and shakers? Speaker 2: Oh that, there was only five families I think, about four families, that ran everything and. Speaker 1: Who were they? Speaker 2: One was the Hodges and they had deep roots, roots in the Caribbean, Jamaica, the others was the Jacksons, another one was the Harrises, I remember them. In fact we are all still very close to each other and there were other families but those were the families I really remember growing up with 'cause we all attended school together and we attended a Seventh-day Adventist school and the men, all of 'em had what we called a trade in those days and I remember my--the neighbors place caught on fire one day and there was a meeting held in the kitchen, my [maternal] grandfather Will [William McArthur] held a meeting and the men got together that weekend and repaired that entire--you know 'cause the kitchen was burned, I think one of the bedrooms in the back and they re-. The entire thing was done over the weekend. See and people don't have that kind of rapport today in looking out for each other. Speaker 1: So I wanna talk some about some of, some of the benefits of living in a segregated society. Speaker 2: Well for me it was good because I feel that it gave me a certain amount of strength and it was really important when I came north to go to school. Speaker 1: Why was it important that you've grown up in a segregated society? Speaker 2: Well of all places I ended up going to Adelphi University [Adelphi College; Adelphia University] in Garden City [New York] and Garden City, and I heard it's still that way, Garden City was a place that you were always looked upon as suspicion when you were in that community and Adelphi at that time was an upper, upper class white school, you know and it prided themselves in being a very good school, and I didn't realize all of that about the school. The only reason I attended the school is because someone had recommended I apply to it. I didn't know anything about Adelphi to be truthful. However, the reasons that I choose Adelphi was because they called and said we would like to have someone like you in our school. Because I was a bad little kid, I used to be in demonstrations; I used to do all that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 373428 Speaker 1: Well let's go back and then we're gonna build our way up to you getting to Adelphi [Adelphi College; Adelphi University, Garden City, New York]. When you were in the community like and I'm talking six, seven years old, maybe even younger before first grade-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --did you recognize what was going on in the community? Did you see--were there people around you that you looked up to? Were there role models (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Always. Speaker 1: Who were they? Speaker 2: Well, we owned a restaurant on Ocean Street and that was across the street from the Afro-American [Afro-American Life Insurance Company, Jacksonville, Florida] building and that building was so beautiful it was on postal cards and it was owned by the I.E. Williams, you can check them out, because they're up to about the fifth generation and the leader of the family is always a male and they're usually are medical doctor, and they have been millionaires and I didn't find out they were millionaires until I had gone to Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] to do some work one summer and I happened to be looking up some of Monroe's [ph.] work--data and I read about the I.E. Williams and I, and I came back and I told my mom [Ruth McArthur]. I says, "Mom, did you know the I.E. Williams were millionaires?" She says, "Well, they were millionaires when I was a child" so that was really something because I, I delivered food to them. I would take them sandwiches, Coca-Cola and all that kind of stuff and what I really remember about them was they always encouraged me to go to school, but not only me, anyone my age. They encouraged you to go to school and I remember he had a skeleton in his office like most doctors did in those days and he would be explaining it to me, I'd you know, I'm a snotty-nose little kid, but he would take time and talk to me. However, I didn't realize it at the time but he was trying to train me for the future, like this is how it's done. You always encourage each other to do better and I did know that they had servants in their home, I didn't--but I wasn't looking at it as--I never looked at myself as being poor. I--we didn't have anything but I never (laughter) you know I just thought I was just an ordinary kid and every other kid had the same things that I had. Speaker 1: Well you must've been middle class because everyone had their own business (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I don't think I was middle class, I don't think so. Everyone in my family didn't have a car and those middle class people had cars and they could do far more things than my family could do. Speaker 1: So that was, that was one gentlemen or one family that set an example, role models. Who were some of the other people you looked up to before you started school? Speaker 2: My barber, my barber was--he had had his place on Ashley Street and I still get my hair cut there that's because my older uncle [Lovie McArthur (ph.)] that I mentioned that owned a restaurant, that was his part of town so when I would go to the barbershop all of the famous people that came to town got their hair cut there. So it was a very kind of upscale place. Speaker 1: Was it on Davis Street? Speaker 2: No, that was on Ashley Street. Speaker 1: Ashley, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, now Ashley Street had movies, owned by blacks and Jack- Speaker 1: So just describe that street for me, tell me what was on Ashley Street. Just go down the street in your memory. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ashley Street had all kinds of stores on it, mostly all kind of store you can name, fancy restaurants, had movie theaters and when big acts came to town they would come to one of those theaters on Ashley Street, like Ashley--you can ask anyone that's been around and they'll tell you Ashley Street--and I'll tell you who use to hang out there, Cootie Williams, ol' Cootie, and I didn't know who he was in the beginning and I remember years later we were in Africa and I was talking to him and he says, "You remember that?" And I said, "Yes" and I described the man in the barbershop that--see my socks? Speaker 1: Yes sir. Speaker 2: It was the man in the barbershop that taught me to buy socks that came over to your calf, so when you pull up your pants the people would not see the top of your socks. I learned that in a barbershop. Story_ID: 373429 Speaker 1: Continuing just with the barbershop (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With the barbershop, they were the ones that told me not to ever let someone put a razor on my head. Like always try to have a natural look and if you didn't want to look as if you just stepped out the barber's chair, I learned that from them and that you didn't--you wanted your shirts only to be lightly starched so they would bend and you only wanted the cuff and the collar to be lightly starched. I learned that in the barbershop and you meet many people in the barbershop. Speaker 1: Who did you meet? Speaker 2: Let's see who all use to come in that barbershop that I know? And the reason I'm thinking about it is because I don't know the timeframe because I knew so many people in the music business and. Speaker 1: But just go through the whole list and don't worry about the time but-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --over the time you were going there, who came through? Speaker 2: Well as I said that was a key point for everyone to come to Ashley Street and there were big acts that came through there--what as the? Buck and Bubbles came through when they would come--stop in Jackson- 'cause Jacksonville [Florida] was a key place and whom else did I use to, it was someone else. Speaker 1: Do you remember? Speaker 2: I think. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: I think it was the Two Zebras [ph.]. Speaker 1: Do you remember minstrel shows, did minstrel shows come through? Speaker 2: No, I think minstrel shows was little before my time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because when I came along people were listening to swing music you know like they were listening to people like Erroll Garner and Teddy Wilson and the king of 'em all was the, Art Tatum, Art Tatum was the man. Everyone wanted to be like Art Tatum and I got to know Big Al McKibbon that played bass. Al McKibbon. Speaker 1: Why did you know so many musicians? Speaker 2: Because my family knew many musicians. Speaker 1: Why did the family know so many musicians? Speaker 2: Now that I really don't know, (laughter) I never asked 'em that question. It was just normal, I guess. Speaker 1: Because you said. Speaker 2: Well about--I know why they probably knew so many, because my Uncle Ali [Ali McArthur (ph.)] was a boxer, that was the reason why he knew so many people and from what I'm told he was pretty good so I don't know. Speaker 1: He didn't--I mean he came way before Cassius Clay [Muhammad Ali] even? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Your Uncle, just--I was wondering the name Ali, did Ali he, did Ali already trace (unclear). Speaker 2: No, he fought under another name, but I do know that he, that he was a fighter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you could tell he was a fighter. Speaker 1: So he knew the musicians, but you, you also said that you either knew Lionel Hampton or you knew one of his. Speaker 2: No, I knew K.D. Speaker 1: K.D. you were gonna tell me a story? Speaker 2: Yeah I knew Kenny Dorham. Speaker 1: Yeah you were going to? Speaker 2: Kenny Dorham was from Texas and I knew him and, and in fact as I got older he and I became good friends and at one time we worked at the same place. Now, he was a top trumpet player working for a living, and he was one of the top ten trumpet players in the world you know, he. Speaker 1: What was the place you worked together? Speaker 2: At Republic Aviation [Republic Aviation Corporation]. Speaker 1: Doing what? Speaker 2: Well, I was doing electronic work, I don't remember what K, but he didn't work in the same department with me, but I knew him so when we would see each other we would talk to each other and he would tell me if he had a gig or something then I would go to see him or something like that. Story_ID: 373430 Speaker 1: So where did black people, and I'm saying black or African American, what (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I understand yeah. Speaker 1: Where, where did you get your news from during those days, like did--like did you get it from the men in the barbershop? Did they talk about what was going on in the world--did you listen to (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you--it, not only did you have the Afro-American. Speaker 1: Which was the newspaper. Speaker 2: Yeah, you had the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], you had the Baltimore Afro [Baltimore Afro-American; Afro-American Newspapers] which was owned by the Murphys and you had what else? They had radio stations but I wasn't in to that. Speaker 1: But you got your news from the Afro? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Because that was your local black paper? Speaker 2: Yes, no. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: My favorite paper was the Pittsburgh Courier because I use to like to read Mr. J.A Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] with the cartoons and everything, but everything was in a cartoon form, and it was giving you all of the history about the great kings and the queens and people whom had did things--that was my favorite. Speaker 1: Can you remember any stories, read any--reading any other stories in either the Pittsburgh Courier or the Afro, a story that stands out for you, can you remember reading something? Speaker 2: I always would read about things that had happened to us, that always struck me always you know. In those days you could get lynched, you could do--anything could happen to you and any time they had a story like that it was usually on the headlines and there were good things in there, they talked about baseball. I was a great baseball person and in fact I saw most of the big blacks Stars. I saw Josh Gibson, I saw Satchel Paige I saw all of those folks, Showboat Thomas [David Thomas] I saw all of them. Speaker 1: Playing in the Negro Leagues? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then there was also the Cotton State Leagues. Speaker 2: Yeah, I saw it in the Negro Leagues. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well it was segregated (laughter), this is before Jackie Robinson. Story_ID: 373431 Speaker 1: Well, when do you remember recognizing that you were black for the first time, and, and by that I mean that people in life would discriminate you based solely on that purpose, when did that come to you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When it really dawned on me? Speaker 1: When--yes. Speaker 2: In Sabbath school, we had something called the friend for kids when you have a like--I see we were--attended church on Saturday and they were telling us this story about Noah and I was in the third grade, I can remember that very well, I was in the third grade and they told the story about Noah and, and they said Noah was drunk and Noah cursed--not his son, but I didn't realize this at the time. He said, "Cursed be Canaan." Now remember, I'm only nine years old. That kind of made my ears perk up because you know as a nine year old the first thing you would think of: well, why would God even listen to a drunk? Because you're taught not to smoke, not to drink and everything so the two things didn't go together and I was not the only one thinking that, that day because when we went in the boys room, and that's what it was a little boys room, and we went in there you know and you said, "Do you believe that"? Said, "No, I don't believe it," you know and that started me on the quest of really reading and being interested in books. Speaker 1: But help me understand, you heard them say, Noah was a drunk? Speaker 2: No, he was--had been drinking. Speaker 1: Had been drinking. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And he, and? Speaker 2: And his--how the story was related that--now as a nine year old I don't recall exactly how they phrased it, what Ham was supposed to have done, but at nine years old I thought the curse, even though he said Canaan, I thought the curse was on Ham because that was what was put forward in those days that black people were cursed through that. That was taught and I just couldn't understand that. That didn't make sense to me 'cause my [maternal] grandparents [Roxie McArthur and William McArthur] and the people in my community, they--you know they didn't want you to be drinking and carrying on like that and they just you know, they wanted you to live a different lifestyle. Speaker 1: So the curse was dark skin? Speaker 2: Well it wasn't actually--I didn't interpret it that way. I'm just interpreting it at that year--down through those years. I only interpreted it as how could God talk to a drunk, and not only talk to him, listen to them. You, you see that-- Story_ID: 373432 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But what I'm trying to put together is this connection, how did that make you feel second class as a black person? Speaker 2: Because I had heard stories about we were cursed, but as a child you don't kind of put all of those things together but you've heard them, just like for instance I didn't understand at the time when you did something wrong, your grandparents would say, at least--so I was around my [maternal] grandparents [Roxie McArthur and William McArthur] all the time and they would be sitting up on the porch in the swing or in the rocking chair and they would say, "Child, now I want you to come up here and sit right next to me, and I want you to stop acting like the devil." So you knew what that meant, but it wasn't until years later that I understood what they were saying was altogether different than what I was thinking, because remember I said they said, "Stop acting like the devil" (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Stop acting like the devil. Speaker 2: So, it wasn't until I met Mr. Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux], the bookstore owner who started clarifying all of those things for me, because remember I told you I use to come to New York [New York] and I was a wanderer. I use to--they'd tell you not to only go downtown, 'cause you could play stickball and all in front, but I would walk all around you know, and one day I walked all the way to Mr. Michaux's bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York]. So naturally I go marching in his store and that's why if you read some of the things, some of 'em said they had known me so long and everything. They'd known me since I was a youngster and one day I was talking to Mr. Michaux about church, and he said, "You're interested in that?" So I told him the--what happened to me when I was nine years old and he gave me a book. He didn't charge me for it. I have the book 'til this day, it's called 'The Bible Unmasked' [Joseph Lewis]. It took me years to understand it, but (laughter) I still have the book. Speaker 1: So what became your understanding of them saying your acting like the devil? Speaker 2: In the old days, Mr. Michaux told me that the slaves thought that white people were the devil because only a devil would do something like that to a person and say that they own you for life and doing all of those different things, and that's was something I didn't know before and you know it's started coming together to for me because one day he says, I says to him, I says you know, "Why do people always say Jesus? I said, "Even when the preacher gets into trouble with his sermon, he'll say, 'Ah, ah, ah Jesus?'" So he says, "They don't even know what they're saying, because when the olden people use to say Jesus or looking for Jesus to save them, they wanted that slave ship of Hawkins [John Hawkins] to take them back to Africa 'cause the lead ship was named Jesus so you see," and, and for just meeting people and listening to them and--you start getting a different perspective of elders. So after that I use to like to listen to all of the elders and when elders would come around it would be something to listen to them, because they had things that I just liked to listen to them talk. Story_ID: 373433 Speaker 1: So we spoke about your mother [Ruth McArthur] somewhat but one thing you said that I said we'd come back to, we're coming back to now, you said that you remembered her taking you to school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So what is your recollection of her dropping you off at school? Speaker 2: Well, all I know is I didn't wanna stay (laughter). However, after they got me in and after a couple of days it was okay. I liked school and I liked school because I had a best friend. His name was Horace and he--Horace Jackson [ph.] and he and I use to try to best each other in our lessons. We weren't competing against anyone except each other. So we kind of kept each other going and I must add that he went on to do very well in life. Speaker 1: So when you--talking--I'm talking about first grade, what can you remember about the school, what was the name of the school? Speaker 2: It was the Seventh-day Adventist school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's what they called it. Speaker 1: Seventh-day Adventist school. Speaker 2: Yes, and. Speaker 1: And you went there from first to--all the way? Speaker 2: All the way through, yeah. Speaker 1: All the way? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All the way through high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I don't know what they did to us in those schools, but I can tell you what I learned from that school years later. I don't want you think I figured this all out all of a sudden. Most of us that graduated from that little small school became licensed professionals in the North. One fellow he was ahead of us that was in that school, Howard Hodges [ph.], you can Google him. He was a great pianist, he went to Julliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York]. He came out of that school and his brother became a very well-known principal, Benito Hodges, he came out of that school, and there were doctors and lawyers that came out of that school. Now we did not have a lab, they--we had makeshift thing, but what I found out far and later when I was getting one of my master's [degrees] in education, I did not know I was privileged to have a Montessori-type teaching situation because there was more than one grade in the class you know, and we use to laugh and say, "I learned reading, writing and arithmetic and it was taught to the tune of a hickory stick." So you know you made a lot--because that was true--if you did something in school you had to hold your hand out and they would hit you in your hand and not only that you got a killing when you went home (laughter) because you had embarrassed the family so it was quite interesting, that school was. So I remember that and it's just normal things, you know you like to wait until recess to play ball and to do all of things, it was just a normal thing that you liked to do. Story_ID: 373434 Speaker 1: Well you were born in '32 [1932] so and at the end of World War II [WWII] you were almost a teenager. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know and African American men start to come back from war, from the war. Things start to change a little bit. Did anyone in your family go off to participate in the war? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: My father, he fought in the Pacific. In fact I got him a pension because he was complaining about always being ill and I went to--who did I go to see? I know I had gone to see some politicians and I wrote a letter to--they told me to write this person in Washington [D.C.] and I got him a pension. Now, then the family had moved north. Speaker 1: The whole family? Speaker 2: Yeah, well I'm talking about mine, not the whole family. Speaker 1: Your family--okay but your immediate family? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And moved north, they moved to New York [New York], Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: New York, naturally, Uncle Ali [Ali McArthur (ph.)] was here (laughter), so we moved to New York. Speaker 1: So in the late '40s [1940s] is when, and I'm just staying this for the sake of this interview, but we could say the Civil Rights Movement began to gain some momentum? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: When do you as an individual, you could say almost teenager at this time, what is your first recognition of civil rights, I mean did someone call you a nigger, did someone--? Speaker 2: Oh, that was normal, you could walk through the park in Jacksonville [Florida], you couldn't sit in the park. Speaker 1: But you could walk through it? Speaker 2: You could walk through the park but you couldn't sit in it, and sometimes when the white kids would see you they would call you all kind of names and things like that. Speaker 1: So when--were there any parks for African Americans in Jacksonville that you could do out--do activities in? Speaker 2: You may have lots to play on but I don't recall a park. Now if they had one it was never revealed to me, although we did have a movie production company in Florida, Jacksonville. Speaker 1: What was the name of that production company? Speaker 2: I don't recall the name of it, I just knew Oscar Micheaux use to make his pictures there. Speaker 1: We just interviewed some--one of his--the daughter of one of one his leading ladies [Evelyn Preer]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] what was the--? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sister Mary Francesca [HistoryMaker Sister Francesca Thompson]. Speaker 1: Sister Mary Francesca. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Fordham University [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Fordham University, I can't remember her--the mother's name but she was one of the actresses. So that came, came out of Florida. He was making his movies in Florida. Speaker 2: Well I don't know whether he made all of 'em there but I know he made-- Speaker 1: Some. Speaker 2: --some of 'em there, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 373435 Speaker 1: So we were talking about the Civil Rights Movement gaining momentum and you said while it was (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it wasn't so much I didn't--we didn't call it civil rights in those days, what is really was you had all of these soldiers coming back [from World War II, WWII] like my father and they really thought they had gone and fought for freedom, and then there were a few lynchings--see I can remember that. Speaker 1: Who was lynched? Speaker 2: There was a couple of soldiers, I didn't know them. It was in the paper, there was a few soldiers who were lynched while they were still in their uniform so all of those things make deep impressions on you, things that you don't forget very lightly, and but what really made an impression on me was when they lynched Emmett Till. Now that really made--because that was in all of the papers, that was just everywhere and it was the brutality of it that struck me. You know because you say well what kind of people would do something like that? And I, I think that had an awful lot to do with the way I was thinking, the way I went to school, I think that, that had an awful lot to do with it. Speaker 1: Well, Emmett Till was 1955. Speaker 2: Five [1955], right. Speaker 1: Do you--your recollections of that are through the newspapers? Speaker 2: I remember it more through the newspaper because of that gruesome picture they had, now, that's how I remember it so well. Story_ID: 373436 Speaker 1: Did you ever fear for your own safety? Speaker 2: Several times, but things like that--there are things I've done when I was younger I wouldn't do today. Speaker 1: For example (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and I'm sure when you Googled me you found out that I was--had written that article ['Harlem Diary: The Untold Story of the American Nightmare,' Lez Edmond] and won all of those awards for it. Now that's something I--you should hear that tape. See, I have most of that stuff on tape, 'til this day I have that on tape. They played it on the radio, part of it one time and they said you were in a war because in one incident, I'm driving on 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], no Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard]. Speaker 1: Well let's just go back and tell people what the paper is so--I mean the pamphlet you wrote so we--they know what you're talking about. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So explain that part of it? Speaker 2: Yeah, what? Speaker 1: That--explain what you're talking about, you're talking about writing the paper you wrote--are you talking about the riots? Speaker 2: Well to me it wasn't a riot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a rebellion. Speaker 1: A rebellion? So that's what we're talking about. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The rebellion and it took place in? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964] in Harlem [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: In Harlem. Speaker 2: And what happened--well there was a few incidences and I'll tell you it was with me in part of the time. One of the persons that was with me was Bill Tatum [Wilbert Tatum] of the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] and Bill Tatum, you should interview him and let him tell his own story 'cause just tell him you talked to me and he'll tell you stories that you wouldn't believe, but anyway even in the South I had never been around that kind of violence. I'm driving between 125th [Street] and 126th Street on Lenox and the policemen came and used my car for a shield, leaning on my hood shooting at some people on the roof. Story_ID: 373437 Speaker 1: And the person in the car with me was Omar Ahmed that was with Malcolm X, because I had gone by and picked him up at his home, and I just talked to Omar recently because those of us that put the OAAU [Organization of Afro-American Unity] together for Malcolm, we all met for the first time about a month ago, that's why I thought you--the reason that you were calling me 'cause I haven't ever written about the last time I talked to Malcolm because I was on the committee that planned his Sunday meetings on what he was gonna speak about and we had a very big disagreement that night, it was on a Thursday night, and. Speaker 2: We as in who? Speaker 1: There was a group of us that were on that committee. Speaker 2: Who was on that committee, can you remember some of them? Speaker 1: Until this day the only person I'll admit that was on that committee was Herman Ferguson. Do you know Herman, you ever heard of Herman? Herman was on that committee, Herman was the person that I brought into the group because Malcolm wanted him to be head of the education committee and Herman and I had known each other for quite a while. He was a principal at P.S. 40 [Samuel Huntington School] in Queens [New York] and the reason that I told them about a month ago about why they could never catch--Herman was always angry with me 'cause I wouldn't write about that meeting. I said, so I told him the reason that I would not write about that meeting is because it would disrupt some people's lives because the people that were arguing for him to speak--Herman told me 'cause I was not at the meeting, I was still peeved about it. Herman says the ones that were arguing most vigorously against your position were the first ones to jump under the table and leave their wives and children exposed. That's what Herman told me 'cause see I wasn't there, but when they rehearsed killing him I was there, 'cause I have that tape. I have the tape where Malcolm says, "Get out of my pocket." When they rehearsed shooting Malcolm, I have that tape because--do you know--did you ever interview or talk to Brother Benjamin 2X? His last name was Goodman, he passed away. He lived in Virginia, he was the one that introduced Malcolm, 'cause he was his--one that always at the mosque, Mosque No. 7 [Masjid Malcolm Shabazz, New York, New York]. Well I knew Benjamin very well and I knew Earl Grant very well. Do you know him; I mean that was with Malcolm, Earl Grant? Speaker 2: I don't know him, I know of--I haven't interviewed him. Speaker 1: Yeah, well Earl has an awful lot of information because Earl use to give me the tapes and he would say, "Listen you need this because if anything happened to me, someone needs this history," and that's how I have the tapes to of most of the meetings and everything. Speaker 2: So tell me what's on some of these tapes? These are tapes of Malcolm X's--? Speaker 1: About the--these are the tapes of our meetings, even the guests that spoke are on those tapes. Speaker 2: And the meetings being what happened? Speaker 1: Well that was on Sunday--on Sunday it was always planned what he was gonna talk about and whom we were gonna have as guests. In other words like Mohamed Babu [Abdulrahman Mohamed Babu] who was the--that lead the revolution in Zanzibar, which it was Tanganyika [Tanzania] in those days. Him, he's on some of those tapes. It was a young lady we called her Sister Sarah [ph.] which I saw her recently, she was on that tape, and she was only a teenager then. So you had all kinds of people and, and if you will look at 'By Any Means Necessary' there is a photograph that I'm in with a group of people, including Bill Tatum [Wilbert Tatum] and all of them that I had invited because I had the connections with many of the civil rights groups. I was the go-to person if you wanted to--because I liked--you know I just knew some of--I even had in those days I had Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] number, we fell out a little though. Story_ID: 373438 Speaker 1: We were talking, we'd jumped ahead and we talked about Malcolm X a little. Now we're gonna go back and build up to how you got to that place, to be a liaison between the community and the civil rights leaders. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We were speaking off-camera saying that perhaps growing up in a segregated society [in Jacksonville, Florida] had prepared you for your role when the Movement came about. How so? Speaker 2: You're ready? Well, I think that came about because I don't believe that you can be a second-class citizen, and I'm sure I heard someone say that. It's sounds good to me, so I thought about it, and either you're a citizen or you are not. Now I must also confess I never believed in civil rights. See because if you understand constitutions and different things of that sort, civil rights is something someone bestows on you which can be taken away from you if at any time. So I was always a believer in human rights and maybe that's why Malcolm and I got along very well because there's this many things I didn't believe in, and the kind of people that I would talk to, and we haven't gotten to it yet but I was greatly influenced because I hung out in three different bookstores. Now the people in the bookstores may not have been friendly or all that friendly with each other but I knew all three of 'em and for reason it seems that they like adopted me as if I was their son or something. Speaker 1: What were the three bookstores? Speaker 2: One of 'em was Mr. Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux] bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: And where was Mr. Michaux's bookstore? Speaker 2: Mr. Michaux's bookstore was on 125th Street in 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], diagonally across from the Hotel Theresa [New York, New York] and, and all of the big speeches by Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] and all of 'em would be held in front of Mr. Michaux's bookstore because he owned all of that equipment. That stage belonged to him and he would rent all that out to you. Around the corner at that was Mr. Richard B. Moore's bookstore [Frederick Douglass Book Center, New York, New York] from Barbados, and he was considered the dean of the speakers for African American history. He was very eloquent, could write very well. In fact he could write so well, he was writing people's dissertations. This is Mr. Richard B. Moore and then he moved to 23 East 125th Street, upstairs and it was like a hall and everything 'cause we had speakers every Sunday and in--I use to take the attendance, I wasn't speaking yet (laughter), and people like John G. Jackson, Elliott Skinner, Dr. John Henrik Clarke; all of them use to come there on Sunday and they would have these sessions, and I think that's where I really cut my teeth on getting to know an awful lot of people. Story_ID: 373439 Speaker 1: And then the third bookstore was down at 52-54 West 13th Street and it was on--owned by Mr. Andrew Curtese [ph.] and he was from the Soviet Union, he was a Marxist and he had literature from all over the world, and for some reason or another, and he owned the building. There was a restaurant downstairs, he owned the building. His wife played the piano beautifully, his son was very smart, on drugs. All he wanted to do was to sit in that beautiful park [Washington Square Park, New York, New York] there at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and, and play chess. That's all he wanted to do, and whom else? I just happened to go in his bookstore one day. It was not really a bookstore; he was really more of a book distributor and we would just start talking and I let him know I was in grad school [Adelphi College; Adelphi University, Garden City, New York] and everything and he says, "Well, what are you doing in grad school?" and I let him know and he says you should be reading this, you should be reading that and he was the one that really educated me on Europe. It was him and he made me look good but I'm not the only one that he made look good. Guess who else he made look good? [HistoryMaker] James Forman of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] when he was going for his master's [degree], that's also whom was tutoring him (laughter) yes and, and it, it's I think that you must sometimes be fortunate because Mr. Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux] was telling me things, and, and just being so nice to me Mr. Moore [Richard B. Moore] the same thing and Mr. Moore's book on the word Negro and it's evil use ['The Name "Negro": Its Origin and Evil Use,' Richard B. Moore] is a classic. He had a committee, Earl Grant was that committee and there's--you're fortunate to have the original first edition of that book, I, I know it's worth something and they have a photo in there on Earl Grant and Earl Grant is in that photo. So that was a great experience for me, meeting all those different people. In fact he and his wife, I guess they were teaching me culture, had taken me to see Vladimir Horowitz, the great pianist. They took me to see the great pianist Vladimir Horowitz and they were into that just like my uncle that I told you about, the uncle that was the fighter. Speaker 2: Ali [Ali McArthur (ph.)]? Speaker 1: Yeah, him he, his wife was also from the Caribbean and she to use to like to go to those teas. Aunt Ida [Ida McArthur (ph.)] use to like to go those teas on Sunday and that's how I got to meet Joe Louis. I was at one of those teas one time and he sat there and he talked with me, answered all of my dumb questions 'cause I didn't know, I wasn't old enough really ask him an intelligent question and that's how I met Joe Louis. Story_ID: 373440 Speaker 1: Well, what year did you graduate high school? Speaker 2: You know, I don't even remember. Speaker 1: But during that senior year in high school who--how, how did you decide which university you were going to? Speaker 2: You know the days, you didn't decide you were told and what saved me from all of, what really saved me from it was we were going to move to New York [New York], (laughter) and that saved me 'cause I would have had to go to Oakwood [Oakwood College; Oakwood University, Huntsville, Alabama], and-- Speaker 1: (CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay, continuing. So you were saying you were gonna have to go to Oakwood? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But you didn't because? Speaker 1: The family moved to New York. Speaker 2: And why did the family move to New York? Speaker 1: I think it was that they wanted to get out of the South and I think Uncle Ali [Ali McArthur (ph.)] had told them that they could live a much better life in New York, now that's what I think. Speaker 2: So once you arrived in New York, what neighborhood did you live in? Where did you live? Speaker 1: At 120-24 109th Avenue in Queens [New York]. Speaker 2: So that was your introduction to New York City, your living here as in living here (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Living here permanently. Speaker 2: Permanently, so how did you then decide to go to Adelphi [Adelphi College; Adelphi University, Garden City, New York] or how--were you told? Speaker 1: No, someone recommended I told you, someone recommended that I do it. Speaker 2: And you said yes because? Speaker 1: Yes because I didn't know any better, it sounded good to me (laughter). Speaker 2: Well what did you hope to be up to this point? Speaker 1: Well, I knew I wasn't going to be a preacher or a teacher. Speaker 2: Why not those two things? Speaker 1: First of all I didn't believe in preachers and I didn't believe teachers earned enough money for me. They were highly respected but they did not earn any money, pardon me so I liked the money part. Speaker 2: Who had you been reading up to this point, because this is before you had the three bookstores? Speaker 1: No, well I knew Mr. Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux]. Speaker 2: Okay from the summers? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So okay, so you'd been reading the stuff Mr. Michaux? Speaker 1: Yeah but my--if you asked who was my favorite, my favorite author was Langston Hughes, you wanna know the truth. I use to like to reach Richard Wright 'cause I thought he was an excellent short story writer, and whom else did I like? And I liked Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois]. Speaker 2: All black. Speaker 1: Yes, was there anyone else (laughter)? Well you know that's, that's who was influencing me. Story_ID: 373441 Speaker 1: So once you get to Adelphi [Adelphi College; Adelphi University, Garden City, New York] as a freshman, how do you decide on a major? Speaker 2: Well, I was deep into business because of my background. I liked history so I choose those two roads. However, I was always pretty good in math and I would take science courses so that didn't bother me. Speaker 1: Well let me ask you this, how did it feel for you and having being reared in a segregated black community [in Jacksonville, Florida] and now you're in New York [New York] and at university for the first time, and it's a predominately white one? Speaker 2: How did I feel? Speaker 1: How did you feel, did you feel second class, did you feel, oh I'm much smarter than they are? Did you feel, oh we're all the same? Speaker 2: No, no, no I knew before I got there how they were gone treat me. I knew that; my attitude was only two people gone talk in class, that's the professor and I, and the rest of you gone shut up and listen, because most of my classes there was no on in that class looked like me. Speaker 1: So you said you know how they were going to treat you, did you mean poorly? Speaker 2: Well I knew that I would not be a favorite. However, I must say that it was very interesting because some of the best breaks I had came from people. They really didn't talk to me. Like I had a fellow in my class and he says, "Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond], what were your grades last semester?" I said, "Oh I got five A's." He says, "You know people like you don't pay to go to school," and I says, "No?" He says, "No, people like you don't pay to go to school." He says, "Go by and see Professor So and So this evening and tell him you need some money." So I did exactly that and I told him I says, "You know I love Adelphi however, the prices here are just prohibitive." And he says, "We can't lose you, Lez." He pulled a paper out of his drawer, he said, "Sign this," and gave me half of my tuition right on the spot. You know what I did with that money? You know you don't get the money, it goes into your account and if your account is over, they give you the money back after the semester. I bought a Volkswagen, I bought a Herbie (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm assuming that was your first car? Speaker 2: How did you guess (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Laughter) So what year would that have been, do you think? Speaker 2: Well I didn't go to college right away, but the idea that would've been during the peak of the Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 373442 Speaker 1: Well I have some dates here and let's just try to pinpoint it. Okay, let's say--well, Medgar Evers was killed in '63 [1963]. Was that--did that register on your radar? Speaker 2: Yeah that would register, yeah. Speaker 1: So was that before or after had the Volkswagen? Speaker 2: That was--it was around that time. Speaker 1: Around that time, okay. So which of event put the fire under you, which event made you say okay, I've gotta join this movement? Speaker 2: Well I was busy all the time. Speaker 1: Doing what? Speaker 2: Doing what? Oh, going to all kinds of meetings. Speaker 1: But there are oh so few black people on campus [of Adelphi College; Adelphi University, Garden City, New York], it wasn't campus activity? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: I'm talking about this is all outside activity. Like I knew all--well I go to the bookstore. The bookstore was a meeting place. You see it just wasn't a bookstore. I met Cassius Clay [Muhammad Ali] at the bookstore. I met Malcolm X at the bookstore. I met [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory at the bookstore. I met all of those folks at the bookstore. If you wanted to see someone you left a message at the bookstore and then you had Ms. Brown. Ms. Helen E. Brown that was in the bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York], she always dressed in traditional clothes and most people thought that Ms. Brown was Mr. Michaux's [Lewis H. Michaux] wife, but she wasn't, and say for the sake of argument she met you and you were into what you're doing. She'd say, "Well you know you--this is Lez's [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond] number, you should call him up," and she was always connecting young people together. That's how that worked. Speaker 1: So she then connected you or to the right people or someone at the bookstore did? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what were some of the activities, specific activities that the bookstore led you to? Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef Ben-Jochannan], I knew Dr. Ben when he was just--you know Dr. Ben I think was a civil engineer. I knew him when he was doing that kind of work, when he was always writing. He use to lean against the cars and have this big notebook and he would be writing and writing and I would--out with him recently. I took him to dinner recently and he let me see his new work and he's still doing it the same way, still doing it the same way. He says, "Lez, if you need anything in here just let me know and you can copy it." So that's how that worked. Now remember he was not really coming in the bookstore, he use to hang out with the nationalists, you see. Mr. Michaux's people that he hung out with was people like Mr. Leigh Whipper, the old actor, and J.C. Johnson the songwriter that wrote 'Empty Bed Blues' those were some of his friends, and that's how you just got to know people. They use to let me sit in the car with them. Now I did not participate in their conversations, they just let me sit in there, and I would sit in there and they would talk about the--what was going on during the '30s [1930s] and '20s [1920s] and all of that. Now, I had read about a couple of 'em but I didn't let them know I had read about them. Story_ID: 373443 Speaker 1: So was there an incident, was there one point that was a turning point for you that--a pivotal point where you became more of an active participant as opposed to an observer? Speaker 2: I think truthfully, my honest opinion for that question would be I always felt a certain way and when the opportunity presented itself I just took advantage of it, just took advantage of it you know like someone will say, "You wanna go to such and such a meeting?" "Sure." You know, and then you would go. Speaker 1: How did you become so connected with Malcolm X, actually? Speaker 2: I told you I met him in the bookstore. Speaker 1: I know you met him in the bookstore, but I wanna know how the relationship developed and that was one of the questions that came from-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Janelda [Janelda Brito (ph.)]. Speaker 1: --Janelda, and it was what was your relationships with Malcolm X within the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Well, Malcolm didn't believe in civil rights also, and Malcolm was always thought that it was something that I didn't smoke, I didn't drink and certain things I didn't eat and that was all because of my background. So I use to kid him and tell him, I says, "Well I don't know whether I really believe it but it's a holdover from when I was a kid, they trained me very well." So we would laugh about it, but Malcolm liked books, I loved books and I think that's how we really hit it off because he was a reader and I could identify with that. Speaker 1: How did you get on the committee, the committee that at the meetings that would discuss what he would talk about? Speaker 2: Because I told you he knew me. Speaker 1: He knew you? Speaker 2: And he knew some of the things that I was into and what I was thinking about. Speaker 1: And you didn't have to be a Muslim to be on that committee, or did you become a Muslim? Speaker 2: No, he used to let me come to his private meetings at the Nation [Nation of Islam] and I was not a Muslim, wasn't even thinking, in fact I didn't even know who Elijah Muhammad was (laughter) and some of 'em tried to get me to go--they were gonna give me a free trip to Chicago [Illinois] to talk to the Honorable Elijah--I said, "I don't know him. I only know Malcolm," and you know when you, when you're young you have certain ideas, at least I had certain ideas. You know, like I wasn't interested in meeting a lot of people you know. I was just happy in my own little world. Story_ID: 373444 Speaker 1: Which brings us to sort of your professional life along the same--during that same time, what were you doing for a living? Speaker 2: You wanna know? You would not believe this, told you I was pretty good in math right? I worked in electronics. Speaker 1: Selling, repairing? Speaker 2: Now mostly, guess what? Mostly I worked in research and development. Did you read that letter that (unclear) sent? Oh, I didn't show it to you. Well anyway. Speaker 1: So you got a job in research and development? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What year did you graduate Adelphi [Adelphi College; Adelphi University, Garden City, New York]? Speaker 2: Please, when did I graduate? I don't even remember, I don't I'm serious. Speaker 1: Okay but then after that was that the first job, the job in electronics? Speaker 2: Are you kidding? Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: No, I always worked, I worked since I was a kid, even when we had the restaurants, I had to clean the windows before I went to school in the morning (laughter). I have worked all my life, all my life. Now I didn't start out just working in electronics. I have to be honest with you. I used to be interested in short wave radio and things like that. Speaker 1: Did you build one? Speaker 2: Well, truthfully yes, so I used to be involved in that. I don't want you to think I use to hang out with that crowd also and then there was one person whom was just excellent at it. His name was Ellis Bell [ph.]; he has gone on to glory. Ellis Bell was of terrific assistance to me because I remember I had this job and this thing was giving me a fit, and when I say a fit, I mean a fit. I couldn't get it to work at all. So one night I was disgusted and I called Ellis up and I said, "Ellis, I'm trying to get this thing to work across the spectrum," 'cause you look at it on an analyzer, and I says, "Now I know I'm usually very good at figuring out things, but I couldn't, I can't figure this one out." I said, "It looks good half a way across the band and then it falls right off." So he thought for a few minutes and he says, "You're trying to tune it right?" I said, "Yes," and when you tune it, it had like prongs on it like your finger and if when I was tuning it would be like one would be up, one would be down you know. He says, "No it can't do that." He said, "It has to open up like a fan," and then I got then I got the idea. He says, "It must open up like a fan," and it had to be even. Do you know the next day I went to work, I had that thing working. I had it all across the band at the correct magnitude bandwidth, everything, and I had a habit, and see when you're in the lab, see you have a desk and everything but that's in the office, but when you're in the lab you sit like in this high chair, back chair and everything is padded 'cause you can get shocked or whatever and I had a habit of sitting in the chair doing this (gesture) and for weeks I just sat in this (laughter). So the supervisor came to me one day and he says to me, he says, "Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond], that unit works doesn't it?" I said, "Yes". He said, "Let me see it." So I showed it to him and everything and he just smiled. I said, "How did you know it worked?" He says, "Because the last few weeks all you've been doing is just sitting there looking at it" (laughter). Story_ID: 373445 Speaker 1: There was a brother that worked there as a porter. Now there was a couple of other brothers worked there but they didn't have, they had mostly females, like say if I needed something repaired or wanted to change a component, they had a group of women that you go over to and they would change these things for you, and it wasn't many of us working there. So on Friday one of the women would bring in a tablecloth and we would all eat together and I would go to the--this restaurant we liked that cooked fish and all of that so I would go running to the restaurant--'cause see I could, I would not like where you could tell me what to do, 'cause when you work in research and development that's the top of the food chain. So we would sit down and have a nice lunch together and then there was this fellow that was the porter named, we called him Hitter that's because he could hit from the outside, he played basketball and Hitter used to prepare a little place for me. I use to take a nap every afternoon in his little hangout there I used to--he had a little place made for me and Hitter told me one day he says, "I was in the president's office and you know what they said about you? They said that you were the only one that ever made that unit work." I said, "What?" I says, "When they hired me they told me this unit, they were just having problems with it." I said, "They lied to me." He said they were never able to get that thing to work. So that made me a big hit, right? And if you read the letter that Mike, Mike [ph.] was an Englishman. What I did when I worked with Mike, that was for Radio Engineering Lab [Radio Engineering Laboratories, Inc.] in Long Island City [New York]. We built one of the first semi-conductors, high powered power supplies and it was stable from 2700 to 3200 watt- volts, stable which means that when you--if you put it on 3,000 it would lock right in at 3,000 it would not vary at all, and we worked together for a few--it was five of us, one was Hank Ofario [ph.], it was Bill Chang [ph.], it was another fellow from South Africa--Blackman [ph.], I think his name was, yeah Blackman because he couldn't understand why I didn't like him. And I says, "How can I like you when I go and demonstrate against South Africa every weekend?" (Laughter) We use to demonstrate against the-- Speaker 2: Apartheid. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah-- Story_ID: 373446 Speaker 1: You were talking about; just speaking briefly if you wanna sum up the five gentlemen who you worked with [at Radio Engineering Laboratories, Inc., Long Island City, New York]. Blackman [ph.] was the last one you named. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And he wondered why you didn't like him, you said it's because of you know protesting (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was in South Africa. Speaker 1: In South Africa, so he was a white South African? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did--this was in the '70s [1970s], then '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: This was in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: The '60s [1960s], okay. So did he under--did he have any understanding of what was happening in this country? Speaker 2: All he couldn't understand was why I didn't like him because I was very adamant about that. It had nothing to do with working with you or something like that, but I just didn't participate like, say for instance Mike [ph.] was my good friend. Speaker 1: Who was also white? Speaker 2: Yes, but--and Mike was an Englishman and Mike we use to go listen to jazz music together and do all those kind of things together so it was, it, it was just different. It was just different. Bill Chang [ph.] and I, but Bill Chang had children so he was a different kind of a person. He went on to work for jet propulsion lab and, and he, Hank Ofario [ph.], both of--they did very well, very well. Story_ID: 373447 Speaker 1: So moving forward like the movement is, the Civil Rights Movement, the human rights movement has gained a lot of momentum by now (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Movement, yeah. Speaker 1: In '63 [1963] we have Medgar Evers. Speaker 2: The march in Washington [D.C.]. Speaker 1: And the March on Washington, you know Kennedy's [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassinated. Speaker 2: Um-hm. That was in November, I can tell you exactly what I was doing. Speaker 1: What were you doing? Speaker 2: I was in there [Radio Engineering Laboratories, Inc., Long Island City, New York]]--remember I told you that was a radio engineering lab, now what meant was, that's not an ordinary radio. That radio picks up all kinds of signals okay? And I was listening to some of the--I guess they were military signals and I said somebody just said that they--the president has been shot in Dallas, Texas, and they says, "What?" I said, "I just heard it," so you know they thought I'd had been smoking some pot or something when I told 'em that, and it wasn't until two hours later that they told on general--the public, the general public that Kennedy had been assassinated, and I told the people where I work, I says, "Listen," I said, "I heard it, I'm telling you I heard it." And they says, "Oh you didn't hear that," and they let all of us go home, everyone went home. Speaker 1: What were you feeling that day? Speaker 2: You want me to be truthful? It was interesting to me he was the first Catholic president of the United States and did not live through his term. See, the United States has the worst record of killing their leaders. See most people don't know that. The United States has this terrible record, they kill their leaders more than anyone else and that's what came to my mind, about him being a Catholic and he was killed. Speaker 1: Well, Malcolm [Malcolm X] said it was a case of the chicken coming home to roost or something to that effect. Speaker 2: Well Malcolm didn't really say that 'cause I have a copy of that. He didn't say it in his speech the way they say it had been. That was a question that was asked of him at the forum, 'cause that was a Q&A time, and when he was asked about it, he said that was the chickens had come home to roost. That was not in the original speech 'cause you know how I know that? I have a copy of his original speech corrected by his own hand, so I know that that's, that was a question that was asked of him. Story_ID: 373448 Speaker 1: How would you describe your relationship with him [Malcolm X]? Speaker 2: Cordial, I could call him at home so you know that that-- Speaker 1: Well it was more than cordial if you could call him at home. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it was cordial. Speaker 1: I mean did you consider him a good friend, an okay friend, a great friend? Speaker 2: I had the utmost respect for him because the night that we had, I had, we had, I had lost the debate, at least my side lost the debate whether he would speak, he put his arm around my shoulder and walked me over to the corner of the room and he says, "You're very upset over this brother." I says, "Yeah." He says, "Everything is gonna be all right," he says, "don't worry; everything is going to be okay." I will never forget that. I never even told my mother [Ruth McArthur] about that. Speaker 1: So what I don't understand is that they, there--you sensed that there is a rehearsal to kill? Speaker 2: There wasn't think, it was a rehearsal. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the week prior to that. Some fellows got up and one of 'em said, "Get your hands out of my pocket," and that's exactly the same words that was said the following week when he was assassinated, and Malcolm said the same thing, he said, "Hold it, hold it" and then he was shot, 'cause I have that tape also. Speaker 1: The tape of him actually being shot? Speaker 2: Um-hm, 'cause I told you, you should talk to Earl Grant. Earl Grant, if he feels like talking he can tell you so many things until it. Speaker 1: What is your relationship with Earl? Speaker 2: Earl and I just knew each other. Speaker 1: But you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I told you. Speaker 1: --on the same committee? Speaker 2: I told you I knew--Earl was one that was coming also to see Mr. Richard B. Moore. Remember I said he was on that committee. He was on that committee, I was not on that committee, Earl was on that committee. All I did was I was just a person that supported it and would come in on Sunday and things like that, 'cause see they had lectures every Sunday, practically, not year around. They didn't have 'em in the wintertime. Speaker 1: How did you, Malcolm knew you so that's how you became a member of the committee? Speaker 2: Malcolm had known me far longer than that committee came into being. Speaker 1: He knew you from the store? Speaker 2: He knew me from the store, and he always would ask me to come hear him speak. Speaker 1: Now when he asked you to come to hear him speak, was he speaking on a street corner for twenty people or by this time he'd built up the reputation that we've come to know? Speaker 2: Malcolm, they had to block off the intersection at 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], both sides of the street, you needed a shoe horn to get a place when he would speak there. The general public hadn't any idea about Malcolm until Lomax [Louis Lomax] told them, and I knew Lomax's other wife Betty Lomax [Betty Frank Lomax], I knew her. It was when, when--Lomax had gone to '60 Minutes' and told them that--about this group, that was the first time they ever even paid the Nation of Islam any attention, and that--when he would speak or when Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] would speak, there was no advertisement. You did not hear it on WLIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York] or any of those things. It was strictly by word of mouth. Everyone knew to be there and they were there. If you don't believe it go back and look at the photos and see, they were there. Speaker 1: It's kind of like the bus boycott in Alabama when they were gonna boycott the buses the next day they, the night they had only the night before to get the word out to everybody then. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tomorrow don't take the bus. Speaker 2: And until this day I don't understand how that happened so effectively and that's all over. It's like a, it's like something in the culture, it's in the wind, people hear about it. It's very interesting. I have looked at that phenomena and I haven't figured it out yet because it happens so frequently. Story_ID: 373449 Speaker 1: And personally I think that we have gotten away from ourselves. Speaker 2: How so? Speaker 1: I think that we've become too Westernized; we have a colonial heritage and don't wish to admit it. See, I'm the first to confess, I do have a colonial heritage, and I have adopted quite a few of their ideas because what I didn't tell you about too much was my [maternal] grandmother's [Roxie McArthur] side of the family whom was altogether different, 'cause my grandmother and my great-grandmother whom I have photos of were Native Americans you see, and the culture is altogether different, the way they look at things are altogether different. Speaker 2: Can you give me, can you give me an example of? Speaker 1: Sure, they have the utmost respect for animals, the land, how you treat the earth, and some would call it a religion, but that's just their way of looking at life that is wrapped up in the culture, and what they usually do is they--now this is only my interpretation of it. They have the tendency to study a person or a thing. They study it because it has certain characteristics and they learn about those characteristics and that's what they make their decision on and that's why when you read some of their literature they will say to you, well we have studied what you had to say, however, your words did not match your deeds, and that's what would happen. Speaker 2: So having grown up or, or being part Native American you feel--what role would that play in your life later on when it--dealing with people or how did it make you? Speaker 1: Well I never really--to be truthful with you I never even talked about that. In fact I never even mention until people come to the house and they see the photos and they'll say, "Oh my goodness I knew it." Like I've had people say to me, "I knew it, I knew it." I said how did you know it? Speaker 2: How did they know? Speaker 1: They said by the way I conduct myself and the way, and, and one fellow told me he says, you greeted--I use to be very active on this campus [St. John's University, Queens, New York] and therefore I would be at the graduations and big celebrations when we have 'em and how I would greet people is, and I think I still do it 'til this day, I says, "Oh what we were blessed so much today, the great spirit has moved, removed this blanket from the sky and we have all of the sunshine," so it's, it's a different kind of way of looking at things. Story_ID: 373450 Speaker 1: And then I'm familiar with the history of Andrew Jackson. I'm familiar with Osceola, and 'cause I wanted to know how did all of those people develop in Florida because Florida was part of the Spanish Main and at one time during the Spanish Main if you became a Christian they had to treat you differently, so and I love the idea when I tell people I'm from Florida 'cause they have no idea of what I'm referring to, like I mentioned George Hanna [ph.]. George Hanna's father is from the Bahamas, you see. West Indian Joe Baker, his mother was from Barbados, but what they can't understand is Florida was like a melting pot for people from all over. My first girlfriend was a Cuban, and what I know that most of 'em don't know is dark skinned people, brown skinned people did not go to school in Cuba. See, most people don't know that, they, the ones that could afford it, they sent their children to Florida to go to school and had to go to black schools, because one thing about Jacksonville [Florida], I can't speak of all of Florida, I can only speak to the part I grew up in and you must excuse the expression, but I only use this word as a direct quote. If you weren't white you were niggers in Jacksonville. I don't care how blue your eyes were, how straight and long your hair was, and they would tell you that to your face so they were very clear, and this is something I have experienced. I'm not talking about something I read in a book because I have people in my family if they walked in this door you wouldn't know what color they were you know, interesting, and I'm not the only one, all of us have that in our families if we look at it, and as I said I never go around telling people that and about my grandparents and all of that. I don't talk about it. Story_ID: 373451 Speaker 1: So during your time in New York [New York] did you, were you ever involved with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] or any of the other? Speaker 2: Well, let's put it this way, I knew [HistoryMaker] James Forman, I knew H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], in fact there's some filmstrips available some place with me with Rap and I used to knew a lot of people, 'cause they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were in the places you needed to be on something. Speaker 2: You're right (laughter) in fact I was a coordinator for the Freedom Now Party. Speaker 1: I don't know the Freedom Now Party. Speaker 2: The Freedom Now Party got on the ballot in Michigan, in fact the person that ran for governor was Reverend Al, Alfred Cleage [sic. Albert B. Cleage, Jr.]. Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964], that's how I got to know Grace Boggs [Grace Lee Boggs], her husband and all of them, I know--knew all of them. Speaker 1: Did you do anything down south outside of Florida, like in Alabama, Mississippi? Speaker 2: A little. Speaker 1: A little, you know during that time I think those three civil rights workers from the north were killed, Chaney [James Chaney], Schwerner [Michael Schwerner] and--? Speaker 2: Right, I knew people in--yes, I just don't talk about it, but the idea. Speaker 1: Why do you not talk about it? Speaker 2: Not pleasant, very brutal and it's hurtful when you can talk to someone that morning or that evening and the next day someone tell you they're dead. I said, "Well it can't be, I just talked to him last night." "Well they're dead now. The car was blown up." It's--we only hear a fraction of the things that happen to people. Speaker 1: Well you knew them? Speaker 2: Well I had to know the people I'm referring to yeah. Speaker 1: Right, okay Speaker 2: You know like, what was his name? I can't think of his name at the moment but anyway, and the only reason I was choosing him--Featherstone [Ralph Featherstone], his brother was a big Lutheran person in the church. Featherstone was blown up and, and that's why I said--I'd say I'm not a joiner, I don't go around joining. The only thing I belong to if you probably noticed what I belong to the historical society, honorary society, psychology and things of that sort, education, because they let you in because of your grades. Those were the only things and the Golden Key [Golden Key International Honour Society], those are the only things. I don't join fraternities because they embarrass people. They make 'em do all those silly things that I don't think is necessary and when you're fighting for freedom you don't have time for things of that sort. You really don't, it's, it's a serious business, it's a serious business and you, you have to know how to conduct yourself. That's why I say sometimes, it's the--if you have the opportunity, talk to Bill Tatum [Wilbert Tatum], he's an interesting person and he has some interesting information for you. Story_ID: 373452 Speaker 1: So can you take me through the day of the event in Harlem [New York, New York] that you wrote about [in 'Harlem Diary: The Untold Story of the American Nightmare,' Lez Edmond]? Speaker 2: Well what I had observed--see I had noticed things in Harlem before so it wasn't. Speaker 1: What had you noticed before leading up to this? Speaker 2: I noticed that people were getting a little agitated like for instance one time I witnessed a shooting in the subway, Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], 125th [Street], I didn't see the actual shooting and the police came and this was right downstairs where LIB [ph.] was, and I was remember the police were blocking off all the traffic and many drug addicts use to hang out in that block and I remember this lieutenant or captain says to this young man, "Get away from around here," and the fellow was carrying a shopping bag, I'll never forget and he says, "What are you gonna do, shoot me?" He says, "I take a chance every time I stick a needle in my arm, so you don't scare me." You know what he did? The captain got back in his car turned all of those red light out and drove away, and I called, I called Kenyetta [ph.] whom had been in the Nation [Nation of Islam]. I said, "You'd better come up here because someone need to talk to the people here, if you don't it's gonna get out of hand." You know and you know I was that kind of a guy. Like for instance and I'm not gonna mention any names at the moment, but this fellow that was supposed to be in the movement was going to shoot Donald Washington whom we knew as Hassan [ph.]. We were at this black power meeting over in Newark [New Jersey], that big meeting, and Hassan had broken up a news media thing, came in knocked over the cameras, and so this fellow was gonna shoot him, I mean actually shoot him and I says, "I don't think that would be wise." I said, "Just cool it for a moment," and I knew he was a good friend of Baraka [Amiri Baraka] whom was Leroi Jones. So I called him up, I said listen I said, "There's two brothers have a beef over here, can they come over to your place and squash it?" He said, "Sure send 'em over." See it's just that. Speaker 1: How would they go to his place and squash it? Speaker 2: Because they could talk it out. Story_ID: 373453 Speaker 1: So take me through the day of the event in Harlem [New York, New York] that you wrote about. Speaker 2: The day in Harlem--something had happened, it wasn't just that that happened all spontaneously. Something had happened, I don't recall I'm going to be very honest 'cause that was quite some time ago and I don't recall, but anyway I was up in Harlem as usual and things just looked kind of tense and, and that evening I saw people gathering around and I went up to Omar Ahmed's place and I said, "Omar, I says come on, I think things are gonna jump off," and I had my tape recorder and everything and that's how I got all that stuff on tape. All my interviews are on tape, everything and that was the first time that Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef Ben-Jochannan] had gotten national coverage. Until this day he still thanked me for that, it was the first time. Speaker 1: So what did you do? You went to Harlem-- Speaker 2: And things-- Speaker 1: --with your tape recorder. Speaker 2: Yeah, and things, yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: Things jumped off that evening just as I said it would. Speaker 1: And then you, I read that you saw police beating people and? Speaker 2: I saw everything, anything you want--the only thing you will notice about that article ['Harlem Diary: The Untold Story of the American Nightmare,' Lez Edmond], I did not use any curse words. You do not see one of 'em in there. I saw everything, that why I said Bill Tatum [Wilbert Tatum] was--because I gave Bill Tatum a copy of my tapes and he won awards also in Europe 'cause he was writing for some European newspapers at the time because his wife Susan [Susan Kohn Tatum] prepared breakfast for us. Speaker 1: So did this go on for more than one day? Speaker 2: It went on for a few days. Speaker 1: How did you see your role then, what did you think your role was with that tape recorder? Speaker 2: To tell the truth, because the news media did not put us in good light, I don't care what we do. That has been my experience, they always slant it to make you look like you're the bad guy and I saw my role--in fact I never even saw my role as writing for white media. You know the only reason I did that article for them is because attorney Conrad Lynn asked me to do it, and I have the utmost respect for attorney Conrad Lynn. He was the one that called me up and asked me would I do it. Some people had called him and he told them he says, "The only person that I know can give you that article is [HistoryMaker] Lez Edmond," and that's how it happened. I didn't go looking for it, they looked for me. Story_ID: 373454 Speaker 1: So that day happened, that was the political front, what was happening on, in your personal life? Where, where were you working, had you started a family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you notice I have always worked. Speaker 1: Of course. Speaker 2: See that's--yeah that's. Speaker 1: But I only ask you so that we have it on tape so I can hear you say it for yourself. Speaker 2: The reason that I have been able to do things 'cause I always had a job. Speaker 1: Always worked, yes. Speaker 2: I had a job and when you have a job, 'cause I had responsibility, you can afford to be more liberal, 'cause many of the people I were hanging out with did not have jobs. I mean let's get real about that and at one point I didn't work in the summertime. I would take the summer off because I was fortunate enough to earn enough. See I wasn't living beyond my means, I didn't have any habits so therefore I didn't have something that I would be spending my money on. I didn't go out and spend my money on women and cars and all that. The only habit I had, I liked to look neat all time, not fabulous but I liked to look neat and every time you--because see my jobs required that you wore a suit and a white shirt. In those days you couldn't wear. Speaker 1: Couldn't wear a color. Speaker 2: Like no other color, you had to wear a white shirt to work, and one of my mother's [Ruth McArthur] favorite pictures of me is in my white shirt on with two of my colleagues and we're working on something. That was her favorite picture of me, so you can see it's a class thing even there, and when I told her that I was going to resign from my job and start teaching, she had stroke. She didn't speak for me for weeks. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: 'Cause she liked what I was doing, and I guess it was prestigious, I mean I can understand that. Speaker 1: Why did you decide to teach because early on you said two things-- Speaker 2: I didn't wanna. Speaker 1: --you didn't wanna do is preach and teach? Speaker 2: You better believe me; I got invited to the Cape [Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Cape Canaveral, Florida] and for the first time in my life I saw what a real missile looked like. When I saw that thing my heart skipped a beat. That's a building; that's no toy. I said this thing is to kill people. You are not making this to go and kiss someone. This is to kill people. That thing is over three hundred feet high and when you look how they load--I don't know whether you've ever been in that building or not? I was able to sit in the capsule and everything and I'm telling you I have a photo of myself standing in one of the exhausts of a missile and I cannot touch from one end to the other and I held my hand up just to show you how large--now that has five exhaust pipes on it that size, five of 'em. Story_ID: 373455 Speaker 1: --Seton Hall [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey], I'm the one that got him interested in teaching. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I gave him a job. Speaker 2: Well, we're gonna get to that but we're just gonna go back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay you're in, at the Cape [Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Cape Canaveral, Florida] you're looking at this, this missile. Speaker 1: Missile. Speaker 2: And. Speaker 1: I was against the war. Speaker 2: The Vietnam War at this time? Speaker 1: Yes I was against the war, and just so many people were being killed and some of 'em you know, you know them. This is not like--you could go home at dinnertime and watch a live war on TV, but when someone you know is getting killed, it becomes personal. So that kind of turned me off and whenever you see that much killing going on you never know when one side is gonna make a mistake. This country already has the reputation, they will drop the bomb on you and I remember years ago I was watching, I don't know whether it was 'Meet the Press' or 'Face the Nation' and this struck me. Kissinger [Henry Kissinger] was talking to the moderator and the moderator asked him, he says "The United States has an awful lot of Euro dollars out there," and I forgot how many billion or whatever it was and he says, "If that money is called what would happen?" And Kissinger said, "We would go to war." See and I have been around long enough to have studied some history. War means money to some people. Some people are going to make an awful lot of money in a war, and if you really want to know more about it and how that kind of thought process work, you should look at Palmer's [R.R. Palmer] 'History of the Modern World' ['A History of the Modern World'] and look up Rothschild [Nathan Mayer Rothschild] because when Napoleon [Napoleon Bonaparte] got into trouble, Rothschild had a spy there and he's, his spy told him that Napoleon was losing, so Rothschild took us money, and backed the other side and once you understand how that functions, the same thing is going on today. When you look at that, when you look at how you have this terrible minimum wage, all you need to do is to go back and read and see, isn't any of this new, like for instance some people will say, "Well that's only poor people." I said, "Listen, are you familiar with the 1856 election in this country?" The 1856 election in this country when Buchanan [James Buchanan] was the standard bearer for the Democratic Party, that election was about putting all poor Germans and Irish in particularly, into slavery. That's what the election was about. New York people voted for it, that's why the Irish revolted and did not want to go and fight in the Civil War but they don't put that in history books. They don't put in history books the brutality of the slaves, chattel slavery, they don't. You can ask students, what the word chattel mean and they don't understand that and you do--when you look at the brutality like right now as we are sitting here, the big thing is over this congressman [Mark Foley] with the pages. Now imagine a person saying they own you, and how they can abuse you and you can't say anything. We don't write about that very often, I mean in fact you're supposed to forget about it. How are you going to forget being traumatized like that? How can you forget people taking your identity? I can only go so far back in my family. I can only go back so far and that's it. You and I could be relatives and we don't know it because it depends on the what the slave ship needed that day, that's what it depends on and I just feel that there's so much work to be done and when I looked at those missiles and all of that, there has to be a better way. Story_ID: 373456 Speaker 1: And I believe in students. You talk to any students that have had me, they'll know they'll tell you I don't trust older people, because older people like myself we have a pension we wanna protect, or we wanna protect whatever we have, it's always material things, we do not think about what we're doing for our grandchildren and things of that sort and I just feel that we, we need to get back on the right path. It has nothing to do with religion because if religion could solve the problem, it would've been solved long time ago and most religions there's nothing but violence in it. I don't care what religion. There was only one religion in this country that was against slavery and that was the Quakers, and even some of them were slave owners, you see? So, so therefore we just have an awful lot of work to do and that's what I think that I loved about Malcolm [Malcolm X] so much 'cause we could discuss these sort of things. Mr. Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux], Mr. Moore [Robert B. Moore], John G. Jackson, all of these people--see if a young person and you're coming up under people like that they're laying a lot of wisdom on you. You may not understand it at that point, but some place in your life they're still talking to you, all you have to do is listen. They are still talking to you. Like I didn't understand that for many years, that when someone says well the spirits talk to you. It's not some spirit at that moment is coming and talk to you but it has been said to you before, and you come into the light and understand what they were saying to you. That's how I look at it yeah. And then I remember a great leader. He had a meeting and the speech is about him and he says, "You say that your religion is the correct religion." He says, "If it's the correct religion why don't all of you get along?" He says, "We have listened to you so what we would like to do is I want you to go back and you teach all white people not to cheat us and rob us and then you come back and then we may consider your religion." You see that's what I mean like when you study cruelty in religion, who was more cruel that the church? All these torturing things that you're reading about, where was all of that developed? That was developed through the church, crucifying people, so it's, it's just that going to the Cape [Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Cape Canaveral, Florida] and seeing all of those things and thinking about the way that I had been reared. I was like living a contradiction. Story_ID: 373457 Speaker 1: And from that day until this, I have loved teaching, and I'm happy that my aunt lived long enough for me to tell her before she made the transition that she was right, 'cause she told me when I was five years old I was gonna be a teacher. My mother's [Ruth McArthur] sister that was next to her, she told me that I was gonna be a teacher, and I asked her, I said, "Aunt Emma [Emma McArthur (ph.)], how did you know I was going to be a teacher?" She said, "By the way you addressed the other children." Isn't that interesting? And she always told me I was gonna be a teacher, always when I was a little kid. I says, "But I don't like teaching," and--really interesting, and-- Speaker 2: Your first teaching assignment? Speaker 1: My first teaching a-? You know how I started teaching really, I'm talking about legitimately, Lenny McCree [ph.] I worked for asked me to take--I worked with Lenny McCree. Lenny was from England and he was teaching and he said, "Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond], would you take my class?" I said, "Sure I'll take your classes for you," and the people loved me they says and I remember it was, his last name was Buchan [ph.], he says, "Lez, we need you in the system," and that's how I got into the system, that's how I got my file number and everything. 'Cause if you checked it out you'll know that my file number is a very low number so you'll know I've been around for a while. Speaker 2: So how did you get from--how did you get to Seton Hall [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey]? Speaker 1: Some ladies were having dinner together and Judy Miller [Judith Miller] whom was head of the department at Seton Hall was describing the kind of person she wanted to come to Seton Hall. So Charshee McIntyre, I don't know whether you read her book says, "Oh, you need Lez." And, and I owe a great debt to Charshee. I'm happy that we were able to discuss it before she made the transition because Charshee thought so much of me until she says, "I can always tell when students have had you." I she, said says, "Any student come to my class I can tell when they had you for a professor," so I don't know what it was that she picked up about me but it was because of her that I ended up at Seton Hall. Story_ID: 373458 Speaker 1: Then if you notice I had studied with Dr. Carl Rogers, the outstanding psychologist and Dr. Nelson [ph.] at this school had also studied with Dr. Rogers and she phoned me at home one night and she says to me, "Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond], if I offered you a better deal and got you a better deal would you leave Seton Hall [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey] and come to St. John's [St. John's University, Queens, New York]?" I said, "Try it and see what would happen." Now it took her two years to get me in here but she got me everything she promised me and more, everything she promised me and more and I had an excellent dean and I had an excellent chair of my department. My department chairman was Bob Hendrix [ph.]. Now we were not personal friends, but he protected me and even when people said things about me, he would tell me, "It's your damn class and you run it anyway you choose," and the president [Joseph T. Cahill] of the school whom he has gone on to glory also, he was the president for about a quarter of a century here. He had put together a class on this campus of three hundred students and he choose me to take over that class when he--now why he choose he never revealed it, never. And I took over that and was very successful at it like (unclear) the professor of the year and all that kind of stuff, really was--but the students were just so nice to me. The students were really nice to me and I don't take credit for that because it's four of us we use to eat dinner together on Sunday, at least twice a month, and that was Dr. Clarke [John Henrik Clarke], Sister Sybil [Sybil Williams Clark], and Deborah Squire [ph.] and we use to eat dinner together and we use to call it the family and I said, "Family, something has come up at school that I think we need to discuss," and I says, "I was offered this class with three hundred students to teach Western civ [Western civilization]," and Dr. Clarke pushed his chair back from the table and he looked up like this and he says, "I have never taught Western civ in my life but this is how I would do it." All I had to do was to take notes, he choose the book for that class, explained why he choose that book and how he would run that class. So I just was at the right place at the right time. So I don't take credit for that, I just take credit for being able to execute it. Story_ID: 373459 Speaker 1: Well one of the other questions that came up from one of your students, Lisa [Lisa Algarin-Alemany], was what do you remember most about Carl Rogers? Speaker 2: How honest he was, this man--I'll tell you what I really learned from Carl. Dr. Sylvia Gaines whom was really his heart, when I say heart I'm talking about he had the utmost respect, but affectionately we call her Sister Sylvia. We were at one our conferences at Fordham University [New York, New York] downtown and Sister Sylvia and I had asked him to talk to this professor that worked for Union graduate school. When the professor came in that day it was at lunchtime, it was all planned, Carl looked at him and he said (strokes beard), "I don't particularly care for you." So that means they had some kind of--he says, "However, Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond] and Sylvia asked me to do something for you." He says, "Whatever I can do for you I will." I needed to see that and to watch someone of his stature actually practice it and that's why in my classes I allow you to say anything you please. The only thing I will do is press you to defend it. That's the only thing, can you defend it? Now why do I do that? Because you have young people coming out of the joint that will run circles around these youngsters with their degrees and when I say that I'm talking about run circles around 'em and they don't know anything about that most interest--but my experience has taught me because some of the worst head whippings that I have gotten is from people whom did not go to school, 'cause I remember the first time they let me speak on the ladder at 125th Street, now you know to speak on the ladder at 125th Street that's a great honor. They gave me ten minutes on the ladder, and this fellow came over to me and he says, "Young man, that was a very nice talk you just gave." He says, "Do you know where the word Ethiopia came from and what it means?" I said, "No." Then he asked me a few other questions, he was very nice to me, gave me a head whipping, a head whipping and you know who he was? He was the guy that they called Trouble, always spun around in his seat that plays trombone for Billy Eckstine's band, that who it was (laughter), so you see I learned from experience and I enjoy it. Story_ID: 373460 Speaker 1: Did Malcolm [Malcolm X] ever give you any head whippings? Speaker 2: Malcolm gave everybody head whipping, but he, he was so nice, he was really nice like--most of the fellows were jealous of Malcolm because Malcolm could be talking to you--now the sisters would be talking to you and Malcolm would drive up in this big Oldsmobile and the sisters run over (laughter) to talk to Malcolm you know, and when Malcolm talked to you, I don't know whether you ever noticed but he always took out his pad, he had a pad that he'd write down things and he--the sisters would tell him that their husband didn't come home or it wasn't bringing--and he said, "Don't worry sister, I'll take care of it." He would send a few of the brothers down to say that they came to see me and they would: "Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond], your wife came by and says that you've been acting up," and say that I kind of act off--all of a sudden I'm on the ground and they would be picking me up brushing--, "Brother, you fell down or something? What's wrong with you brother? You're a little clumsy." You know so he had an army to back up what it was and I'm just shocked, shocked that no one has really studied how they got people off drugs without sending them to some institution. No one has ever that I know of. Speaker 1: How did they do it? Speaker 2: They did it through working on your mind, they played mind games with you because what they did really was to show you that you are somebody and you shouldn't be dirtying up yourself like that. See and once you start believing it, that's powerful because a little girl had a big thing on me, they asked this little girl one time and they says, "What did you learn in the Freedom School today?" I don't know whether you remember they had things called Freedom Schools during the movement and this little girl says, "Well one thing I learned that no one is any better than I am." Coming from a little kid, you know and she, she had been in Freedom School that day and, and that impressed me. That really impressed me for this youngster to realize that wasn't anyone any better than she was. Story_ID: 373461 Speaker 1: What was Malcolm's [Malcolm X] relationship to the Panthers [Black Panther Party]? Speaker 2: To be truthful with you, I don't really know because see I knew Don Freeman [Donald Freeman; Baba Lumumba] and all of 'em. In fact Life magazine offered me to work for them but the first test they gave me they wanted to write an article on RAM [Revolutionary Action Movement], and you know who arranged that meeting? They even knew what kind of food I like, they took me to this big Mexican restaurant on 50 something Street, and had made all of these offers to me and I turned 'em down, and you know what Todd [ph.] told me? He says you're crazy 'cause that was the equivalent of working for '60 Minutes' today. I said, "What?" He said, "Yes" and I was offered a job with the United States Information Agency, and I can tell you who offered me that job, Howard B. Woods. Howard B. Woods offered me that job and when we were flying over to Dakar [Senegal] in 1966 and he had already checked me out, everything. He came out--'cause he was in first class and he came back and sat with me and talked all night--'cause you fly overnight when you're going into--as you know into West Africa and he talked to me all night. The next morning he says, "Don't go with anyone else. Come with me." I didn't have to go through customs or anything and his Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] limo was waiting, he let me go to the meetings with him and people had come from all over Africa, had his chauffer to drive me to pick up my press pass and everything and all of these people were--and I want you to image it's hot, overhead fans on, and these people, some of 'em were from big news organizations. Now I want you to imagine me as a young man walking in this office and the man asked me what my name and I told him and then all of a sudden this man comes out of the office and says, "Monsieur Edmond [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond], we've been expecting you." Had me in the office, gave me my identity and says, "Oh, and they arranged for you to stay at the Clarisse, the grand Clarisse hotel [Hotel des deputes, Dakar, Senegal] and everything (laughter) and, and it was just funny and, and the person that had given me the information on whom to call was Enoch Waters [Enoch P. Waters], you ever heard of him? He was a newspaper man and I met him at the UN [United Nations] and I told him I was going to Africa he said well this person that you should call and the person he had me to call I can't recall her name. She wasn't home when I first called, her maid, housekeeper answered the phone and guess what I found out about this lady? You know John Lamb the bass player with Duke [Duke Ellington]? John Lamb was chosen by her to be in Duke's band. She brought a tape and played it for Duke and see and Duke was all tied up because his--was almost like his brother was Mercer Cook [Will Mercer Cook] and that's who Mercer was named after and all of 'em came out of that bourgeois background and all of that and you, you know it's, it's just interesting. I have photos of me at the--at his home. Well it's the ambassador's home 'cause Mercer was the ambassador of Senegal 'cause he spoke French fluently and while I was there guess who I hung out with? I hung out with the president's son and I didn't know he was the president's son and we were hanging out having a good time his young people and he was taking me to all of these different places and I was invited to Mali. On the dance floor, this fellow says to me, "Would you like to come to Mali?" 'Cause I knew Kula Bali [ph.]. He says, "You knew my Uncle Kula Bali." I said, "Sure, I know him, your Uncle Kula Bali." He says, "Would you like to come to Mali, I can arrange it?" And he could. Speaker 1: Did you go? Speaker 2: No, but the idea is I was happy he--just because he (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you were asked and he could arrange it. Speaker 2: Right, he could. Speaker 1: The opportunity was there if you wanted it. Speaker 2: Right and, and, and it's just interesting and I met some very interesting people in Africa that affected my life. Story_ID: 373462 Speaker 1: Who did you meet in Africa that affected your life? Speaker 2: To be truthful I don't even know his name but here's what happened. Some young people came to see me one day and they says to me, "We have been watching you, and you are a true brother and some people wanna talk to you and we will come pick you up tomorrow morning at seven o'clock." I said, "Okay," so I was ready at seven. Speaker 1: What year is this in the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966], I was at the art festival [First World Festival of Black Arts, Dakar, Senegal]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was at the African art festival and this is 1966 and he says--so I, I go with him and they took me to a medina, 'cause most of 'em all were Muslims. You know the women eat in one room and the males eat in the other room and that evening we were outside like in the sand and everything, but only you weren't sitting in the sand, but you--that's where you were at and he says he was gonna have like a spiritual meeting, and he had this can with chicken bones. Now you know we know chicken bones when we see them (laughter). He had these chicken bones and he would take these bones and shake 'em and throw 'em down and read them and when he got to me he says, "Do you mind brother if we did you?" I says--I'll tell you exactly what I said, "Well I haven't killed anyone recently or done anything bad so I guess--," you know being all hip you understand coming from the city right, so he says okay and I'm going to tell you what he did to me. Do you know he told that circle about that meeting I had with Malcolm [Malcolm X]. I hadn't told my mother [Ruth McArthur] or anyone and you're the only one that I ever told that that happened, and that's how I knew there was something else going on. Those bones were not, didn't have anything to do with what he was doing. It's just like the people with a crystal ball--had nothing to do with what they're doing and that's how Carl [Carl Rogers] had me in his inner circle of psychic phenomena because to be in his inner circle you had to have an experience of psychic phenomena and that was psychic phenomena. Story_ID: 372556 Speaker 1: So we're gonna pick up with this story and then we're gonna go back. You were telling me about Sister Sylvia [Sylvia Gaines] or how you met her, or you'd given a speech she came up to you and said? Speaker 2: Yeah, she said, "Young man I have someone that I think would like to meet you," and not knowing who the person was she never revealed that to me. She says, "I'm going back home over the weekend and--," but I was gonna be at over there for another four weeks 'cause I was in this--a fellowship program and when I phoned her that's when she revealed to me who she wanted me to meet, and that's how I ended up meeting Carl [Carl Rogers]. Speaker 1: So to take one step back to being Carl's inner circle, one has to have experienced-- Speaker 2: Well I didn't even know he had an inner circle, I have to tell you that. It was one day he was talking 'cause for some reason, I told you he just loves Sister Sylvia, and we were all sitting at the table eating, 'cause remember we had traveled together. We'd been to other countries together, because I was a facilitator and so we were very familiar with each other and he says, "Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond], what do you think of physic phenomena?" I says, "Well first of all it's something we can't really explain." He says, "Anything ever happen to you that you don't really understand?" I said, "Yes," and I said, "It's something that I never even told my mother [Ruth McArthur]. In fact I haven't told anyone that that happened 'cause it's just so unbelievable," and he says, "We're going to meet tonight so I want you to come," and then they had me to tell the story. Speaker 1: What was that world--describe for me this inner circle of people? You don't have to give their names if it's confidential. Speaker 2: But, well I can talk about Carl 'cause Carl was the head of it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: Carl was deep into psychic phenomena. Speaker 1: Which is what? Speaker 2: Which is there are things that happen that you can't explain. You don't have any explanation for them, but you actually experienced it. It's just like having an out of body experience or bi-location. Those are things that people can't explain, but they happen! They'll say, "Oh, a person can't be in two places at one time," but it has happened so many times. It happens, how is that? Can anyone explain that, you know? The same way when I think about some of the elders that I've been around, some of the things that they have said, some of those things are very deep, and I didn't understand them until either I was reading something or talking to someone and they kind of revealed something that made sense to me, you just can't tie it together. You just can't tie it together. Story_ID: 372557 Speaker 1: Like for instance I was reading--I have a Anglo-African [The Anglo-African] magazine from fif- 1859 and I'm reading this story in it and the character in it was a slave and someone asked him about a meeting that they had had about church and he says, "I don't believe that." He says, "God wouldn't give people like that any power (laughter)." That's what he said, and I had to really think about that. I had to really think about it 'cause see some people make you think you know like say for instance someone talk about David, when David saw his general wife [Bathsheba] lying out sunning and how she got pregnant and they tried to camouflage it by sending for the general [Uriah] to come back so he could sleep with his wife and they'd say it was his child, and now this is a story in the Bible, and the general was so dedicated to David that he slept outside of David's room so that means that this whole thing is going to be revealed (laughter). So what David did was send the general to a place he knew he was gonna get killed, you know. So how do you explain something like that to a young mind? I mean that can corrupt a young mind, something, and this is David, but and then David went on and David was--when the child was born the child died and David had been fasting and praying and everything so when he, they told him that the child had died, he went and took a bath, ordered all of his servants to bring him this food and so one of 'em asked him and says, "Why all of a sudden you change." He says, "While the child was yet alive, who knows? Maybe he would live, but now that he's gone he's coming back no more. The eyes will never see him again." Interesting, interesting and you can read the same thing in Job [Book of Job]. Job was a wise man, Job was supposed to have walked off the earth with God. He said the same thing. He said once you go to the grave you are not coming back no more. Very interesting, but people don't read it and I do not know what the figures are at this point, but I do know that not too many years ago there was only two dozen people of African descent that had a doctorate in the Old Testament. Just like slavery days, certain things they don't want you to know you know because what did they teach us? They taught us the gospel where Paul [sic.], "Servant be obedient to your master," [1 Peter 2:18] became a watch word, interesting. So all I want to do is to get the children to think. Get our young people to really think. I don't care what you're thinking, and you'll say, "Well why do you say that?" Because you know something about the human mind, once you can think usually the scale balanced toward justice because you will come to an understanding that what you'd been thinking all the time is not true. Very interesting and you'll say well how do you know that? Because I had the opportunity to ask Arnold Toynbee a question, and I asked him, now you know he was supposed to be the last word in historians right? He had written ten volumes on it. I says, "In one of your volume you stated that African people have never contributed anything to civilization. Do you still believe that?" The moderator got upset and interfered and to his credit Toynbee waved him off and admitted that he had said that but he no longer took that position. So, it's just interesting how people can come into certain knowledge and it depends on how you approach them. Story_ID: 372558 Speaker 1: How did you move from history to psychology? Was it Carl [Carl Rogers] a major influence? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, I was at a conference and I met a gentleman whose wife worked in the next office from me and he says to me, and we were sitting next to each other at the conference table, and he says, "Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond], I heard so much about you from my wife." He said, "You know what you should do? You should combine what you're doing with psychology," and I just thought it was a great idea, and that's how it happened because if you notice my degrees, I had no idea I wanted all those degrees. It was always someone influencing me. How I have the master's [degree] in education, it was Ruth Muller, Dr. Ruth Muller [ph.] had heard me speak. Now I didn't know the woman even knew who I was, and one day I had gone to see her about something and she says, "You know you should get a master's in education," Dr. Ruth Muller and she says, 'cause she was getting ready to retire, and she says--and I said, "Why should I do that?" And she says, "You would make an excellent teacher," and then she revealed to me she had heard me give a talk in District 5 in Harlem [New York, New York]. You see how things happen, and I had sworn I would never go back to another classroom (laughter), and that's how it happened. So sometimes I think that things are out there, it depends on do you hear them? Story_ID: 372559 Speaker 1: Have you experience any other psychic or psychological phenomenas since the African trip? Speaker 2: Only what other people have, but they don't really think about it. I can tell you something that happened to me recently. I had gone to the store to get some spinach. I love spinach you know, raw spinach and went in the store and bought everything except the spinach, and it was the same spinach that--I wouldn't have said that I'd have gotten sick, but what was it that made me completely, because I didn't go to the store for those other things and I purchased other things, now that's psychic phenomena. What blocked that out of my mind? And it wasn't because I didn't pass the department 'cause you see it soon (laughter) as you go in the store. You know so it's just interesting how things like that happen, and I remember one time a person pointed a gun at me and was gonna shoot me and it's something just happened and he didn't shoot me 'cause I always ask people, "You ever face death." I said, "In particular when someone can kill you and no one is gonna do anything about it, not even look for you." Interesting, so we can't explain things of that sort, they're just unexplainable. However, I do think and I really believe that since we only use 5 percent of our brain, I think that a book like 'From "Superman" to Man' by J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] makes an awful lot of sense, because we've been dumbed-down, we don't know the power of the brain and I'm speaking from experience, we don't know the power of the brain because you can bring many things into being just by willpower, willpower, 'cause I've been told many times that I couldn't do such and such a thing, and I can say this. Story_ID: 372560 Speaker 1: I worked for, not long, but I remember I went to work for a bookstore here in New York [New York], very famous one and the fellow says, you know what he told me? He says--he must've obviously watched me around books and he says, "You should treat those books like blocks of wood," and I quit, and I'll tell you why I quit. He was Jewish, had a bar mitzvah and the first thing they teach them is to have knowledge. Now why would he tell me not to have knowledge? 'Cause he didn't even know that I knew anything about--see he assumed that I knew nothing about that when all of these people that I've known, that rabbi, I knew Rabbi Parrish [ph.], I knew the people that were in that temple (laughter). I told you Mr. Leigh Whipper, Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef Ben-Jochannan] all of these people are Hebrews. Speaker 2: So you bring up an interesting point which never even, I wouldn't have talked to you about but why do you think there is still today a certain level of animosity between blacks and Jews? Speaker 1: It depends, I don't really know, it depends, see what we can Jew, there no such thing as a Jew. You can be a Hebrew but that's all that's something new. You have what they call a Sephardic Jew. See the Jews that came over here originally were not Europeans they were Sephardic, some of 'em were our color, just like if you read about Spinoza [Baruch Spinoza]. It says, but Spinoza was a black man. You ever read that? You didn't? Well, that's just Spinoza. It's wasn't that he was a black man, Spinoza was a Sephardic Jew and there's a difference between a Sephardic Jew and (unclear) because in Israel today mostly all of the presidents of Israel has been either from Germany or Russia, all Europeans and you have people in Israel is very dark, but they're Sephardic and they're prejudiced against them and they're in the military you know, so you know like people just don't know that you know certain things and particularly when you have traveled. In fact if you want to take a shot of it I brought something for you to look at. You wanna take a shot of it? In fact I'll tell you what I brought for you, I brought an Ethiopian Bible ['The lives of Maba Seyon and Gabra Krestos'], only 300 copies wherever published. I own copy number 278, I brought it for you to look at you know and it's, it's just that the way education is being dumbed-down our children will stay in slavery and everyone else is gonna be in slavery. Story_ID: 372561 Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the future and African Americans (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now I'm not being facetious; I don't believe in hope. Either you diligently work for something or you don't. You don't achieve anything by praying and all of that. You achieve things by working for it and you know who really drilled that into my head, Mr. Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux]. Mr. Michaux drilled that into my head, he says, "Brother," he always called me brother, he never called me Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond], he called me brother. He said, "Brother," he says, "we're always on our knees." He says, "If you had a God would you have a God and you want you want someone begging you all the time?" He says, "You can help others when they help themselves." I heard that, and Mr. Michaux was the kind of person that most people were sleep on, most people don't even know that Mr. Michaux was a millionaire, most people don't know what. Not only that, Mr. Michaux didn't have to pay rent, by order of Nelson Rockefeller, the governor. See I know things that people don't have any idea that was going on. Mr. Michaux when he use to take care of business and have to go to Washington [D.C.] with him, you know who he would call to go with him? Me. He treated me as if I was his son. Before he made the transition he called me up one day that's when his store [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York] was moved over to Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard]. He called me up and he says, "Brother, what are you doing?" I says, "Nothing at the moment" 'cause I use to go by his house on Thursday when his help was off and he'd drink his brandy and tell me all kind of stories. So he says, "I want you to go downstairs in the basement and I want you to choose any books you want and put 'em by my desk." Now this is in the basement. He said, "Put 'em by my desk." I said, "Okay." He said, "I'm gonna come in Saturday and you meet me there and I will add 'em all up." I said, "Okay." I choose five cartons of books out of his basement and he was one of those old time people. He'd take a long strip of paper, a thin strip of paper about this big, but it'd be long, add everything up by hand and he got to a Bible. Now I happen to know that Bible was worth $50. I know that. He put down $7.50 so I stopped him. I said, "Mr. Michaux I have to say this, I know that Bible is worth $50. I know it," and he had his desk downstairs and had this huge chair, swallowed him up. Now Mr. Michaux was the same stature as Haile Selassie, same complexion, everything. 'Cause I know I've talked to Haile Selassie at the Schranto Theater [ph.] in 1966, walked right up to him spoke with a very thick British accent. He says, "Brother, why do you want that Bible?" And I says, "I don't really want the Bible I want the first two page. That Bible was published in 1850 in Savannah, Georgia and the first two pages talk about the greatness of Africa." I said, "That's a contradiction." Turned back around, "I know what I'm doing $7.50," (laughter) you know so. It's some--again it's, it's your attitude-- Story_ID: 372562 Speaker 1: Because he was the one that arranged for me to go to Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] for the summer and some work. Now no one would have never thought he had that kind of connection. Speaker 2: How did he arrange it? Speaker 1: He knew the curator and I had held all the correspondence with Marcus Garvey and Booker T. [Booker T. Washington] in my hand. They brought the original box out, some of it they let me even copy, yes, that was arranged by the brother, he arranged that and at one time I had in my possession a full length film of Oscar Micheaux. Speaker 2: And where is that film now? Speaker 1: Back to where it belongs, it was Mr. Michaux's [Lewis H. Michaux] film he loaned it to me. I had all the reels, you know it came in those very heavy boxes that someone-- Speaker 2: A metal case. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and Mr. Michaux was some man and I was so happy that he and J.C. [ph.] and all of 'em. Speaker 2: How did you meet Mr. Michaux in Jackson--? Speaker 1: I told you I used to go. Speaker 2: In Jackson, yeah. Speaker 1: I use to go to his store, and as I said he knew me when I was a youngster, snotty nose. Speaker 2: Oh, actually I, I got it now, I didn't mean Mr. Michaux. I was thinking Oscar, the-- Speaker 1: I never met Oscar. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I met his wife [Alice B. Russell]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I met his-- Speaker 2: But that's whose film you had? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It was Oscar's okay. Speaker 1: I met his wife only through Mr. Michaux. Speaker 2: Now what kind of name is Michaux? Speaker 1: French. Speaker 2: French, so he was French? Speaker 1: He was from Louisiana so he had that background. Speaker 2: Was he light skinned, dark skinned? Speaker 1: He was light skinned, I told you he looked just like Haile Selassie, same stature and everything. Speaker 2: Looks and everything, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, Mr. Michaux. Speaker 2: And so he spoke Creole? Speaker 1: Mr. Michaux spoke a lot of things but people didn't know it. Mr. Michaux was a big ladies' man and how I found that out is I went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] with him once and I found out he use to run an after-hours joint so most people didn't even know that about Mr. Michaux, 'cause we called him the little professor. Speaker 2: Well how did he come to opening a bookstore? Did he ever tell you the story? Speaker 1: He was disenchanted with the church because had been a figure 'cause his brother was Lightfoot Michaux [Lightfoot Solomon Michaux], the one that always had that thing, "Happy am I," that built the projects down in Washington [D.C.]. Well his brother was there and he just took another path and he thought that we didn't read and I, I have him on tape where he had tears in his eyes and he saying what gratification he's gotten out of owning a bookstore and he told me the story about one day a man came in and--said, "Listen, here's my son. What book would you recommend to him?" And he say he sold him a book called 'How to Become a Doctor' [ph.] and years later that young man came back and said, "Mr. Michaux you don't know but I'm the one that came into your store and my father brought me a book and recommended 'How To Become a Doctor.' I want you to call me anytime, here's my card." Doctor So and So, you know so he impact on many people lives. He impact on having bookstores started around the country. He helped people start bookstores. People don't know that side of Mr. Michaux. Mr. Michaux was some man. He was really some man, he was very quiet. He didn't like people to know it but he liked his brandy and he, he liked to relax, like just to sit around and talk and things of that sort. So it was really interesting. Story_ID: 372563 Speaker 1: So when you look back over what you've done up to this point, what stands out? Speaker 2: My former students, I have students that still call me from over a quarter of a century ago and that's gratifying, 'cause usually when they leave school you don't hear from 'em anymore. I know their--I know their children and here their children are getting ready to have children and that's a good feeling. Isn't that something? You know you're not interested in anything else and I think that they keep me going, they really keep me going. Speaker 1: So you're kind of like Mr. Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux]. Speaker 2: Am I? Speaker 1: Well you inspire all these students and they're coming back to say, "This is what you've done for me." Speaker 2: Well, you know I, I really don't thing about it you know like some--they come and they tell you something you know but all you're doing is, because every year you have a new crew (laughter), you have a new crew. Story_ID: 372564 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, if, in the last minute we have on this tape what wisdom would you like to leave with young students today that will see this (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well first, I don't know whether I have any wisdom, truthfully, I'm being very honest I don't think I know whether I have any wisdom. I don' give advice, I make suggestions and I just try to be myself, you know I don't take all that stuff serious and I remember Truman Nelson [Truman J. Nelson] called me. You know he was a writer. Truman Nelson called me one time and he says, "Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond], what do you think of some of your work is at such and such a place?" I said, "Nothing." He said, "That's why we like you don't take any of this serious." I said, "No, because as soon as they don't need you anymore they discard you," because I've work for Antonioni, Michelangelo Antonioni. When he made his first film here in New York he hired me as a consultant 'cause he had seen some of my work on Italian TV. Took me all over when he was gonna make (unclear) I flew all over with him. I remember when I went to Camelback Inn [JW Marriott Scottsdale Camelback Inn Resort and Spa, Paradise Valley, Arizona] when that young lady saw me, she was fumbling and everything and I says, "Excuse me," I said, "it seems that you were a little confused." I said, "You mind giving me the key so I can take a shower and you call Los Angeles [California] and ask them what I look like?" People had called the social secretary, wanted me to have dinner with 'em and you had to get dressed for dinner. Story_ID: 372565 Speaker 1: You were at the point in the story where you're at the hotel and you said, "Call L.A. [Los Angles, California], look give me the key I'm gonna take a shower." Speaker 2: Yes, and I asked them to call California to ask 'em how I looked because it wasn't only that I had this beautiful layout in Arizona, I had a car, a helicopter was gonna pick me up the next morning to take me out over Death Valley [California] 'cause ca- Antonioni [Michelangelo Antonioni] was thinking about shooting a scene out there (laughter) so it was just, it, it was just something and as I said people wanted me to have dinner 'cause they wanted to find out because most 'em asked me, they says, "Are you an actor?" I says, "No." They said, "Well what do you do?" I said, "I'm a writer," and you know that would take them by surprise because we were flying all over the place. We were in San Francisco [California], we were in Los Angeles [California], and I remember I called up Benny Carter, the musician and I told him I had lost Joyce's [Joyce Carter Mills] number. So he gave me Joyce's number and I called, 'cause Joyce and I had been friends since we were sixteen so I took her to dinner that evening and she had divorced her first husband and she married this fellow that was Mills, he was an attorney, so we laughed about old times and things that we had done and you know just different people because Joyce and them always thought I was gonna be a musician 'cause I was around so many musicians and knew so much about it and I says, "Well you weren't paying me any attention 'cause that was the last thing I thought about doing because that life I don't you know all that traveling." I said, "I don't like that. I wouldn't live too long I don't think." And that was about all about-- Speaker 1: What was the title of the film, the title of the film that you were working, the movie that you were working on? Speaker 2: Oh that was 'Zabriskie Point.' Speaker 1: And what year was that, do you remember? Speaker 2: Sure, that was in 1966. Speaker 1: Sixty-six [1966] is a big year for you? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, so that was 'The Breezy Point' [sic.] after--and you had recommended? Speaker 2: Kathleen Cleaver and until this day she doesn't know that. Speaker 1: Now how had you had gotten--how did you see her, where did you see her in? Speaker 2: Because, now if you wanted to see me what did he want to see me about? Different people I know, right (laughter)? That was the reason why he hired me because that's what he wanted to make his picture about and so I mean, let's get real. He wanted me because of the people I knew. Story_ID: 372566 Speaker 1: So you said, looking back, one thing that stood out were the students but as far as accomplishments do you, do you take pride in any of the things you've accomplished? Anything that feels really good to you that you've been able to do? Speaker 2: My health has been reasonably good, my family hasn't given me trouble, now who can ask for anything more than that? If I wanted to go for the money part, I would've made other decisions 'cause I had the opportunity to make far more money so I think that I made the right choice, that's how I feel. Speaker 1: What regrets do you have? Speaker 2: Not sending my daughter [LezAnne Edmond] to and having one of her degrees from an all-black traditional school [HBCU], that's one thing I really feel badly about. Speaker 1: And why? Speaker 2: Because she has never experienced going to school where you meet people that look like her that have been in school for generations, generations, you know like five different generations have graduated from the same school. She needs to see that and I'm very disappointed that I have never taught at a black school, and I have always wanted to teach at a black school. You see so you do have things that you did not accomplish, however, it just seemed like the opportunities--'cause see I never looked for a job, I have to be very honest about that. I haven't looked for a job in--I don't even remember the last time I--. I could lose a job, I have got fired on jobs and had another job. Speaker 1: Monday (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, without me even looking for it, and I'm being very honest, without me even looking for it. In fact the--when I was telling you about working with Mike [ph.] and all of 'em [at Radio Engineering Laboratories, Inc., Long Island City, New York], I'd gone for an interview, I took a friend of mine with me and when I--during the interview, the man says, "Well what did you work on last Lez [HistoryMaker Lez Edmond]?" So I says, "Oh, we worked on a high powered power supply," and he says "How many volts you said it was?" I said, "Well it locked in at 227 to 3200, but it could higher or lower, but that's to drive transmitters, that's what those power for--," and he said, "You did, is, and one person could pick it up?" I said, "Yes one person could lift it up." He says, "Can you draw it?" I said, "Of course I can draw it." So I showed him how we stacked power dialed, tied all of the collectives together so it'll take the amperage and he got up from his desk, walked out of his office past his secretary and he said to buddy that we had been friends for years--for many years, he was in the Nation [Nation of Islam], George 39 X and he says to him, "Are you with him?" He said, "Yes," he said, "you're hired too," and put us in charge of the job. We could, we could work seven days a week if we wanted to. We could work ten hours a day, seven days a week if we wanted to. I would not lie to you. All of us were young, all of us had nice looking cars, had nice looking women too (laughter). Story_ID: 372567 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well we didn't talk about your personal life and we should use the last ten minutes to do so, 'cause you spoke about your daughter, but you have a couple of children. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Let's speak about them as much as you can. Speaker 2: Well, our son died and it's not that I'm sentimental or anything I just don't talk about it and it must've been a reason for it because they could've been killed in a war or something, and my wife divorced me and I don't blame her. We're still very good friends. My daughter still has a nice relationship with her mother and we all go out to dinner sometimes together you know so it doesn't bother me, it doesn't bother me at all and the reasons why I haven't got--didn't remarry, the reason I didn't remarry is very honest, I thought that it was unfair for me to wanna go back to school, do different things and have a wife and she may want to have a child or something and that's not fair. At least that's how I looked at it. So I don't regret making that decision. I do not regret making that decision, but I do remember my wife and she used to say to me, "You go out every Saturday morning and you go look at books and things." You know so that's kind of sensitive and then one time she told me she says, "You love your daughter more than you love me," and that kind of hurt my feelings you know and I says, "Well, why would you say that?" She says, "If she turn over too hard your foot is on the floor, (laughter) and you're running into her room." So you know some of those things are kind of biting you know and, and she was telling the truth now because remember we lived pretty well, I'm not gonna--in fact we lived near here. We use to send LezAnne [LezAnne Edmond] here for those programs they have in the summertime we use to do that you know so, you know sometimes it's not that you're earning a lot of money but you have discretionary funds and sometimes I think we, we kind of lose what our priorities should be, now that's how I look at it I'm not advocating it for anyone else, but that's it and, and I've met some beautiful women. When I say that I'm talking about character wise and could've gotten married again but I just choose and I told 'em I said I don't think it would be fair to you because it's like I have a habit and it's very difficult to break habits and I remember one time (unclear) Ms. Hill, she was the sister who incorporated putting black books and all of these libraries here, now you know there isn't any organization more conservative than the library. She hired me as the historian, and you know why she told me she hired me? She says, "I saw you looking at books one day and just the, the way you handled them I knew that you loved books." Now, isn't that something? And that never left me so I said see that, I must be addicted, it must be like an addiction. So that's what happened you know. Story_ID: 372568 Speaker 1: Well, we thank you very much. Speaker 2: No, I thank all of you for coming here and being so nice to us. Speaker 1: Well, you're wonderful to us. So you have to leave me with one good, upbeat story. Speaker 2: One upbeat story? Speaker 1: Yeah, something that makes you feel good. Speaker 2: Makes me feel very good? I came home one day from Seton Hall [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey] and I was chair of my department, so you know that's a grueling drive for one thing, 'cause that's not easy driving going from here to Seton Hall and I don't know I must've been tired or something or my daughter [LezAnne Edmond] saw something and she says, "Dad you're not a spring chicken anymore and I don't think you should be making that drive every day." So I don't know 'cause she never revealed that to me and would you believe my phone rang that weekend it was Dr. Nelson [ph.] calling me on the phone to come here [St. John's University, Queens, New York]. Now isn't that something? All my daughter said to me was just, "Dad I don't think you should," and you get sensitive over that 'cause you--suppose you fall asleep at the wheel, you're sitting--you're driving where all those trucks. It's not like driving on the Palisade [Palisades Scenic Byway] and that scenic drive. Oh, it's nothing like that, it's hard driving and I think that that's a wonderful story to tell because I'm still around, because I don't think I would've still been teaching had I been at--no, would've been too much for the old man. Story_ID: 372569 Speaker 1: What we're looking at here is like a corsage of Thompson, George Thompson who the abolitionist had visited the United States and there was a reward put on his head for the first person to lay violent hands on him, and whom you see supporting him is Wendell Phillips (unclear) and Theodore Parker, and the letter is in his support is in the center and it's signed by the three persons that their photo is present. Speaker 2: That photo is, was taken in Paris [France] and that's a few of the members of Ray Charles' band. The short fellow in almost the center there is John Hunt that plays flugelhorn and trumpet. Speaker 1: I have to. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: That is me with the lady on the left, is the coach of the basket- lady's basketball team. The young lady on the right is a player for the St. John's [St. John's University, Queens, New York] women's basketball team. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: On the right that's Dr. Clarke [John Henrik Clarke] and his wife, Sister Sybil, and on the left, that's Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef Ben-Jochannan] and myself. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: On the right, that's the outstanding attorney, Johnnie Cochran, and the person on the left is myself. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Thank you. Speaker 1: That's Dr. Clarke and his wife, Dr. John Henrik Clarke, and his wife Sybil Williams Clarke. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's Dr. Clarke on the left, and that is attorney Conrad Lynn on the right. Speaker 2: That Felipe Lopez, the basketball star on the right, and of course, that's me on the left. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: We are looking at 'The lives of Maba Seyon and Gabra Krestos,' and this is one of the oldest religions of Christianity in the world. It's the Coptic church and it was loaned to Dr. Budge [E.A. Wallis Budge] by the owner of the original manuscript and it was published in 1898 in London [England]. There was only 300 copies of this printed. The copy that you're looking at is copy number 273 and I don't really recall how long it's been in the family, but it's been in the family for quite a while. Speaker 1: This is Maba Seyon sitting under a tree by the marketplace. Speaker 2: Is Maba Seyon in this Jesus Christ? Speaker 1: She's like the mother. Speaker 2: Mother, she's the mother. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: She's the mother of Jesus. Speaker 1: Figure, yeah. Speaker 2: And then who would be Jesus on this? Speaker 1: That would be Christ. Speaker 2: Christo. Speaker 1: Yeah, (unclear). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE: That's someone everyone can relate to. Speaker 1: What we're looking at is the celebration, Ethiopian and Egypt's style of celebrating Palm Sunday. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Can you see it? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right. We're ready, Jim's [James Salnave] ready. Were you gonna read it? Read it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Read it. Speaker 2: Oh, what you're looking at the bottom, is you're looking at St. Michael, St. Stephen, and St. Johns. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. I found something on police brutality in the background on this (unclear). Speaker 1: That's Ramparts magazine in 1964 and it's on the disturbance in Harlem [New York, New York] and that other side of the picture is a picture that was outside of Mr. Michaux's [Lewis H. Michaux] bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York]...