 Story_ID: 6895 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I am the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our Videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing are Julieanna Richardson and Monet (ph.) Farr. Sir. Could you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Mel Farr. M-E-L F-A-R-R, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: Eleven Three Forty Four [November 3, 1944] and where were you born? Speaker 1: Beaumont, Texas. Speaker 2: And what is your occupation? Speaker 1: I'm an automobile dealer. Speaker 2: And what is today's date? Speaker 1: Today's date is August 20, 2002. Speaker 2: And where are we? Speaker 1: We are in Ferndale, Michigan at Mel Farr Motors. Story_ID: 6896 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food? I would say my favorite food would be--I don't have a favorite food--any favorite foods (laughter). I really don't. I eat because you need to eat. I am not particular about any one specific thing. So I--I like to eat. I like good food but anything particular, no I couldn't say. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes. Yellow. Speaker 1: Yellow? Speaker 2: Yellow. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is probably spring. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination is the Bahamas. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. You are only going to earn today what your skills and efforts entitle you to and no more. Story_ID: 6897 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your beginnings and can--can you give us the names of your parents and spell them for us please? Speaker 2: My mother, Doretha Frye. D-O-R-E-T-H-A. She's eighty-one years old. My father, Miller Farr, Sr. M-I-L-L-E-R, F-A-R-R, Sr. He passed away September 5, 2001. Speaker 1: How old was he? Speaker 2: He was eighty-seven years old. Speaker 1: And (what?)--was your father born--what--what--where was your father born? I know you were born in Beaumont, Texas. Speaker 2: My--my father was born in Newton, Texas and Mother was born in Call, Texas [both in Newton County, Texas]. Speaker 1: Now, did they have a story that they passed on to you about how they met? Speaker 2: Yes, Dad and Mom met at a--at church. Yeah, they met at church, because back in those days that was probably the only gathering that you could meet everybody in the area is--it was at church. So, that's where they met. Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us a idea of what your mother was like? Speaker 2: My mother is probably as strong of a person of I've ever known. She's very organized. She's very disciplined, was a very hard worker. My mother worked as a, a domestic person for all of her life until we moved out to California and then she worked as a sales person at a, a clothing store. Story_ID: 6898 Speaker 1: What about your father [Miller Farr, Sr.]? Speaker 2: My father probably did a little bit of everything. As a kid growing up his mother died when he was nine years old and he had a sister who was two years old, and his father left him and his sister. So my father raised his sister and himself from nine years old. So, my dad growing up had all kinds of jobs but as I know from my--from the jobs that I know that he had, he was a cement--cement truck driver in Beaumont, Texas and when I went to UCLA he followed me out to California and I got him a job at UCLA as a worker in buildings and grounds. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there--do either one of--? Speaker 2: But one of the things that I must say about my father along the way in the jobs that he did have. He always had that entrepreneurial spirit. He had the ability--the mechanical ability, so he would buy cars and he would sell cars and he would sell those cars in the front yard of our home in Beaumont, Texas. So, he got his dealer's license in 1960s--60--selling used cars. So, my father started out in the--in the used car business and he would sell the cars and he--he would take as much as money as the person have and they would come every week and make payments on the automobile. So, even as a--as an individual who had no theoretical knowledge, he had an, an entrepreneurial spirit and I--I personally believe that that's why I've been able to become a fairly successful entrepreneur and I think that--I got that from my father because he had that entrepreneurial spirit. Speaker 1: Yeah, he--he apparently had it developed at an early age--at nine years old he had to raise his sister by himself? Speaker 2: Yes. My dad has always been a kind of a guy that he would find a way to succeed and that I think was something that I inherited from Dad. And he told me and he said, "Son, you know if you can go to school and you can get an education and he said with the common sense that you inherited from your mother and myself, you will be a hard person to beat." So, Dad in his way was very instrument in my being what I am today. He's always said, "You know, Son, you--you gotta take a chance. You know, if you don't take a chance, you'll never know if you're going to be successful or not. So, go out there and--and give it the--the very best that you--you can and I know that you'll be successful at this thing." Speaker 1: (So?) did--did your father have any stories or any--anything that--that he--any--any stories about your ancestors going back to--through Reconstruction--back through slavery? Did he have any stories about you know what they--you know where they were and what they were doing in slavery period and that sort of thing?) Speaker 2: Yeah, my father always talked--talked about his grandmother and his grandmother was a slave and she died--was not--she--she was killed early as she was growing up because she was a kind of a person that wanted to be free and she would not back down from her white boss--bosses you know, and eventually it got to the point where they felt that she was a problem within the slave camps and you know she mysteriously disappeared and my father said that he thought that she was murdered. Speaker 1: (Now?) she--was that in Beaumont? Speaker 2: No, that was--he didn't know, you know, it was--it was stories that he was told about his grandmother by his mother. Speaker 1: Any other stories that--that he had--that he imparted to you about his ancestors? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, he had--you know, Dad talked a lot about the fact that his father grew up--his father's father grew up as a slave and that there was not a real connection--family connection because of the fact that you were bought and sold you know, so a lot of that history that one would probably learn from their--their mothers and fathers and grandfathers you know just was not available because of the fact that they were not--they--they were not living together or they did not know where their other relatives were and et cetera, and so it--he grew up as a--as a kid that felt that he had to provide for he and his sister so he was always a great provider. Speaker 1: Were--were, were his grandparents alive when--when he was helping his sister--I mean when he was raising his sister? Were they--were they around? Speaker 2: No. No, eventually his uncle raised him and one of--and--hi- and one of his aunts raised his sister. Story_ID: 6899 Speaker 1: Did your mother have any stories about her ancestors? Speaker 2: Yes, Mom--[Doretha Frye Farr] Mom's stories about her ancestors were sort of vague other than my grandmother who her name was Ella LaVice (ph). She was born in slavery. I know she was born--yeah, I think she was--she was born in slavery and--no, I'm sorry, she was not born in slavery, but my--my grand--my grand--my mother, you know talked about her mother's grandmother and you know--that--stating that--and that's the side that was not very clear. She--she knew very little about her grandmother. Speaker 1: Did--did she have any--did she remember anything else? Is there anything else from the past that--? Speaker 2: No, the things that we talked about was her and her brothers and sisters. There were fifteen of them, and that they were born and raised there [in Call, Newton County, Texas]. They were a very closely-knit family. It was thirteen sisters and--and, no it was twelve sisters and three brothers and they all worked in the fields. I mean they had to pick the cotton, they had to--you know--grew corn. I can remember my mother talking about going down and visiting my grandfather and grandmother in Call [Newton County], Texas and I had a real likings to the hogs and the pigs and when my grandfather would go out and slaughter a hog for the meal, you know I would really--would cry cause I didn't understand why--why grandfather would kill you know the little, little innocent--hog, you know and my mom kept trying to tell me, "Son, that's so that we can eat," you know (laughter), "That's--they're there so we can eat," you know, so, you know those were the kind of stories that were--were told to us as we were growing up as kids Story_ID: 6900 Speaker 1: One of the things that I can also say about my mother [Doretha Frye Farr] and my father [Miller Farr, Sr.]--they really did not dwell on the past. They tried to focus on the present and the future. (So-, "Guys, we want you to have a better life than what we had or what our, what our parents had. So, what we want to do is we wanna make sure that we give you everything we can to make sure that you have a better life." So they all talked--always talked about the future rather than the past because sometimes--they always said that, you can't do anything about the past, you know. My father's saying all the time--he'd say, "Hey son, look, that's sawdust, you know." "Sawdust--what you mean?" He say, "Once it's sawdust you can't do anything with it. You know, you can't saw sawdust, you know. So, don't try and do something, or correct something that was--has been done in the past. Let's look present and future." So, there was not a whole lot of discussion about our past--their past because their past wasn't a great--wasn't anything great. It was sad. It was struggle, it was all of those kinds of things and one of the things that my parents always wanted for my brother [Miller Farr, Jr.] and myself is that for us not to struggle. Think about the present and the future, because if you dwell on the past you are not going to be able to take advantage of what's out there for you. Story_ID: 6901 Speaker 1: Can you kind of think back to the day that you grew up in Beaumont, Texas and tell us about some of the sights, and sounds and smells of--of the place you grew up on, in the neighborhood, and what it was like? Speaker 2: Yeah, growing up in Beaumont, Texas was--I thought it was (laughter)--it's amazing. I thought it was one of the best places in the world. And the reason why I thought that is because of--of my athletic ability, because I became the--the, you know--accepted. I became accepted by the community where I lived. I became accepted by really the whole town because of you know, my athletic ability. Speaker 1: That's black and white? Speaker 2: Well, not so much white. I really did not know a white person until I went out to--until the coach from UCLA came down to recruit me, or the coach from Michigan State came down to recruit me, or the coach from Wichita that came down to recruit my brother [Miller Farr, Jr.] for--who was a professional football player too. So, I--my--my beginnings were--were very segregated. All of my teachers were--were--were--were black. The environment that I--I lived in was black. The only white person that I knew was Mr. Charlie (ph.), and Mr. Charlie owned the grocery store down the street so that's the kind of--of--of a life I lived. I can remember you know, riding on the back of the bus. I can remember us having an outdoor facility and I can remember the guys coming back in the alley taking the waste from the outdoor facil-, facilities that we had, you know. So, those things I--that I can remember. I can remember being called a nigger, you know. I can remember the fact that I had to drink at a fountain that said "white" and one said "colored", and the one was colored was warm water and the one that was white was cold--was cold water, you know. So, I--I--you know, I endured that. I can remember in a little town right--right outside of Beaumont where a black was--was drug by a rope until all his skin was off of his body, you know, very similar to something that happened in Jasper, Texas about three or four years ago. Those things I remember, you know when you--so when you talk about my beginnings and the smell, the sounds of--of Beaumont, Texas, it was one that as--you only can understand what you--what you're experiencing and the environment you are in. I thought that I had a decent living there in Beaumont, Texas, up until--I left Beaumont, Texas and got exposed to life outside of that community. Story_ID: 6902 Speaker 1: The times that--that we took our--our summer vacations and we would drive from Beaumont, Texas to Los Angeles, California to visit my mother's sister there and we use to go there every other summer and I can remember you know driving and--and there was no such thing as stopping and going into a motel you know. We drove those two-thousand miles and we would get up into Amarillo. My mother had a brother up there. We would spend the night with him and we would take the car and--and we would hit Route 66 and we would drive all the way into Los Angeles and I can remember my father--and these are things that I think are very important in--in my developing and self-development is--is that my father and mother did give us an opportunity to see life outside of Beaumont, Texas, and that was with our vacations going out to California, and I can--I will always remember the time that we went to the [Los Angeles] Coliseum. At that time the Los Angeles Dodgers was playing at--in the Coliseum, and going out in the Coliseum and looking at this big arena, seeing my heroes that I grew up admiring, playing baseball, you know, Roy Campanella and you know Maury Wills and those--those kind of guys, and so you know I told my dad, I said, "One day, I'm going to play in this stadium." I'm going to play in this stadium, and when the coach from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] came to recruit me, boy, that--I said, "Oh, man. I'll have a chance to play (laughter) in the Coliseum. I'll have a chance to go to the school that Jackie Robinson went to. I'll have a chance to go to school that Woody Strode went to. I'll have a chance to go to school where Rafer Johnson went to school," you know? So all those are the kind of things that--that inspired me to go back to Beaumont, Texas, get my education, become the best possible football player that--that I could be so that I could attain that goal, and I've always been a kind of a guy that has been very, very, very goal-oriented. Very, very goal-oriented. Speaker 2: Well, you've got a sense of history. I mean I--I can tell that from what you just said. You--you knew you were--you wanted to be a part of this continuum of history and these great athletics from UCLA. Story_ID: 6903 Speaker 1: Something you said. I'm gonna ask you about it, and then we'll move on, but you said you observed a lynching, where--where a man was drug--(where--where?) this man being drug--do you remember what that was about, or did anybody explain to you what that was about? You said you saw--? Speaker 2: I did not see it, you know, see it, but it happened. It was something that was talked about in the--in the city, you know, "Why?", you know, and they said that he was--it was a sign that was outside a city "Nigger, don't let the sun catch you--"-go down and you in the city, you know. So what was the cause of it, I don't know, but one of the things that we knew that they drug him till-till he was--you know--they killed him. So, that was frightening as a kid growing up there and my father talked about the race riot that was in Beaumont, Texas. We were very young, very young, but every year about the same date that it happened--ever year, everyone would get armed. I can--I can remember I caught my father getting out his gun you know, and everybody was on alert to say that you know it was going to happen again, you know. So that little--little--little city there had a lot of racial tension back then in those days and I--I can just remember as a young kid, you know experiencing that and my father and mother talking about it and they--you know--the--the--you know, the, the community talking about the terrible race riot--that--riot that had in Beaumont, Texas. I think it was around 1949 or 50. [sic, 1943] Story_ID: 6904 Speaker 1: Where is Beaumont [Texas] situated basically, just (unclear)--? Speaker 2: Beaumont is about twenty-one miles west of the Louisiana border, about eighteen miles, nineteen miles from the Gulf of Mexico. The one thing that Beaumont has is it has a lot of mosquitos and the temperature hovers around ninety-two degrees in the summer and the humidity hovers around eighty nine [per cent], you know, and so you can imagine (laughter), you know the climate there in the summer. It's--it's tough. As a kid growing up, it didn't bother me you know. But when you go back there--and you get use to--to another--the weather someplace else, you know, it's--it's a little--little bit embar--unbearable back down there because of the humidity and the temperature is--back then there were no air conditioners, you know--we did not have any, but so, it was--it was a very hot, muggy kind of--of weather. Story_ID: 6905 Speaker 1: What kind of a little boy were you? Were you--what--what did you like to do? What were you like? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things I--you can ask my mother--I never gave her one ounce of--never gave her one ounce of--of a problem. I was not a problem ch-, kid. Always very, very, very ambitious. Very ambitious. Wanted to succeed. And a lot of people say that I'm kind of stubborn. You know, once I set my mind on something then it's very difficult for me to--or for someone to persuade me not to. I've always believed in dreaming. I'm a big time dreamer, and I think dreams get you to build and set goals. If you can't dream, you can't set goals and I think that man's basic purpose on earth is to achieve--achieve happiness, and happiness is not eating, and drinking and being merry and everything is going my way without any conflict or tension. Happiness is you come closer, and closer to achieving your basic goals and objectives you set for your life, y'know? Is happiness. That's my definition of happiness. So, I think once you--you know, you set your goals and your objectives and you work towards them and make the necessary sacrifices in order to accomplish those goals and objectives, and set those goals up there high. Set them up there high. Give you something to fight for. So, I've--I--I--as a kid, I've always strived to--to excel. Excel in the classroom, excel on the athletic field, whether it was baseball, football, basketball, track. I did them all. Story_ID: 6906 Speaker 1: Where did you go to grade school? Speaker 2: I went to Odom Elementary School. Speaker 1: It was a black school, right? Speaker 2: All black, and my high school, I went to Hebert High School. Speaker 1: All right. When you were in grade school can--can you remember like what you were most interested in in grade school and what--what subjects and or--or activities you know caught your interest in school? Speaker 2: Well during grade school I was interested in--sports. I was interested in sports. Absolutely interested in sports. I was interested in being a cowboy, you know cause--I mean all you saw on television was cowboys and Indians. So I wanted to be a cowboy . I wanted to--and--I wanted to be a football player. I watched--the games and I'd see--see my heroes, the Jim Browns and Lenny (unclear) Moores and Ollie Matson and those guys being very successful on the football field and I was a kind of a big guy and I was fast and so I said you know what, I'm going to be a professional football player. So I set a goal when I was twelve years old to be a profess-, professional football player and I just kind of stayed focused on being that professional football player and I know the closer and closer I came to--to being that--accomplishing that goal the happier I was. You know when I made All-State in football and the college coaches started calling me, I'd get letters from the college, I mean I was happy you know, when the college scouts started coming down and recruiting me I was very, very happy. When I went to UCLA and I made All-American, that went-- that gave me one step closer to--to accomplishing my goals and objectives and then being drafted by the Detroit Lions, that was it. It was something that, hey I've set, and then when I got--became twenty-two years old and became a football player--a professional football player I said, hmm, now--I need to set another goal. So in 1968 Ford Motor Company put in its first African American dealer--a guy by the name of Ernie Banks and Bob Nelson in Chicago, Illinois and I was playing ball for the Detroit Lions and the guy who owned the Lions, name was William Clay Ford, the grandson of Henry Ford, so I said, hey, I'm going to go out to Ford Motor Company and get a job. So I got--went out to Ford Motor Company my second year in the league and got a job at Ford Motor Company. Story_ID: 6907 Speaker 1: Who were your role models and mentors and teachers in school? Did anybody take an interest in you? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah, my English teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mrs. Taylor (ph.). She stayed on me. She absolutely stayed on me. She saw some talents that I had and she stayed on me. And my coach, two coaches, Clifton Ozen who was my high school football coach and my baseball coach and track coach by the name of Minix. Those were the people that--and [Enous] Minix--Minix--Ozen was really con--was really interested in my athletic talents and being a great football player. Coach Minix, he was interested in me being a good student as well as a good football player. So the combination of the two and with Ms. Taylor, you know they were--they saw something in Mel Farr and they did really sort of stayed on me to--to make sure that--that I stayed on the--the straight and narrow, you know to make sure that I don't let this talent go to waste. So those--those two, those three people were very, very instrumental, you know along with my mother [Doretha Frye Farr] and my father [Miller Farr, Sr.]. My mother and father have always, always been supportive of whatever I wanted to do. Story_ID: 6908 Speaker 1: I want to ask you to explain the football tra-, tradition in Beaumont, Texas and what you were calling the Golden Triangle you know? How many guys, you know--I mean what was the tradition? Who--who you know--talk about the guys that (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, you know it's amazing how one person can go out and succeed and the others will sort of copy, you know, and I've always said that it's--it's very important that there are role models, you know, because roll models are very important in allowing one to establish goals and I say you can't imitate what you can't see, you know? So there were a couple of athletes who became very successful in the Beaumont area, and one guy in particular by the name of Alvin LeBlanc. He became very, very successful there and he went off to Wichita State to play ball and from that point--and Ernie Ladd--those guys there started that tradition in Beaumont and the next couple of years, you know, I mean they were--great football players that came out of that area, that Golden Triangle area. We had twenty-one guys in the National Football League in 1971 from the Golden Triangle and fourteen was from Beaumont, Texas, and I'm not--I'm not just talking about mediocre football players, you're talking about all pros. You are talking about real stars. You are talking about All-Americans, for example in 1965 and 1966 they were--[Charles Aaron] 'Bubba' Smith and I were Consensus All-Americans from Beaumont, Texas. We ha--in 1971 we had twelve guys from that area that were just not football players, they were all pro football players they were the very--the best in the game. Warren Wells, Ernie Ladd, Mel Farr, Jerry LeVias, Miller Farr, 'Bubba' Smith, [Lawrence Edward] 'Tody' Smith, you know I can go on and on and they were just--you know these names are very familiar because these--they were All-Americans and all pros. So Beaumont, Texas created--I mean it--it created a lot of--of really outstanding athletes, but someone started it, you know, and--and who started it was--was a guy by the name of Alvin LeBlanc--and Ernie Ladd--and-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)Can--can you spell his last name for us? Speaker 2: L-E-B-L-A-N-C. Speaker 1: Okay, LeBlanc? Speaker 2: Yeah, LeBlanc. So he was the one who started it. He was probably the best athlete I've ever seen in my entire life. This guy was All State football, All State basketball--not All-State basketball, he averaged thirty five--thirty-two points a game. He was All State in baseball. Won the 100 and 220 in track. And you know they say, well, Alvin--he decided he was going to go out for tennis. Right? And he won singles in tennis (laughter) in high school. That's the kind of athlete he was, you know, and everybody wanted to be like Alvin--Alvin LeBlanc, and--and--. Speaker 1: How big was he? Speaker 2: He was a--back then he was a big--he was a big guy. Six two, about two hundred and ten pounds. You know, so he was--he was a--a great, great all around athlete you know? I mean he could have--I mean this guy, you know, he--he didn't go out and succeed because he left school and et cetera but--he had some person things that got in his way but I--I thought that he was the best all around athlete that I've ever, ever seen in my life. Speaker 1: Okay, so this--this Alvin LeBlanc inspired you I guess? Speaker 2: Oh, no question about that, because y'know, he inspired my brother [Miller Farr, Jr.] to play quarterback and to--to you know, copy his style. My brother was All-State in football, he was All-State in basketball, he was All-State in baseball, you know and he won the 100 and the 220 in track, you know and he was two years after Alvin LeBlanc. I was two years after my brother, you know, I did the same thing All-State football, basketball, track and--and baseball you know. So it was--so we followed that in the tradition of Alvin--Alvin LeBlanc. We were all--all were quarterbacks (laughter) you know and both of me and my brother matter of fact went to Wichita State [University] because Alvin LeBlanc went to Wichita State, and--and I was going to go there and I changed my mind at the last minute and went out to UCLA. Story_ID: 6909 Speaker 1: Did you play ball in grade school? I mean were you involved in organized football in grade school too or just in--in Hebert high school? Speaker 2: In elementary school [Odom Elementary School, Beaumont Texas] we had junior high football. I played the seventh, eighth and ninth grade junior high and I went out in the seventh grade and I played junior high in--in the--in the ninth grade and the--in the eighth grade and ninth grade and then I played high school [Hebert High School, Beaumont Texas] in the tenth, eleventh and twelfth. Speaker 1: Did--did football interfere with your studies in school? I mean did--did--not that it has to, but did it, you know--(when you were--?)? Speaker 2: You know no, it really didn't. I felt that--and--and I got a very good education from watching my brother and him going through the recruiting aspect because they came to recruit him and one of the things they looked at was grades, you know, and to get into very good schools you had to have very good grades. So, football and my wanting to excel in football and wanting to go to a major university, it said that I had to have good grades, so I worked on my grades to make sure that if the, if these colleges came to recruit me that I would be able to qualify to go there as a--as a student athlete. Story_ID: 6910 Speaker 1: What were you thinking about--I mean in terms of career beyond football? Did you have any thoughts about that while you were in school or did you--did--were you just thinking about you know a football career? Speaker 2: Well in high school it was about football. When I got to college there's--a whole new world opened up to me that I--that I never--never thought was out there, you know? I had an opportunity when they were recruiting me--I had the opportunity to go down in the dug--in the [Los Angeles] Dodgers' dugout and sit with Maury Wills and [Jim] 'Junior' Gilliam and man, that--that inspired me. I'm out here with the--with--hey these guys--these are great, great athletes and I had the opportunity to--to, to get to know them. I had the opportunity to get to know Bill Cosby when he was doing "I Spy" and I--at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]--because they came around, you know. My getting then--become very good friends with Arthur Ashe and, and those kinds, so it inspired me--look, not only to be a good football player but also get the education and believe me I was absolutely behind. My education in Beaumont, Texas--it was separate and it was unequal. When I went to UCLA I had to bust my butt because I was so far behind based on where the other kids were. So, I worked with the tutors. I did everything I could to--to make sure that I got my grades because if I did--if I--I--didn't get the grades then I could not play. So that inspired me to go to class and study because I did not want to flunk out of school. Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the recruitment process. When does this--when did they start trying to recruit you and what was it like, I mean and who came down and tried to recruit you and how did you sort them out? Speaker 2: Well, I had--I had about seventy-five offers from all over the North and the West. Speaker 1: Would the phone ring or would letters come or--or? Speaker 2: Letters, letters and phone. Letters and phone and coming down to the school (alright?)--you know I--I went to the University of Oklahoma, Bud Wilkerson tried to recruit me to come go there. I went up in Michigan State here with--with Duffy Daugherty--I went to Kansas, so--I went to UCLA--so I went and visited quite a few schools--Arizona--before I made the decision on what school I wanted to go to and it was very easy to make that decision--at UCLA--to go to UCLA. The coach came down, he gave an airline ticket to go to UC--to come up to college to--to the school to visit the school. Speaker 1: Who was the coach then? Speaker 2: Tommy--[William F.] 'Billy' Barnes was the head coach. The coach who recruited me was a guy by the name of Dick Mansperger and I'm still in touch with Dick Mansperger. Matter--matter fact I talked to him about a couple of weeks--months ago. But he came down to recruit me. And he said, "Melvin, I got--" he used to call me Melvin. "Melvin I've got a ticket for you to fly up--up to-- UCLA, Los Angeles and visit our campus." I said, "Okay." So, he flew me to UCLA. Never--Never left. Speaker 1: Well, you were already primed to go there anyway because you had visited it when you were a kid and you had always fantasized (unclear)--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, absolutely, absolutely. But you know what--never left there. That was in July [1963]. I started working on campus and my parents, you know, I--I said "One of the things that you know--to get me to stay you know is, look I'd like to see my parents leave Beaumont, Texas you know for a better life out here, and because her--her sister was there and my dad was very close to her husband so it was an ideal situation for me to go to UCLA and it's also an ideal situation for my parents to move out there and also my--my father to, to have a job." And when I went out there I knew that's where I wanted to go to school because of its history. UCLA, not only did it turn out great football, basketball, baseball--players, tennis players, track, but it also created pioneers. Jackie Robinson, pioneer. Woody Strode, pioneer. Rafer Johnson, pioneer. Arthur Ashe, pioneer. Y'know? So, that's the school I wanted to go to you know? Speaker 1: Yeah, these are black men that are not only athletes but well spoken personalities that achieved in other areas too (unclear)--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, no question about it. I mean--I mean Jackie Robinson--he broke--he broke the color barrier. Woody Strode--he would be--he was the first actor--black actor to take--play a serious part in any movies. Rafer Johnson became the black--the first black decathlon champion and--and you know he was a--a sportscaster and etcetera, etcetera and Arthur Ashe--we all know who Arthur Ashe--the Wimbledon champion, the guy--the--the guy that, you know, you had to admire because of his, his demeanor and the fact that he was very interested in black history, you know, I mean he's done a lot of research on black history, you know. So when you look at those people--those individuals and you--you--you know, they just were not athletes. They were pioneers, you know and I look at a Mel Farr now you know, and what I'm trying to accomplish now you know. Hopefully, one day I will go down as a pioneer, you know. Yes, we--you know--I'm--I'm sure you probably get there later but, I, I won't go into it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell me about college? What was UCLA--you talked about the--being behind in terms of academics. But what was the social climate like at UCLA? Did you--did you find it--UCLA a lot different from Beaumont, Texas in the neighborhood you grew up in and Abert (sic, Hebert) High School? Speaker 2: (Laughter) well, it was night and day (laughter) you know, hey, I could hob-nob and be friends with--with the majority race. I think--one of my good friends was a guy by the name of Shelly Novak that I met there who went--and he was one of the FB--he was one of the--on the FBI--on a story called "The FBI", a series--a T.V. series "FBI". He was one of the--key--actors on--on that series. Shelly Novak became a friend of mine. Yes, I had started inter reacting with the majority race. They--the--the social life in Westwood--it was you know, Westwood--I mean, it's great. West LA, you know, it's great, it's--it was a great, great social life. You have to have--you have to have a certain amount of discipline to be able to go to school there, be an athlete, be a star there and also study, because it's easy to get off into the social life because it was there. Story_ID: 6911 Speaker 1: What were the highlights of your football career and what--did you ever have any problems where you were actually struggling, you know, on the field or had a--had a problem that--physical injury or something like that may have prevented you from (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, yeah I had a physical injury in high school when I was a sophomore. We were playing in the Bi-District Championship Game in Houston, Texas, and we were playing Booker T. Washington High there and right before half time I went to make a tackle, swung around, pop, and broke my leg in half, right below my knee and they really thought I would never walk again. But, to take--to show you how determined I was--look--that next year I made All State in Football, after having that leg broke in half. Speaker 1: It broke clean thru. Speaker 2: Clean thru, both bones and I came back that--that--in less than nine months I got out on that football field and made All-State in quarterback. At UCLA, my sophomore year I broke my--my arm right before the season started, and I played with that broke arm during the entire sophomore year. Speaker 1: Did you have it in a cast or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, it had its--I had a little cast on it--but--it'd heal. My--in spring train--in spring practice I broke the transverse process in my back and I was able to overcome that and go back out and make All American. So I've had my share of injuries and then in spring practice I broke my other arm and (chuckles) they--they said that "Mel you hit too hard, that's why you are breaking your arm," you (unclear), but those are the kind of things that you--that you go through and as I said I was a very, very, very aggressive kind of a player and I always wanted to give it everything I had. Story_ID: 6912 Speaker 1: At UCLA, what--what did you play? Speaker 2: I played running back, cause they wouldn't let--I mean there was a black quarterback at UCLA when I started there. His name was Carl Jones and he was--he was a quarterback for UCLA my sophomore year--my freshman year at UCLA and then he graduated--and they thought that I was a much better running back than quarterback and I guess they were right because it turned out very well for me, but I think probably in today's--if I came out of college with the talents that I had--I would have--I would have, no question about it, I'd have been a quarterback--because I had the ability to throw the ball very well, but I ran the ball very, very well you know, so I was a much better runner than I was a thrower, you know, but in today's game, that mobility in quarterback is very essential you know, so it's all timing you know. I wanted to play quarterback but never got a chance . Never got a chance, you know--never watched-they never put me under their--under the center (laughter). They said, you go right over here (laughter) and you play running back, you know, cause I was big. I was a big guy you know back then. I was six two, two [hundred] ten [pounds]. For a running back in those days that was--that was big. I was one of the biggest guys on the team. Speaker 1: Now, if I remember correctly--(unclear) you played some defensive back too and ran back kicks too? Speaker 2: No, my brother, my brother Miller [Farr] was a defensive back. He played defensive back and he ran punts and kickoffs. I was always a running back. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. You never ran any--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Never ran any punch or kick offs back. Naw. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so, you know when you look at my college career, oh, it was great. We won the Rose Bowl my sophomore--my junior year. We were ten and--ten--I mean nine and one my--my senior year. So, I--I had a very, very successful career there. I really thought that if they would have given me the ball more I--I absolutely could have won the Heisman trophy there, but it--they--I only averaged carrying the ball about sixteen times a game as a--as a running back and I made Consensus All-American. You know, so think about if they would gave me the ball twenty fives a game what would have happened, you know, but the--the coach geared everything around his quarterback. Speaker 1: I know when you were--your senior year, you know, people were talking about you. You were--East-West Shrine Games,--you did something great in there. I can't remember what, but I remember you from that. Speaker 2: Yeah, well you know every--every time I had an opportunity to touch the ball I've always thought that I, you know, I could take it all the way and that's what I did at UCLA. That's why I only carried the ball sixteen times a game, but I averaged about six point nine yards--I mean I averaged over six yards a carry my senior year so,--. Speaker 1: That's very good. Speaker 2: Oh, it's--absolutely, excellent you know, so you think about averaging six point yards--six yards per carry--tell me--carrying the ball twenty-five times what could have happened, so, but I looked at it as a very successful college career. It didn't beat me up, you know, so, I came in the pros and--and showed them that I was--I was intending to show them that I was the best college player when I left college and I proved it when I came here with the Detroit Lions and I became "Rookie of the Year" you know. So, all the rookies out there--I was the very best. So, that meant that I was the best player in college, and--and I wanted to prove that so--and I went out and I proved it. Story_ID: 6913 Speaker 1: Tell me about the draft and how--how that experience is, most of us have never been through it (chuckles? How it is to get drafted and to go from California UCLA to Detroit in--and this is in 196--? Speaker 2: Seven. [1967] Speaker 1: Sixty Seven. This is the year that the big Detroit [Michigan] riot took place and Detroit--I suppose could not have been the most attractive place--I mean just on the surface--when you look at the news media as a place to come to and you are leaving UCLA coming to Detroit. Now, what--what was the draft like and what did you think about Detroit before you came to Detroit? Speaker 2: Well, I got married in my--my junior year in college and my wife and I were in the bed and I got a call, I think it was about six o'clock in the morning and it was Joe Schmidt the head coach of the Detroit Lions and he said, "Mel Farr," you know "You the number one draft choice for the Detroit Lions," and I was the seventh player picked and I was disappointed, because I thought I should have been the first player picked (laughter). You know how athletes are, you know. I thought I should have been the first player picked, but [Charles Aaron] 'Bubba' Smith was, you know, so you look for Beaumont, Texas, you had Bubba Smith, the first player picked and Mel Farr the seventh player picked, you know, and so, I said, "Wow, Detroit Lions," you know, and I sort--I sort of felt that the Detroit Lions probably was going to draft me because Joe Schmidt and [Richard] 'Night Train' Lane--they were playing the Los Angeles Rams--they came in town and they had me come out--come out to the hotel. They wanted to talk to me before the--before the draft you know, and they came out and they--they talked to me--talked to me before the draft you know, and they had said that if they--if I was on the board they were going to draft me because we played Cal my senior year, and the Lions were playing San Francisco--the 49ers, so Bill Ford, who was the owner, and Joe Schmidt and all, they came over to Berkeley to watch the game, UCLA, they wanted to see Mel Farr, right? And I just had a--just a spectacular game. I carried the ball twelve times for a hundred and sixty five yards or something like that and three touch downs, you know, so I was just, you know and sat--sat down for the second half, you know, so you know they said, I was their guy, you know. So they drafted me, said, "We got you Mel, we will have a ticket to fly out to Detroit and we want to see you." So, got with my agent--they called him and made the arrangements and I came out to Detroit, and met with the coaches and et cetera and I think about a month or so later I signed with the Detroit Lions and I came here in Jul-, June of 1967 and Detroit was literally on fire. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know from the riots--was literally on fire. So I came here and I had to spend a couple of days--because we--I had to go down to the--Atlanta to play in the All-American game they had down in Atlanta, Georgia and then I came back here to--. Speaker 1: Was that the Blue-Gray Games? Speaker 2: No, it's called the All-American Game. It was down in Atlanta, Georgia. So I played in that bowl game and came back here and we played in the College All-Star Game. That's when the College All-Stars were paid to play the Super Bowl champs, you know. So, what--was--. Speaker 1: Who'd you play that (year?)? Speaker 2: We played Green Bay. Speaker 1: Green Bay Packers? Speaker 2: We played the Green Bay Packers that year. You know, so that was my beginning in--in--there I just was assured of myself who was the best back because they had quite a few backs that came out there, Floyd Little (ph.), Nick Getti (ph.)--. Speaker 1: Floyd Little was all pro? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean--so--so--they had a lot of great backs and I got out there and I--I started, you know, so that meant that the coach thought that I was better than all the rest of them you know, so you know it's--it's a very competitive game--and you know, you know, and I'm a very competitive person so, I--I felt good about the fact that, yeah, I was better than all of them, you know, and I knew that, and I wanted to prove it so I proved it there because I was the starter in the College All-Star Game and then coming here with the De-, Detroit Lions and becoming Rookie of the Year, it says, yes, you were. Story_ID: 6914 Speaker 1: What was the [Detroit] Lions' team like -- I mean what--what was--? Speaker 2: Sorry, very sorry. Speaker 1: Who was--okay. Speaker 2: Very sorry. You know I thought we wasn't. Speaker 1: The coach was Joe Schmidt? Speaker 2: Yes, the coach was Joe Schmidt. He was new--he was a rookie coach, you know, never was a head coach before and we were sorry. I thought we won five games in my rookie year. But I was able excel on a very mediocre football team, but I also think that it was the reason why my career was short, because of the fact that we were a mediocre team and I got injured my--my rook--my rookie year. I gained more yards than any running back to come in as a rookie other than Jim Brown and I missed three games of my rookie season. So, I could have gained that thousand yards in my rookie season and--and broke the rookie ru-, the rookie rushing record, you know, but I--three--had--I had a very bad thigh operation--I mean thigh bruise which kept me out of three games. Then I came back my sophomore year, my second year in the league and I was really, really gung ho, really gung ho. Man, I'm going to have a great year, right? Boom, boom--boom and then leading the League in rushing and boom, got my knee tore up, you know. So, I only played half a season then. Then my third year in the league--and then overcame the knee operation, leading the League in rushing--boom--tore up my sec--my--my--my right knee. So I've got--had two knee operations in two years right, and come back my fourth year and made All Pro. Made the Pro Bowl. Led the team to the playoff game that we had against Dallas, Texas--I mean Dallas--. Speaker 1: What was this, was 1970--? Speaker 2: One. [1971] Speaker 1: One. Speaker 2: We lost to them five to nothing, and I'll tell you without a doubt if I had of been healthy, we would have been there. I'd dislocated my shoulder two games before with the Rams. So when you talk about injuries, I've had my share. But you know, I think the good part about it is that I've--I was able to overcome them. I was able to overcome those injuries and get back on that field and do my thing, but I was not--you know, it took, you know, no one ever saw the real Mel Farr. You know--I--I--you know, no one ever really saw the real Mel Farr because I was injured all the time, and so that's when I started devoting all of my, all of my off-season efforts in trying to do something other than play football. I was preparing for my life--I was preparing for life after football. Story_ID: 6915 Speaker 1: Tell me about your last year [1973] in football--in pro football. What was it like? Speaker 2: Well, I'd--in the beginning of my last year I was really set on retiring, because of the injuries--with the injury factor--and also--I have a wife and three kids and I--said, you know what I want to be a whole man, you know, I want to be able to go out and play ball with my kids in the backyard, et cetera you know. This is--this is going to be it. I'd already been working at Ford Motor Company for six years in the off season learning the retail automotive business. It was very instrumental in Ford Motor Company having its own--its minority dealer training program. I hired the initial ten guys to go--put them on the training program at Ford. I kind of wrote the au-, training--training program for minority automobile dealers. So I was so involved in my off-season employment, you know. And I also went to school at night at the University of Detroit to finish up my degree cause I did not finish in four years at UCLA, you know, cause I said I was behind going there you know. So it took me a little longer but I worked at Ford Motor Company during the day, went to the University of Detroit at night to get my degree--and played football, you know. Everybody would--on the plane going out play--I would be studying for my, my home--for my test so I could graduate and I graduated from the University of Detroit in 1970. So, my last year was, look, this is it. Everybody knew that I'd--that it was going to be my last year and because I was--I was not going to go out there and not being--being able to perform the way that Mel Farr could perform. Speaker 1: You were in the All Pros the year before right? Speaker 2: No. It was two years before. Speaker 1: Two years before, okay. So you were really a sense that you were probably over with--? Speaker 2: Oh, it was over with for me. But look here, I knew it. I recognized it, hey, two knee operations, a very, very bad shoulder operation and--I--I can't turn my arm over here. I can't move it you know--you can see my fingers and everything --so you know when you're--when you're playing that game it's, it's a very vicious game out there and look, I had my share of the game. I wanted to get out of the game and I wanted to start my career as a automobile dealer. And so I retired, and I have not looked back. I have not regretted it. I have not regretted it. Speaker 1: This was 1973? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Your last year? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you play like full-time in '73 [1973] or did you play--? Speaker 2: No, I was a--I was a spot player. I was not--you know I started probably eight or night games my--last year--was not a starter. They--the Lions ended up trading me for Houston for a number three draft choice, but I told them I was retiring beforehand so they were trying to entice me to go down to Houston, and Houston wanted me really, really bad, but I just did not want to play football anymore. So, I told the guy, thanks, but no thanks. He said, oh Mel, here's--here's this blank check. You write--write in there. I said, thanks, but no thanks. I did not want it. Speaker 1: Did they try to lure into Houston by its proximity to Beaumont? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah. They thought that I would be a very good match--match down in there and coach said, "Look, Mel we want to coach Sid Gillman." They said, "Mel we want to build our whole offense around you." I said, "What?" (Laughter), "Not me." (laughter). "Not me. Never me." 'Cause you know I just didn't want to go out there and take that physical abuse any more. I mean, hey you got to be mentally ready to do that and my body was, was tired of it. And I wanted to be able to play tennis and play golf and et cetera, you know. So, I said, no thanks. No thanks. Story_ID: 6916 Speaker 1: Are there any players on the Detroit team in those--in those days that stand out as--as friends and or--or exceptional people that you can look back on--(look back on?)? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. I--I look at some of the players that played with us who had absolutely outstanding athletic ability. Charlie Sanders, the tight end. I think Charlie Sanders should be in the Hall of Fame. Lem Barney, defensive back, kick returner, probably one of the most talented players that ever played a game--a Hall of Famer, you know. You look at the guys, Alex Karras, I played with Alex. I thought Alex was a--you know great football player. We had, you know, Gregg Landry . I thought Greg Landry was a decent--a decent quarterback. Earl McCulloch, who was a wide receiver from--from USC, who had a record for the hundred and twenty yard high hurdles, you know--so great athletes and--we had some great players to play on our team, and that's the one thing that I missed when I retired, was the camaraderie of the players. Not so much the game. You know every year this time, I know where I was gonna be. I was gonna be on a football field someplace practicing, you know, and after practice we--we-we-we'd go out and kibbitz and get a beer or two and--and then we'd go back into training camp, you know it was--you know that bond that you create to--to go out there and say, hey, you know, we--we--we--gonna do this thing cause we're going to--we wanna it all, you know--you know and that kind of camaraderie, you know that's the thing that I really missed once I--I got out of the game. Speaker 1: So you think there's a kind of--matter--matter of luck it seems to me you know in terms of injuries and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, it's luck. It's luck--who drafts you. You know, (laughter) I mean--you--because football is such a team sport, you need a team effort in order for you to show--to--to show your talents. You know it's--it's difficult if you have great athletic ability and you are on a mediocre team and that mediocre team doesn't get better then that means your career won't be the kind of career that you were hoping that it would be. So, going to the right team is extremely, extremely important, who has the--the ability to use your talents in a way that you can get the best out of your talents and win football games, you know. So, you know when you are--you know like you know coming out the--oh, quite naturally you know, I would have wanted to be drafted by Green Bay, you know, I mean cause--because I'm-drafted--drafted by the Super Bowl champs. That gives me an opportunity to probably go back to--to win a Super Bowl you know, and then you know you get drafted by the Detroit Lions and--and we haven't won a championship for fifty years or so you know. So, you know those are the kinds of things that--that you have no control over--but, that have--but it has an effect on your career. Speaker 1: I suppose for-for a back it's important to be on a team with a strong offense line or you're in trouble, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, you know, yeah you take Barry Sanders (ph.)for example who I think is the greatest football player that ever played the game. Period. The greatest football player that ever played a game. Barry Sanders could be rushing--that's if he was still in the league he--he could be going for twenty thousand yards this year, but he was on a very mediocre team with an organization that was mediocre and I mean you can't say anything other than the Lions' organization is mediocre. They haven't won but I think two playoff games in the last twenty-something-odd, thirty years, you know. One--I think they only won one. That's the year my son, Michael [Farr], played here with the Lions. See I have two boys--followed me out at UCLA. Played football for the UCLA Bruins. Mel [Farr], Jr. played running back there. He wore number twenty two at UCLA, I wore number twenty two at UCLA. Mike, he was a wide receiver at UCLA and you know--what a thrill having both of your sons play at the same--your same-- your alma mater and both of the guys played in the 1986 Rose Bowl. I played in the 1966 Rose Bowl. That--that has never happened before--or I don't think it'll happen again. We are the only brother--two--we are the only brother--brother combination--two--two generations of brothers to play in the National Football League, you know. My--. Speaker 1: You and Miller Farr [Jr.] (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, my brother and I we played and my two sons played. Mel, Jr. played a year and a half--two years with the Rams and Michael played four years here with the Detroit Lions. So, you know that in itself is--is history, You know what I mean? And I doubt if that would ever happen again. Story_ID: 6917 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your career with Ford and the--the car dealership. You--you started your car dealership in 1975, right--1975? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I started working with Ford Motor Company in the off-season, in 1968, right after Ford Motor Company put in its first African American dealer. And the reason why Ford Motor Company put in its first African American dealer was right after the riots, and Henry Ford [Jr.] said, you know, what we are going to do is we are going to open our retail dealerships to African Americans. So, they went out and they put Ernie Banks--the Hall of Fame baseball player, and Bob Nelson into a Ford Dealership in Chicago. Wow, and I just started working with Ford! I said, God. You know my dad was a used car dealer--I'm working here at Ford Motor Company now. I'm going to be a dealer! You know, so I'd set a goal that year that I'm going to work at Ford Motor Company. I'm gonna learn this business and I'm going to be--become an automobile dealer. I retired in '73 [1973]. In '75 [1975] I purchased Mel Farr Ford in Oak Park, Michigan. Now, Mel Farr Ford in Oak Park, Michigan had been bankrupt twice, you know. There were two white guys in there before Mel Farr--they couldn't do it. I bought the store in 1975 with a partner by the name of John Cook. We said--we were partners for about three--three--three years and he and I disagreed on the philosophy on how the business should be--how we should go forward in the business and et cetera and--so I ended up buying him out in 1970--1978 and in 1979, those cars lined up at the service stations in California when they started to having this gas war and in '79 [1979], so my timing was absolutely the worse to buy him out, but I did it--interest rates went up to nineteen percent, twenty percent in 1980. I'm struggling, struggling, struggling as an automobile dealer, and that's when Nate [Nathan] Conyers, Bill [William] Shack and myself--we started the National Association of Minority Automobile Dealers [NAMAD]. We started that association so that we can get some money from the government so we can withstand this downturn in the market, because there were about--President [Jimmy] Carter came here and announced that he had allocated--I think it was two hundred million dollars for automobile dealers for loans through the SBA [Small Business Association] and he allocated twenty two million dollars for minority automobile dealers, and it was through out lobbying in Washington [D.C.] that we were able to get that done through the minority--through the National Association of Minority Automobile Dealers and it allowed me to get two hundred and ten thousand dollars from the SBA and it kept me in business in--in those very, very difficult times, and it was a learning--a learning period for me. I felt very confident in my ability to be a dealer, but there were some things that I had no control over and that was the economy. So, those funds were--were--were really a necessity. It was very necessary for me--for us to survive back in 1980 and '81 [1981], and after that Ford Motor Company came out with some fuel-efficient automobiles like the "Escort", before then we had all of the gas guzzlers, you know,, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The LTDs (laughter) Speaker 2: Yeah, and we had the "Pinto" and if--if you hit--if you ran into the back of a Pinto, it caught fire, you know, so, we did not have very much to sell, but I was able to with--withstand that downturn, and we--you know grew our business to be--you know the largest [black-owned] business in this country. Story_ID: 6918 Speaker 1: In 1998 you all had sales in excess of five hundred million dollars. That the largest--you--you had the top black business in the United States, right? Speaker 2: Yes, and--let--let me just tell you a story. It was 1980--I think it was 1980--'80 [1980] or '81 [1981] [sic, August 1978]. President [Jimmy] Carter invited the top one hundred black-owned businesses to Washington, D.C. to the White House to have dinner and this is when B.E.--Black Enterprise came out with his "BE 100", and we were at the White House having dinner and they said, you know the oldest guy we have here is A.G. Gaston [Arthur G. Gaston] from North Carolina Mutual Life (sic) and he was eighty four years old and the youngest guy here--a guy by the name of Mel Farr, and I think I was thirty-four years old at that time, and I had the sixteenth largest owned-black business, you know. So it said two things. It said one thing that there was not very many black businesses, you know, black businessmen out there. If I just left a career as a football player and then five years later--six years later I got the sixteenth largest owned black business in this country, it says something for black businesses in this country, you know. But you know, I was looking out the window at that dinner, and I said, you know, I am thirty-four years old. I am the youngest guy here, and I got the sixteenth largest owned business in the country. If I'm not the largest black-owned business in this country before I leave this earth, I'm--will be a failure. So, you know what, I put on blinders. This is my goal, and you know--and I would always--been a goal-oriented person, you know. I--I've said you know I--I've got a little saying--saying, "If a ship does not know to what port it is steering or going, there is no winds favorable to it," you know, so that means you have got to have some clear-cut goals and objectives, and you go after them you know, and that's what I set my sight on. I set my sights on "I want to be the number one African American business in this country." I achieved--it in 1998, and I'll tell you, here on camera--probably the worst thing that ever happened to Mel Farr. Speaker 1: (What?) becoming the number one? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And so "Where do you go from there?" questions? Speaker 2: No, no, it's because I became a target--by the media--by the media. They have tried to crucify Mel Farr, and the reason why they tried to crucify Mel Farr is because I'd decided that, hey, I want to go into urban America and provide basic transportation for those who don't have access to financing. And, I've been crucified by the media, but that tells you a couple of things. Number one, it tells you something about America, you know. I asked a reporter, I said, "Ma'am," I said, "Look, you writing a story about Mel Farr and people buying cars from me and you say I have more complaints than any other dealer in Michigan for the Secretary of State. Well, you know what? I sell more old cars and used cars to those people, all right, who can't get transportation, you know, and I've sold over one hundred thousand--three hundred thousand cars over--over the last ten years. I'm gonna have complaints because I sell more cars to this segment of the market than anybody, because those cars would break. Now, hell I didn't manufacture them and I didn't drive them before they was turned into me. All I did--did was repair them and sell them. Why in the hell are you going to try to make a big story like this, you know?" I said, "Shouldn't the story be--look, here's a guy--a little black guy--mother and father never got any theoretical--education--never had any education. Left Beaumont, Texas at eighteen years old, went to UCLA, became an All-American, went to the Detroit Lions, All-Pro, worked at night--I mean went--went to school at night, worked in the day time and played football, to work on his career after football, took a business that was bankrupt--twice, nobody wanted it and from zero sales in 1975, all right, to over five hundred million in 1998--isn't that a better story?" (Laughter). Story_ID: 6919 Speaker 1: So what--what are some of the critiques of the media--I mean what--what do they--what do they critique you about? What--what are their main issues? Speaker 2: Damn near anything. I mean--mean and I say, damn near anything, you know? There was a--I mean the story was a two-part story on Mel Farr, you know--two part story, you know. Speaker 1: Was this in the Detroit News? Speaker 2: This was on the local station here, the ABC station here, locally. A two part-story on Mel Farr, about some people who--who had some complaints on cars, you know. I said, "I didn't--I didn't manufacture them damn cars. You know, I sold the cars--I mean--they had some problem with the automobiles. All right? Guess what--we repaired them. Cars break, you know. Man is not perfect--he's not--learn how to do anything perfect, but I am not the manufacturer--why you makin' such a big deal of it?" "Oh, because you have more complaints than anybody else." Oh, no, it's because of the fact that I've grew this business to be the number one and--and I--I am providing basic transportation to urban dwellers. Yes--and this is before I got involved in the--the--the "on-time" device that you put on the cars to make sure that the customer makes the payments--if they don't make the payments the car don't start. This was even before that, y'know? It was just a personal attack against Mel Farr. Because why? Mel Farr sell eyeballs. But you know, I thought it was so grossly unfair. The story should've been as I--should have been the opposite, but that's white media dealing with African American businesses. Speaker 1: Okay, now when did this story apparently on television come out? Speaker 2: In '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, the same year that you became number one? Speaker 2: Right after. Right after, I mean just directly right after I became the largest African American business in this country, and I mean--I mean attacked--there were--then there was newspaper articles about the same damn story. Then I got involved there in this--in this "on-time" device that we put on the vehicles because I'm selling automobiles to customers, all right, who has dam-, damaged credit and no one would give them an opportunity and I gave them--gave them an opportunity to sell them an automobile, to finance them through my finance company in--in order for them to have basic transportation and boy, whoo! I get attacked again, you know, it's--you know the Ralph Naders, the nay-sayers, you know, they all started attacking Mel Farr--why? Because I'm trying to provide basic transportation to--for--to the urban dweller, you know, provide that so that they can lift themselves out of poverty, you know. You see, if I don't sell them an automobile, who will? You know, and the good thing about this and this is why I've taken my business now into this market, is that every car that I sell and I finance through my finance company, Triple M Finance Company, I change their lives. I change their lives. So the benefit that I'm getting out of this thing 'cause I grew this business to be the largest in this country and I'm very proud of it, but there is something else out there for Mel Farr. Mel--Mel Farr, I want to put urban America--those who can not get financed, you know, in automobiles so they can lift themselves out of poverty. Story_ID: 6920 Speaker 1: Mr. Farr, I just wanted to try to put this in perspective and what--what does it mean when someone in Detroit, who's poor not to have a car? Speaker 2: Welfare. It means welfare. It means robbing and stealing. Look, Henry Ford, who--when he invented the assembly line process, he invented the assembly line process so the masses can have access to basic transportation. When he built the Model T, the Model T was a basic vehicle and it was something that he built and you know what he did--he--he felt so strongly about the conviction that everyone should have access to basic transportation is that he raised the wages for the people who built those cars from two dollars a day to five dollars a day. He said, "Why shouldn't I pay them enough money so they can afford to buy my car?" I don't know if it was--it was a--a self-fulfilling idea that he had or if it was hey, you know what, this is the only way that a democracy is going to work is that everyone should have access to basic transportation. Now since, and since they have that access to basic transportation they have the freedom to come and go when they please. It's going to allow them to--to be able to enjoy the things the rich enjoys, and that is the ability to be mobile, and I look at it--look at this--now here we are talking about over a hundred years later, you know, and there are some people in our society that don't have access to just basic transportation. So that's my charge today as a businessman is to come up with the technology--the technology which will allow us to loan money to those who have not had the discipline to pay on time, the ability to have access to basic transportation. So, as a businessman, you know, I--I had to make a decision, you know, what way--what Mel Farr--is going to go in, and I hope as we look back at history--is that you know, this guy Mel Farr, he had an idea. He had an idea to put this ["On Time"] "starter interrupt system" on the automobile so that the consumer--the customer who lives in urban American can have access to transportation so they can go to where the jobs are. Two-thirds of all of the entry-level, low-skilled jobs are being created in suburbia. How is the urban dweller going to get to those jobs? Well, transportation. Speaker 1: In a city like Detroit-there's not an elevator train system or subway system to take you from the inner city to the suburbs? Am I correct--? Speaker 2: Well you know what, even though there are cities in this country that has mass transit--a mass transit system, that system is to get suburbanites to the city, not city dwellers-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It should be the other way around. Speaker 2: --to suburbia. All right, so when you look at it--if we want to empower people, you know, we need to empower them so that they--they will be able to lift themselves out of poverty. You see, every customer that I sell and I finance through Triple M Finance Company, I change their lives--and you know and--and it's funny, to--to look at who I am as a businessman and where I would like to take our company in the new millennium is--I was at a cocktail reception at Edsel Ford the Second's home. He had gave--he gave a cocktail reception and dinner for Sparky [George Lee] Anderson. Sparky Anderson was the manager for the Detroit Tigers--won two World Series here. He was the manager for the Cincinnati Reds--I think they won two World Series down there and they were inducted--they inducted him into the Baseball Hall of Fame, and Edsel Ford [II] who is the Chairman of the Board of Sparky Anderson's charitable organization that he started here called "CATCH" --Caring Athletes For Kids [Caring Athletes' Team for Childrens' and Henry Ford Hospital] and I am on the Board of Directors of that charitable organization and so we were there and Sparky got up, you know as Sparky normally does, he got up and he said, "Look, guys, it's not difficult for Sparky to do what he's done. It's very simple. I've been always the kind of a guy who--I've always followed my wallet first--I mean my--sorry--I've always followed my heart first. He said if you follow your heart--your wallet first, your wallet will follow." Boy, I said, you know, when Sparky got through with his little speech, I went up to Sparky Anderson and said, "Sparky, outta all these people here, why are you just talking to Mel Farr," and the reason I say that is because I'm on--standing on the lawn of the guy who I thought--who lived in the twentieth century, did more for mankind than any single human being and that was Henry Ford, because he made it possible for the average person to have access to basic transportation when he invented the assembly-line process, but more importantly he paid the workers enough money so they could buy his cars. Story_ID: 6921 Speaker 1: You said Henry Ford was perhaps the greatest person that ever lived---. Speaker 2: Well--not, you know, not so much the greatest that ever lived. I said he's probably done more for mankind, you know and when I said mankind is because of the fact that--that he allowed man to be mobile, which allowed the--man to enjoy and to be able to experience so many other things in the world because of the ability to be mobile, you know--you can say the Wright Brothers out of Dayton, Ohio, you know, that their invention made the world smaller--Henry Ford with the automobile made the world smaller. The Wright Brothers with the airplane had--has made the world smaller, you know. So, I think that those inventions were very important to mankind. Now, the point is that I don't know if Henry Ford was doing it for his wallet first, or his heart first. But it doesn't really matter 'cause society has benefited from it and the Fords are awful rich, you know. So, I--I feel that this drive that I have as a--as a--as a businessman is now--is to reach back--provide that basic transportation to those urban dwellers who don't have access to it today, because without transportation it's very difficult for you to move yourself up from poverty to a life where you are able to--to participate in this democracy that we live in. Speaker 1: Isn't it true too that in a city like Detroit, you got--it's an eighty percent black city and it's experienced some hard economic times of late--it's--its probably true too that if you are gonna sell cars in Detroit, you are going to have to figure out a way to--to meet the needs of a population that doesn't have a lot of credit and a lot of money. Right? Speaker 2: Correct. But I think this is an absolutely great place to do what I'm trying to do and that is have financing available for that--that segment of the market. Now, it's tougher than I ever thought. You know, because it's hard to raise money for people who--in the loan--raise money and loan that money to people who have not showed the discipline to make their payments and make their payments on time, because all credit is--is a paying habit. They--they--they grant you credit based on your previous paying habits. When you have not had an--access to an automobile you have not had access to credit, then it's very difficult to do it. By way the credit is determined--it just absolutely rules out the urban dweller, because of the way the model is set. You know, it's set on how suburbanites pay, not how urban dwellers pay, you know. So it is a huge challenge that is--that is in front of me, but I am will--I have the desire to overcome all of these obstacles to make it happen. Story_ID: 6922 Speaker 1: You've had to be very creative, I guess in trying to come up with ways to be able to market cars to the people in the urban community who don't have a lot of credit and you used some techniques and--I guess some-- Speaker 2: Technology. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Tech--technology is the driver, you know. You know I personally think that having access to trans-, transportation should be a fund-, fundamental right for every American . I mean just as we have every--every American has a fundamental right to have electricity--heat--water--a telephone. We call those utilities. See, you don't need credit to get--to get--to use the--the system--lights and telephone and water and et cetera. That's--that's just a fundamental right of an American, you know. And I also say that, you know, it should be a fundamental right for an American to have access to basic transportation, and the way it is set up right now, it's exclude--you know--it's excluding a large segment of that market. For example, forty two percent of the people in Detroit don't have credit in order for them to buy an automobile. So I'm trying to create a--the technology, all right, that will allow us to--to be able to sell cars to those customers, finance those auto--customers and they pay us as do people who have excellent credit. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you tell us about what--I know one of the ideas that you came up with was light and utility companies--if the person doesn't pay, then the--the service is shut off. Can--can you explain that better? Speaker 2: The technology is an--is an--is called the "on-time device" that I sort of co-invented that would allow us to put this device on the vehicle and it's called a "starter interrupt system" and what device does it--it goes on the starter of the vehicle and what I've tried to do is I've tried to set up our system in reference to--in--in relationship to how the urban dweller lives. The urban dweller lives from week-to-week. Very few of them have bank--bank accounts, you know, they don't have checking accounts, all right. So what happens is on Friday when they get paid, you know, that's when I want to get paid so that I'll--if I do that and I do that very successful--then I'll be able to raise more money and I will be able to put more people in automobiles, so it's very important that we put it--we--we initiate a system all right that's a very profitable system, you know. If it's not profitable, then I can't be able--I won't be able to execute my business model. So what happens is you put the--the--the device connected to the starter. The device has an indicator that's attached right underneath the dashboard and it's a light you know, and it flashes three times. One, two, three. One, two, three, meaning you got to three days to make your payment. One, two--one, two. Two days to make your payment. One, it blinks on and off. One day to make your payment, and the day your payment is due, it beep, beep, beep. So all that the device does--it's--it's a--it's a warning mechanism to the customer--let the customer know that their responsibility is to pay, you know. If they pay for the car, you know then they are gonna improve their--their credit rating, see? If they pay for the automobile they are going to have this vehicle so they can go and come when they please--the freedom to go and come when they please. So, it's a--it's a--very important--very important, I think to our society, you know that this technology, all right, is embraced, all right, and I protect--perfect my business model which would allow me to be able to borrow more money so I can put more customers in automobiles and this is a very good opportunity for--for--for us to use to get the people that we want off of welfare--take them off of welfare and put them to work. They will have the opportunity to go to where the jobs are being created. Speaker 1: So just like if I don't pay the light bill you know there will come a day when the lights are cut off. If I don't pay my bill to Mel Farr and I-- when I get in my car, you know, it could be a--but I get a warning ahead of time. I get three warnings and on that-- It'll beep, beep, beep. Speaker 2: It'll beep, beep, beep, and I get in and if I ignore that--and so for whatever reason and get in and turn on and the car doesn't start, then I gotta--then after I make my payment I get the service again right? Speaker 1: Well, what happens is there's a keypad. What the customer punches is in a four-digit keypad--that the customer punches in a--a code and the code will allow the customer to have seven more days to operate the automobile. Now, the car--what happens is the--the--the device is set to cut off at seven p.m., all right? Now, at seven p.m. once you cut the car off and you go back out to start the car, it will not start, all right. It does not stop the customer in traffic or anything like that, because once the car is started it--it--it will not stop it. Speaker 2: Now, that was a claim that was made. I think a couple of young ladies made this claim and it really sounds wild. It just--they were riding along and all of a sudden the car just stops on the freeway or something like that, but I think it's been shown that that was not the case--(unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, that was not--I have been sued many times over that and we've been fortunate enough to go to court and we've been able to--be successful in the judge ruling that the device is safe (unclear) meaning that it won't shut off once the car has been started, number two is that the device does not violate any consumer protection laws. So we've crossed those hurdles. Now what it is--is for me to perfect my business model and that's what I am doing now. That's why one of the reasons why I've sold all of our new car dealerships--most of my new car dealerships so that I can concentrate on creating this finance company which will allow--and will protect--perfect our business model which will allow us to put urban Americans on wheels. Put them on wheels. Reduce the amount of money and the number of people on welfare, you know, because they can't go out and get a job, and also they are able to go out and get a better job because of the fact that they are mobile. So it's--I think I extremely important for this segment of our market. Speaker 2: Let--let me ask this then-- if I punch in the keypad and I get seven more days and then I still don't pay up then it goes off for good right? I mean, for--? Until I pay again or (unclear)? Speaker 1: Well, let me just explain to you exactly how the device works, all right? The system is set up--if you don't pay by Friday at seven p.m., once you cut the car off and you go back out and try and restart the automobile, it won't start, right? You make your payments, you know, we give you a six digit code. You punch the six digit code in, you know, and the indicator light goes green and you have seven more days to ride, all right, until next Friday. Now, there is an emergency code that you can punch in there because if something happens you know, and you got an emergency and you haven't paid, you put the emergency code in there and you've got forty-eight hours to drive. Speaker 2: Okay. So if you have an emergency like somebody got sick and had to go to the hospital or something--some other emergency? Speaker 1: Yeah, all you do is punch your code in there and you got seven more days--I mean forty-eight hours. Speaker 2: Okay, so there are some--there are some safety nets. Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, absolutely, absolutely. So, the only way--the reason why the device is on the automobile is to discipline a customer. It's a discipline there, you know. People who are educated--people who understands the system and understand credit and has the discipline to take fifty dollars a week and put it the cookie jar cause you got a two hundred dollar a month payment, all right. They are fine, but people who've never had credit before and have never been disciplined to do that, it's very difficult for them to pay their bills on a weekly basis--I mean on a monthly basis when they live to week-to-week. So, this device allows us to collect weekly, all right, because it's very difficult and very people-intensive to have weekly collections on a--on a volume basis because of the--the number of man hours that it takes to collect on a weekly basis versus monthly. So the system allows us to be able to take that customer who no--no one else will finance, put that on a customer's automobile and change their lives by disciplining them to do what they really want to do anyway. They want a car and they want to pay for it, but they just not disciplined enough to do it. Speaker 2: Okay, I understand that--so, but now have people tried to--now I know in Chicago they have a system called the "Boot System" for people who owe parking tickets. They put a boot on a car and they can't move it, and to tell the truth, there have been those who have tried to defeat this device in various ways and there are people in the neighborhood that know how to get a boot off a car. Have people tried to--have--have you run across people who have--? Speaker 1: Tampered with it? Oh, they've tampered with the feature, yes, and we are working on a tamper-proof system, all right, and--. Speaker 2: It's an on-going struggle? Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--it's an on-going struggle, yeah, but most people wanna do it and they look at this as--as a discipline. They want to pay on time, so--and they want an automobile. So we have very few customers that really tamper with the device. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, now are there any other creative ideas that you've come up with to facilitate--you know, business in the community? Speaker 1: Well, I think this--this is enough. This is more--more than enough. My being able to do this and I--I think that without a doubt--without a doubt, five years from now, ten years from now, in history they are going to write about a guy by the name of Mel Farr--started this system and--and perfected it. Speaker 2: Have--have other dealers picked up on this? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh, yes. Oh, yes. The company that we have called "Payment Protection System" which I am part owner of--we've got about fifty thousand units on the road right now. Speaker 2: Okay--in various states around the country? Speaker 1: In various states around the country, yes, and--and this--this--this system is--is becoming a lot more popular--becomes familiar--because what it is doing--it has allowed--allowed people to have access and I think that this is the only reason why I've--I went into this thing is because well, I think it's something that--that I am mandated to do, and I need to have the discipline, the fort--the strength to overcome all of the--the--the adversity that has surrounded the device. All of the negative publicity that I've gotten on the device and--here's a time that you are doing something creative and certain people look at a certain way and you're gonna be criticized for it and you are you are gonna get beat up for it and--and you know--there always--you know I don't like the term, but they always say "pioneers" they lie face--face first in the dirt with arrows in their back, you know I don't like that terminology but it's--. Speaker 2: It's real. Speaker 1: It's--it's real. I mean it's real. I have been attacked by people who--for whatever reasons--it doesn't make sense. If I'm able to pull this off and do a very good job with it--the welfare--the amount of money that is going to come out of your taxes will be less because you will have more people working because they can get to the jobs. We'll have more people able to--be able to get better jobs because they get to those jobs. So it's something that I think that--that America should be behind and backing Mel Farr up to--to ensure that this works. It's going to be a hell of a lot cheaper than to try to put a mass transit system here in Detroit. A hell of a lot cheaper. Story_ID: 6923 Speaker 1: Now this is another thing that is kind of comical scenario, but it's not a new one in black America dealing with white America, but in one of your marketing campaigns--now, you often wear a cape in ads as the super dealer? There's a--there's a story that there's a--in a store in Fairfield, Ohio, in an all white community--actually, a white guy who had the cape on and was--was Mel Farr. Now, I've heard now--just--I'm--I'm--I've heard of this same--of this same kind of thing happening in the fashion industry--we interviewed a fashion designer who was represented in some circles by a white woman. They thought the white woman was her, and they bought her fashions, you know and--and she didn't reveal until after twenty years that she was really the designer and people thought it was the white woman--but, tell--tell me about--I mean this is something that is common--been common in black businesses for quite--quite a while, but try to--tell me what your--your philosophy was? Speaker 2: Well, my philosophy was--(I'm?) primarily in the all white community in Fairfield, Ohio and it just wouldn't--wouldn't make sense for Mel Farr to go down there because the demographics--and we did--did--we surveyed and--and did some marketing surveys and--and found out that it would be best for somebody to do the commercials versus Mel Farr--because of the demographics and what we are doing we are interested in selling automobiles--you know, not interested in seeing Mel Farr. I'm not that--I have an ego to see Mel Farr in a cape in Fairfield, Ohio, you know. It's says that Mel--the demographics said that you shouldn't do it and we made that decision not to go on T.V. there, because of the pure demographics of Fairfield, Ohio. Speaker 1: Was it kind of odd seeing that commercial though with the white Mel (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well, yes, yes, and I got--a lot of people you know said, you know, thought he was Mel Farr and because he was doing the commercials and so when he would go in to do the commercials we would go out to have dinner or something like that, "Hey, that's Mel Farr," you know, and he happens to be a white guy and I'm the Mel Farr, you know, really you know (laughter). So it was--it was--it was somewhat intriguing and--and funny but all I was doing is letting the market dictate to us how we should merchandise there in that--that facility. Speaker 1: Now do you think there will ever be a day when that kind of thing is not necessary in--in the United States? Speaker 2: (Laughter), you know what, I don't think so. I don't think I'll be able--I'll be around to see where this society that we live in is color blind. I don't think that I'll be around to see that. I know that today it's not color blind. In the future, hopefully, it will, but I don't see it happening here in this country anytime soon. Story_ID: 6924 Speaker 1: Tell me about--I know in 1998--was that the peak year? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, and you had like--like how--how many dealerships and where were they? Speaker 2: Eleven. Speaker 1: Eleven. Speaker 2: I had eleven dealerships in four states. Michigan, Ohio, New Jersey, Baltimore, Texas--five states. Speaker 1: Okay. Now--and you, you know as you stated before you--you got some criticism from the media and so forth, but what--now here you have like one now--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what--what--what happened? What's your analysis of what happened? Speaker 2: Well, it--it's very complicated. You know, it's something that is very, very, very complicated. It's--you know when you're not in control and it--when it--when it's--when you are not in control and other people have your destiny in your hands--they make decisions unilaterally and could have--you know affects your business. See, my business has always been urban business, you know, I have always been an urban dealer. I grew my business in urban America and when Ford Motor Company--I mean Ford Motor Company and Ford Motor Credit changed their buying practices, you know, in other words they stopped buying paper--paper means they stopped lending money to those customers who had C and D credit, which I was the master of. I did more C and D credit to--for Ford Motor Credit than any dealer in the country, and when they changed their buying habits and said that they buying--were not gonna be buying that C and D paper again, it affected my business more than any dealer in the country. I also--I had an agreement with Ford that--Ford and Ford Credit that they bought a certain amount of those--of that business and I participated in the losses and what happened was that--you know it's very difficult when a train is going, you know, that you--you take and--and cut the--the engine off and then--and you're going downhill--you are going downhill--look, there is no way to stop it. So--. Speaker 1: Like--like changing the game, I guess-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely. Speaker 1: Changing--changing the rules of the game-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Absolutely. I mean, and--and it's a decision made higher up and I understand the reason why they made that decision, you know. They are in the business of selling new cars and to people who have good credit, and I'm in the business of selling a lot of used cars and new cars to people who had marginal credit. The two didn't match. Ford Motor Company changed its whole outlook on what it wanted to sell and how it wanted to do business in America--in the United States, all right? They've gone upscale, upscale, upscale, upscale. Everything is upscale, upscale, upscale. That's what everybody want to be--upscale, upscale. Why they wanna be upscale, upscale? Because that's where all your--all your A and B [credit rating] paper, you know, and so what we'll build is we'll build those cars that are--that are exciting to upscale customers-- which cost a lot of money--our profit margin is a lot greater so that's where we want to--we're gon' spend our money. We're gon' spend our money financing those customers who buy--who are buying our upscale automobiles--where we make the money. So, they made a business decision. Them making their business decision was counter-productive or it affected me more so than other dealers in the country because of the fact that my business was urban business, all right. So what happens is that I had to make a choice, you know. My choice was, did I want to get out of the financing business--cause I'm in--I'm in the--not only did I have dealerships--I have a finance company [Triple M], you know, and--and financing this urban paper, and my choice--the choice was to be with Ford Motor Company selling automobiles in suburbia to people who can afford and have the credit to--have the credit to buy our vehicles or do you want to do business in urban America? And that was a very, very, very, very tough decision that I had to make, but I said, if I don't do it, who will? Just because I had athletic ability and I escaped urban America with my athletic ability going out to UCLA, coming to the Detroit Lions, getting an education, you know. My father started being in the used car business and--and finance business in his little old way--I think that that's what I was put on this earth to do. I think I was put on this earth to do what I'm doing right now and that is develop my finance company so that we can sell more and more and more urban customers automobiles that will do five things. Start, run, move, steer and stop. Basic transportation. So they will be able to lift themselves out of poverty. Story_ID: 6925 Speaker 1: I--I--I just believe in--in the saying that I read in a philosophy class when I was going to the University of Detroit at night, and it--a book of--that was written by--I can't think of the guy's name but it was sort of Judeo Christian ethics book and it says, you know, "Each in his corner a concept of self-actualization" and in philosophy a "concept of self-actualization" means, every human being should have the opportunity to develop their God-given talents. Since man is a social being, the only way that you can reach the highest degree of self-actualization--you have to work for the good of others. So others--you can lift others up so they can develop those God-given talents. If you look at this thing. Just think for one minute. If Henry Ford wasn't allowed to create the assembly line process, you know, where would the world be today? If Bill Gates wasn't allowed to let his talents be developed, where would the information system be today? So, I say, right now, probably out in Detroit, Michigan and urban America, there's a kid that has the formula to cure AIDS in his head, but we may not ever see it. Why? Because of the fact that he's not been able to develop those God-given talents. So, I think of this, and I think all through mankind, all through man's existence on this earth, there have been those individuals who had that--the opportunity to develop their God-given talents and this is the reason why we've had the kind of inventions and the kind of life that we live today, because of that, you know, and that's why in order to do that man has to be free, number one freedom is essential--. Story_ID: 6926 Speaker 1: For a while, even when you had the Ford dealerships you were selling Hyundais and Kias, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And when is--tell me about the relationship with the Korean businessmen and--and I know you're--you're still selling those, you know, and you know--you know--what--what is the--what is the importance of that relationship--building that relationship now? You know Japanese cars are established now in the U.S., the Germans have been established now and the Koreans are pretty--they are est--I think they are--they are lightly established but not as firmly as the other groups but they are trying to get in. Speaker 2: Well, the--right now in this country, the Kia and the Hyundai--they are the fastest growing franchises in this country today. Their sales are up, went up thirty and forty percent over what they were in the previous years. Like, for example, when I got the Hyundai franchise here in 1997--I think it was '98 [1998], there was only about eighty thousand Hyundais being sold in this country. Today this year, they are going to sell three hundred seventy five thousand Hyundais. There was only about thirty thousand Kias being sold in this country in 1998, and now there's going to be over two hundred and fifty thousand Kias sold in this country this year. So, where--where you see is that these automobiles are entry-level cars that they've--that they've come in to sell just like the Japanese did forty years ago. They came in with entry-level cars. I can remember them coming in with the Corona out on the west coast and look at them now, they are selling Lexuses you know. So I think that the Koreans is just taking a page out of the Japanese strategy--is come in here with a good cheap and economic automobile, build your foothold, produce a very quality, fuel-efficient, inexpensive automobiles, you know, and for me it's a very good car here, because I am selling cars to the urban dwellers primarily and it's a car that's--that's affordable for them. So I see the--the Korean auto makers here probably duplicating what the Japanese did thirty years ago. Speaker 1: Do they provide an opportunity--a special opportunity for African American car buyers and car dealers? Speaker 2: Well, they--not as aggressive in doing that as your Ford or your General--General Motors, but they are--they are looking at that market and looking at it and they are trying to do something about it. You know, they are not where they need to be or where they should be you know, but they are making some strides in that particular area. But they are interested in--in selling--cars--I mean African Americans, in being dealers, because a lot of black folks from America buy their product because of the fact that it's affordable. Story_ID: 6927 Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't touched upon in terms of the business or--or do we need to talk about that I haven't asked? Speaker 2: Well, you know, the only--the only thing that--that we struggle with as--as entrepreneurs and African Americans especially today when there is such a credit crunch today is getting access to the capital. You know, I think that most African American businessmen says--would say that having access to capital is their number one problem. I look at where we are as a company and where we would like to grow as a company--in other words, there is no real African American finance-owned, finance company in the country--that I know of. There may be one out there but I don't know of any--that finance automobiles, all right? And what we want to do--we want to create, all right and I've been doing this now for--since 1985 with Triple M Finance Company and Triple M Finance company is a company that--that my wife and I thought of back in 1985 when I said, you know, boy, if I can take these cars and turn these cars into cash, you know and I can build something that would allow me to get the customers financed that are being turned down by other financial institutions, and so this is why I started Triple M Finance Company. Now Triple M Finance Company, I hope, will grow to be in that arena as I've grown the automobile business--regional automobile business here [Michigan], all right. So what I've done is I've kind of changed my focus, you know. My focus is more on financing automobiles than selling them. That's where I'd like the Mel Farr Automotive Group in the future or ten years from now you look at our organization and you see the main thrust for this organization and how it has grown is because of the fact that they have their own finance company and they've got a great business model and they got this technology that will--that allow--that is allowing them to sell cars in areas where others are not. Speaker 1: Now, oh, tell me about the Seven-Up Bottling Company, that's--that's a good story. Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1985 a friend of mine who had several dealerships up in sort of northern Michigan, Flint, Michigan, and Gaylord, Michigan by the name of Al Bennett who lived in Flint, came to me with the idea and said, Mel, we have an opportunity to buy a Seven-Up Bottling Plant here in Flint. So he called me and said, would I be interested in it. We had another friend of ours by the name of Charles Wells and we said "Charles, you look at it--you look into it and see if we can't this accomplished," and so we were able to get it accomplished and was able to buy the Seven-Up Bottling Plant in Flint, Michigan. We bottle RC Cola, we bottled A&W Root Beer, we--Squirt--not Squirt but Sunkist Orange Juice and--and Schweppes. You know, so we have the bottling company up there and we became the first one hundred owned and operated bottler in the country, and that was also--Reverend Jesse Jackson was very instrumental in getting that done because he had--just negotiated a deal with Seven-Up Bottling Company to--to improve its relationship with African Americans and so it became possible for us to buy that so we bought it. We kept it for about four or five--four or five years and--and we were not able to buy the bottling--the Seven-Up Bottling in Port Huron. If we'd been able to do that then it would have gave us enough volume so that we could've grown the business the way that we thought the business should grow, but that--that did not happen so we--eventually sold the Seven-Up Bottling Plant and--and I went back--well--I put my folks back on the automobile business--and run our automobile business. So, it was something that we did that was--became the first African Americans to do that and it was something--it was a great experience, but it did not last very long. Speaker 1: So, you're are not afraid to take a risk are you? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Am I afraid to take a risk? Um-hum? Well, my father always said, "if you never take a risk, you'll never be successful." So, all successful men have all taken risks. So, if you don't take a risk, you will miss out on things. Story_ID: 6928 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: My number one concern for the black community is getting our kids educated. That's so important. My other concern for black America is that you know, we need to be able to understand each other and start loving each other. I mean, we need to love each other, you know. I think there is an--there is an absence of love between our community. Meaning that we need to stick together. We need to understand that we are a huge, huge market in this country. We spend a lot, a lot of money in this country you know, and what we need to do, is we need to create more entrepreneurs. We need to and--and we need to go to back into our cities where we are born and raised and start up businesses in our community, you know. We need to do that, and--and I challenge the young to go to college. You know, when I was growing up the--the saying was, go to college, get you a good education and come out and get yourself a good job, you know. I say you need to go to college, get you a good education and go back into the neighborhoods where you were born and raised and start businesses in those neighborhoods, all right? Because the neighborhood can't survive without businesses. You know, I mean if you look in suburbia, and go down any street, you see business after business after business. You see new buildings going up, you see new buildings up--you see new buildings going up, you know. You see capital just rolling in suburbia and you go to urban America and all you see is abandoned buildings, abandoned businesses, abandoned homes and this and that. You know, that can't--that cannot continue. We have got to put a stop to that, and the way that we do that is that we have to become entrepreneurs in our neighborhoods, but in order for us to do that we have to have capital. So we've got to be able to have that capital so that we can invest it in our neighborhoods. So, that we can help ourselves. We can help ourselves, you know. And until that happens, you know, we are going to continue to see the dirt--decay happening in urban America. Story_ID: 6929 Speaker 1: What do you see as your--your future activities? What--what are your goals going to be next? Speaker 2: Growing my finance company. Triple M Finance Company is the way I wanna go, because it would allow Mel Farr to be able to finance automobiles and hopefully will be able to be so successful that we will be able to provide capital for those individuals who wanna go into their neighborhoods and start up businesses you know. That's my hope, you know, is that you know Triple M Finance Company becomes the finance company of choice for African Americans to finance automobiles and also a place of choice where they can go get capital to invest in the urban marketplace. Speaker 1: What do you think at this point is your legacy? Speaker 2: It's hard to say that because it's ahead of me. At this point what is my legacy? Well, I would say that I want my business to be the best retailer--retailer in the country, you know, I'm a retailer, and retail, you know, so I grew my business to be the best retailer in the country for African Americans and I did it from a meager beginning of zero and boom! That took a lot of energy, took a lot of effort, took a lot hard work, took a lot of maneuvering, you know, but I accomplished it. Speaker 1: What--what do your parents think of this success, 'cause both of them were able to see you--were able to see you achieve this number one status? How did that make them feel? Speaker 2: You know my parents were very proud of me, and I've always as a kid growing up--that's why I didn't give my mother and father any problems, you know. Because I've always said one thing I wanna to do, I want to make my mother and father very proud of me. I want to make my mother and father very proud of me, because they gave me so much love. They gave me so much of the things that I think that you need to build the substance that you can go out and accomplish what I was able to accomplish, you know. So--and also, you know, they gave me those genes to do it, so it was them that allowed me to be what I am, so, look the one thing I know--the one thing I know, I made Miller Farr, Sr. very proud of me and Doretha Farr very proud of me and that's all I ever prayed for--my parents to be very proud of me. That's why I've probably lived the life that I've lived to--to ensure that I would not disappoint them. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: A guy who (laughter) who was very passionate, very strong minded, and always thought that he could accomplish things that others said was impossible. You know when I left football, my goal was to show the majority race that you could be a football player, black, ex-athlete and you can be a successful businessman, because at one time--they said that all we could do is "play the game"--I think I dispelled that from one career, topping one career as an athlete and topping another career as a businessman. You know what? I think that's--that's a hell of an accomplishment. In fact that's a hell of a job, but you know what? There is still more for Mel Farr to do, because one of the things that you're always going to say about Mel Farr--he's often pleased--but never satisfied...