 Story_ID: 476946 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Lessly L. Fisher [HistoryMaker Lessly "Count" Fisher], L-E-S-S-L-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, L-E-S-S-L-Y? Speaker 2: L-Y-. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lee, L-E-E, Fisher, F-I-S-H-E-R. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August the 19th, 1923, Canton, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, now you have--you're known basically as the Count, right, as Count? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you get that name? Speaker 2: We- Count Basie gave me that name. Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, what was the occasion? Now his name is Count Basie so-- Speaker 2: His name is William [William Basie]. Speaker 1: Okay, but people call him Count (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Count. Speaker 1: So what circumstance caused him to name you Count too? Speaker 2: We was in Chicago [Illinois], oh, god, now don't start asking me days 'cause I'm too old. I can't remember a lot of stuff. But we was in Chicago on a jam session, my band and his band. And we was at the DuSable Lounge [Chicago, Illinois] and was all having fun. And was at this table having a few drinks, and he looked over at me and say, "You know what young man, your band sound like mine almost," and he laughed and the fellows laughed. Hey say, "You know what, I'm gonna knight you Count Fisher, Little Count," and that's what started. Speaker 1: So you were knighted by Count Basie? All right. Speaker 2: Little Count, he said Little Count, that's what he called me. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Now? Speaker 1: Well, what has been your occupation? Speaker 2: Musician, ex-deputy sheriff, ex-chief of police. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And you're also the former owner of a club to, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, a couple. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you're a proprietor of a couple of clubs? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so businessman as well? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so what is today's date? Speaker 2: Three, ten, o' seven [March 10, 2007], I think. Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In my home in Grand Rapids, Michigan. Story_ID: 476947 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer. The first question is; do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, not that I know of. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I have two, Hammond, Indiana and Austin, Texas. That's where my two sons are. Speaker 1: Okay, now the last question is; do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Let there be light and there was light. Story_ID: 476948 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Seaser Fisher] side, but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Ruby, R-U-B-Y, her maiden name was Mosby, M-O-S-B-Y, M-O-S-B-Y, and her married name was Fisher [Ruby Mosby Fisher], F-I-S-H-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't--can't tell you that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can't tell you that. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a--now you were born in 1923. Do you think she was in her twenties when you were born or thirties, or what do you think? Speaker 2: Oh, she was nineteen when I was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I can tell you when I, when I was born, she was nineteen and my daddy was twenty-two. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born was it 1904? Yeah, 1904 I guess (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know; you can count it. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Canton, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side and Speaker 2: Just to my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay, and what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: He was a, a steel mill worker. Speaker 1: In Canton? Speaker 2: No, in Calumet City [Calumet, Indiana]. Yeah, in Calumet City in Indiana. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so he moved from Canton to-- Speaker 2: Canton to Calumet City, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Are there any stories about--now, you were born in Mississippi? Your mother was born there so she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my dad was born there. Speaker 1: --so she grew up there too? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 476949 Speaker 1: They have any stories about Canton [Mississippi]? What was Canton like? Speaker 2: I don't know. They brought me out of there when I was three years old. My dad [Seaser Fisher] left Canton when I was three years old and brought me to East Chicago, Indiana. Speaker 1: Well, did your mother [Ruby Mosby Fisher] talk about what it was like to grow up in Canton? Speaker 2: Yeah, she say it was awful, terrible, very racial. The blacks down in Canton had no say-so over nothing. They worked the cotton fields. My dad was a, a--one of them driver--he drove a, a rig for the great white father to clean roads and things. I don't know what you call it. And she was a maid in the house. And she used to tell me about how they used to get--they used to watch the white people down there whip the black people like they were children. And I used to tell 'em I'm glad I wasn't raised down there. Speaker 1: Now, this was during the 1920s, we're not talking about slavery we're talking about like supposedly forty something years, fifty years afterwards. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, after that. 'Cause she'd tell me--well, she told me all about this when we was at harbor [Indiana Harbor], in East Chicago when I got older. So I guess that was before I left there and when I was three, so I'm eighty-three now. So, you can count it I guess. But, she said that it was, it was terrible. My dad, he had to leave. Story_ID: 476950 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Seaser Fisher. Speaker 1: That's C-A-E- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) F-I-S-H-E-R. Speaker 1: I mean, C-A-E-S-A-R? Speaker 2: Seaser, S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: S-E-A-S-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Seaser. Speaker 1: Seaser Fisher (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fisher. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you know his date of birth? Speaker 2: No, he was twenty-two when--he say he was twenty-two when he hit East Chicago, Indiana. Mama [Ruby Mosby Fisher] was nineteen. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so 'bout 1901 I guess for him. So he was born in Canton [Mississippi] too? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family? Speaker 2: You wanna know something? It's shameful to say, I know nothing, nothing, I don't even--he used to talk about a brother he called Buh Jimmy [ph.], Buh Jimmy. And that's all he'd tell me. I don't, you know, we'd talk about Buh Jimmy all the time but he--come to think about it I don't even know my father's father's name. I don't even know his mother's name. Speaker 1: So you never met 'em or anything like as far as you know. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. I know the only time I been back to the South is when I was playing music. I never been back there. Speaker 1: Now, you said your father had to leave, he had to get out? Speaker 2: Yeah, he had to get out of Mississippi. Speaker 1: What happened? Is there a story? Speaker 2: He did, he did some things. He got in some trouble down there, down south. My daddy was a Mason and they, the Masons got him outta there--got his family, me and my mama and my daddy outta there. Speaker 1: Now, was he in trouble with the white people down there? Speaker 2: Yeah, he couldn't stand the--my dad was very cool and very laid back. He couldn't--you didn't know when he was gone do whatever. And he did--they said he stayed in trouble fighting and they was planned to kill him. And the Masons, Masonic Order got him outta there. Speaker 1: The Masons in those days--one of the functions that they performed was getting people out and getting them help. And it was like if you were a black Mason in those days, from what I have heard in these other interviews and read, your brothers could get you, get you outta there. Speaker 2: Yeah it was pretty strong. Speaker 1: That's one of the reasons that people joined the Masons so they could have a link to-- Speaker 2: It was pretty strong up until not too long ago. I saw something on TV that made me ashamed to be a Mason. (Unclear) Shriner. They made me--they divulged some things on TV the other night 'til I still don't understand. I been waiting to talk to my wishful master. Masonic Order-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Speed. Speaker 2: Okay, so we were talking about your--you said your father had to get out of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah he had to get out. Speaker 2: --Mississippi and the Masons helped him. Speaker 1: Yeah, the boys got him outta there. He, he never told me what it was about, all he'd is--, "Son, I had trouble and it was so bad that if I hadn't of left, I'd of been dead in about forty hours." Speaker 2: Those were the days of lynching and-- Speaker 1: That's right, killing a black man and just letting him lay there. Nobody do nothing, yeah. Speaker 2: So, he had to get out and he never went back, did he or? Speaker 1: Oh, no, no. No, he never went back down there. And I've never went down there. Speaker 2: So, it must of been very serious because--that's probably the reason why you don't know your family members down there 'cause he had to keep his secret to-- Speaker 1: Oh, you've brought up something, man, you did something. Speaker 2: This is a traumatic kind of a--the traumatic effect of racism in the sense that he had to get out and not even contact his family there. Speaker 1: Yeah, I got--you did it. Speaker 2: I imagine if--well, I'm just thinking if he had done something--committed a horrible crime I doubt if the Masons would've helped him escape, you know, or get out. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 476951 Speaker 1: When he'd [Fisher's father, Seaser Fisher] leave in nine--now, you were born in '23 [1923], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twenty--1923. Speaker 1: So he left in what? Speaker 2: Three years--I was three years old when he Speaker 1: Twenty-six [1926] then, '26 [1926] or '27 [1927]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--we was in Indiana when I was three years old. Speaker 1: Now, what was the connection to Indiana? Did he know somebody there already to? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my grandfather had--my mama's [Ruby Mosby Fisher] daddy had moved to Calumet [Indiana] and daddy come to there. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was in Calumet City, Illinois, right? Speaker 2: No, no, Calumet. See there's a Calumet City and then there's a Calumet. Speaker 1: Okay, Calumet, Indiana. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Calumet, Indiana, that's right. Speaker 1: All right, okay. Now, what did he do there? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Your father? Speaker 2: He went to work in the steel mill, Inland Steel [Inland Steel Company], Inland Steel mill in East Chicago, Indiana. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did other relatives come up and join him, I mean, other relatives from Mississippi? Speaker 2: No, well, some relatives come but they wasn't daddy's relatives, they was mama's relatives. I got a cousin--call him Cousin Tot [ph.], he's in Chicago [Illinois] now. Well, if he's living, he's in Chicago now, Cousin Tot. That's the only one I know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that came up. Story_ID: 476952 Speaker 1: So your parents met in Canton and, you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, Canton, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Now, did either one of them have a chance to go to school in Mississippi? Speaker 2: Oh, daddy [Seaser Fisher] went to school. I think he went to the eight or ninth grade, tenth grade. Mama [Ruby Mosby Fisher] went to the eight or ninth, tenth grade, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. I take it they didn't tell many stories about Canton other than the bad times (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, they didn't. Whew, no they didn't. I don't know too much about Canton. Matter of fact, I don't know too much about the South. Only thing I know about the South is what my dad and mama told me, and what my wife [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] tells me. That's all I know. Speaker 1: So, a place to be from but not to go back to. Speaker 2: The way they tell me, the way I am, yeah. 'Cause I couldn't live down there, I couldn't live south. And you can tell that to anybody, I couldn't live down south. Story_ID: 476953 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I got--I had four brothers. I have nobody now. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the last one. Speaker 2: I'm the last of the Mohicans. Speaker 1: And where did you fall in order of birth order? Speaker 2: What I do? Speaker 1: Where do you fall in the birth order? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, so do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Like what? Speaker 1: Well, the first thing that you remember as a little kid? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, boy, oh, you're dangerous. (Laughter) What would you like to know? Speaker 1: (Laughter) It must be a good one. Speaker 2: Oh, what would you like to know? Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory, the first thing that you remember in the world? Speaker 2: I have a ve- oh, you don't wanna know the first thing I remember. (Laughter) I fought, I stole, I, I--just name it, I did it. That's the best I can do. Speaker 1: First, as the first thing you did (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Makes sound) First thing, I remember? God. I, I went to school. (Laughter) I caused a lot of little trouble. Story_ID: 476954 Speaker 1: Now, what, what was your neighborhood, what was your neighborhood like? (Unclear) your neighborhood (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) My neighborhood was dangerous. (Laughter) God. Speaker 1: Did you grow up in Calumet, Indiana? Speaker 2: I don't need this. No, I grew up in East Chicago, Indiana, East Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay, so when did the family move to East Chicago? Speaker 2: Well, that's where we moved to, East Chicago. Then we moved--no, we stayed in East Chicago. I moved when I left home, moved to Gary [Indiana], myself. Speaker 1: Okay, but you grew up in East Chicago. Speaker 2: East Chicago, yeah, I grew up in Speaker 1: Was there a name for your neighborhood that you grew up in? Speaker 2: New Addition [East Chicago, Indiana]. Oh, you ask me smart questions. Speaker 1: So you grew up in New Addition. Why did they call it New Addition? Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that. All I know is New Addition with a little swimming pool in the middle of the city. And every day it was some blood in the swimming pool. (Laughter) God. Speaker 1: Sounds like a rough place. Speaker 2: It was rough. Rough, L-U-F-F, Rough. (Laughter) You messing with me. It was rough. That was rough. Speaker 1: Okay, that was a all-black community or did? Speaker 2: Nope, Mexicans, Polaks, Italians, and spooks--black people. Speaker 1: Okay, so a mixed neighborhood? Speaker 2: Very, very mixed. And it was no prejudice. 'Cause, Miss, Miss, Warwick [ph.] would whup my butt, mama [Ruby Mosby Fisher] would whup her butt, and Mr. Manichetti [ph.] would whup my butt and mama whup his butt, you know, right down the line. We'd get whupped and we all stayed right next to each other right down the line. You know, it was no you stay over there and you stay over, we all stayed right there. I stayed here, the Manichetti's stayed here, the (unclear) Warwick stayed here, you know, like that. It was no--in that neighborhood, we didn't know no prejudice. Speaker 1: Okay, now, but when you went down into East Chicago was it different or was? Speaker 2: No, it was the same thing. East Chicago was the New Addition. Speaker 1: Okay, but when you went downtown to do stuff, what was? Speaker 2: Oh, when we went downtown, we fought our way back. See, we had a guideline, Carey Street--the Carey Street gang and the New Addition gang, the New Addition gang was my gang. The Carey Street gang belonged to a boy named Delois Parker [ph.]. And when we wanted to go to the show, you had to go downtown to the theaters. They was downtown. We had to go into Delois' territory, Carey Street gang. We fought our way through to go to the show. We go to the show we was bleeding; we bled in our popcorn and everything. We ate that. And when we come back, we'd bleed--we'd fight our way back home. Speaker 1: So this was just a normal course of events? Speaker 2: That's even- the course of events. Every Saturday we'd fight, yep. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is a tough steel town. Speaker 2: It was a bi- it was something, it was something. It was something. (Laughter) Man, you ask some funny question. Story_ID: 476955 Speaker 1: The answers have been pretty colorful so far, but we, we always ask this question. Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: What? (Makes sound) Sights. What is sight, like what? Speaker 1: Well, what did it look like over there, and did it smell like over there? Speaker 2: It smelled fight. It look like fight. It was fight, so I don't know what you talking 'bout. That's all I can say. Speaker 1: Sounds? Sounds (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sounds, fight. That's all I did, went to school and fought. Now, I'm telling you the truth. You ask me just the truth as I can. Speaker 1: Now what was the housing like in the neighborhood [New Addition, East Chicago, Indiana]? Speaker 2: What you mean housing? Speaker 1: Like what--yeah, you know, what kind of housing did you stay in? I mean, what did it look like? Speaker 2: Oh, they was nice I guess back in them days. They was clean. Speaker 1: It was wooden houses or? Speaker 2: Oh, wooden houses, yeah, they all wood. They were wood houses. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you didn't have--back in them days, you didn't have too many brick houses, people couldn't afford 'em I don't guess, you know. They was houses--daddy [Seaser Fisher], yeah we lived in wooden house-- Story_ID: 476956 Speaker 1: And my daddy [Seaser Fisher] worked all the time so we did all right, you know. I guess, you know for back then. We ate every day. Speaker 2: Steel job was not a bad job I guess (unclear). Speaker 1: Oh, no. Well, that was it back in them days. Most--all the men I knew, Mr. Wallace [ph.], Mr. Perry [ph.], all of them worked in the mill, steel mill [Inland Steel Company]. When I got old enough I went in the steel mill for a while. After I worked there for a while, and when I saw Mexican fall in that ladle, fall in that furnace and burn up I come down and when I saw my--see, my father was shop steward. And when they blowed the whistle for him to come shut that tank down--see, when you die, they shut it down. They shut it down, and when daddy came out I told him, I'm through. And I walked out of the mill, and that night I told him what happened. Then the next time--see, I was dancing then, you know, messing around. Then next time I looked up I was dancing in Calumet City [Illinois], that's how I started music. Speaker 2: Okay, now, we're getting too far ahead now but, but I understand. That's a good--you know. Speaker 1: Well, that's what you asked me (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we'll get back to that, we'll get back to that. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what you asked. Story_ID: 476957 Speaker 1: What did you like to do when you were growing up, what were your activities? Speaker 2: What did I like to do? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Fight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You asked me, fight. I loved fighting. I loved to fight. Speaker 1: Okay, it was the kind of neighborhood where you either had to fight or get beat or what? Speaker 2: You fight. You come outta school, fight. Go to school, fight. Go home, fight, yeah. That's all we did. Speaker 1: Okay, did you--now, did the family go to church? Speaker 2: My mother [Ruby Mosby Fisher] lived in church. Reverend, Reverend Andrews [sic.], I'll never forget him. Reverend Andrews was my preacher. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the name of the church? Speaker 2: Antioch Baptist Church [Antioch Missionary Baptist Church, East Chicago, Indiana], yeah. Speaker 1: Antioch Baptist Church. Speaker 2: Antioch Baptist Church, yeah, down on Melville Avenue [sic.]. I'll never forget that either, Antioch Baptist Church. No, I'm sorry, Reverend Lee [Willie A. Lee], that was the pastor. Reverend Andrews was the church in somewhere else. Yeah, Reverend Lee was my pastor, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you--were you involved in activities at church yourself or did your mother just go (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my mother was, yeah. She'd make me go to BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America], she'd make me go to BYPU every Sunday and that's it. But that was my activity. Speaker 1: Okay, BYPU is Baptist youth? Speaker 2: I don't know what it was? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Baptist Youth Training, BYPU, Baptist Youth Training something [sic.]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I was in, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, did you sing in the choir or anything like that? Speaker 2: No, no. I'd fight outside the church, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, I see that fighting was a big part of growing up. Speaker 2: That's all I did, I'm telling you. I'm telling you the truth. I won't lie, I fought, that's all I did when I was a youngster. Speaker 1: Now, did you like sports? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Did you like sports? Speaker 2: Wrestled, I boxed. Yeah, that's all I did. I didn't like no football or nothing like that, football, baseball, bas- football. I didn't play none of that, I only did that--that's how I come outta school, I was wrestler, wrestle my way through school. See, I come outta school when I was eighteen. So. Speaker 1: Okay, did you--was music important when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, loved music, yeah. Yeah, we had a little what you call 'em, what you call them--little juke joint back there with a vendor in it and all the kids, we'd go in there and--our curfew I think was twelve, one o'clock something like that. I can't remember too good, but we'd go in there and Mr. Perkins [ph.] would let us play the juke box. He, he'd play the first five numbers and they was what, I think a nickel. And we'd get bottles and things all though the day and sell 'em at the store to have a quarter to go play the juke box, five numbers for a quarter. And we'd play that, yeah. Yeah, I loved music. Story_ID: 476958 Speaker 1: Who were some of your favorite musicians? You'd play the juke box every night and who do you like the most? Speaker 2: Andy Coot [ph.], Jimmie Lunceford, Teddy Wilson, (laughter) Chick Webb, Sarah Vaughan, oh, I could just name 'em. Speaker 1: How old were you when you really started appreciating music? Speaker 2: I don't know. Oh, I guess I was--I started to appreciating it I guess when I was about nineteen, twenty, yeah. Speaker 1: But when you were a little kid were you into music at all? Speaker 2: No, music didn't excite me--nothing excited--hey, until I was about seventeen, I didn't do nothing but fight. I didn't believe in nothing else, just fight. Speaker 1: Did you and your brothers fight a lot? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, I had a brother named Emil [ph.], he's 'bout this color, he died in the [U.S.] Army. He used to kick my butt every night. And he was built like a, a bear. And me and him would--I tell you what, if I couldn't fight, I'd go get Emil--we'd all--you know most spooks at this time lived right by the tracks. You know the track deal. And if I couldn't find--I'd go get Emil and we'd go cross the street--go cross the tracks and fight. That's the way it was. So me and my brothers we fought all the time, but didn't nobody else fight us. Speaker 1: Okay, so were you like known in the neighborhood [New Addition, East Chicago, Indiana] as pretty tough? Speaker 2: Pretty tough family, yeah, we fought. Speaker 1: Okay, so did your brothers comprise the rest of the gang? I mean, you know, members of your gang? Speaker 2: Yeah, all but one. I got one over there that was a coward. He talked a lot and come got us. That was Eddie [ph.], he run off at the mouth and when somebody jump him, he'd come and get us. And here we go and fight. Speaker 1: Make your day it looks like (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: So this is the New Addition gang? Speaker 2: Yeah, New Addition, that was my gang. Speaker 1: Does the singing group, New Edition, have anything to do with East Chicago [Indiana]? Speaker 2: No, (laughter) I don't know them singers (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. All right. Oh, okay. Jackson 5's [The Jackson 5] from Gary [Indiana], I just thought I'd ask (laughter). Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 476959 Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite shows on the radio? Speaker 2: No. 'The Shadow,' yeah, yeah. Yeah, we--the shadow knows, yeah, we used to listen to that. See, we couldn't have--when TV come out we couldn't afford one for a while. Yeah, but I listed to 'The Shadow' that's all. My mama [Ruby Mosby Fisher] would let me--see, listen to 'Ma Perkins,' 'Ma Perkins,' you remember that? 'Ma Perkins.' Speaker 1: It was a soap opera, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I listened to that with ma, listened to that with mama, yeah. Story_ID: 476960 Speaker 1: Now where did you go to grade school? Speaker 2: Calumet first, I went to Calumet, Garfield grade school [ph.], Garfield. Then they built a school there where I lived in East Chicago [Indiana], I can't remember that name. I went there, grade school. When we moved there. See, 'cause, see when I went to Garfield, staying with grandpa. Speaker 1: Okay, in Calumet? Speaker 2: In Calumet, yeah. That was Garfield grade school. Then they--Plymouth, that's it, Plymouth Columbus School [sic. Columbus Elementary School, East Chicago, Indiana], Columbus. I went there. Speaker 1: Now, that's in East Chicago? Speaker 2: East Chicago, yeah. Speaker 1: It must have been a strong Italian influence for being named Columbus I would guess, if they built it in--'cause I know that, that--the Chicago [Illinois] area, Columbus Day is a big day with the Italian community (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Were there a lot of Italian students at Columbus? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a lot of Italians. Yeah, Nate Furticelli [ph.], the Minichellis [ph.]. Yeah, lotta, yeah. And a lot of Polish. Speaker 1: Okay, so the Catholic--lot of Catholic churches I imagine. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know 'bout that. You know, I didn't pay no attention to that kind of thing. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have a favorite course in school, I mean, a subject matter in school? Speaker 2: No, I was a dummy. I went to school on wrestling. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't pay much attention to academics and--? Speaker 2: No, no. Reading, writing, and arithmetic was all I could do. History and all that stuff, unh-uh. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in school or? Speaker 2: Miss Gosh [ph.]--Miss Daniels--Miss Bessie Daniels was my favorite teacher. Well, Miss Bessie Daniels and Miss Posey [ph.]. I had two, 'cause they looked out for me. Speaker 1: Were there any black teachers in your school? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were black. Those two were black, yeah. Well, Miss Posey was 'bout your color. And Miss Daniels was dark but very smooth. They were very soft-spoken, very nice lady. Story_ID: 476961 Speaker 1: Now did you--oh, I was asking you earlier, did you get involved in Golden Gloves or anything like that when you were a kid (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I fought in the Golden Gloves. Yeah, I won couple of three tournaments and things. Speaker 1: Okay, know, boxing was a big deal in those days Speaker 2: Back in those days, yeah. Yeah, if you could box, you could get anything you want, yeah. Speaker 1: I know when we interviewed your wife [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher], I asked her about Joe Louis fights. Were they a big deal I guess in East Chicago [Indiana] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Joe, I met Joe. With the--you ever heard of--babe, he never would have heard of Scalise would he? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No. Speaker 2: See, I met Joe Louis here with a fellow that hung out on 54th Street. He owned a nightclub, restaurant on 54th. And Joe used to come out there all the time. 'Cause he was from Detroit [Michigan] this man, and he was a Italian man. And I used to run with him. Speaker 1: And where at, what city is this we're talking? Speaker 2: Here, 54th Street. Speaker 1: Oh, here in Grand Rapids [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Yeah, 54th Street. And Joe'd come out there, I met Joe Louis out there. Speaker 1: But when you were growing up, what--do you remember what happened when he would fight on the radio? Speaker 2: Who, Joe? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What do you mean, what happened? Speaker 1: Yeah, what was it like, I mean, in that community? Speaker 2: To me? Speaker 1: Yeah, what's your reflection of a day Joe Louis would fight? Speaker 2: Oh, I thought he was one of the greatest cats in the world, me. Yeah, 'cause, yeah. Brown Bomber, yeah, I thought he was one of the greatest that ever lived, 'cause he was a fighter. Speaker 1: Now, when you were growing up, were you all aware of Jack Johnson? Speaker 2: Yeah, Jack? Jack Johnson? Speaker 1: I mean when you were growing up did you know about him? Speaker 2: Yeah. Let me see, Jack Johnson's the one that didn't use gloves, wasn't he? They didn't have gloves in them days (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well they had some--yeah they started out with the gloves-- Speaker 2: Yeah, started out with fists, yeah, they come outta the ring right. Yeah, they come out tearing, I mean, fighting. Oh, yeah, they fought with no gloves. But when they made gloves, remember, they was what six ounces or they was real light. They didn't have too much padding, yeah, yeah. Yeah, I remember Jack Johnson. Schmeling [Max Schmeling], and them boys, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a favorite fighter growing up? Speaker 2: Jack Johnson, you told me, yeah, Jack Johnson, boy. Jack Johnson, Joe Louis, and then it come to my man with the footwork. Speaker 1: Oh, Ali [Muhammad Ali]? Speaker 2: Ali, yes sir. I loved that cat, man. I was so sorry when he, you know, when that thing, yeah, Ali, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, we'll get into that one later. You may even have met him up here, I don't know. 'Cause I know he used to have a farm in Berrien Springs, Michigan. Speaker 2: No, I didn't meet Ali, I don't think. Cassius Clay, I don't think I've met him. Speaker 1: He was like in western Michigan, he had a farm--I think he's still living there. He's getting ready (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he's still living. Speaker 1: --to move to Louisville [Kentucky] I think now. But he's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I saw it in the paper not too long ago, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, but he was living in Bearing Springs, Michigan. Story_ID: 476962 Speaker 1: How were your grades in school? Speaker 2: They was fair, they was passible. They was fair. They passed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you moved along even though--? Speaker 2: Yeah, I moved (laughter) along, yeah, with hard study. Yeah, Miss Daniels [Bessie Daniels]--that's the reason I love Miss Daniels and Miss Posey [ph.] 'cause they'd tutor me, they teach me, you know. 'Course, like I'd run errands for 'em, you know, go down to the office and get their pencils and they papers and stuff. And, you know, I'd do things. They'd teach me, tutor me a half an hour or hour after. They'd keep me outta the streets, that's what they call theyself doing. 'Cause they know soon as I hit, hit the ground fighting. And they'd keep me out for the hour, you know. They was good to me. Speaker 1: Was it hard to get through a day of school without fighting? Speaker 2: No, I couldn't get through no whole day--a whole day without fighting. Are you kidding me? You got to be kidding. A whole day without fighting, man? Back then? Shit. I'd be sick, I'd have the pneumonia. (Laughter) Oh, man. Speaker 1: Now did-- Speaker 2: I had a special friend named Theo Barnes [ph.]. His hands looked like he had worked in the steel mill. And Theo could hit that wall and break it down. And me and Theo run together, and wherever there was two or three fighting, we didn't bother 'em but when it was five or six, that's when we fought. Speaker 1: So you'd like just get in there and Speaker 2: Get in there and go to work. God dog! I ain't got no teeths, have I? I ain't got no teeth? Speaker 1: No, sir. Speaker 2: Yes, sir, where you think they go? (Laughter) Man, you don't know, you don't know, you don't know, man. I had a life, man. And God let me live--he gonna let me live twenty-two more years. I got twenty-two more years coming. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I'm eighty-three, man. But forty-five or fifty of them years was nice. Ooh. Story_ID: 476963 Speaker 1: Well, let me get back to growing up--but did you--when did you first start playing music? Yourself? Did you start playing in grade school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: 'Cause you're a drummer, right? Speaker 2: Well, when I come outta school, they had a job waiting on me in Louisville, Kentucky. Back at Arthur [ph.], when I come outta school, when they handed us my diploma, my mama [Ruby Mosby Fisher] was sitting down and I give it to my mama and when and got on the bus. I was nineteen. Speaker 1: Okay, now let's go back a little bit. I think we went too far ahead. But where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Washington High School. Speaker 1: Okay, that's in East Chicago [Indiana]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, is that George Washington High School? Speaker 2: No, Washington High, just Washington High School. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, so when you were in high school, you weren't playing an instrument or anything? Speaker 2: No, no I didn't play no instrument in high school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't in a band or anything? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Did you sing or--? Speaker 2: No, I didn't do nothing in high school but fight, fight, fight, fight. Speaker 1: Okay, but you must have had some decent grades to graduate? Speaker 2: Oh, I had nice grades. I had nice grades. 'Cause, see, when I--if I didn't have nice grades, my daddy [Seaser Fisher] would fight. And you didn't fight your father, not mine. 'Cause he'd shoot you. No. My daddy--bring home at least passable grades if you gonna eat at my table. And I loved to eat which you see. Story_ID: 476964 Speaker 1: So did you get in a lot of trouble growing up because of the fighting? Speaker 2: Stayed in trouble. All the time. Speaker 1: What's the, what's the, tell--I mean, tell me, what was the worst trouble you ever got into in grade school? Speaker 2: (Makes sound) In grade school, in grade school (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, in school, period, I guess. Speaker 2: Oh, in school. (Laughter) You really wanna know? Me and Theo [Theo Barnes (ph.)], my boy, me and Theo we had a stranger come from another school to come in. He was built like a Coke cola bottle [Coca-Cola], Italian boy, Italian boy. And he's built and he come in school with that, I am and I can whup everybody, and all that. And, at that time we was cooling it, you know, 'cause Miss Daniels [Bessie Daniels] had got on us and we's gonna be good and all this. And this lil- his name was Danny [ph.], I ain't gonna forget him either. He--all the girls, 'cause he was handsome. You know, them Italian boys pretty anyway. Handsome and he's walking 'round school--he's about I guess about the tenth or eleventh grade. He's walking round like he was so God. We tried to talk to him, and he wouldn't talk to us 'cause we was black. And we said, okay, everything gonna be all right. So we couldn't find no fight for 'bout two or three days, and Theo say, "Hey, Less [HistoryMaker Lessly "Count" Fisher]." I say, "What?" He say, "Danny look like he's a pretty good boy." And we talked about this about three or four days. So, okay, so we all like to swim. We'd go swim, summertime. And he came out on the beach, the biggest mistake he could of ever made in his life. He come out on the beach to swim. And Theo said, "Let's do it." I said, "All right." And Theo walked behind and kept walking. And he looked, "What do you want?" And Theo said, "Nothing." "What do you want?" "Nothing." And we know he could fight the way, you know. We say, okay, we want (unclear) women. Two or three days later in school, he started talking to Theo's girlfriend. And Theo just walked passed him and knocked his hat off, and that was it. He hit Theo and bust Theo up side his head (laughter) and Theo couldn't holler, he hit him so hard. Theo, said, "Ah, ah," (laughter). He knocked Theo down. (Laughter) And I'm setting on my locker like this looking at Theo. And I said, "I thought you was so bad." (Laughter) Theo said, "Ow, ow." Danny like to--here I come Theo. And I walked up to Danny to hit him and Danny hit me up in the stomach and knocked me down. Me and Theo said, "This ain't gonna do." We both got up to kill him and he had three boys to come up--little bitty cats, they came up to whup us. And they beat the cow--they beat us to damn near to death, them three. Miss Daniels had--she's coming out going, you know, to another class and she saw it. And if Miss Daniels hadn't have stopped, I think they'd havee put us in the hospital. (Laughter) They damn near killed us. We didn't fight no more for 'bout a week. (Laughter) But we caught him going to the store, down to Mr. Todd's [ph.] store in the evening and we went and got some sticks and we damn near killed that boy. (Laughter) That's one time I got expelled. We got expelled that time. Speaker 1: You were expelled from school? Speaker 2: Yeah, we got expelled 'cause we--he had to go to the doctor. We damn near beat him to death with them sticks. (Laughter) But I know Danny like to kill--I don't know where them three come from though. I always thought where he get them three boys, 'cause we's gonna do something to him. And he did something and his three boys come, and little bitty cats, little bitty cats. They damn near killed us. (Laughter) Me and Theo talked about that--I had a black eye, a swollen jaws. Theo had black eyes, swollen jaws, we looked at each other like fools. Then we say, that's all right, we got him. That was 'bout the baddest thing I think I ever got into 'cause everything else we got into was off the school ground. This was all in school. And after we had did him out, you know, from school which related to school, they had to expel us 'cause it was related. But they expelled us for a week. (Laughter) That boy liked to killed us. (Makes sound) I almost stopped fighting, shit. That was--yeah, that was 'bout the baddest I can remember. Story_ID: 476965 Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Washington High School, East Chicago, Indiana] did you--were you a member of any organizations in school, any clubs or anything? Speaker 2: No, what was that? Speaker 1: I don't know, anything? Speaker 2: I wasn't a member of nothing but fight. That's all I remember, just fight. I didn't know nothing, I didn't know nothing. Speaker 1: So you were on a wrestling team though, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on a wrestling team. I was on that, that's what got me outta school. Speaker 1: What weight class did you wrestle? Speaker 2: Light-heavy at that time, light-heavy. Yeah, 'cause I've always been big, you know. Speaker 1: So, you got a chance to travel with the team a little bit? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah, from there to Hammond, Hammond, Indiana. We come with that far. We won most of our matches. That's reason they--I think that's one reason they kept me outta trouble 'cause we was winning our matches in school. 'Cause I know I (laughter) did enough stuff to get messed up in school, but I was winning most of my matches. So, Miss Gosh [ph.] and them looked over us. Gosh was our principal, Mrs. Gosh, she was a lady principal which was [U.S.] Army, in the Army. She was in the Army and come out and retired and got to be principal. And she was a mean mickey-fickey too. And she loved that, you know, she loved that sturdy thing so I think she kind of liked us but she couldn't say nothing 'cause we fought all the time. 'Cause that's what she come from, you know. But she kept us going because the team, the wrestling team. Speaker 1: Okay, when you were a senior in high school, did you--when you were in high school, did you get a chance to go to the prom and all that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah, we went to that. Speaker 1: Okay, and they didn't try to separate you all out or nothing? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, they didn't do that. No. We had a nice prom, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went to that. Story_ID: 476966 Speaker 1: So, when you were a senior [at Washington High School, East Chicago, Indiana], did you--what did you want to be, I mean, what did you wanna be career wise or did you wanna go to college, or what were you thinking about? Speaker 2: No, I didn't think about college. I ain't never thought about college 'til my wife [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher]. See, her family's so educated. All of her peoples is--(makes sound), you know. And my brother-in-law, he's so messed up in the head, I hate him sometime I love him so much. He gotta one of them, boy, I wish you could meet that boy. (Makes sound) He gotta--Alan Green is a whew! That's all I can say. I ain't never seen nobody with no head like my brother-in-law. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were--did you think you'd just go into the steel mill [Inland Steel Company] and work or what? What did you think you'd do? Speaker 2: No, when I got outta high school, I don't know, I don't know. Speaker 1: You said something earlier about a job waiting for you in Louisville [Kentucky] or something (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, see that's what I'm fixing to say. I don't know because I just--when I got my diploma, they gave it to me and I gave it to mama [Ruby Mosby Fisher]. And we got on the bus and my band was waiting on me. I had a band then, see. Story_ID: 476967 Speaker 1: Now, when did you start getting involved in music? Speaker 2: (Makes sound). Speaker 1: Was it in--were you still in high school? I guess you had to be if you were, if you were graduating and had a band (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was in high school when I started to playing, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, tell me how did you start? Who taught you how to play? Speaker 2: Wallace Hayes [ph.], my cousin, he's in one of them books. He's in one of them books. Wallace Hayes Speaker 1: Okay, so your cousin, Wallace Hayes, was he, was he in a band? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Yeah, he's the one that started--I told you I started coming outta--when that Mexican fell in the ladle. I quit and went to dancing I told you in Calumet City [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Dancing, what do you mean? Speaker 2: Tap dancing. Speaker 1: Okay, so you-- Speaker 2: See I had a, I had a-- Speaker 1: --did you take lessons for tap dancing some place or--? Speaker 2: No, I just started tapping, you know, I just taught myself. It was three of us, me, Jerry Bell Connell [ph.] and I can't think of the boy's name. Me, Jerry Bell and another fellow. I can't think of his name. We's named the Night Steppers, Three Night Steppers. We started dancing in Calumet City, and Wallace was the band playing there. He played for us. Bud and Artie's Four Aces [Four Aces, Calumet City, Illinois], that's the name of the club. Speaker 1: Okay, so you danced at the Four Aces. Speaker 2: Bud and Artie's Four Aces, yeah. Speaker 1: I'm sorry Bud who, what is his last name? Speaker 2: Bud and Artie. I don't know. Speaker 1: Nartie [sic.], okay. Speaker 2: Four Aces, Calumet City. Speaker 1: All right, so Speaker 2: So, I started dancing and Wallace started teaching me drums 'cause I always been fascinated by drums. And he learned me how to play. Speaker 1: Now you graduated from Calu- from Washington High School [East Chicago, Indiana] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Washington High School. Speaker 1: --in what year? Speaker 2: Forty something, I don't know. Speaker 1: Forty-two [1942], '43 [1943]? Speaker 2: I was eighteen when I come outta school. Speaker 1: Okay, '48 [1948] I guess. Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, so you started tap dancing and learning how to play the drums? Speaker 2: Yeah, Jesse Evans taught me how to read. He's on that picture, that music picture right there. That's my band in there. Speaker 1: He taught you how to read music? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, all them cats on that picture, they read--sight read, they bad. (Makes sound) Yeah. Speaker 1: So, was it hard to learn all this? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't hard to learn how to read. It ain't hard. Speaker 1: So, you took to it pretty easily, huh? Speaker 2: Yeah, it ain't hard to learn how to read music. If you can count, you can read. Story_ID: 476968 Speaker 1: Now, was it hard to get your own drum set or did you play somebody else's drum for a while (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, it wasn't hard to get my own drum set 'cause see I went to work for--when I come outta high school [Washington High School, East Chicago, Indiana] and I went on that little thing when we jumped on the bus, went down to Kentucky and played that gig and come back home. And I went to work for a Jew boy named Jake Brenneman [ph.] in East Chicago, Indiana. He was a--he owned stores in Chicago [Illinois], in Jew Town. And he owned a store there in East Chicago, and I was his driver and bodyguard. Speaker 1: Now, why did he need a bodyguard? Speaker 2: Well, I was his driver and bodyguard. He kept a lot of money. And my mother [Ruby Mosby Fisher] used to work for his family--was his cook. And Jake bought me my first drum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right now, so did he own any clubs or anything? Speaker 2: No, he owned a clothes factory down in Jew Town. Speaker 1: What they call Maxwell Street area in Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah, on Maxwell Street. Yeah, I used to work all down Maxwell Street, man. Yeah. Jake had about four or five stores down there. And I used to go down there and take money. See, I used to drop money off in Whiting [Indiana], at the bank in Whiting. That's before they--black (laughter), back in them days when you go to Whiting, they had a sign say, black keep driving. And I was one of the only black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hm. So Whiting was more than just a name. Speaker 2: --boys that stopped in the bank in Whiting, Indiana. And they know not to bother me, 'cause Jake Brenneman was that powerful. See, it was Jake Brenneman, Fred Brenneman [ph.], Annette [Annette Brenneman (ph.)], and Yosh Brenneman [ph.]. Yosh, well, Yosh has got to be still living 'cause he's much younger than me. And he owned everything downtown now in Chicago. But, I could--I'd go--they had money in the bank in the harbor [Indiana Harbor] and they had bank money in Whiting, and they had a bank in Chicago--money in Chicago. And I was the only black that will stop in Whiting. And I'd park my car like this, half way the street, get out. And the police better not let nobody hit it. Story_ID: 476969 Speaker 1: So we, we left off you were a bodyguard (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --for Jake Brenneman [ph.] and you were making deposits in the bank in Whiting, Indiana, which is right next to East Chicago [Indiana] and south Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 2: Whiting--no, Gary [Indiana], Whiting, Chicago. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Gary, Whiting, 63rd Street Chicago. That's the way it runs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I can see that blindfolded, I done drove that so much (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did you ever go into Chicago into any of those clubs on 63rd Street in those days, where all the jazz was going on? Speaker 2: All of 'em, which one? Name it. Speaker 1: Well, I can't name all of them but you know. Speaker 2: Well, name one. Speaker 1: Well, I wasn't there so I can't (laughter). But I know there were a lots of them (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois], Speaker 1: Rhumboogie [Rhumboogie Cafe, Chicago, Illinois] Speaker 2: Rhumboogie. Speaker 1: Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Me and Mike DeLisa was like this. That's the man that owned it. Red Saunders, you ever heard that name? Speaker 1: Yes, right. Speaker 2: Well, see, I used to play shows for Red Saunders. Speaker 1: He's the one that controlled the shows at the Regal, right, wasn't that Red Saunders? Speaker 2: No, at DeLisa. Speaker 1: Club, Club DeLisa, okay. Speaker 2: He was the band leader of the--Red Saunders was the band leader in DeLisa. He was a drummer. And I used to play for him when he'd wanna take off, he'd call me. I'd play his shows, 'cause he had some moving shows, you know. You ever heard the name Roy Perkins [ph.]? Speaker 1: Unh-uh. Speaker 2: All right, Roy was down on 63rd Street. I, I've tried that (unclear) see, its running through my mind. Red--Roy Perkins, Lotis Perkins [ph.], they were brothers. Carnell [ph.] was the piano player. Damn--Roy Perkins, Lotis, Carnell and the drummer was Cecil [ph.] somebody. I can't remember his name. I used to play with him. The DuSable Lounge [Chicago, Illinois] I tried to tell you 'bout, you ever heard the name--he was a little faggot, beautiful cat, played piano. That's all they had there. That's all they needed 'cause that's what we jammed. Corneil- Corneil- God daggit! Speaker 1: That's all right, we just, you know, it's one of those, Speaker 2: Oh I hate this. Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: Mr. Simmons used to let us jam there all--that was the jam session. And then we'd stayed at the Evans. So, when we'd get the road, come back, we'd stay at the Evans Hotel [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, did you ever play at the Sutherland [Sutherland Hotel, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Southern Lounge? (Laughter) Yeah, played the Sutherland. Played the Sutherland with her cousin, Lester Young used to play there with me. Speaker 1: Yeah, the great Lester Young. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was her cousin. Well, I can't remember 'cause that name would knock you out if I could remember it. Yeah, man, yeah I played in Chicago all around there. Speaker 1: A guy had a poem once that said, don't lose your head because your brains are in it, said Lester Young one night at 10th and Lenox [sic. 110th Street and Lenox Avenue]. I don't know. (Laughter) Go on. Yeah, Lester Young with the hat, with the porkpie hat. Speaker 2: You're dangerous, you're dangerous. What was that club on 63rd Street? You remember when the bus station was there a long time ago, right on 63rd Street, South Park [South Parkway; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], it was a bus station remember? All right, upstairs, sky club, sky bar? Speaker 1: 63rd, it might've been--not--this would been too early for, it been too early for Herman [HistoryMaker Herman Roberts]--I mean the big club--what's his name now, Roberts, Roberts Show Lounge [sic. Roberts Show Club, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Roberts Show Lounge. Speaker 1: Is that what you're talking about? Speaker 2: Roberts Show Lounge, yeah. That's where a lotta shows, Roberts Show Lounge. Speaker 1: I guess it wasn't too early for that, yeah. I guess Roberts Show Lounge, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Naw, naw, it wasn't too early, no, you right. Lot of, lot of shows there. Speaker 1: Yeah, Herman Roberts was somebody we interviewed about five years ago. Speaker 2: (Makes sound). Speaker 1: Don't agonize over these names 'cause we got--we're still rolling (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well go 'head. Go 'head. Speaker 1: Let's just tell the story. Speaker 2: Go 'head, go 'head. Story_ID: 476970 Speaker 1: But you knew all the--you, you played in Chicago [Illinois], all over east, East Chicago [Indiana] and that whole area over there between Indiana and the South Side of Chicago. Now what did you learn that you didn't know when you were a bodyguard for Jake Brenneman [ph.]? Speaker 2: What did I learn I didn't know? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean just general stuff. 'Cause when you're in another world like that with people that are doing things (simultaneous) Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What I learned, I didn't know? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I learned how to keep my mouth shut and your eyes open, and look around you before you speak. I learned that. Speaker 1: So why do you think that they chose you to be a bodyguard for Jake Brenneman other than the fact that they knew you fight? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Ruby Mosby Fisher] worked for Jake and Jake gave me the job of clerk in the store. He had a store there. Speaker 1: In-- Speaker 2: A regular store in East Chicago, Indiana, clothing, clothing store, men and women's store. And he gave me the job as a clerk. And before he gave me the job as clerk, they'd always go in there and rob him. When I got the job as clerk, they didn't have no more robberies. 'Cause all the thugs 'round there knew me. I was a thug, I was one of them so, what, they gonna rob me? You know, so Jake said, "Well, hey, I can use--." I say it to my wife [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] sometime, he gave me a saying: that don't go with me brother. When he got mad, he said that. That don't go with me brother. That's what he meant. That don't go with him brother. Speaker 1: Well, where was he from? Speaker 2: There. Speaker 1: I mean was he-- Speaker 2: East Chicago. Speaker 1: I mean, he was born and raised in East Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah, his whole family--Jake Bremer, Fred Bremer [Fred Brenneman (ph.)], Yosh Bremer [Yosh Brenneman (ph.)], Annette Bremer [Annette Brenneman (ph.)]. They stayed on Euclid Street [sic. Euclid Avenue]. His son was Yosh, I raised Yosh. Story_ID: 476971 Speaker 1: So ho- how long did you do that, did you serve as bodyguard for him? And you're still playing your own gigs and stuff? Speaker 2: Yeah, still playing, yeah. He'd let me--I'd go out. That's why I loved him, 'cause I could go if I had a trip, I go. And I let Theo [Theo Barnes (ph.)] work for me while I'm gone. I don't know how long I worked with Jake [Jake Brenneman (ph.)]. Speaker 1: Well maybe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Five, six, seven years something like that I guess. Speaker 1: Okay, five, six, seven--what did you do, I mean, next? Speaker 2: Just, just--oh, what'd I do after I left him? Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess I'm trying to get a sense of where your career went as a musician, you know, how did you--'cause at one time you're doing a lot of traveling and I don't know--I mean, if you were traveling in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, what you do is when you travel like that, you go like you say you got four or five--say you got five gigs out. If you working a job, before you take the job you tell the man what you do. And you have to do this, or can you have this time if you need it whenever you need it. You and him agree, that's what me and Jake did, agreed. Now, like when I went to say, when I went to Kentucky, I went to Ohio, come back through Ohio back to Kentucky and back to home. I got them days off. Now, if my booker book me say they gonna hold you over, I call the job. Say, man, I need another week or two weeks to be off. Okay, how is my man doing? He doing all right. Okay, that's way you do that. See, you just don't walk off a job. You get your time off or don't take the job. That's the way you do that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were able to travel to different gigs and around even though you were working (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And work. Yeah, I worked in the mill the same way 'cause my daddy [Seaser Fisher] was shop steward. I did that too. So, when I quit the mill, and quit the jobs then I went on the road just before I married her [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher]. I had another--I broke that band up and got five pieces. Five pieces. Then I went out and stayed for about six months. Then I come back, then I broke that up, got another job. That's the way I did that. Story_ID: 476972 Speaker 1: Who are some of the musicians that played with you? Speaker 2: Schoolboy Porter [John "Schoolboy" Porter], Jack McDuff. Well, let me see, the band I took out was Schoolboy Porter, Johnny Mott [ph.], Levy [ph.], me and Bill Lane [ph.], and Aretta, Aretta Lamar. Speaker 1: Okay, Loretta what, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Aretta Lamar. Speaker 1: Aretta Lamar. Speaker 2: Aret- Aretta. Speaker 1: Aretta. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Lamar. A-R-T-T- Lamar, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And you say later on Jack McDuff played with you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See, I jumped over. Jack was--see that's when we first started Jack was with me. See, Jack--me and Jack was raised together. That was way--you talking 'bout long time ago now. I jumped that one. Speaker 1: Did Jack McDuff always play the organ and the keyboard? Speaker 2: No. Jack play more piano than he'll ever play a organ. Piano man. Story_ID: 476973 Speaker 1: You have any stories from being on the road? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Which one? Speaker 1: Is there an interesting story you can tell us about being on the road. Speaker 2: No, I ain't gonna tell them, I ain't gonna tell them, my wife's [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] sitting here. I ain't telling them. You ain't gonna get me put out. No, daddy. Speaker 1: Is there a story you can tell about being on the road? Speaker 2: I don't know. I'm happy and on my own. I'm happy right now. You ain't gonna get me put out, not me. You don't know that quiet woman over there. She's a tiger, buddy. Speaker 1: So you toured with your band from the--I guess from the early '40s [1940s] until when, I mean, how long did you? Speaker 2: Stay out, you mean stay out? Speaker 1: Well, no not just stay out steadily but, you know, touring, come back and forth. Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know 'cause, hell. Speaker 1: Was it time that you settled in Indianapolis [Indiana] the first time that you kind of settled down and played in one place or? Speaker 2: Let me see, Indianapolis. Yeah, 'cause I was with her. That's when we bought the tavern [Carousel Club, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Okay, maybe we should do it like this, just tell me the highlights of what you're playing and, you know, so I can--'cause I don't have it written down here so? Speaker 2: Let me see, highlights. What kind of highlights? What would be a highlight? What would be a highlight? What would be a highlight? Speaker 1: Well, I guess a big gig some place with a lot of stars and making a lot of money. Speaker 2: Well, the biggest gigs I ever had with stars was right in my own place. See, 'cause I had practically everybody down there at Chateau de Count [Chateau de Count et Eve, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Oh, the First Hotel [ph.] too. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's where all your stars stayed at the First down on Capitol Street [sic. Capitol Avenue]. Speaker 1: Where in Indianapolis? Speaker 2: Indianapolis, yeah, the First Hotel. Yeah, that's where all of 'em stayed. Now, everybody come through there. You would just name it. And see we was the house band there. Yeah, that was my biggest highlight, yeah. Yeah, the First Hotel. Story_ID: 476974 Speaker 1: Now did you have a chance to cut any records or anything? Speaker 2: No. I had a chance but I didn't cut 'em. Speaker 1: Okay. Why not? Speaker 2: I don't--crazy. Just like my wife [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] should've been cut. If she had've been cut, she'd been on top right now. You ought to hear her, she's tough. She's one of the finest singers in the country right now. Well, right now she is the finest, 'cause all these little funky singers that thinking they singers, and I hope you print this, all them people that think they are musicians ain't nothing today. They can't read, they can't sang, they talk, they rap, they talk bull, they make--they talk the wrong sentences, they say the nastiest things on records today. They ain't got no voice, they holler. And how they make that much money I don't know. And you can quote Count Fisher [HistoryMaker Lessly "Count" Fisher] for saying that. Speaker 1: Well, now, okay. Well-- Speaker 2: And if they don't like it, come see me. Story_ID: 476975 Speaker 1: How much di- did you make in those days on the road when you were playing? Speaker 2: I don't know. What you mean, how much? I made a living. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, but for instance, typical set on a night you play some place, I mean, what do you get per- how many shows you have to do and what would you usually get? Speaker 2: Some places you make two shows; some places you make three shows. Some places--now, which band am I talking 'bout my small one or my big one? Speaker 1: Well, say, the most lucrative one? Let's talk about that maybe, I mean, during the road days when you weren't in one place. Speaker 2: The most lucrative one was the small one 'cause you made good money with the big band but you had to pay out big money. You make like, all right, all right--when I was in Cleveland [Ohio], yeah, take Cleveland. I stayed there six weeks, yeah. Okay, I was at the China Casino [ph.] and I was downtown, yeah, six weeks, five pieces, yeah, okay. We made something like thirty-five hundred, four thousand [dollars] a night, a week. That was for four or five pieces. That's pretty good money. Speaker 1: That was for those days, yeah. Speaker 2: You see, that was back in them times. So, that's about the lucrative I had. 'Cause, see, when I make like forty-five hundred, five thousand, six thousand dollars for my big band, you had a lot of money to pay out. But the five pieces, yeah, that was the most best that I could do. Story_ID: 476976 Speaker 1: Now did you get a chance to appear on a radio or television much? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, China Casino [ph.] broadcast all the time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: China Casino (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So in those days they'd broadcast live on the radio the band music from-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, we broadcasted. Well, we broadcast in George's Bar [Indianapolis, Indiana], yeah, George's Bar broadcast. That's how I met my wife [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] in George's Bar broadcasting. Speaker 1: Okay. So, in those days even if you didn't have a record, people could hear your music on the radio. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah, I got her on a bit--me and George. I didn't think she could sing. George talking 'bout letting her, "I want my girl to sing on the radio. Let her sing with your band." I said, "I don't want that woman singing with me, she can't sing." He said, "Well, let her sing a number." I said, "Well, go ahead and let her sing," 'cause I was working for him, you know. I said, "Go ahead and let her sing," I went to the bathroom. Man, that chick started singing and I had to--what! I'm in the bathroom, I had to get out the bathroom and come sit on the bar and listen. She upset me, man. I said, "Yeah, she can sing with me, yeah, hell yeah. Come on." And I said, "Instead of singing, let's get married." Shit, and that's forty something years ago and we're still together. Well, she must've did some good singing, (laughter) both way. Story_ID: 476977 Speaker 1: You settled in Indianapolis [Indiana] at a certain point really to--and establish your club [Chateau de Count et Eve, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: How did that come about, how did the establishment of your club come about? Speaker 2: Well, we was working for a man named Morris Mitchell downtown in Indianapolis. And we made him so much money that he moved out and bought another club. And we made him so much money there, he wanted to move and buy another club. I said, "I'm gonna quit you here, Morris." And I quit him there and went and bought us a club, me and her [Fisher's wife, HistoryMaker Lois Fisher]. That's how we did that. Yeah, Morris Mitchell, I'll never forget him, Jew boy. Speaker 1: How did he do after you all left, did he do okay? Speaker 2: I don't know, I think Morris died. Didn't he? Morris, I think died. I'm pretty sure he died. Speaker 1: So how did your club, I mean, did you--how did you choose a location for your club? Speaker 2: No, we, we--it was another club. We bought--it was another club. Speaker 1: I know, but how did you choose your location? I mean, did you think about like where do I wanna be in the city? You know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I liked that club 'cause I had worked there. (Unclear). I can't remember the name of it but, see, I had worked in that club and me and the boss was tight. And he was getting sick and I liked the club. I felt it, so I talked to him and he was bringing all the stars anyway. So I said, well, what about me? He say, well, let's make agreement. And he give me a figure and I gave him the money. We bought it lock, stock and barrel, everything. Yeah, his name was Ernie P. [ph.]. Ernie P. Yeah, we--it was next to the statehouse downtown, seat five hundred people. It was a nice club. See, we had a club here too. Not here, Grand Rapids [Michigan]. Where am I at? In Grand Rapids? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a club here. Up here on 28th out there on 28th Street. Speaker 1: Okay, so was it hard to get used to running a club too or was it easy? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no, it wasn't hard. Speaker 1: Did you have any problem with liquor licenses and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: No. I had good bartenders until the last one, yeah. No, all you had to do is get somebody to watch that cash register and watch them over-pours and you in business, with your waitresses, you know. Your waitresses are straight. Story_ID: 476978 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who are some of the entertainers that you brought into your club [Chateau de Count et Eve, Indianapolis, Indiana] in addition to your own band? Speaker 2: Well, Jack McDuff, Jimmy McGriff, Jackie Davis, this girl with all that hair I was trying to talk about. Speaker 1: Diana Ross? Speaker 2: Diana Ross, no, she didn't work for me. She worked (unclear) I know her that's all. The cat with, with the guitar (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you talking about Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina Turner. Speaker 2: Ike and Tina, yeah, Ike. Speaker 1: So, did you bring them in? Ike and Tina Turner? Speaker 2: No, no, she didn't work for me either. She worked for Buddy Byrd [ph.], that's right. I can't think of that name now. I brought in most of 'em. Did I say Jackie Davis? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Jimmy Smith. That singer, Hamilton. Roy Hamilton (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Roy Hamilton, Roy Hamilton, right. Speaker 2: We brought Roy Hamilton in, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, what was the biggest act, I mean, what was the most popular act that you brought in in those days? This is in the '50s [1950s], right? No, the '60s [1960s], right? It was in the '60s [1960s], right, '63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Whew! Speaker 1: Was anybody like super hot in those days that you were able to get? Speaker 2: I thought Coltrane [John Coltrane] was gonna do it but he damn near closed me. Playing that (makes sound). Speaker 1: So he was going through transition period then between playing, you know, real avant garde music? Speaker 2: He messed up a lot of people, an. I sent for that cat's booker. I sent for the man out of Chicago [Illinois], I brought him in special and gave him a fifth of whiskey and set him at the table, said, listen. And when he got through, he looked and shook his head. "And I got to pay him?" He said, "I'm sorry, you signed the contract." That man couldn't--and then Elvin Jones, I almost had something done to him. Speaker 1: Why, what happened? Speaker 2: Elvin Jones? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Instead of (whistles), that man (makes sound). That's all he did. And I looked--and I know he was a better drummer than that. Loud, my waitresses and them would go outdoors, get away from the noise. I was trying to think of the act. I can't think, man. You know, the biggest act I brought. I'll say Roy Hamilton. I know it was some bigger than him. I had Lula Reed too, yeah. I remember her. And that girl that did, "Oh babe," what was her name? Speaker 1: I'm trying to think is that Barbara Harris, no? Speaker 2: No. She was my daughter's godmother too. Ruth Brown. Speaker 1: Oh, Ruth Brown, okay. Well, you had the big names, you know. A lot of the big names and some of the comedians, huh? Your wife [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] mentioned-- Speaker 2: I had some comedians, who was that? Speaker 1: George Kirby (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) George Kirby, yeah, I had all them cats, yeah. Kirby and Moms Mabley. Speaker 1: Redd Foxx? Speaker 2: Redd, oh, yeah. Yeah, he gave me--I got all his albums over there. He gave me a whole lot of albums. Zorro Rojo, that was the name of his scoot mobile. Speaker 1: Zorro--? Speaker 2: Zorro Rojo, red fox, that's what that meant. Zorro Rojo. Yeah, red fox. He'd park that little red thing out in front of the club-- Speaker 1: Di-- Speaker 2: --he put that on it. Story_ID: 476979 Speaker 1: Did any of the big athletes come to your club [Chateau de Count et Eve]? Speaker 2: We had all the wrestlers. Speaker 1: Really? Okay. Speaker 2: Dick the Bruiser [Richard Afflis], Shy Brothers [ph.]. Oh, yeah, we got the--he brought Jayne Mansfield, star. Speaker 1: Jayne Mansfield came? Speaker 2: Yeah, Dick brought her. Speaker 1: Dick the Bruiser? Speaker 2: Yeah, he brought her. It's in there, I got the picture. Yeah, and she's a stupid blond. He brought that chick in there and say, "Hey, I want you meet Jayne Mansfield, come." Well, see me and Dick was like this (gesture). And I say, and she say, "Well, I'm glad you got to meet me." And she just come in, you know. And Dick looked at her and say, "You're not going nowhere yet. We just got here, what you mean you glad to meet me, sit down." Yeah, and I sat him in the corner, his corner. Yeah, all the wrestlers, they lived with me. And, yeah, we used to--that's who I used to fight with all the time. Speaker 1: The wrestlers? Speaker 2: Yeah, man. Well, see, they didn't fight in my club, when we was at the Bar Music [ph.]. See, we was at the Bar Music a long time. And they fight down in the bus station all the time. They just come in there and just--well, see them cats had them girls and them girls bring tricks in there, you know, and they'd fight. And when the fight break out, the wrestle would be right in the middle. And whenever I--I don't know why, wherever I go the wrestle would always come, you know. And they'd come in, cat with five of them girls and the girls would holler. And here come her man to fight the wrestler and here I go off the bandstand. And we'd just fight. And we--man, we tore up the Bar Music so many times. (Laughter) God dog. Speaker 1: (Laughter) We're gonna, we're gonna pause the tape. Story_ID: 476980 Speaker 1: You were telling us about the wrestlers coming in your club and getting in fights (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah. Not my club, in the Bar Music [ph.] not in the Chateau [Chateau de Count et Eve, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Speaker 1: Now, well why didn't you let them fight in your club? Speaker 2: Well, my club was classy. The Bar Music was just another--it was in the bus station, how's that. Everybody get off the bus, wherever you come from, you go to the Bar Music. See, you come right from the Bar Music, you come down the street, right here is the statehouse, you come on down this way then you come into the Chateau, which you'll see, very classy and everything. Speaker 1: So they did have some respect for a place not to tear it up. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah, we had two or three fights but we settled that real quick. They didn't like to fight no more. No, doggit, they wouldn't fight. I couldn't get no more fights. Speaker 1: Well, did you want 'em to fight and tear your club up? Speaker 2: I had some bouncers weren't go have that. 'Cause, see, once they see a bottle--see, my boys was like me. Theo [Theo Barnes (ph.)] and them boys like me, they loved to fight. Speaker 1: So did you have Theo with you at your club? Speaker 2: Theo? Oh, yeah. What was I gonna leave him? That was my baby, we went to school together. Oh, yeah, I didn't cut away from Theo 'til--well, when I closed the club. Yeah, 'cause I come up here. That's when I left Theo. Shit, no, no, ain't nobody in the world bad as Theo with me. Yes, sir, and I had a thing--when I--see, I had three cats, walk the floor, and when they hear (makes sound) they find out where that come from. Was it all right or was it somebody spilled something or did somebody drop something, or was somebody like this, you know. See, you learn how to read people, you can read. And if a cat pick up one like that (makes sound) and (unclear) pick it up again, my boys were right there. And if he do like this (gesture) we got him. But if he do like this, well, good evening, can we help you, anything else? That's way I had my boys, you know. Speaker 1: Did you have to worry 'bout guns in your establishment? Speaker 2: Yeah, I worried about it. But, see, I had a sign. You had a gun in your pocket, you can't come in. If we find it, we'll take it. That's the sign was in the place, beautiful sign. Speaker 1: So, it was like Dodge City [Kansas], they had to leave their guns, you know, outside? Speaker 2: Yes, sir, we don't do that in here. 'Cause I had them big floor shows. See, my drapes cost eighteen hundred dollars back then, you know. Well, if you look at it, I had a pretty club. And my girls dressed, I didn't have waitress run up and down the floor with blue jeans on. They had uniforms, you know. They treat--and if you bought a Coke [Coca-Cola], the Coke automatically went up to two dollars, just a Coke. And if you get that much in a bottle, they'd pour it your glass and take the bottle. Now, after a certain length of time, they gonna keep worrying you 'til you buy or leave. That's the way it went. Story_ID: 476981 Speaker 1: 'Cause I was paying too much money for them acts, you know. So, I paid that Coltrane [John Coltrane], I think I gave him two grand [two thousand dollars]. Speaker 2: So I guess you never brought him back, huh? Speaker 1: I wouldn't pay a dime to see Coltrane naked. Ain't nothing that man can do for me. No, that's the saddest thing I've--and what make it so bad, I know he could play that's what made me hurt. I know the man can play, and I know Elvin Jones could play 'cause me and him used to hook up in Chicago [Illinois], you know. Matter of fact, I took him in the dressing room and told him one night, "Man, you doing this to me. Why you doing this to me, I'm a brother. I belong to you and like you. I been on the road like you, me and you played together. Why are you playing--?" "Well, man, this is the new day, new music." I said, "Why do it here, do it someplace else. You know what to play here that's why I brought you. Play the song you made." "Yeah, well, I'll see, baby." And get back and do the same thing. Him and Ty, the piano player, what his name? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] McCoy Tyner? Speaker 1: McCoy Tyner. I talked to McCoy, "(Unclear) he's the boss, what can I do?" Which was right, you know. That cat, no, man. Story_ID: 476982 Speaker 1: What was the toughest part of running a--about running a club of your own? Speaker 2: Watching the cash register. Speaker 1: A lot of stealing? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Bartender, that's the easiest thing in the world for a bartender to do if you don't know him. And my last one proved it. Speaker 1: What happened is there a story (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He could steal, he was good. Beautiful bartender. He could make you five drinks in one shaker and they'd even out, that's how good he was. 'Course I found out at the end what he was doing. Speaker 1: How did he--did he have a special way of taking the money? Speaker 2: If you bought in four mixed drinks, he'd put two, three in the cash register and two on the side--the money. He (unclear) somebody come and order three or four beers--say four beers, he'll put five--four--three in the cash register, put one on the side in his tip jar. And when he got that tip jar half full, when you go back by the tip jar is empty. What happened to it? And I didn't dig that until the last time so, see, I give myself--I punish me for being so ignorant 'cause I knew better. 'Cause that was my thing, I watched bartenders. And I don't know why--it was just for him to beat me 'cause I usually--no bartender can beat me. 'Cause, see, it's eighteen shots in a fifth, see. Too many people don't know 'bout eighteen shots, twenty-four shots in a full quart, all of that. See, I learnt my waitress, I taught my waitresses. So why would I let a bartender beat me? So I did that to myself. I, I can't get mad at that. Story_ID: 476983 Speaker 1: Why did the club [Chateau de Count et Eve, Indianapolis, Indiana] close? What happened, I mean, what happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother [Ruby Mosby Fisher] got sick here--not here, Muskegon [Michigan]. She got sick and called me, wanted me to come home 'cause she didn't have much time. So I talked to my wife [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] and she knew I was fixing to--I had the bartender setup. That's what happened, how come I lost my club. I had him setup. Me and Theo [Theo Barnes (ph.)] had him ready, we was gonna serve him with a platter. Speaker 1: Did you ever have a confrontation with him? Speaker 2: No, we was gonna serve him. I was gonna take his head off. I was gonna leave him, 'cause he beat me, I know he beat me outta two or three thousand dollars. And she--one of the waitress told her. And mama had called me so she said, "Baby, let's sell and go see 'bout mama." 'Cause she know she couldn't talk me outta nothing else. So, I said, "Well, okay." So I sold my club and come up here to see 'bout my mother. But that bartender--see, God is so wonderful. See, I believe so strong upstairs it's pathetic. I believe strong upstairs. He did this--'cause I swore when I retired I was gonna go back home. That's the only man that ever did me like that and got away with it. And God blessed him, 'cause I had him on my list. So, he made it. That's why I'm here, my mother. She's over there on the piano. Speaker 1: Okay, so how was she when you got here? Speaker 2: She was in pretty bad shape. I don't know how long she lasted. I don't know, it was a couple of years I guess. She left me, yeah. Story_ID: 476984 Speaker 1: I know you did some, did some music gigs around here [Grand Rapids, Michigan] as well, but you ended up joining the police department. How did that happen? Speaker 2: Was working-- Speaker 1: Was it a sheriff's department (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sheriff's department. Speaker 1: Sherriff's department. Speaker 2: I was working in--I don't know--downtown, was working one of the clubs and the boss of the friend of the court frequented the place I worked. He was a singer and he liked what we was playing, and he asked me one night to let him sing. I said, "Come on, you know." I let anybody, you know, if you can do it. He sang, and he sang pretty good. So he started coming in and started to singing and he liked to sing. He started coming one night and then he coming two nights, then he started to coming in three nights a week. So one night, walked up to me and was talking, and he said, "How'd you like to be policeman?" And I laughed at-"What the hell you talking 'bout?" What's his name--Bill Rowe [ph.]. I said, "What you talking 'bout, Bill?" He said, "How you--I think you'd make a good cop." I said, "Man, you got to be silly." He said, "Well, you think about it." He started to singing, you know. So, a couple more nights he come back, he said, "Count Fisher [HistoryMaker Lessly "Count" Fisher]," he said, "I'd like for you to be one of my deputies." I said, "What you mean one of your deputies?" (Laughter) And he told me who he was. "Oh, man, you kidding?" I said, "Well, let me talk to my wife [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher]," I'm kidding. So I went and talked to her. She say, "Well, baby, you working three or four nights a week, and it wouldn't hurt if he let you, you know, play music. See, we need the money." I said, "Hey, I never thought about it but all right." She said, "You like to fight." She said, "You know." I say, "Yeah, okay." So I talked to him. He said, "Well, you be in my office tomorrow morning." No, no, take that back. He said, "When you get off I'll wait for you. I wanna show you something." I said okay. So me and my wife we went--he took us downtown, took us upstairs to his office and he said, "This is my office." He said, "You'll be working right there." I said, "What will I be doing?" He said, "Well, it's according if you pass my test--pass the test." Speaker 1: Exam, yeah. Speaker 2: I said, okay. So, well, you know, I love challenges I told you that. So, I said, "Okay, I'll be down here tomorrow." I went down there and took the test. The man called and told him so he called me. No, he come by the club. He said, "Damn," he said, "look at your score." He said, "You got a scholastical average that kind of score?" "I don't know." He said, "You can be a detective out there." "I don't know 'bout that." He said, "Come to my office tomorrow." I said, "'Bout what time?" He said, "Be there at nine o'clock. Can you be there?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "Can you get up that early?" I said, "Yeah." So I got up 'bout seven o'clock, took my bath, went downtown. He said, "You come to work? Come to get a job." No, he said, "You come to get a job?" I said, "Well, what you got?" He showed me the papers and things. And he said, "This how much you'll be making." I said, "Damn, that all?" I said, "What I got to do?" "You got to go out and get people, I'll put you with a partner for two weeks. If your partner say you make it, you'll be on your own and you'll get a raise." I say, "Okay, we'll try it." "Here's your badge." I said, "Already?" He said, "Here's your badge, here's your permit, gun permit." I said, "I carry a gun?" He say, "Yeah, you go to the shooting range tomorrow." He say, "I'll have Pat [ph.]," which was my partner, he's going now too. He say, "I'll have Pat take you out on the shooting range." I say, "All right." And I was, you know, I was playing with it. Hell, then I got to liking the thing, man. And after two week I went by myself. There it is. Speaker 1: What kind of experiences did you have as a sheriff's deputy here? Speaker 2: None. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No, I was a musician. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I didn't have no kind of experience. That's what--everybody laughed at when I call the boys back home, they call me a liar. When I call my boys, when I call back home and told 'em I'm a police, a deputy sheriff, they--"You lie. How in the hell you got to be a deputy as much as you fight?" You know. But I was a deputy. I stayed with them, I don't know how--'til I retired I guess. Story_ID: 476985 Speaker 1: I used to own that whole, that block over there, Franklin [Franklin Street, Grand Rapids, Michigan]. From that corner to that corner, we used to own it. And had a grocery store. Speaker 2: You had a grocery store too? Speaker 1: Had a grocery store, restaurant. Grocery store, restaurant, a little clothing store, poolroom, donut shop, and a house. That block was mine. That house across the street right there, that house next door there, all mine, and this one. Story_ID: 476986 Speaker 1: And one day Bob Blevins [Robert Blevins] called me over at the store, "Hey, (whispers) black motherfucker." "Yeah, what you want, Indian [Native American]?" "Where you at?" "You called me, I'm in my store." He say, "I'm--." I say, "Where you at?" He say, "I'm in Baldwin [Michigan]." I say, "What the hell you doing in Baldwin?" He say, "Can you get down here?" I said, "What you mean can I get down? I can go where I wanna go, Bob." Well, me and him had worked together out there. He said, "Come on down here. Tomorrow I'll look for you at ten o'clock. (Unclear). We's that close, you know, we's brothers, like brothers. We had fought together and all that. I told Eve [Fisher's wife, HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] about it. She said, "Well, when Bob call, go see 'cause I know you gonna worry 'bout him." I went down there and I walked in the office, and I says, "Is Bob Blevins here?" She say, "Oh, you mean Sheriff Blevins?" I say, "What you mean sheriff?" She say, "Oh, Mr. Blevins is sheriff." I say, "Well, where is he at?" She say, "He's in the office." And he heard me talking, he said, "Come on back here." And I went on in the back. He said, "What you doing?" I said, "I come to see what the hell you want, what's wrong with you? Who's bothering you?" He say, "Come on." And we got in his little jeep, he took me on out to Idlewild [Michigan]. See, Idlewild is that county. And he took me out there, he say--and we rode around. Man, people run up and down cars (makes sound) and we went out on the beach. See, my--I used to--I was raised in Idlewild, in Baldwin. My grandmother is buried--my grandmother and uncle is buried in Baldwin. Speaker 2: So you used to go out there when you were younger? Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, when I was--oh, yeah. I went out there before it had streets there, pavement. Speaker 2: What county is that? Speaker 1: Think it's Lake [Lake County, Michigan], I'm not sure. I think it is. Lake, I think it is. Speaker 2: You say it's the same county as this? Speaker 1: Naw, same county as Baldwin? Idlewild. Speaker 2: Now, what county is his county here? Speaker 1: This is Kent County [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were at the Kent County's sheriff's department? Speaker 1: And he say, "I want you to come bring you So and So butt here and help me run this." I say, "Oh, man." He say, "Goddamn I need somebody here I can trust." He say, "You know I don't trust nobody but you." I say, "Well, Bob, let me talk to Eve." And I come back home and I told Eve 'bout what he's talking 'bout. She say, "Well, you know how you and Bob is. If that's what you want, go 'head we can use the money." And she hadn't went to school then so I say, "Well, we'll take it for a while, see." So I called him. I say, "I'll be back tomorrow." I went back up there and next day somebody took me back to the office, back out to Idlewild, took me to the office. And told the man that run the office, "This is your new chief of police. Make him." He say, "Make him." So, they swore me in. He took me back downtown. He say, "Now I'm gonna give you the power of the whole county." Yeah, Lake County. And say, "I'm gonna give you the power of Lake." And he, he swore me in there, so I was a deputy sheriff too. So I had the whole, all the whole power. So I got to be chief of police. Story_ID: 476987 Speaker 1: Chief of police of Idlewild [Michigan] and deputy sheriff (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Deputy sheriff. Speaker 1: --of Lake County [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Lake County. Speaker 1: Okay. What year was that did all this happen? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay, now, what year did they do this? Okay, you're a chief now according to this? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Well, see, now it's the chief's association. Speaker 1: Oh, chief's association. Speaker 2: See, I belong to the Association of Chiefs of Police [National Association of Chiefs of Police] of the country. See, that's my private detective license. See, I got a detective association. Speaker 1: Okay, but what year did they make you chief of police? Speaker 2: Shoot, I don't know. Speaker 1: Let's see, you came up here in '66 [1966], right? You came here in '65 [1965], '66 [1966], right? And how long was it before that you were deputy sheriff? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't know. It ain't on here? Speaker 1: No it's not. Speaker 2: I wish my wife [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] was woke, (laughter) she'd know. Speaker 1: She might. Anyway, somewhere between 1966 and what, I don't know, '75 [1975] or so? So, in the early '70s [1970s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember dates. Dates and names I do not remember. Speaker 1: Okay, we'll just say the early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: Is any particular interesting story that comes out of being the deputy sheriff and police chief around the dukes of hazard? That's what your wife referred to that era. Speaker 2: We's fighting every week (laughter). Speaker 1: Now there a lot of cabins that people have that live in other cities and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Say what? Speaker 1: Summer homes, and that sort of thing in Idlewild. Speaker 2: Say, what? Speaker 1: Said, there are a lot of summer homes in Idlewild, right? Speaker 2: It ain't nothing but summer homes in Idlewild. Speaker 1: Okay, now does this situation present a law enforcement problem with people not there all year round and? Speaker 2: No, because they all went by the same rules. Speaker 1: No, I just wondered if some the cabins were abandoned during part of the year (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah, a lot of them abandoned. Speaker 1: --and did that present a problem in terms of law enforcement because--would people vandalize the cabins and bust in them and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we broke all that up. Yeah, that's--Idlewild, well they sent for me 'bout five or six times again now as you see. See, I stopped all that, all that break-in shit. You see, 'cause when I catch a cat breaking in a house, he was mine. I could eat him yummy yummy or put him in jail out there in them woods. And I mostly yummy yummy. (Laughter) See, and they stopped that breaking in. And coming to find out the cats that was breaking in was all outta Detroit [Michigan]. And me and the boy in Detroit was real tight, you know, Keith [ph.]. We was real close. Speaker 1: So, lot of black people from Detroit, Chicago [Illinois] and Ohio and other places had cabins out there. Were the people breaking in mostly black people from Detroit or were they white people or who--? Speaker 2: Black people. Speaker 1: Okay. I would've thought it would've been some of the locals around here that would do it but actually they would come all the way from Detroit (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Detroit, um-hm. Speaker 1: --to break into these cabins? Speaker 2: At one time, if I can remember, at one time I had damn near twenty people outta Detroit done broke into houses. I had so many people in there that I had to have a special judge to come in. Yeah, yeah. Me and Bob [Robert Blevins] stopped that though. That's a cat I wish you could meet too. But, yeah, we had a lot of fun. Speaker 1: And Bob was a sheriff of that-- Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: Sheriff of Lake County? Speaker 2: Bob Blevins. He was the sheriff. He's retired now. He's up in U.P. [Upper Peninsula, Michigan] now. Yeah, he's retired like I am. Story_ID: 476988 Speaker 1: So you retired from the sheriff's department? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I retired from there. Well, not the sheriff's--well, yeah. They called it chief of police (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From the chief of police--you were chief of police until you retired? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was chief of police and retired from there. That's reason I belong to the association [National Association of Chiefs of Police]. See, my stuff is good 'til next year. See, I'm in the national order of police. That's what you call it. The national order, anywhere in the country. Story_ID: 476989 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, I mean, is there anything you would do differently? Speaker 2: (Laughter) There you go. Not a thing. I'd do the same thing over twice if I could. Fight. I could do it all over. Nothing. See, 'cause like I tried to tell you and your man back there, this thing about racism. I don't see races, I wished I did. That would cure--please believe me, that would cure a lot of things for me if I could see races, different races. But I can't. I can only see men and women. If you do me wrong, you can be the color of this or you can be the color of this, I'm gonna get you or you gonna get me. If you do me right, you can be the same color, I'm gonna love ya. Now what is the difference in races? See, my thing is people's heads are screwed on wrong, see, because what happens when you in a car with a whole lot of people or on the bus with a lot of people and the bus turn over? What happens to them, the ones that ain't hurt? What do they do? They try to help the ones that are hurt. Oh, can--they ain't asked about no race. They asking what can I do. So, like I said, tried to tell you just a minute ago. Here's a man, the computer genius. What they said, he was $56 billion or something, he on the TV, they's telling us about the richest millionaire. He ain't got this dollar. That man can't eat but one steak. Now, if he's a glutton he might eat one and a half, he's full, right? We just got through eating a piece of chicken and you full, huh? You ate a salad but you could've ate some chicken if you wanted to, right? Is you full? Are you happy? He got a ten thousand dollar suit on, I can go put a collar and tie on. I think I look just as good as him. He drives a Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] block, block, block, a $5 million car, that little thing out there will get me just as fun as his 'cause it's in good shape, and the heater jumps. He's staying in a $10 billion house. No rain, hot. I can turn it up, I bet you I'll sweat you. It ain't raining in my house. I don't think it stinks in here. I gotta--you wanna drank, whatever you want, right there. What is it all about, tell me? Story_ID: 476990 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point again, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I don't know what you mean by that. Speaker 1: Well, legacy is what you left behind for others who come after you. Speaker 2: Knowledge. To them eight. 'Cause I can start at the top and go straight down. I can preach about everyone of 'em 'cause everyone of 'em is doing fine. I haven't got a drive-by shooter, I haven't got a dope addict, I haven't got a rapist, I haven't got a clowner, I haven't got a weird thinker. Start at the top, each one of 'em got beautiful homes. Each one's got, yeah, beautiful jobs. I don't see one of 'em begging. All of 'em got good education. And the last one is fixing to graduate from high school, which is eighteen and he got scholarships waiting on him. What can I say, God has treated me wonderful. Story_ID: 476991 Speaker 1: Now was it difficult to raise children when you were trying to operate a club and you're away at night a lot, and working for the sheriff's department at the same time? Was it--you know, was it difficult to raise children in that atmosphere? 'Cause you've moved a lot too, you've moved a lot from place to place. Speaker 2: The way I raised my kids--we raised our children, no. 'Cause see, that top one, that girl up there (gesture) and the one right there (gesture), we taught them how to help us. See, my children didn't have kids staying with 'em overnight and all that. It was enough of them to play within themselves, that's way we taught them. They loved each other. Like on the weekend when we'd be--on a Saturday, let's go to the drive-in. We'd get in our wagon and go to the drive-in. Let's go to dinner. We'd get in our wagon and we go to dinner. Let's go swimming. We go to Muskegon [Michigan] and go swimming, all. Let's play domino, we all play. We didn't have a bunch of kids running in and out, bunch of kids staying overnight. They slept within each other and that's what comes out to. They doing fine. Speaker 1: So you were able to reinforce your own values with your children? Speaker 2: That's it. That's why I can't understand what people are doing with these kids today talking all that mess. Story_ID: 476992 Speaker 1: Tell me this, this is one question we always ask and that's like what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: (Laughter) There you go, you put me on the spot again. Ask that question again. Speaker 1: Yeah. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Yeah, to wake up. Wake up, stand up and open your eyes and stop seeing black. See the world, see what it's about. Don't think the world--get up off the pity shit. The world owe me. The world don't owe you nothing. Your momma and daddy, you come out they nut sack. You didn't come outta the world. They didn't, they didn't--what you call it--if they didn't want you, they should've had an abortion, see. That's my, that's my thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Wake up, smell the roses. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And stop thinking somebody owe you. Story_ID: 476993 Speaker 1: Now, is there, is there anything I haven't asked you that you think we, we need to discuss before I ask my last question. Speaker 2: (Makes sound) You tell them people that sent you out here, that you are a genius. You ain't missed nothing. You're beautiful and I appreciate you even thinking about talking to me. Speaker 1: Well, thank you. Speaker 2: You're beautiful. And that gentleman over there [Matthew Hickey], he's beautiful. That's all I can say. Thank you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Stop, look and listen. That's all, and wake up. That's all, wake up race, not black race. Wake up my race. My race is every race. I'm white, I'm black, I'm brown, I'm Mexican, I'm everything. Wake up, that's all I got to say. Story_ID: 476994 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's my, that's my trio, which is the boy with the glasses is Erroll Grandy, organ player. And the boy cross from him is Chuck Bush, my tenor [saxophone] player, and that's me standing up behind 'em. Speaker 2: What were you all called? Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: That is the Count [Count Fisher Trio], that is my singing group. That's me in the back, Chuck Bush and Earl Grandy, that my trio. And the four in the front was my singing group. They call 'em the Count. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: That is my group, the man standing with the microphone, he's called Pro McClam [Clarence "Pro" McClam], he's a blues shouter. And that's my group at George's Bar [Indianapolis, Indiana]. Hattis Alexander [ph.] on tenor and me on drums. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is Bill Lane [ph.] on bass? Speaker 2: On bass. Moreland on piano. Speaker 1: Montan Moreland [ph.]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Not Mantan Moreland? Speaker 2: Mantan, yeah. Speaker 1: The comedian? Speaker 2: No, no, that was another one. Speaker 1: This another one, okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 1: That is Charlie Aikens [sic. Charles Aiken], Moms Mabley's son. He's emceeing a show at the Chateau de Count and Eve [Chateau de Count et Eve, Indianapolis, Indiana]. Speaker 2: You said his father was Cab Calloway? Speaker 1: Yeah, his daddy--he told us that his daddy was Cab Calloway. Speaker 2: That is part of a floor show out of Detroit [Michigan] on the stage of the Chateau de Count and Eve. That's my trio Chuck, Erroll and myself on the instruments and that's a front on the show. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Snake dancer on the show. Snake dancer with her boa constrictor, she have two. And she's a female impersonator on our stage at the Chateau de Count and Eve. You ready? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 2: That picture you're looking at is the boss, the man that started the musicians' local [American Federation of Musicians] all over the world, James C. Petrillo. And that's for him, that's me standing over on the--they had me bodyguarding him that night. And that is his man standing and his lady on the other side of him. Well, I forgot his name. Bill [ph.] I think. Speaker 1: That's my big band. That's me in front, Count Fisher [HistoryMaker Lessly "Count" Fisher] with the stick in his hand and the white coat. And the man that's jumping off the stage was one that always went with us called--his name was Curtis Anderson [ph.]. He was the one we called our bodyguard, he looked out for us. That was at the Mermont Ballroom [ph.] in Indianapolis [Indiana], yeah. That was in Gary, Indiana, Mermont Ballroom, I'm sorry. That is Arthur Prysock, one of the world's greatest singers on George's Bar in Indianapolis, Indiana. That was my band on the bandstand. Bill Lane, Hattis and myself, Count Fisher at George's Bar. Speaker 2: In our cloak room at the Chateau de Count and Eve. That's my wife, Lois Eve Rene [HistoryMaker Lois Fisher] and a dancer, one of our dancers. Speaker 1: The mighty Dick the Bruiser [Richard Afflis] and the movie star Jayne Mansfield setting in the corner of the Chateau de Count and Eve. Speaker 2: Me on drums and my son Lessly Fisher, Jr. on the other drum. He's a drummer too in our club, Chateau de Count and Eve. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I think we need to do that again. Speaker 2: That is me on drums and my son, Lessly Howell Fisher, Jr. on the other drum. He's a drummer too in the Chateau de Count and Eve. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No it wasn't the Chateau, it was in Austin. Speaker 2: In Austin, Texas at his job. Speaker 1: That's in the Archway Lounge in Chicago [Illinois]. The first two pictures on the right side, point, that is Lionel Hampton and Duke Ellington at a party they were giving there. I'm in the back somewhere, yeah, somewhere. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go 'head. Speaker 1: That's me in Idlewild [Michigan] and the patrol car as chief of police and deputy sheriff of Lake County, Idlewild, Michigan. Speaker 2: 'The Bulldog' ['The Bulldog: A True Story,' Gordon Galloway], that's a book with part of my story and part of the sheriff of Baldwin [Michigan] which made me chief, Bob Blevins [Robert Blevins]. That's our story in a book called 'The Bulldog.' It's on the shelf, you can find it...