 Story_ID: 639090 Speaker 1: Good afternoon, my name is [HistoryMaker] Deborah Lathen and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Could you please state and spell your name, including your middle? Speaker 2: My Name is Kenneth Carleton Frazier [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier], that's K-E-N-N-E-T-H, C-A-R-L-E-T-O-N, F-R-A-Z-I-E-R. Speaker 1: And can you tell us the date and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: I was born December 17th, 1954 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 2nd, 2012. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And where's the location of this interview the address please? Speaker 1: This interview is taking place at One Merck Drive, in Whitehouse Station, New Jersey, 08889. Story_ID: 639091 Speaker 1: And I'm gonna ask you some People magazine type questions, such as what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Hm, that's a good question I'll say pizza. Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer by far. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Bermuda. Speaker 1: And do you a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, actually (laughter) I don't have a favorite. Want me to tell you one that comes to mind? Speaker 1: Yes, please. Speaker 2: I think that if I had to pick one phrase out in life, it would be my father [Otis Frazier] who always said to me, "You can be anything that you wanna be." That's the one that has the most meaning to me. Story_ID: 639092 Speaker 1: Now let's explore your family history a little bit. Let's starts with your mother's side of the family. What was your mother's name and can you spell that also? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Clara Elizabeth Frazier [Clara Frazier], that's C-L-A-R-A, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, and last same as mine F-R-A-Z-I-E-R. And just to clarify 'cause it was always an issue in college admissions. Her maiden name was Frazier and she happened to marry a man whose name was Frazier, F-R-A-Z-I-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was your mother born? Speaker 2: She was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: And what to do you remember about your mother? Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a musician. She was a church organist. And she was very much younger than my father [Otis Frazier], she was my father's second wife and she was a terrific stay at home mother but frustrated because she was a teacher by training. And we got the benefit of having this woman in our lives every day. Speaker 1: Did you know her parents? Speaker 2: Yes, I knew her mother, but not her father [Robert Frazier]. Her father passed away by the time I was old enough to recognize that I had a grandfather. But her mother lived with us? Speaker 1: Oh and what's her--what was her mother's name? Speaker 2: Her mother's name was Mallie Marie Frazier [Mallie Frazier], M-A-L-L-I-E, M-A-R-I-E, F-R-A-Z-I-E-R. But her maiden name was Harper [ph.]. Speaker 1: And where was she from? Speaker 2: She was from Harrisonburg, Virginia. Speaker 1: Now, so--can, can you go back any deeper in your family? Was everyone originally from Pennsylvania on your mother's side that you know of? Speaker 2: Well my mother's family immigrated to Pennsylvania in the early part of the 20th century from Harrisonburg, Virginia, and much of my mother's family still lives in Harrisonburg, Virginia, and so I've been to Harrisonburg a couple of times to see my relatives who are still there. Speaker 1: And do you know what they did in Harrisonburg, Virginia? Speaker 2: I know that some of my aunts were maids, but I don't know much more than that. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us--so your mother was a homemaker and a teacher? Speaker 2: And a church organist. Speaker 1: And a church organist, and what, and what are your earliest memories of your mother? Speaker 2: My earliest memories of my mother, I can remember, the earliest memory I have of my mother was when she was infuriated because I was five years old. And I remember I pushed my sister [Carol Frazier] down the steps and it managed to knock out her baby teeth. And the reason I remember that was even though I was too young to go to school, my mother marched me up to elementary school [Morton Hall Stanton Elementary School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and put me in as a five year old first grader. Speaker 1: To get you out of the house was that the purpose? Speaker 2: That was, so probably so she wouldn't kill me. Story_ID: 639093 Speaker 1: Okay now let's go to your father side. What was, was your father's name? Speaker 2: My father's name was Otis, O-T-I-S, Tindley T-I-N-D-L-E-Y, Frazier F-R-A-I-Z-E-R [Otis Frazier]. Speaker 1: And where was he from? Speaker 2: He was from Greenwood South Dako- South Carolina. I'm sorry not South Dakota, South Carolina. Speaker 1: And did you know his parents? Speaker 2: I did not know his parents. Although, his father was alive until the time I was around six or seven, but I knew of his father. Speaker 1: Now how far back can you go on your, on your father's side in terms of any stories that you know from your, from that side of the family? Speaker 2: Well I know a lot of rich stories from my father's side of the family because my father's father was named Richard Frazier. I'm usual in a sense that I can say that my father's father was born into slavery. Speaker 1: And, and tell us did, did your father's tell you any stories about his father in that regard? Speaker 2: I have lots of stories about my father's father Richard. I think the first thing I have to put into context, is I mentioned earlier that my mother [Clara Frazier] was much younger than my father, so we haven't talked about my father. But my father was born in the year 1900 in South Carolina, and he had three years of what passed for an education for a black child between the years 1906 and 1909. He came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the age of fifteen. And he was sent north by his father, Richard Frazier who was a sharecropper on the same plantation that he was born into slavery into--on in South Carolina. The reason I know my fa- my stories about my grandfather is my father's abiding sense in his life was that because his father sent him north before he reached the age of majority. My father's life was much better because he didn't have to follow his father into indentured servitude the way that sharecropping was in South Carolina. Speaker 1: And so, so then now did you know your, your father's mother? Speaker 2: I did not. Speaker 1: Do you know any stories about her? Speaker 2: I did not. Story_ID: 639094 Speaker 1: Now how did your, your mother [Clara Frazier] and your father [Otis Frazier] meet? Do you know? Speaker 2: They went to the same church. Speaker 1: And when would that have been when you--when they would have met? Speaker 2: In a- like 1950. Speaker 1: And they married in? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-one [1951]. And my oldest brother was born in 1952. Speaker 1: And what is your oldest brother's name? Speaker 2: His name is Robert Randolph Frazier [Robert Frazier]. Speaker 1: And your other sibling. Your sister? Speaker 2: Her Carol Marie Frazier [Carol Frazier]. Speaker 1: And you're in the middle. Is that correct? Speaker 2: I'm in the middle. Story_ID: 639095 Speaker 1: Okay, so let's move on to your early years now. So tell me a little about--bit about the street that you lived on, your house, your neighborhood. Where was that? Speaker 2: Okay. So I was born and raised in a neighborhood called North Central, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], or North Philade- Philadelphia and I think most people would have called that when I was growing up the ghetto. It's now referred to euphemistically as the inner city and it, I grew up on a side street called Cleveland Street, incredibly narrow street. It was really more like an alley than a street. And my family had a very humble row house, but it was a house that was full of love and I grew up in a, in a house where there were very, very high standards of behavior and, and thought and interaction. Speaker 1: What was your family life like, a typical day in the Frazier household when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Well my father [Otis Frazier] went to work. He had a very demanding labor job. He was a janitor. And for us a typical day was. If it--school was not in session, we were required to go to the library, which was several blocks away and check out books, and we required to read our books and then you were allowed to go outside in the street and play and that's where I learned to play baseball and football and all the other things that kids do, but that was basically what my life was life. It wasn't a very eventful life, except that being raised in my parents' house was a, a house where you were required to read a lot, you were required to think a lot. What I remember most about my upbringing was the quality of the discussions that went on at the dinner table. Speaker 1: Give us an example? Speaker 2: Well I grew up during the Civil Rights Movement. And so as things were happening, as the country was grappling with the issue of the difference between what it said its values were and what its value seemed be at least as it relates African Americans and the movement that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] led was on the news every night and we talked about that. I remember, one of the earliest I have was when I was five years old, the discussions that were going on about the presidential election where John F. Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was running against Richard Nixon [Richard Milhous Nixon]. I can still remember those discussions at the dinner table and my [maternal] grandmother [Mallie Frazier] and my mother [Clara Frazier] and my father, they, they spoke very intelligently about the issues. My father had almost no formal education. I didn't get to say this, but he was self-taught and he read two newspapers every day and so at my dinner table, there was very rich, robust discussion about current events and that's what I remember about my house. In fact, I tell people a funny story about when I was older and I was dating a younger woman, who happened to go parochial school and I brought her home for- to meet my father and we were sitting around and my father turned to her and he said, "Well what your opinion on prayer in public school?" And being a young woman she didn't really get in--want to get into the conversation, she said she said she didn't really have one and my father said, "Well let's sit here until you get one okay." She never came back (laughter) because, in my family, you weren't allowed not to be able to think about something. Story_ID: 639096 Speaker 1: How about when we're looking back at your childhood in that, in that home on Cleveland Avenue [sic.] I think. Speaker 2: Cleveland Street [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Cleveland Street. What are some of the sounds and the smells that, that come back to you? Speaker 2: Well I wanna start with the smells. The smells were always, my [maternal] grandmother [Mallie Frazier] was an amazing cook and so I grew up in a house where there was always lots of good food. And I can remember the smells of cakes and pies baking. Every Sunday it seemed we had fried chicken (laughter) after church. Those are the smells that I can remember. And the sounds I think were just the sounds, I would have to say the sound of the piano because my mother [Clara Frazier] was a musician. My younger sister [Carol Frazier] followed in her footsteps and became a concert pianist and so the sound was always the sound of, of the piano in the background. Story_ID: 639097 Speaker 1: And let's now sort of move ahead to--you're starting elementary school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now what is the name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to the Morton Hall Stanton Elementary School, which is in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I went there from first grade to third grade, and I then went to another school which was, I was bused to another school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], which was called the Masterman School [Julia R. Masterman Laboratory and Demonstration School], which was the school that was a school for all the, I guess academically advanced children from Philadelphia would come to this one school. Speaker 1: Okay, so let's start off with your first school then. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And tell me what was that like for you? Were you, you beginning at that stage to decide what you wanted to do in life? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: What were you interested in then? Speaker 2: I don't remember what I was interested in other than baseball, and playing sports and things of that nature. Again, I can remember, I can remember when I was five years old sitting on my [maternal] grandmother's [Mallie Frazier] lap. My grandmother loved baseball, my father [Otis Frazier] loved baseball, and I remember the Pittsburgh Pirates won the World Series. A guy names Bill Mazeroski hit the only home run in history of baseball that actually decided a World Series. I was five years old I can still remember to this day my, my grandmother celebrated that home run because nobody rooted for the Yankees [New York Yankees]. Speaker 1: So sports were what you really cared about? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So how did you find your way to the school, the school for gifted children? Speaker 2: I can't answer that question except to say that one the, one of the most powerful recent experiences I had in my life was when I was named CEO of Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.]. I got a phone call from a woman whose name is Betty White [ph.], who was my second grade teacher, and what I also remember about elementary school was that in those days you could read the Bible in elementary school. It was, it had gotten, it was before the [U.S.] Supreme Court had ruled that prayer in public school was not constitutional and I should've mentioned that my mother [Clara Frazier] being a teacher all of her children knew how to read when we went to school. And what I remember about Mrs. White second grade class was that she separated me from the rest of the kids. And she taught me out of a box, like a kit of things. And this year she, last year when I named CEO she called me. She's in a retirement home, and she called me to say she had seen the article in the Philadelphia paper and she wanted me to know that she had saved my mother's letters to her all these years because by the time I got to her second grade class, she was aware that my mother had taught me certain things and that I needed to be kept stimulated because I had I guess what people know call ADD, attention deficit disorder, and it was, she was very emotional. She said, you know, I, I thought about you many times. I wondered sort of what happened and I see this article and I, I've treasured this letters because apparently the two women wrote to each other and she would send home every weekend a progress report to my mother in my book bag. And my mother would get it and she would write back to Mrs. White and that's, that was just a very powerful conversation. Speaker 1: Have you seen the letters? Speaker 2: Now I have not seen the letters, she's now at a retirement home and I keep saying I need to go visit her. Speaker 1: So what year do you think that would've been? Speaker 2: I know what year it was, that was the year 1961. Story_ID: 639098 Speaker 1: So you--now you're at the school for the gifted children [Julia R. Masterman Laboratory and Demonstration School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Allegedly gifted children. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. I went there from fourth grade on. Speaker 1: Fourth grade until when? Speaker 2: Until the end of ninth grade. Speaker 1: And what was your experience like there? Speaker 2: Well that was a very different experience 'cause I was bused across town. Speaker 1: Was it racially mixed? Speaker 2: It was very--slightly racially mixed. That what I was gonna say so my elementary school [Morton Hall Stanton Elementary School] was in my neighborhood [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. All the children were African American or if you wanna be chronologically correct Negro children. And I was bused across town to this school where I was one of only two or three Negro children in the fourth grade and there were like three or four fourth grade classes, so there was only one in the class. So it was very different for me. Speaker 1: And what--when you say very different, how did you feel going into that environment? Speaker 2: Well I--at first I felt a little bit like an outsider because I didn't see the kids from my neighborhood, and I remember feeling sad that all my friends were still walking to school and, and going to school together and playing in the playground and I had to get up very early and catch a bus to go across town to this other school. I remember feeling like I was the only one that wasn't allowed to sort of have fun with my friends. And I did--I remember painfully how different it was to go to school with white children for the first time, who didn't really in my view necessarily wanna be my friend. Speaker 1: But did you eventually make friends at the school? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So is there anything, did you play sports when you were in--at, at that school, in the elementary school? Speaker 2: Yes, but there weren't, there weren't, there were like intramural teams. You played sports in elementary school, it was recess, is what I was trying to say. Sports in school was recess or gym class. Speaker 1: Okay. So--now what's your next move after that from, from leaving high--that was elementary school, was it middle school? Speaker 2: And junior high school. Speaker 1: So you did both together, that school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that school went for--from fourth grade to ninth grade. And what was significant there, is that I skipped eighth grade. And after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was because of your academic performance? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. There was a, there were two tracks in the school. There was a track for the really advanced kids within that school, and there was a--in that track seventh and eighth were taught in one year. And I was on that track, and then I went off to high school and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was your mother [Clara Frazier] still writing notes back and forth to the teacher at this point and time? Speaker 2: No, I think by the time I got to that school the curriculum was more challenging. I think the notes were being written because in my neighborhood school as Mrs. White explained it to me, she knew that I was way past the second grade curriculum, and so this--I was mentioning that she taught me out of a box. She--I still remember she would sit me at this little table and she would pull work out of this, it was like a kit, and she would give to me to do. And I think it was because other kids were learning to spell and I already knew how to spell. I was gonna say one of the things I remember about Mrs. White's class, I could still remember this distinctly and I mentioned to her when she called. You could read the Bible in school and she would have me read the Bible to the class, and often other grownups would stand there, which to me was unremarkable. But I think in, what she was saying in retrospect people were somewhat surprised or amazed that a kid at that level, especially since I was a year younger than other second graders was able to read as well as I could. And again that's growing up in a, in a teacher's house if you get my drift. Story_ID: 639099 Speaker 1: So then high school, name of your high school? Speaker 2: Was Northeast High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--the academic high school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] is called Central High School, but Northeast High School had just started a program for scientifically gifted children who were interested in the space exploration effort and I really was very interested in space and science. And so I chose to go Northeast High School to this program within there that was again sort of a magnet program for scientifically strong children. Speaker 1: Now are your parents encouraging you in this regard? Speaker 2: Well there's an important fact that we've not covered in the academic thing which is that, when I was in the seventh grade, my mother [Clara Frazier] passed away. So at this point, I had only my father [Otis Frazier] who raised me. Speaker 1: And your father is raising two other children in addition to you? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: So in seventh grade, that's you're what you're twelve? Speaker 2: Something like that. Speaker 1: Twelve, thirteen, something around that age? Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: That had to be devastating? Speaker 2: It was, it was, I have to say the most pivotal moment in my life because my mother died of a blood clot that was secondary to a hysterectomy. So she went into the hospital to have a pro- a procedure that I wouldn't call routine, but it was also not something that where we thought she was sick and in jeopardy of her life. And I can still remember my father, we came downstairs to go to school and my father said, "There's something I need to tell you kids and it's that your mother died last night." And I sa- you, know, I can still remember it like was yesterday, how devastating that was. Speaker 1: And you made it through the seventh grade even this, I mean academically well and in spite of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. Speaker 1: And was that because of your father? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit, what your father did. How he kept you guys, how he moved you guys through this? Speaker 2: Well let me just put it this way. My father was a wonderful man, but he was not very sentimental about his children. And he had very high standards and I remember, I didn't finish the story. We were all devastated when my mother died and I remember he said, "You guys, you kids go up to your room and you can cry a little bit, but when you come down, we're going to have to keep going in life." And we did cry a little bit, but we came down and we had breakfast. And my father said, "Life goes on." And my father was very distant man before then because I think like many families of that time, the mother was the nurturer, the one that raised us. My father, his job in the family was to work and earn money and to hand out the discipline when my mother encouraged him to do that. He taught us obviously how to throw a baseball and things like that. But, like unlike modern parenting where I think my children [Lauren Frazier and James Frazier] feel like they know me, I didn't feel like I knew my father. I knew my mother, my mother was the, was the nurturing parent. And then when she died suddenly my father had to step into that role, and I think that for him it was a great opportunity. Years later he would say, "I would not have even known my children had my wife died." But he, he became the mother and the father. He had no domestic skills but he learned to cook, he learned to do all the things that you needed to do to raise children. Story_ID: 639100 Speaker 1: And you had some aunts in there too? Speaker 2: I did have aunts and my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us, tell us the names of your aunts and the role that they played in your life? Speaker 2: Well I'll start with my mother's sisters, 'cause remember I mentioned to you that my [maternal] grandmother [Mallie Frazier] lived with us. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was still alive at this time? Speaker 2: She was still very much alive at that time, she did live with us. But my mother had two sisters, my Aunt Margaret [Margaret Frazier] who is also a very strong influence in my life, and my Aunt Lovely [Lovely Frazier] who was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lovely, L-O-V-E-L-Y? Speaker 2: L-O-V-E-L-Y, was her name. And, and my, my Aunt Lovely was a domestic for a wealthy family in the sub- Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] suburbs which was the same family that my grandmother had been the domestic for, before she became too old. And my, my Aunt Margaret ran a nursery. Speaker 1: Children's nursery? Speaker 2: Yeah a children's nursery so she was an entrepreneur. She ran a private nursery, and she was also another very strong influence on me in my life, because like my father [Otis Frazier] she was a, she was a loving family member but not overly sentimental. Very disciplinarian type person. Speaker 1: So did these ladies work in concert with your father to help raise the three of you or was it primarily your father? Speaker 2: It was primarily my father. So my fa- we lived across town from them, and we would see them. But, but no my father actually, he became a mother and a father. He, he was not a person who felt sorry for himself. And all of sudden when my mother [Clara Frazier] died, it became his duty to take care of his children. And he, he did that, and, you know, sometimes when I have stress in my job, I look back and I can't imagine how stressful that must've been for him. Because he was much older than my mother. I mean my, my mother died at around forty at the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how old was your father? Speaker 2: At that time he was around sixty-seven. So it was really something for him. I don't think he thought that his child bride would leave him with young children and that he would have to raise them. But he did. Speaker 1: Did he have children from his previous marriage? Speaker 2: Yes, I have half siblings. Speaker 1: And what are their names? Speaker 2: My sister is named Willa Mae [ph.] and she's passed away. My brother's name Richard [ph.] he's passed away. Speaker 1: Did you know them? Speaker 2: I knew them but I didn't know them like siblings. I knew them like aunts, 'cause they were so, aunts and uncles, 'cause they were so much older. Speaker 1: And they were in Philadelphia as well? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 639101 Speaker 1: So, let's move pass seventh grade, eighth grade, ninth grade, anything that-remarkable about those years in, in middle, middle school [Julia R. Masterman Laboratory and Demonstration School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: I wouldn't say anything was remarkable other than I had, you know, the normal, started to get interested in girls and things of that nature. I don't remember anything remarkable. Speaker 1: What about politics 'cause we're in the era of Civil Rights Movement, Black Power movement, are you beginning to feel--be interested in anything political? Speaker 2: Well I have to say that, I mentioned before the, the whole concept of current events and politics was always discussed in my house, so I don't remember that changing that was a constant throughout that period. I remember one funny story about this was I was in fourth grade and I had to do a book report and I read the book by Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] called 'Why We Can't Wait,' and I remember my teacher called my mother [Clara Frazier] and she said that she didn't think it was age appropriate. The teacher at this time was in, in this new school, it was a white woman. And she--I don't know what her motivation was but, but she was saying to my mother that the book was not age appropriate and my mother said, "I'm sorry it's age appropriate for my--this is what we talk about at our house." And I can still remember my mother saying to other mothers on the street when people would remark that she spoke to us like we were adults. And I can remember my mother's rejoinder was, "They already know how to be children. They're trying to learn to be grownups. That's why we treat them like grownups." Speaker 1: Okay, so did you feel any sort of racial discrimination in, while you were in high school [Northeast High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with the integrated high school? Speaker 2: Well I would say junior high school and high school I did feel there was, of course at that time in the '60s [1960s] and the early '70s [1970s] race was a big issue. I remember when the race riots occurred in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I can remember how our neighborhood changed before and after the race riots. Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about that? Speaker 2: Well let me start by saying something superficial. Before the race riots we were either Negro or colored, and after the race riots, we were black. So that was one thing, in fact, black was a pejorative word when I was growing up until it became a positive word. The other thing that I think I can remember most about that period was that before the riots there were people in our community who were white, who were just a part of the community, like the merchants or the guy who would collect insurance door to door. And after, I remember that there was a sense of the, the race differences were really significant in a way that they weren't before. I would think they Black Power movement which occurred, I remember when Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] spoke at our neighborhood church, began to change our way of thinking about ourselves in relation to society. Speaker 1: Did it change the way you related to the white grocer or the people that you had known prior to, to the riots? Speaker 2: I can tell you a very funny story that's a very pivotal story in my life about that. It didn't change the way that I related to the white grocer at all. I, I remember in my neighborhood there was a complaint about the white grocer, it happened to be a Jewish merchant and there were a lot of people who complained that they thought he short changed people. And my brother [Robert Frazier] came home one night and, and repeated that ubiquitous complaint of the neighborhood, and my father [Otis Frazier] who was always different from everybody else said, "Listen, I gotta explain to you." When he put his fork down you knew we were gonna get a lecture and I'll give you the abbreviated version, he said that--, "Our neighbors think the world's divided into white people and black people. In reality, the world's divided into people who can count and people who can't count. You don't get to choose whether you're black and white, but you do get to choose whether you can count or you can't count." So as it relates to the ubiquitous complaint, he never reached a word like ubiquitous, about being shortchanged. My father's view was if you choose to be in a category of a person who can't count, not only can he cheat you, he ought to cheat you (laughter) okay. And so that story just symbolizes my father's view of the world. Which was that my father saw that there was a racial divide. He would tell us about when he went to--as a forty-seven year old man, paid his admission to what was then called Shibe Park in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and saw Jackie Robinson on the playing field, he said, "I knew my children could do anything after that." And so his point of view was not that people weren't going to try to stop you, but he would say the only question in life is can you be stopped? That's the only question, it's not whether somebody else wants to stop you or tries to stop you. The only relevant question is can you be stopped? And I think of myself in many ways as answering that question every day, that I'm the person who won't be stopped. Story_ID: 639102 Speaker 1: So, we are now moving through high school [Northeast High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. What were your favorite subjects? Speaker 2: I was always a science, chemistry, physics, biology but mostly chemistry. I really liked that and, in fact, when I got to college [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] I was going to be a chemistry major because I liked chemistry so much. Speaker 1: How did you get interested in that? Speaker 2: In chemistry? Speaker 1: Just in science in, in general. Speaker 2: I just always liked it. It always struck me as being interesting. And I can't really answer how I was interested, but it was always what I was strongest at. Speaker 1: So you majored in science and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean, you mean in high school? Speaker 1: High school. Not majored but that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was the--I was inclined towards science and that's why I chose that high school. Speaker 1: And how did you, how did you fair at that high school? Speaker 2: I think I did relatively well. Speaker 1: I think you're being modest. So why don't you tell us a little bit more? Speaker 2: No, I was an okay student. I wasn't a great student. I was a student who performed well enough that I didn't have to deal with my father's [Otis Frazier] ire but in high school, I remember being much more oriented towards the sports side of things and social things. Speaker 1: Did you play baseball and football? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes, and those were the things that I was mostly concerned with as well as the girls. Speaker 1: So what, what were your aspirations at that point? Had you, had you honed in on what you thought you wanted to do in life? Speaker 2: Oh I think I wanted to be a football player or a baseball player at that stage in my life and I wasn't really focused on academics. Although, I did do, my father would not accept anything other than relatively good grades. Speaker 1: And meaning relatively good grade was what? Speaker 2: Mostly A's, you could get few Bs. My sister [Carol Frazier], younger sister was one of those kids who all through school got only A's. I wasn't quite that good a student, but I did well enough that, you know, on my SATs and my National Merits [National Merit Scholarship Program]. I was a finalist and I was able to get into Stanford [Stanford University, Standford, California] and West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and all those really good schools. Story_ID: 639103 Speaker 1: Did you have a particular or special teacher in high school [Northeast High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that you would say was your mentor. Speaker 2: No, but I can tell you the teacher that made the most impact on me, was my geometry teacher and that's because I failed geometry. And the reason I failed geometry, now you 'gotta back, this is like the late '60s [1960s] and my geometry teacher, his name was Mr. Zysa [ph.]. He was young and he had really long hair, and so he looked different than the other teachers because he wore his hair long and he seemed like he was young and he was very friendly to us. And he had this rule, said you could cut class two times or three times, that's all you could do. And I was playing football at the time and, and I was bused across town and as a result of that I would, you know, try to do team breakfasts with the, with the rest of the team players, but I would, sometimes it would conflict with geometry. And I was a very good student in geometry. I got all A's and, but I cut more than my allotted cuts. And there were four marking periods. And I remember the marking periods, the grades as though it was yesterday. They were A, A, A, F and when I went to see Mr. Zysa, (laughter), "Obviously you made a mistake. I'm one of your better students." And I remember he looked at me and he said, "You need to learn that there are consequences for not doing what you're supposed to do." And I ended up having, first of all my father [Otis Frazier] had never seen a failing grade from any of his children, so I had to explain that. And my father's response to things that were outside the parameters of acceptability was immediate violence. But beyond that, I had to go to summer school. And I remember I went to summer school and the woman who was teaching summer school. The first day she called me up to her desk and she said, "I know why you're here honey." She said, "Because you didn't go to class and I know you don't need to learn anything this summer, so you can bring paperback books and you can read it, but if you don't come here every day, I'm gonna fail you." And that story is an important story to me because as harsh as that was looking back and he was very harsh on me. Speaker 1: He did not change the grade? Speaker 2: He did not change the grade. He gave me a lesson early in life that I've watched other people learn later in life where the ability to recover from it, is a lot less. So I learned then the importance of consequences for certain behaviors. Speaker 1: So that was--what, what year would you have been in high school do you think? Speaker 2: I think--I'm saying that, that was 1968, '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: You would've graduate in '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: One [1971]. Speaker 1: One. Oh, that's right 'cause you skipped a grade, okay. So now, you played for, for the football team, the high school(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultanous) Badly. 'Cause I was too small, I skipped two grades. So my high school at- athletic career was undistinguished because I was just too small. Speaker 1: Okay. Now it's time to go to college then. But first, let's talk about girlfriends and proms and things like that. Did you, did you date in high school? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. Speaker 1: Was there a love of your life? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Brenda Ruffin [ph.] and she's still a very good friend of mine. She was my girlfriend throughout high school, throughout college [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] and even in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] she was my girlfriend. Story_ID: 639104 Speaker 1: Now you said just a moment ago, that you'd gotten into Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and, name all the schools that you, that you were(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simulataneous) I can't remember them all but, a number of them. Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. Speaker 1: That's a fine school. Speaker 2: It is a fine school. What happened in those days is that those were schools were starting to opening, opening themselves up to, to African American students. And if you did well on the standardized test you would get these letters from these schools without having applied, asking you to apply to be admitted to those schools. Because they could tell by, by your standardized test scores and so--but my, my aunt, my Aunt Margaret [Frazier's maternal aunt, Margaret Frazier] was friends of our congressman his name was Robert Nix, Sr. [Robert N.C. Nix, Sr.]. He was one of the few African Americans in the U.S. Congress in the '60s [1960s] early '70s [1970s] and Congressmen Nix had never been able to exercise his appointment, well not recently to the military academies and so somehow it got to his attention that I could be a kid from North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that he could send to the military academies and so my family got all behind this. My father [Otis Frazier] was along for the ride and I was supposed to go to, I got into Annapolis [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] and West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] and supposed to go to West Point. And I didn't wanna go because what was going on at that time was a war going on in Vietnam-- Speaker 1: Vietnam [Vietnam War] is that--yes. Speaker 2: --and, but I was admitted and I was supposed to go there and I turned down all the other schools. And I remember it was around early December or so I got a letter from the commandant at West Point, saying, "Dear Mr. Frazier [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier]. In reviewing your records it has now occurred to us that you are fifteen years of age and you cannot be inducted into the United States Army." Because again this goes back to this whole thing about being skipped in my mind's eye I was a peer of my colleagues but I was too young. Speaker 1: And the age limit was what? Speaker 2: Seventeen to be inducted. Speaker 1: Seventeen. Speaker 2: And so they suggested that I go to one of those military schools for a couple of years to get old enough, and that's how I persuaded my dad that I didn't need to go to this military school, and that's how I got out of, I would've otherwise gone to West Point. And at that point, the only school, one of the schools that was willing to retroactively admit me was Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], and that's how I ended up at Penn State. I never intended to go to Penn State at all. Speaker 1: So you had turned down all the other schools that you had been admitted to, planning on going to West Point, until they said sorry you're just too young? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so Penn State admitted you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So what year would that have been 1971? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 1: And you were fifteen years old? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 639105 Speaker 1: So you started college at sixteen when most other people started around eighteen? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And how was that? Speaker 2: Well do you want the honest answer? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Socially it was tough because I was two years younger than other college girls. Every other respect I'm not gonna mince words, I was more mature than the other people on campus because I had grown up in my father's [Otis Frazier] house. My mother [Clara Frazier] died when I was young. I had a lot of responsibility. I had my first job when I was thirteen years of age. College was not hard for me because I had much more discipline than most of my peers in college. Speaker 1: Well tell us about Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania]. That's a big school isn't it? Speaker 2: It's a huge school. You can get lost in that school. It's, you know, thirty-five thousand undergrads in one campus and the class sizes are huge. And I went there originally to be a chemistry major. And, but I always found college to be fine. I had one great professor in college too. I should tell this story. My first semester in college I took college calculus which was very hard, and I remember the professor was an Asian man who I could never understand what he was saying, and I worked very hard and the first couple of exams I didn't get great grades, like Cs or whatever, but the end of the semester I was consistently getting A's and he gave me a B in that course. And I'm always grateful to him because I, I believe somehow that if I had gotten a C in that course my approach to college would've been fundamentally different. Speaker 1: Was this your freshmen year? Speaker 2: My first, my freshmen year. But because he gave me a B in that course in my, I remember thinking I still can have a really good transcript. That was my first, Penn State had trimesters, that was the only B I ever got in college. Everything else was an A. And I think that was in part because he was kind enough to give me a grade that represented how well I was doing at the end of the course, rather than throughout the course. Speaker 1: Do you remember his name? Speaker 2: I don't. Story_ID: 639106 Speaker 1: You said you started off as a chemistry major? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But you changed majors? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And when was that? Speaker 2: I think it was the middle of my sophomore year. Speaker 1: And why? Speaker 2: Because I decided I wanted to be a lawyer. Speaker 1: What, what happened to, to bring about this transformation? Speaker 2: I think I always wanted to be a lawyer in the back of my mind, but I was carrying on from the high school science orientation into college [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], and I hadn't squared those two things. Speaker 1: But what precisely if you can, made you say its law, was there something that you wanted to achieve, a goal that you wanted to accomplish, some kind of a, a legacy or commitment that you wanted to make? Speaker 2: Oh well that's a different question. Yeah I, the reason I wanted to be a lawyer is because I saw people like Thurgood Marshall making huge social contributions in society and I, you know, I started to take other courses, you know, as a freshman you have to take lots of different courses. I took a history course, I took a political science course, introduction to government and I just realized I was more interested in that than I was in science. So it was a combination of looking at what lawyers did in society and also, being oriented as a freshman to all the courses you have to take more broadly that made me realize that my interests were much more on the, sort of the humanities and law side than the science side. I do think it's remarkable that I find myself though in a company now, that is so science oriented. And I don't think that, that's a complete coincidence. So having an affinity toward science and some ability in the sciences and in math, I think is very helpful if you're gonna end up as a liberal arts grad running one of the foremost scientific enterprises in the world. Speaker 1: Which is Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.]? Speaker 2: Which is Merck. Speaker 1: So, so you switched your sophomore year to political science. Is that correct? Speaker 2: Yes, and then I was a history major too. I had a double major. Story_ID: 639107 Speaker 1: And what was life on campus like at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania], during that time? Speaker 2: There was a lot of, well so, the most significant aspect of college life then, was that there was a war going on. And everything I remember around the campus life had to do with the war and the anti-war protest. Speaker 1: And this is the war in Vietnam [Vietnam War] we're talking about? Speaker 2: The war in Vietnam, in the early 1970s. The other abiding social dynamic on the campus was complete separation of the races. Speaker 1: And voluntary, is that correct? Speaker 2: Voluntary, yes, exactly. In fact, I think the class in front of us was the first class that had admitted large numbers of African American students at Penn State. And there was huge amount of resistance and suspicion and fear on the campus. Speaker 1: So what percentage of the campus would you say was African American when you were there? Speaker 2: It had to be less than 10 percent. Speaker 1: Less than 10 percent. And this is a state school. Is that correct? Speaker 2: It's a state related school. It's not a state school. Speaker 1: It's not a state school. It's a state related school. Speaker 2: Yeah, it ge- it gets funding from the state, but Pitt [University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], Temple [Temple University, Philadelpia, Pennsylvania], Lincoln [Lincoln Univesity, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and Penn State are not state schools. They are state related schools. Speaker 1: State related means that they get funding, but they're basically private? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was, what positions if any were you taking with respect to the war and respect to the black, white separation? Speaker 2: I wasn't very active in the war thing because, you know, I came to campus as a freshman and the war did end at, when I was a sophomore and I don't remember being that particularly involved in the war. I was anti-war if I talked about my sentiments, but I wasn't active in any student organizations. The black, white thing, of course, you couldn't help but be involved in that because there were many white students I think who were uncomfortable with black students on campus. And more importantly, there were, most blacks students were very uncomfortable being surrounded by a sea of white students. Speaker 1: Did you have, during that time a lot of universities, you were getting the black studies programs (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh there were all those programs yeah. I remember there was a black study lounge in our dorm area, which was reserved for the black students and I used to hang out there all the time to play cards mostly (laughter). Speaker 1: Would that have been bid whist? Speaker 2: And, and no at Penn State, the big game was pinochle. Speaker 1: Pinochle Okay. So what is, what is your, your best memory of your years at Penn State? Speaker 2: Putting aside the girlfriends. Speaker 1: You don't have to put them aside but (laughter). Speaker 2: No I think, I think, well so academically I really came into my own because you cou- you could study what you wanted in college. And so I was very interested in political science and history. I had some great professors, economics so college was great. But I also--it was a place to grow up. I grew up from being a sixteen year old little kid to figuring out how I wanted to live my life and, and I enjo- my, my four best years in life, were my four years at Penn State. You know a lot of African American students didn't like it because it was so different, but I grew up in the inner city and I quickly figured out, look hey, I can go anywhere I want, anytime day or night. And unlike Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], which had terrible gang wars. No one was gonna beat me up or shoot me because I was in the wrong neighborhood so I actually saw it as a very positive thing and it was an opportunity for me to learn. In fact, my first roommate in college who's a physician now in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] I believe, in Pittsburgh area. His name was Tom Fernstler [ph.]. He was the son of dairy farmers. Speaker 1: Say His last name again, please. Speaker 2: Fernstler. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: F-E-R-N-L--no S, F-E-R-N, F-E-R-N-S-T-L-E-R, and he was the son of dairy farmers. And what I learned from being with him is we couldn't be more different, but Tom's parents didn't have a lot more money than my father [Otis Frazier] had and he would wanna go to bed when the sun went down 'cause that's what he was used to. And you know when you put kids that are that different into a room, it's tough at the very beginning. Speaker 1: And he's white right. Is that correct? Speaker 2: He's very white. From the Lancaster, Pennsylvania area. And I'm saying when you put peo- with that different together, but they learn that they have a lot more in common. To me, that was the big thing about college. And so I definitely always understood the implicit rules of college which were thi- self-imposed segregation, but I never let that limit me 'cause I realized I could function on both sides, which was something that was very important. Story_ID: 639108 Speaker 1: You graduate from college [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania] with a degree in political science is that correct? Speaker 2: Um-hm, correct. Speaker 1: With honors and all that stuff as well? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about graduation day. Who's there? Speaker 2: My father [Otis Frazier], my [maternal] aunts, my brothers, my sister, my brother [Robert Frazier] and my sister [Carol Frazier], that's what I remember. Speaker 1: And how was your, what was your father's reaction to his son graduating from college? Speaker 2: He took it I stride. I remember by that time I'd been admitted to law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massaschusetts], and I, I remember distinctly people in my church were really impressed that I had been admitted to Harvard and Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], and places like that, and my father's like this is what they're supposed to do, you know, if you get my drift. This is what you were supposed to do. You're supposed to perform at a high level. Because it was available, and you could do anything you wanted. And so I just remember that I remember people in my church trying to make my father feel really good about it, and my father refusing to take the bait. He's like, "Well I went and worked every day, sent him to school, he didn't have to do anything but go to school." Speaker 1: But how did you, how did that make you feel? I mean did you feel that your father wasn't appreciative of what you've done or did you agree with his approach? Speaker 2: No, I thought he wasn't appreciative of what I'd done. I thought my--until I got to be thirty years of age I never really understood my father at all. I thought my father just never gave me credit for all that I did. But I, you know, I've now looked back and I realize that I sit here now because the only place in the universe with the possibility of me being here in this place with this responsibility existed in 1967 was in my father's head. And because he believed firmly that it could happen, it happened. It would not have happened had he not expected or held us to this standard. Speaker 1: Did you ever have an opportunity to tell your father of, you know, what you come to learn from him. Speaker 2: No, 'cause he was not that kind of man. He would- he wouldn't hear it, he would say, "That's your job, that's your responsibility in life." And you cou- he wasn't a person who took emotion very easily. I said he wasn't a sentimental man; I meant that. Story_ID: 639109 Speaker 1: So graduation's over and you've chosen Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. You got into Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] and other schools. Why Harvard? Speaker 2: The name sounded good to me (laughter). And it sounded better than Yale. Speaker 1: And you arrived in Cambridge, Massachusetts and that would be in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: This is your first time not living in the State of Pennsylvania, is that correct? Speaker 2: Yes, it is. One of the first times outside the State of Pennsylvania I would say. Speaker 1: Okay, well what's that like then? Your world has been Pennsylvania specific, Philadelphia, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, mostly Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Mostly Philadelphia and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: And Penn State. And now, and now you're going to interact in a world outside of Pennsylvania with people from all over. Speaker 2: So what I remember about it was that this was for me the biggest transition in my life, 'cause, you know, I really didn't feel that I fit in at all at Harvard Law School with anybody, for the most part. With the exception of Reggie Thomas who was my best friend at Harvard Law School. I, I didn't feel that I was that, I was unlike everybody else. Speaker 1: This is your--okay your fi- this is the first year of law school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And tell us what the class looks like? In terms of African Americans, men and women. Speaker 2: So I remember-- Speaker 1: The diversity of the class. Speaker 2: --I would say that there probably the, the class was around maybe 10, 15 percent women, maybe 20 percent at the most. I don't remember there being many women at all at Harvard Law School in those days. And among African American students, I remember that we were probably again less than 10 percent of the population. And there were a lot more men than women in the African American community. Speaker 1: So when you say you felt like you didn't fit in, do you feel like you didn't fit in with everyone, including the African American students? Speaker 2: Particularly the African American students. Speaker 1: Tell us more about that and why? Speaker 2: Well I just remember that, when I first I got there, there was this rank ordering that was going on among students about where people went to undergraduate school. I could still remember when people would say where you, where did you go to school, and I would say Penn State. And they would--they couldn't get it through their head, they would say, "You mean University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] don't you," and I would say, "No, Penn State damn it." So that was one orientation and I think people took a lot of self-worth from where they've gone to undergraduate school. And so there was sort of a reverse snobbery. I remember one of our classmates Fern Fisher who would say to people, "I went to Howard [Howard Univesity, Washington, D.C.]. That's the black Harvard." She would say in an attempt to try to make that up. And I never wanted to make that up, and I also thought that, I felt for the first time that I was in school with people, who while they shared my race, were from a decidedly different social class. Wealthy people or well off people. Speaker 1: So you felt that the African Americans were well off people? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you have any interaction with the the white people at, at Harvard? Speaker 2: Absolutely I did. Speaker 1: So where did you find and form your friendships, I mean how long did this sort of sense of alienation, you know-- Speaker 2: Alienation is too strong a word for it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would say that I was acutely aware of social class boundaries for the first time in my life. Because I went to a school with many more people who were from economically more advanced backgrounds. So I can remember one specific example. When I was a first year law student, one of the African Americans was having a party and they sent around an invitation and the invitation made reference to it as a soiree, and I had never seen the word before. Coming out of North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I didn't know what a soiree was and I remember saying that and, and going to those parties. And I remember I was at a party once with some people and I, I won't mention names, and some of the people in the party were saying that I was sort of rough around the edges and they made the mistake of saying that to one of my classmates whose name was Rosalind Plummer, with whom I shared the fact that we grew up in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] together and Rosalind said from across the room, "Hey Kenny [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier], guess what So and So is saying about you?" (Laughter) And I remember my response was not a very civil response and, those are the kinds of things that I'm talking about. Speaker 1: But time passed. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you made friends. Speaker 2: I did, I had lots of friends. There's no question about that, you know, obviously, everybody wasn't from the same bolt of cloth and so I had some really good friends. I remember Reggie Thomas, William McKinley Jackson, J.J. Those guys were really good friends of mine. Speaker 1: And you had female friends as well. Speaker 2: I had a few female friends. A woman named Fern Fisher, Deborah Post, [HistoryMaker] Deborah Lathen. I had really good friends. Story_ID: 639110 Speaker 1: How did you find Harvard from an academic prospective? Speaker 2: Actually that was the positive aspect of Harvard, well I, I walked in thinking maybe I didn't belong because I was the only one there from a state school. I think after the first semester grades, I realized I really did belong at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I, I did very well my first year and I think that--I remember my first semester grades were good and I had a torts professor, his name was Milton Katz and professor Katz called me to his office because I guess they blinded the grades and then they unblinded them. He called me to his office and he sat me down and he said, "Mr. Frazier [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier], you have the making of a really fine attorney and don't let anybody tell you differently." So I remembered that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then, did that give you an embolden sense of a-- Speaker 2: Yeah it did, as well as the grades. I, I think I really knew I belonged after grades 'cause people sort of talked about what their grades were. And I remember on my floor in the dorm, it was called Dane Hall, people were talking about their grades and I--my first semester I had an A and a B plus and I was so unhappy about the B plus and I didn't realize that I was making the other guys on my floor feel badly. Speaker 1: 'Cause they had Cs right? Speaker 2: No I think they had Bs or B minus or, and they were saying you have no right to be acting like you're upset about your grades. Speaker 1: Do you think that was Otis Frazier talking to you when you got that B plus? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was my father's stan- standards and I knew that there was this thing called the law review [Harvard Law Review] and I knew that some people were gonna make it on grades and, you know, I, I've always been competitive and I don't deny that, you know, people say to me, you're competitive. I say yeah, I'm competitive. Speaker 1: So when you, when you were at Harvard, had you decided what kind of a lawyer you wanted to be? Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought I was going to be a criminal lawyer. Speaker 1: And why criminal? Do you know? Speaker 2: 'Cause that's the only kind of lawyer I knew when I went to law school. And then I learned that there were these things called law firms. I'd never heard of that before I went to Harvard Law School. And-- Speaker 1: But before we leave Harvard, we'll get to the law firm. Speaker 2: No. I meant--I was talking about being a first year law student. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And people told me that I had to get a suit. I didn't even own a suit so that, that's a social class thing. Before I was, before I matriculated at Harvard Law School. Before interviewing season, I had never owned a suit in my entire life. Speaker 1: Not for church, you, you, your family went to church. Speaker 2: Yes. I'm not saying when I was five or six (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh you--but I, I understand. Speaker 2: I'm saying that from the time I was twelve or thirteen to the time I got to Harvard Law School, I had never owned a suit and I had--remember I'd gone to Filene's Basement to buy a suit to interview in. Speaker 1: Okay. Now but you did something else when you were at Harvard? Speaker 2: Yes, I formed a very important and distinctive group of young men. Speaker 1: Yes, tell us about that, please? Speaker 2: Yeah, so I remember distinctly being in that field that's outside the dining hall at Harvard Law School. Harkness Commons in being out there and throwing a football around with Lamar Sims [S. Lamar Sims] and [HistoryMaker] Charles Ogletree. Speaker 1: Who is now Professor Charles Ogletree. Speaker 2: Is now Professor Charles Ogletree and Reggie Thomas. And I remember Lamar Sims as I recall saying we ought to form our own intramural football team. And I don't remember who came up with the name the Black Plague [ph.], but it was hatched in those very early days and we got a bunch of guys together and formed that football team, and my wife [Andrea Wilkerson Frazier] to this day says, "What is it about you guys and this stupid little football team you had," but it, it endures to this day. Speaker 1: And there was another team that was formed another, another black team? Speaker 2: It was a--yeah but that was formed later. It was called the Mean Machine [ph.] and they were sort of a poor man's Black Plague (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you guys play each other? Speaker 2: Um-hm. In fact, the Black Plague played three years together and we only lost one game and that was the championship game when we were first years. Speaker 1: And you--okay, this was against the Mean Machine? Speaker 2: No Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: That was against the, another team they had some other really good athletes. A guy named Jesse Spikes was on that team. And I remember the former mayor of Baltimore [Maryland], [HistoryMaker] Kurt Schmoke was on that team. It was another team, it was an integrated team, but they were really good athletes and, and we lost that game, it was the only game we lost in three years. Speaker 1: And then some years, some years later, you had a reunion of the teams? Speaker 2: Oh yes, we've had many reunions, but we had one reunion ten years after we graduated and played the guys that were our successors on the team and beat them (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 639111 Speaker 1: Black Plague [ph.], Mean Machine [ph.], Black Plague as I recall you saying returns to the Harvard Law School campus [Cambridge, Massaschusetts] ten years after you've graduated is that correct? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And who, who are the returnees? Speaker 2: Well I think our team captain was a guy named Reginald Thomas [Reggie Thomas] who always took this very seriously. Speaker 1: He's a judge now is that correct? Speaker 2: No. Reggie is running for state representative now in Lexington [Kentucky]. Eric Moye who is a judge in Dallas, Texas; Professor Charles Ogletree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree]; Lamar Sims [S. Lamar Sims] who's the, the assistant district attorney if not the district attorney in Boulder, Colorado; George Haywood, who is still a very good friend of mine and is a retired private investor in Washington [D.C.], who we all look up too. Let's see Jerry Lovejoy, who, I guess the last time I saw him he was general counsel of Taco Bell [Taco Bell Corporation]. Who am I forgetting, I'm, I'm not remembering everybody else. Speaker 1: Okay. So what happens with the match where the--what--how old are you at the time you guys had this match? Speaker 2: You mean ten years later or the Mean Machine games who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ten years later when you go back to, to play the, the successor to the Black Plague. Speaker 2: I think at that point about thirty, thirty-one. Speaker 1: Thirty, thirty-one. So you back to pla- to play the, the Black Plague? Speaker 2: The current incarnation of the Black Plague. Speaker 1: And how does that go? Speaker 2: Well we were able to win the game and we were able to win rather easily. And they were trying to (laughter) I think they were surprised that we were that good but I guess in retrospect thirty year olds are really in pretty good shape. We couldn't have done it when we were forty or fifty but thirty we were in pretty good shape. Speaker 1: So no more reunion to play against the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Although, we thought about doing it when we were forty but someone had the good judgment to say no. Speaker 1: So would you say the Black Plague was one of your highlights of the Harvard Law School? Speaker 2: Absolutely. 'Cause it was a bond that still exists to the day. Story_ID: 639112 Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about the atmosphere of Cambridge [Massachusetts] and Boston [Massachusetts] during those years when you were there? Speaker 2: So, I remember the first year I was there. I'd never been in a place that was as racially divided as Cambridge and Boston were because at that point in time, Boston was going through a great deal of social upheaval over a federal judge, Judge McGarity's [sic. W. Arthur Garrity Jr.] order to desegregate the Boston Public Schools and in particular in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts]. There was a huge amount of resistance to that and I think that, that spilled over into the atmosphere throughout the whole greater Boston area, including Cambridge. Speaker 1: So would you say it was a relatively hostile or difficult to navigate type of environment? Speaker 2: I wouldn't say that because I spent most of my time on a Harvard Law School campus [Cambridge, Massachusetts], but you were surrounded by the kind of racial hatred that I think we've come to identify with Birmingham [Alabama] in the 1960s, so you were in that environment, you were in that television market, that newspaper market. You, you knew that was happening a few miles from the environs of Harvard. Story_ID: 639113 Speaker 1: You finished your trip to Filene's Basement to buy a suit and you decide now I'm gonna move on into my career. Speaker 2: I was told that you should interview at law firms. Speaker 1: And who told you this? Speaker 2: I think it was the upperclassmen. I have to say I had one of the greatest advisors in--at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I was very lucky with the people that were my mentors. The Black Law Students Association [Harvard Black Law Students Association] would assign mentors and my mentor was a woman named Stephanie Bess [ph.], who went on to be partner at Dechert, Price, and Rhoads [Dechert LLP] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and then has gone off to great things at one of the investment firms in London [England] and, I was young and I was inexperienced but she was such a great mentor. I remember she said to me. "Grades really matter Kenny [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier]." Because a lot people, their advice was, "Well you're here at Harvard and you've been successful, doesn't matter." And Stephanie was very intense and I'll just skip ahead. Even when I went to practice law in Philadelphia and years later, she would call me every once in a while. She would say, "Are you doing your work as an associate or are you going to make partner?" Speaker 1: So Stephanie was a mentor to you in the law school? Speaker 2: She was my boss advisor as we called it. Speaker 1: And she advised you to go to a law firm? Speaker 2: She among others. I know don't know that it was she specifically, but a lot of other people. When I got there I realized that the thing to do was to look for a summer job in a law firm. Speaker 1: And you knew that you wanted to come back to Philadelphia. Did you consider any other places? Speaker 2: I did consider other places, but not really seriously. Speaker 1: Because? Speaker 2: Because I'm from Philly. I'm a Philly guy. So I went back to my hometown and never thought twice about it. Speaker 1: And what law firm did you go to? Speaker 2: A law firm called Drinker Biddle and Reath [Drinker Biddle and Reath LLP, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: And tell us about your experience there? Speaker 2: Well. Speaker 1: This is 1978. Is that correct? Speaker 2: Post law school. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yes. It was fine, I have to say one more thing because, for the records is the other major mentor that I had at Harvard Law School before I get to my practice career, was I had the extraordinary benefit of having John Payton as my legal writing instructor and-- Speaker 1: And tell us for the record who John Payton was? Speaker 2: John Payton is recently deceased, had the NAACP Legal Defense Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and before that he was a partner at, at WilmerHale [Wilmer, Cutler, Pickering, Hale and Dorr LLP] in Washington [D.C.] and among other things. It was he who litigated through the courts, all the way through the [U.S.] Supreme Court, the Michigan affirmative action cases, both the law school case [Grutter v. Bollinger, 2003] and the undergraduate case [Gratz v. Bollinger, 2003] in the lower court and the court of appeals. And I think it was only the law school case that he argued in the Supreme Court, but he was one of the greatest lawyers in the country and was a great and fearless warrior for civil liberties and civil rights. And I feel extraordinarily fortunate again that he was one of my first exemplars of what it meant to be an excellent African American lawyer, and I will always be grateful for that. Speaker 1: And that was while you were in law school? Speaker 2: That was my first year legal writing instructor, was John Payton. And I just, out of all the people that it could've been, I feel myself again, fortunate that people like John and Stephanie were the people who took an interest in me and, and, and convinced me that being a first rate law student and then later a first rate lawyer was what I should aspire to be. Speaker 1: And do you have any sense of why they took that interest in you in particular? Speaker 2: I think John was assigned to whatever group of law students that was in the legal writing course and Stephanie I guess was assigned to me. I don't know because I was from Philadelphia and she was from Philadelphia so. I, I don't know for sure, but I do feel myself to have been fortunate to have, because I was so much younger than everybody, to have real grownups as my mentors is what I'm trying to say. Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I graduated in 1978 and I went to practice law in Philadelphia. Story_ID: 639114 Speaker 1: When you look back on your years at Harvard, when you left in 1978, what were your feelings then about the institution and about what you were gonna do in the future? Speaker 2: Well first of all I was completely alienated from Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and a best, one manifestation of that is that I didn't even attend my law school graduation. I had no desire to attend my law school graduation. I was just glad to be rid of Harvard Law School and getting on to the next thing in my life, which was taking the bar and becoming a lawyer in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. And so you take the bar. You pass the bar and you join the firm of Drinker Biddle and Reath [Drinker Biddle and Reath LLP]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what is your area of practice? Speaker 2: Well I was fortunate that when you came out of law school in a firm like that in the old days, there was sort of a period of time when you're asked to rotate through a lot of things before you declared your quote major so to speak and I knew what I wanted to be. I wanted to be a trial lawyer a litigator so, I settled into the litigation department at, at Drinker. Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit about the, the cases. Give us, for an example of what you would say was one of the best cases or the most interesting cases that, that you tried. Speaker 2: Well I have to say one or two cases, so first of all, I'm, I, I sit here now in, in the job of CEO of Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.] and I know that I traced that back to the fact that I was assigned to a Merck case as a first year associate at Drinker. And when the case came to trial I was at that point either at the end of my first year or just at the beginning of my second year and it, there was a partner who was 'gonna try the case and I remember my job was to get some aspect of the trial stuff ready. And we were all sitting around talking about what was 'gonna happen at the trial. And I had the temerity to say that I'd like to try the case and they all looked down the table at me 'cause I'm this kid and I've only been there a year at most and, and, and they were all laughing at it. Speaker 1: This is like 1979, around that timeframe? Speaker 2: Yeah. They all thought it was amusing and the most senior partner in the room, Bob Ryan was his name. He saw that I was serious and after all the laughter happened and people were drifting away and picking up their papers. He called me over and he said, "Kenny [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier]." They all called me Kenny. "What I want you to do is this weekend, I want you to go home and I want you to pretend like you gonna try this case and I want you to come in here Monday into my office and tell me what your opening argument would be." And I remember I went home and I worked all that weekend. Speaker 1: Now were you married at this time? Speaker 2: No I was not. Speaker 1: You're not married okay. Speaker 2: I was very, very single back then (laughter). And I came in and I did my opening statement for him and he called the partner that was gonna try to case in. And then he called the general counsel at Merck. I can still remember this like yesterday and they were yucking it up. "This young feller wants to try this case." He said feller I remember like it was yesterday and the general counsel of Merck was on the speaker phone, he said, "Well why not give him a chance?" Speaker 1: Was this a big case? I mean what were the stakes? Speaker 2: It wasn't a very big case. No. I mean it was--I don't remember what the quantum of damages was, but I don't remember it being a huge case, but it was in federal court in front of the chief judge of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, jury trial. So the senior partner Bob Ryan, after getting the permission from the Merck client, a general counsel, said, "Let him try the case." And he sent the partner down to shadow me in case I crashed and burned. And I remember I picked the jury and I tried the case and I won the case and I think that-- Speaker 1: Was it the first case you've ever tried? Speaker 2: It was the first case I've ever tried. And, and I remember that the chief judge was very mean. And I also remember that I did know how to try the case. I did see what the issue for the jury was and I think that's what, looking back I thi- if it doesn't sound immodest, I think the senior partner saw that I saw what the jury's issues were rather than the legal issues. And as a result of that I got a little bit of a reputation in Merck and so the Merck lawyers would ask for me more and more as I grew older I got more experience, successfully more complicated and challenging work from Merck people. And eventually when Bob went to retire, Merck requested that I was a very new partner at the firm that I take over the Merck account, which was a real controversy 'cause it skipped a couple of generations of partners above me who had worked on Merck matters for years and the bottom line is I, I think that the reason I eventually became general counsel of Merck was because I had that direct connection with that general counsel when I was a young person. So, so that was the case that I would name as my most influential case. Story_ID: 639115 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you had another case that took you to the Supreme Court and it, it in fact, sort of fed your need to do criminal law. You wanna tell us a little bit about that? Speaker 2: You're talking about the death penalty case [Cochran v. Herring]? Speaker 1: Yes I am. Speaker 2: So that's a pro bono case. Speaker 1: And give us the name of the case please? Speaker 2: Yeah, the name of that, so the name of the client in that case was James Willie "Bo" Cochran and Bo Cochran was convicted of murder and sentenced to death for the murder of a shopkeeper in 1976. He'd been on death row for nineteen years. He was less than a month away from his scheduled execution date when I was asked to take the case. I did not wanna take the case. I declined to take the case. Speaker 1: Who asked you to take the case? Speaker 2: A woman named Esther Lardent, who at that time ran the American Bar Association postconviction death penalty project [American Bar Association Postconviction Death Penalty Representation Project]. And she wouldn't let me say no. And I made the mistake of mentioning that I'd been asked to do it to two of the first year associates in the, in the law firm [Drinker Biddle and Reath LLP, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. And I remember they came to my office and they said, "Kenny [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier] we gotta do this case." And they were so excited by it, that I remember that same thing when I was a first year person and since they wanted to do it. And they said, "We'll do all the work and we just need a partner to take it." And so I agreed to take it and it was the most important case I ever took in my life because it turns out that Cochran did not have the right representation. And he was not only entitered- titled to habeas [habeas corpus] relief on his conviction, but also his death sentence and we abl- we were able to get him a new trial and he's a free man. And I would say without equivocation that was the most important legal accomplishment that I've ever had in my life. Speaker 1: And you were honored at the United States Supreme Court for that accomplishment. Is that correct? Speaker 2: Yes. So I was very fortunate that I was honored there and-- Speaker 1: And which justice did you meet Speaker 2: Justice Ginsburg [Ruth Bader Ginsburg] bestowed the award that night. Speaker 1: And what was the award? Speaker 2: I can't remember the name of it, but it's a, it's a national pro bono award [American Bar Association Pro Bono Publico Award] that's given for people who do important pro bono cases. Story_ID: 639116 Speaker 1: So now during the, during the time that you entered law firms--entered your law firm [Drinker Biddle and Reath LLP, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], there were not a lot of African American in law firms (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simulataneous) That's for sure. Speaker 1: They were beginning to enter law firms, but many would come and they would leave, they would not--for whatever reason they would not be able to-- Speaker 2: I think that's right although, I think that phenomenon's happened with a greater acceleration since then. I have to say one of the striking things, and I don't know what these tapes do, but one of the striking things is that the percentage of African Americans who made partner of the original pioneering people was much higher than it is now. Speaker 1: Yes, and why do you think that is? What would you say to the people now who are trying to make it? Speaker 2: Well I think it's a lot of things. I think that the, the practice of law has changed. It's not as much of a--it's more of a business than it was then. There was more profession, so that may have something to do with it. In my own case I know that I would not have made partner except that I joined one of the few firms in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in 1978 that already had an African American partner. Speaker 1: And who was that? Speaker 2: His name was Melvin Breaux, and he was a banking partner. And I only joined that firm in large par- 'cause I looked around and it was one of the few firms that had a black partner. And after my second year I was about to leave because I didn't feel like I was well thought of in the firm and I was going to take a job at the U.S. attorney's office and Mel called all the black partners together at that time and they all took me to lunch and basically they told me I wasn't allowed to leave and, because they said I was running away from this competition and, and, again those were things that, that were really pivotal things in my life. Speaker 1: So that's another mentor that you had. Speaker 2: Mel was a huge mentor. He was a mentor for me on the subject of the unwritten, sometimes inapparent rules that apply in those big firms in terms of the social rules that allow people to find their way into positions of relationships with partners who are in a position to either make or break your career. That's what he did for me. And then I had real mentors, none of them who are black, who are the white partners in litigation who really took an interest in me and actually taught me how to become a trial lawyer. So very different mentors for very different purposes. So to answer your question. And this will sound like another old guy pointing fingers. I actually think I wanted it more than most of the young kids that I interact with in firms now. I was willing to sacrifice everything in my life to become a partner in that law firm. So I worked seven days a week. I worked--no one outworked me. And I think, you know, unfortunately it's a little like going to boot camp and you've 'gotta really want it, you know, if you 'wanna make it in a McKinsey [McKinsey and Company] or one of these big law firms or CPA [certified public accountant] firms. You 'gotta really want it because you're 'gonna be worked harder than you can believe. Speaker 1: And do you think that you are worked harder than say the white lawyers? Speaker 2: I don't believe that, but I believe that when I first came that I didn't have the benefit of the doubt. But I--and, you know, I'm now a member of a clu- of club called the Junior Legal Club that--in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] it's mostly the federal judges and a few select trial lawyers. And when I go to those things I sometimes wanna say to those really older now federal judges that they were patronizing to me, but there's no point in it because when I first showed up in front them, they saw a black lawyer. But after I began to try cases and became successful, they were like, "Oh that's Kenny Frazier [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier]." So I think that's one of the huge differences in race between my father's generation and my generation. My father [Otis Frazier] faced what you might call irrebuttable presumption based on race. I faced a rebuttable presumption based on race and that made all the difference in the world. Speaker 1: Did it, did it anger you at all that you had to face the rebuttable presumption when your peers did not? Speaker 2: It did, but I got over it because my father always said what he always said, you're either gonna become a victim, that's going back to my father's question it's not whether somebody's trying to stop you, the question is can you be stopped. That's the only question and I knew at the end of the day that when, when Mel said, "You can't leave," and the other partner said, "Because it's like running away," I heard my father saying, "Can you be stopped?" Speaker 1: And you decided you would not be stopped, and you stayed and you made partner? Speaker 2: Correct. Story_ID: 639117 Speaker 1: And were you one of the, the few black partners at, at that firm [Drinker Biddle and Reath LLP, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Yes, I was one of only two. And I will say that I made partner in 1984, 1985. And that firm has not made another African American partner since 1985. Through the ranks it has been brought in lateral partners. But, no other associate has gone through the ranks. So that's the point I was making. Mel [Melvin Breaux] was the first associate. He made partner. I was the second associate. I've made partner. They must've had sixty since and none of them have made partner. Speaker 1: And what did making partner mean to you? Speaker 2: It was validation of my abilities as a lawyer. Speaker 1: Now you made partner, you're validated and then you, you give up the crown. And you decide that you're going to come in house. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What year would that have been? Speaker 2: It was 1992. Speaker 1: So what was behind the decision to leave the partnership and to come to Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.] than as general counsel is that correct? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: As what? Speaker 2: As general counsel of a joint venture between Merck and Swedish company called Astra [Astra AB], it was called Astra. But let me just start by saying by the time I made partner and because I did have the ability to do jury trial work, I had a lot of really good clients including some of the cigarette companies. I had, I had a really good practice. What made me leave was that frankly it was unrelated to the practice of law. It was that, when my first child [Lauren Frazier] was born, my wife [Andrea Wilkerson Frazier] had a brain hemorrhage, and she nearly died. And that caused us to have a series of conversations about what we wanted in life that opened up the door. The other thing is that my wife used to be the, the placement director at NYU law school [New York University School of Law, New York, New York], so she understood the law business better than I did. And when Merck offered me this job, I was disinclined to take it. But she really leaned on me to take it because it would be better for the family. And she said, "You should listen to what they're saying to you. They're, they're hiring you into this JV [joint venture]," but they kept saying, "We really want you to come here because we believe there's 'gonna be position of substantial responsibility for you one day at Merck." And I understood the woman who was making that offer, who was the then general counsel of Merck to be saying in effect, "I'd like you to be my successor." I never dreamed that I would be the CEO of Merck. Story_ID: 639118 Speaker 1: So, let's backtrack a little bit and tell us first of all what is your wife's name? Speaker 2: My wife's name is Andrea, her name is Andrea Sharise Wilkerson Frazier [Andrea Wilkerson Frazier]. Speaker 1: And when did you get married, where in your, what point in your ca- career did you get married? Speaker 2: I made partner in 1985 [at Drinker Biddle and Reath LLP, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and then I was free to do what I wanted, and I got married in 1985 to a woman that I met in 1985. Speaker 1: And you have two children? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And their names are? Speaker 2: Lauren Elizabeth Frazier [Lauren Frazier], and James Andrew Frazier [James Frazier]. Speaker 1: So your wife Andrea convinces you to come to Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And tell us about that first position at Merck, you leave the partnership and you're head of this JV. Speaker 2: I'm general counsel to the JV. Speaker 1: General counsel to the JV? Speaker 2: Right, so that was the most boring (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're still doing law? Speaker 2: I'm doing law. It was the most boring job that I ever had in my life because the JV was very small. And the-- Speaker 1: JV standing for joint venture. Speaker 2: Joint venture, right. Between a Swedish drug company called Astra [Astra AB] and Merck. The business was exciting I liked the business, I didn't think the legal work was particularly challenging. But I only did it for one year and was brought to big Merck as vice president of public affairs. Speaker 1: And that was in what year, '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: No, so I had left had the end of '92 [1992] and this was the beginning of '94 [1994]. Speaker 1: In 1994, so you're vice president of public affairs, and what does that entail? Speaker 2: It entailed at that time all the government affairs and policy and communications and philanthropic work of Merck, the large Merck. Speaker 1: And you're spending a lot of time in Washington, D.C. that is? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So is this your first sort of put in your toe in the water of understanding politics and government and business? Speaker 2: I guess you could say that. I would say what it was, is that the then CEO of Merck whose name was Roy Vagelos [P. Roy Vagelos] who was great CEO. Speaker 1: Sorry say his name again. Speaker 2: Roy Vagelos, V-A-G-E-L-O-S. Dr. Roy Vagelos, who's a legendary CEO, in a sense that when he was at the helm of Merck, Merck was the most admired corporation in America according to the Fortune survey, seven consecutive years. And I don't think another company has been as much as three. And he hired me to come here and be vice president of public affairs. I didn't want to do the job, because I wanted to stay in the legal job. But he basically said, "You need to get into the business and understand the business. You--we--we're never gonna forget that you're a lawyer. We know that, we get that, you don't need to spend any more time in the legal department, you need to get into the business." And that's when I joined and I got involved in government affairs, and I got involved in communications. But what I really got involved in was the heart and soul of the business of Merck. I was representing Merck to the outside world. And I learned the business through those five and a half years of running public affairs here. Story_ID: 639119 Speaker 1: Were there any big public affairs issues that Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.] was facing during that time? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. So the first one was the, the first attempt at healthcare reform was done under the Clintons [Hillary Rodham Clinton and President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. It was called Hillarycare, dismissively then, rather than Obamacare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010]. So you could see everything gets recycled in Washington [D.C.], and so that was a big challenge. Healthcare reform under the Clintons which didn't succeed was a big issue for us. But the big issue and one that I'm very proud of was that this company in the mid-'90s [1990s] made a very pivotal scientific discovery. It discovered an enzyme called the protease which is necessary for the replication of the AIDS virus [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], the HIV virus [human immunodeficiency virus]. And this company discovered a medicine called Crixivan, which many people would say was the key to converting HIV from a death sentence to a chronic manageable disease in the West. It was an incredible thing to be in a company when you have a discovery like that, in fact the physician-scientist who discovered it, his name was Irving Sigal [Irving S. Sigal] was going to present the paper and died over Lockerbie, Scotland in that Pan Am explosion [Pan Am Flight 103]. And so that means a lot to Merck people. But the reason that was important was we now had a drug that could be useful in keeping millions of people alive in the U.S. and Europe and Africa. And we had to figure out how to price that drug. It was the biggest public affairs challenge at the time. It's how do you price a drug so that you could provide broad access. And what I remember and what I'm most proud of is, it was my responsibility inside the company to make the argument for differential pricing. We had never done that before, that is to say that we would charge a higher price in the U.S. and a lower price in Africa because of their purchasing power ability. And we were the first company to do it and many other companies refused to do it. And it's now the way in which HIV drugs are priced generally with but--and now people look back and say well of course differential pricing makes sense, but it was a huge policy debate. Speaker 1: And at that time weren't you even, were you being pressed to actually just give drugs in Africa? Speaker 2: Absolutely, we were and we are today because, you know, these drugs, you know, you look at a country like Botswana, the life expectancy in Botswana had risen before AIDS to about seventy years of age. It's now like lower than thirty-five. Its just how HIV has decimated that population because it really decimates the most productive part of the population. And people want you to give it away but what they don't understand is that's not a sustainable thing, to give away drugs. We can't give away drugs until we run out of money and then go out of business. So our obligation as a drug company as it relates to that part of the world that needs our work, that can't afford our work, is to try to bring the prices down to the lowest point where we can sell it at a sustainable way. That is to say, we don't need to make a profit, but we can't be losing money because we have to reinvest that money in the next generation of AIDS products and the next generation of heart products. So we need to lower it to a production price where we can sell it at a price where with the help of parties like the Gates Foundation [Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, Washington] and others, we can make them available. But we can't do it by ourselves. Speaker 1: So when you moved into the, to the new world. This is very different from litigations, I mean this is not going into the courtroom and convincing the jury and getting a verdict and winning or losing. You had to change your, your approach, to, to how you approach pro- I mean how did you learn to be a PR [public relations] communications person? Speaker 2: So, first of all I disagree with that, I think litigation is advocacy. I think, you know, obviously there's some differences between trying to convince twelve people in a box and trying to convince millions of people of a point of view, but it is still advocacy. It is still communications. So I think that--I never really thought of myself as a lawyer, that's the first thing because I always think that jury trial lawyers are not really lawyers. They're more like storytellers than they are lawyers. And so my technical legal ability wasn't what I relied on. It was my communications skills. Story_ID: 639120 Speaker 1: So how many years did you spend as head of public affairs and communications? Speaker 2: About five and a half. Speaker 1: What was your next position at Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.]? Speaker 2: I then became general counsel? Speaker 1: And what year would that have been? Speaker 2: Basically the end of '99 [1999] beginning of 2000. But I also had public affairs all that time. Speaker 1: Oh you had both? Speaker 2: I had both. Speaker 1: That's big, that's a big job. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about general counsel, how you found that role where the--what were the, the big issues that you faced as general counsel? Speaker 2: So the first thing I wanna say is that that's the job that I always aspired to. But when I got to general counsel job, it was not as exciting as I thought it was. Because I had become a person who was involved in the business worldwide and then when I got involved in the legal issues, they seemed, by comparison, narrow and flavorless. Versus the way that I thought of them when I was a lawyer. So I would say that, that was, for me it wasn't a terribly exciting job for around three, three and half years. And then the company (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well before you get there let's just stop for a second. How large was your department? How many lawyers did you have? Just give us a sense of the size and the scope of the--your legal department? Speaker 2: I'd say the legal department at Merck at that time probably had between 250 and three hundred lawyers. Speaker 1: So almost a small law firm? Speaker 2: It was a law firm. Oh, it was very much a law firm. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: 'Cause we stopped using outside counsel we just brought in, in the kinds of lawyers who could do the work on the outside. And we really thought of ourselves as a full service law firm supporting Merck globally. Speaker 1: So you found yourself head of a law firm, but in, but in house? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that was, had been your dream job, and then you got it and it was no longer the dream that you thought it was going to be. Speaker 2: Well I liked it. But I didn't find it as exciting as I--as public affairs was. Public affairs was you're always out there. The issues were always breaking and, you know, you're in Washington [D.C.], you're in Paris [France]. Sitting behind a desk and administrating a legal department seemed less exciting. Story_ID: 639121 Speaker 1: Until September 2004 when the company made the decision to withdraw one of its products. It was a large painkiller called Vioxx. And, and then we were immersed for about four years in the universal battle over that litigation, which allowed me to use the skills that I had developed as a trial lawyer. Speaker 2: But there's more to that story than using--okay let's, let's, let's dig a little deeper into--in that. That was, I'm assuming a very trying, difficult time for you. Speaker 1: It was. Well, first of all, it was difficult time 'cause the decision to withdraw that drug was not an easy one. But once we withdrew it, we did it with our eyes wide open that we were gonna be attacked from every corner, you know, '60 Minutes,' congressional hearings, litigation, you name it. Speaker 2: And personally how did it affect you? Speaker 1: I was obsessed with winning, I can say that. I thought the company didn't deserve to be taken down the way that people wanted to take it down from the outside. And I thought it was an important company for what it could do for the world. And so I was very focused on winning. Speaker 2: And you had--your CEO [Raymond V. Gilmartin] had to resign during that time is that correct? Speaker 1: Our CEO stepped down the following year, yes. Speaker 2: And you had media attention coming to your home, and there was personal pressure involved in this as well, right? Speaker 1: It was huge pressure. Especially when we lost our first case. Speaker 2: So when you lost your first case what did you do? I mean what was--how did you recover? Speaker 1: Well first of all its, it's not just losing, what you, you lose a verdict of $253 million in your first case, and you've been sued sixty thousand times, people can do the math. It doesn't take a lot of math to tell you that the companies bankrupt at that rate. And so it was a lot of pressure, and you have to go on 'The Today Show' ['Today'], morning show, 'Good Morning America.' You have to explain why it is that, that first jury trial with a disastrous outcome is not predictive of what's going to happen in the future. And the, and of course the world only knows what it knows. You have a N of one and it's a disaster. And there was a lot of pressure on us to settle at that time. But I was completely against settling. Fortunately, our board stuck with me, even though my results were pretty disastrous. Speaker 2: The first time around your results were. But you--did you find that the corporate communications and public relations skills that you had developed in your previous job were, were, of assistance to you, when it came to handling Vioxx? Speaker 1: Absolutely because I always knew frankly that the lawyers, that kind of litigation is too important to be left to lawyers. Because lawyers think it, what matters is wins and losses inside the courtroom. But for a company like Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.], its reputation is everything. And so, you know, I'm very proud of the fact that we didn't leave any story unanswered for even one news cycle. If somebody made an allegation against us, we responded in writing or if it was television thing. I, I was really a spokesperson, I would go on television and answer the questions and, and I think that our, our fighting that way was really important for our scientists to see that we were defending their reputation and their honor by not accepting the outside world's challenges and incorrect assessments of what we had done. Story_ID: 639122 Speaker 1: Now today lawyers commonly refer to a technique they use as, I'm gonna Vioxx 'em. And it is a term that's derived from a strategy that you came up with it when you were general counsel. Can you tell us a little bit about that strategy of Vioxxing them how that, what was behind that strategy? Speaker 2: Well it's a funny word, you know, people think of it as a litigation strategy, and I've said many times when I've been asked about it. It wasn't really a litigation strategy, it was a manifestation of who we were. If somebody accuses you of something that's not true, you're going to defend yourself. And so people saw it as a quote strategy. But I actually saw it as a way of saying to the outside world, we really are who we say we are. Our values and ethics and standards are what they say they are. And Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.] is founded on scientific excellence. In fact, one of the great ironies of Vioxx is that it was the most studied drug in history. And so the allegation that the company was trying to hide something was manifestly incorrect because we kept studying it. We knew there was a question about its safety. And a lot of other companies in similar positions would have stopped looking for the answer. Merck just kept digging and digging and digging, and finally, we found an answer that we didn't really like. But when we found that answer, we promptly withdrew the drug and told the world what we had found. And of course, we got punished for it with all these lawsuits. So I would say that the strategy around Vioxx was one that was based fundamentally on who we are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Define the strategy? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Define that strategy. Speaker 2: The strategy essentially was that unlike most of these big cases we were not willing to settle. We didn't wanna get out of it really quickly. We were willing to try cases one by one, jury trials. In fact, we announced to the outside world that we were going to try each and every case. And we did try twenty of those cases in an incredibly compressed period of time. And these case by the way would take two months or so to try. Speaker 1: And that was a winning strategy because? Speaker 2: Because we did the right thing and I think the big issue around the Vioxx strategy that most people didn't understand was it was normal--most lawyers and commentators believed that because the subject matter was so scientific that the plaintiffs had an advantage because they were going to try them in front of juries of people who didn't have really strong scientific backgrounds. Often they would try to pick jurisdiction where defendants really had historically done very badly like, you know, certain places in Texas and places like that. But I think that is where, you said my communications background, that's where having a father [Otis Frazier] with a third grade education made all the difference because I knew that there was a big difference between whether people had a formal education and whether they were smart enough to understand what you were saying to them. And my challenge in that litigation frankly was to help a bunch of, sort of in a way over educated lawyers learn how to convey the science in terms that the jury could understand. And I'm very proud that of our last ten verdicts, we won nine 'cause the juries did see the point that I made a few moments ago, which is if this company didn't really wanna know what was best for patients. Why do they keep studying them? Why--you know, we didn't have to explain what each study stood for scientifically. We just had to show them that we didn't stop. We kept trying our best to understand and elucidate the profile of the drug. Story_ID: 639123 Speaker 1: So, but as I said, the papers were writing all these horrible articles about Vioxx (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the front page of The New York Times said one Sunday that the company was gonna go bankrupt and they could blame it on the ineptitude of their lawyer. And I remember that 'cause I took that a little bit personally. Speaker 1: Yes, 'cause you were their lawyer? Speaker 2: That was me. Speaker 1: So, you come out that, a hero? Speaker 2: Well let me put it this way. I wasn't as bad as I looked when we lost the cases and I wasn't as good as I looked when we had a great settlement. I was somewhere in between. Speaker 1: But how did you feel? Speaker 2: I felt great. I was--so the death penalty was the most important--the death penalty case [Cochran v. Herring] was the most important legal accomplishment. A close number two would be the successful defense of the Vioxx litigation. I think I had the benefit of being known nationally for the defense of the Vioxx litigation and--but, but I don't take credit for it because again, the company did the right thing and it was my job to be able to present the case in such a way that juries could see that we did the right thing. Speaker 1: Now when you were going through that storm though 'cause it's, I mean it's easy when you're now at the point where you are, where you look back at hind- hindsight, but when you're in the middle of that storm and that huge verdict comes down and, you know, The New York Times is writing, you know, Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.] is gonna go--that the lawyer is inept. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Where did you find your strength to not stop, to, to, to, to really push forward and clear, clear your head and come up with the winning strategy? Speaker 2: Well I knew what the winning strategy was, I never, that was never in doubt. The question in my mind was whether my clients, the board, the management of Merck would have the stomach to fight through the bad times. I knew, I always knew we could win these cases because we'd done the right thing. And I also knew that the business model at the plaintiffs' bar, is that they hope to get a quick settlement. They throw everything to try to get a quick settlement. If you make it clear that you're going to have a very long war. That's not what their business motto supports. So I knew that there was a winning strategy to be had I--my challenge was keeping my colleagues with me during the tough times. So I wouldn't say that I worried about strategy. And then individually, I think that's where my upbringing really came in. And, you know, I grew up in a neighborhood [in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where frankly, there were three kinds of people. There were the people who were the predators and there were the people who were the prey and there were the people who were in the middle. And I learned very early on in life, that if you start running, you'll always have to run. And if you stand your ground, you might get knocked down. But over the long term, people will find and easier pe- person to pick on, and that's the same thing with the litigation strategy. We were maybe a year or two and I said to my board, "we've won." And the board said, "You're crazy. What do you mean all these cases--?" And I said to them, "You might remember at the beginning that people projected that we would have five hundred thousand of these cases and we have forty thousand of them." And so the fact that plaintiffs had stopped advertising for new clients, was to me the first way that I could declare victory. 'Cause as--I was gonna win every case that didn't get filed. And so, I, I just knew that if you didn't back down if you believed in it, and you were willing to be called names, and you were willing to be frankly even fired for what you believe in then, it's okay. Speaker 1: And your board stuck with you? Speaker 2: They stuck with me. Speaker 1: And you moved into a new job. Speaker 2: Now they remember that they were always on my side (laughter). I find that mildly amusing when people recall that. They, they were always, they always believed it was the right strategy. When in fact, I seem to remember different conversations in the boardroom. But, but that's that. Story_ID: 639124 Speaker 1: Okay so the Vioxx victory. And you move into a new job. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Tell us about that job. Speaker 2: So after that, the Vioxx was settled in November. And about a month before 'cause, we knew we were going to settle, we were just trying to get the papers right. The head of, of Merck's business operations [Merck and Co., Inc.], what we call Global Human Health, went to become the CEO of Siemens [Siemens AG] in Germany. And that left an opening and the then CEO Dick Clark [Richard T. Clark] came to me and said, "I think you should run the business." And I was like, "No, I gotta do my victory lap on this Vioxx thing. I wanna be the lawyer when the big settlement is announced and they give credit." And he said, "Oh nobody's gonna forget that you were the lawyer." So I took on the, running the business. And that was a really big challenge for me, because I hadn't, I hadn't had to deal with financials. I didn't have experience dealing with about fifty thousand employees around the world. But that was, again it was great learning opportunity and had great people. Speaker 1: And, and normally those type of jobs if I'm correct go to people with M.B.A.'s is that correct? Speaker 2: I think that's right. And certainly, people who have operating experience. It, it was a big risk for our CEO to put a person who had never had line experience in charge of P and L [profit and loss]. At that time that was worth, you know, $25 to 30 billion in terms of sales. Speaker 1: And how did you come up to speed on that job? Speaker 2: Well you just learn, you just take one part of it, and you learn a little bit at a time. And to me it's, the key to success is being willing to surround yourself with people that are smarter than you and to learn from those people. Speaker 1: And how long did you stay in that job? Speaker 2: I was in that job for about three years. And then I was promoted to the position of president. Which was, the difference between that job is, I was in charge of the commercial operations of the company when I became president, I was in charge of manufacturing, research, and development and commercial. Speaker 1: Okay. So they added more onto your plate then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you have any mentors in that, in this position to help you learn the business? Speaker 2: Yes. But, but interestingly the mentors were the people who worked for me, not people above me. And, you know, that's important issue in life, is you can learn from anyone. And I learned from the guys who ran the countries and the important franchises, and the geographies around here. The people who work for me knew that I was coming in from legal. I didn't have a lot of commercial experiences. I've never been shy about saying, "I don't know, what I don't know." And I think if you say that people generally try to help you. Because you're saying I need your help. Speaker 1: Okay. So you didn't feel like anyone had landmines out there hoping that you would fail? Speaker 2: Well I didn't say that. When I took over there were a few people who were unhappy and we had to make some decisions very early about who was on the team, and who was off the team. And some people who didn't wanna work for me. We made it possible for them to have their wishes granted. Story_ID: 639125 Speaker 1: Now so what, what would you think--say in, in those, in those two positions would you think of as your, your greatest accomplishment? Speaker 2: Well, first of all I didn't get fired. But I think the other thing was that the company [Merck and Co., Inc.] did continue to grow. When I was in charge of the business a couple of things happened inside the, the industry that were really difficult for us. Our biggest product was a product called Singulair, got a label change to warn about suicidality for children. And it slowed the growth down. And then our, one of our second or third largest product which is called Vytorin, there was a clinical study what was equivocal about its efficacy and it's slowed the growth of those down, and it required us to make some really major mid-course corrections in terms of our expense bases. And we ended up, you know, in effect laying off half the sales force at that time. Which unfortunately was good preparation for when I became CEO and we had to do major layoffs across the company. Speaker 1: Now--okay so in that position then you had to acquire new skillsets? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Such as P and O [profit and overhead], balance sheets things like that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did you have--how did you do that? Speaker 2: You just learn it. You just come into work every day and you try to learn something that day that you didn't know the day before. And you keep doing that day after day after day, before you know it, you've been around the block a few times, and you--and frankly you learn. You don't have to get your arms around everything at one time, you have to pick one or two things that you gonna focus on and then you have to organize accordingly so that other people are doing the other things. And again, you try to compliment yourself. For me, my greatest weakness was always financial and so I hired as a chief of staff, a woman who had been in line to be the company's CFO and she went to become CFO somewhere else, but we were very good friends. Her name was Caroline Dorsa. And I called her up and I said, "You know I'm in charge of the business," and she said, "That's great." I said, "You know I need a really strong finance person." So I brought her in as my chief of staff. So that was great because I had one of the truly great finance people in the world sitting there in my office tutoring me on finance. Speaker 1: And she had your back? Speaker 2: And she had my back. Exactly. Speaker 1: Now during that time, were you being primed to be the CEO, was, was that what this was all about, those two tours of duty on, in the business world? Speaker 2: I think looking back that was probably the plan. Speaker 1: Was that your desire? Speaker 2: No. Not particularly. I didn't wanna take on the business job. I always wanted to be a lawyer. I shouldn't say this. You know I'm the CEO of one of the greatest companies in the world and I'm not sorry that I'm the CEO, but I can say without equivocation that all I've ever really wanted to be in life, was a lawyer and I've enjoyed being a lawyer and--so I never desired to be anything other than a lawyer. Speaker 1: Except for when you, you just previously told us that when you got the position, your dream position of general counsel, you found that a little bit boring, you missed the business side of things. Speaker 2: Well I think within a company if you gotta choose, I think there are better jobs than the lawyer job inside a position. My last comment was about being a lawyer in the broadest sense (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 639126 Speaker 1: Let's move on to the day that you become chairman of this company. You've been here what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) CEO. Speaker 1: CEO. Speaker 2: First I became CEO and then chairman Speaker 1: CEO and then chairman. But you've been at Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.] about what seventeen years when you become the CEO? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell, tell me about that day. What was that when the announcement was made, and how you felt and what it meant, what's your thought? Speaker 2: I felt overwhelmed by the announcement. I've never been a person to feel glad that I got somewhere. My wife [Andrea Wilkerson Frazier] always says, you don't enjoy anything because you're always on to the next thing. So when I became CEO, I was worried about whether or not I could run this company in a way that I would make a very satisfactory mark as CEO. I knew I felt really good when, I can't lie when the announcement came out and I looked at it and I realized I'm the CEO of Merck and my father [Otis Frazier] had a third grade education and was a janitor, I felt really good about that. My family felt really good about that. But I really am honest when I say that it's really not about me. This company Merck is no ordinary place. The work that we do here is incredibly important to mankind. And so, if you step into that CEO role. My office, I feel like I'm renting that office and that it's my obligation to leave this company better than I found it. And so, I think my overwhelming feeling was a feeling of huge, awesome responsibility. And if you knew the scientific enterprise of this company and the people who comprise it, the quality of the scientists and the physicians who make up the core of our research labs. In some ways, you're saying, I'm a mere mortal. How can I be the CEO of people that are that sort of otherworldly smart? And so, I also say, how can I do my job so that I can enable great science since I'm not a scientist. So it's not a kind of thing that you feel very--at least I don't feel very egotistical about it. I feel like I have to prove to the world that my tenure here put this company back on track to greatness. Speaker 1: Well let's talk a little bit about the symbolic torch at, at Merck that gets passed from one CEO to the next CEO. You, you were telling me a little bit about that previously. Tell us about that on the record? Speaker 2: Well I think--again I say this is not the ordinary company and one of the exemplars of that is that the modern day founder of Merck is a guy named George W. Merck and he had a saying that every Merck employee knows by heart. He said, "Medicine is for the people, not the profits," and the more we've remembered that the better the profits have been and then he went on to say that, "It's our obligation to ensure that our finest achievement," meaning the medicine and vaccines we created, "are made available to everybody." So everybody knows that and there is a Time magazine article from I believe it's 1951 [sic. 1952] where he made, a, a medical school commencement speech in which he uttered those words. He became a cover story of Time in 1951. And that Time magazine (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The year you were born. No sorry, I'm wrong sorry. Speaker 2: No, I was born in 1954, but it's, that, that Time magazine, the original magazine is preserved in a, in a glass case and that glass case is handed from one CEO to the next CEO and you're supposed to display it prominently in your office as a reminder that, that's what this company is about. It's about the people, not the profits. And although, we're under the same pressure any other publicly traded company is, I think it's my obligation all the time to remember that while I have to do the short term performance that drives the stock price. What I'm really here is to create long term medical value and societal value. If I do that, that would drive the economic value, which in term will drive the stock price. Speaker 1: So when you say this is no ordinary place. Then for you, it's a very special place. Speaker 2: It is, I mean you just look at any indicator of the number of Nobel Prize winners. The work that was done to commercialize penicillin. The work that was done to commercialize the corticosteroids. The work--something like thirteen of the seventeen vaccines that are required for American children are made by this company. So the, the nation trust its newborn to us. The work that we've done in past on HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], which I've talked about a few minutes ago. Work that we're doing on cardiovascular and infectious diseases. What this company has done single handily to expand life expectancy. The work that we've done in Africa where by donating products, we've almost eradicated a horrible series of diseases exemplified by river blindness. When you come to work in a company like that and you realize that the company exists to alleviate human suffering, if you just say that, the company's reason for existing is to apply cutting edge science to develop medically important products, vaccines, and medicines that alleviate human suffering and improve and extend human life. It is no ordinary place. Story_ID: 639127 Speaker 1: Now--and at the same time while you're doing something as magnificent as you've just stated, you still have to have a return to your shareholders? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And after you became C- what was, what was the share price at--when you became CEO? And what has your performance been since then? Speaker 2: So when I became CEO, the stock was at about thirty-six dollars. But my very first day as CEO our head of research called me and said that the product that was our product and latest stage development, a product that Wall Street thought was gonna be a $5 billion drug, had developed a problem that we were going to have to stop the trials, and the drug was gonna go nowhere. So the stock plummeted, I sometimes laugh and say, "Why couldn't that call have happened in December of 2010 so the price plummeted before I started." But hey, my wife [Andrea Wilkerson Frazier] always says, "No one's gonna feel sorry for you, because you're the CEO of Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.]. You should remember that." So the stock went down to twenty-nine and on top of that, one of our biggest competitor's Pfizer [Pfizer Inc.] had a new CEO and after years of less than glorious research productivity, I guess I would say, Pfizer decided to make a major cut in its R and D budget [research and development]. And their stock went up, so when Wall Street said to me, "Are you going to follow Pfizer's lead," of course being contrarian I am, and believing in this company's mission, I said, "No, I'm actually gonna increase my research budget," and my stock went down. So I was under a lot of pressure. Speaker 1: And then the board was saying what to you at this time? Speaker 2: The board was saying, "Why are you---?" Oh there's one more thing. The company had given long term earnings guidance through the end of 2013 under my predecessor [Richard T. Clark] and I decided that it--that guidance was inconsistent with the way I wanted to run the company so, three weeks into the job I called Wall Street up and said, you know, that long term guidance I'm not living by it. And so the stock went down. So for the first three months, I think I was under a lot of pressure. And then I decided we needed to do massive layoffs in order for us to be a competitive fit company going forward into the new healthcare environment we were going into so. So the board wasn't happy, my fellow employees weren't happy, the shareholders weren't happy. But, I think we've now righted the ship. We're strong economically. We're focused. New drugs are coming through the pipeline. And the stock has gone from twenty-nine to I don't know what it is today, around forty-four, forty-five, so. Speaker 1: And you beat your forecast? Speaker 2: And--well yeah. We always wanna beat our forecast. We always wanna outperform expectations. I always say to people, people talk about perform, but when I first became CEO my, my slogan was, "We're gonna perform while we transform." And this year I changed it, I said, "We're gonna outperform, while we transform." So that's really the key. Speaker 1: So then you're feeling comfortable that you're, you're, you're basically servicing both aspects of your job. The one that's doing good by producing good medicine, through good research, and in return sharehol- holder value. Speaker 2: I think they're completely consistent with one another. The shareholder value is a proxy for how many humans we help, is the way that I tell people. The more people we help, the more medicine and vaccines that are going out there to help people, the higher our sales are. We don't need to measure them. You measure them in the terms of the units that go to help humanity. You can take those same units and multiply them by dollars, and that gives you the revenue. But it's the same thing at core, it's units of life saving medicines. Speaker 1: But one of things that, you know, we often hear today is people complaining about the high cost of medicines, and how they, they simply can't afford their prescriptions, because the cost are so high. How--I mean how to do you--what does Merck and how do you as a CEO feel about the affordability of healthcare for Americans? Speaker 2: Well I think that's a real big problem, is the affordability of medicines. I think that the challenge we have is when people say medicines cost a lot, I actually correct them all the time. What they mean is new medicines cost a lot. The reality of the world is that 80 percent of the medicines prescribed in the United States are generic medicines that are available for pennies a day. Now, the only way in which a company like Merck can continue to invest $8 billion, billion annually on new medicines in searching for new medicines is if the return on investment giving the risk, the risk of adjusted return, has to be high enough to allow people in the capital markets to put their money up for long periods of times at high risk. That's what drives the price in medicines. But it's new medicines that cost a lot. So as a society we have to decide do we want new medicines even though they cost a lot or are we happy with the medicines that we have now at generic prices. Story_ID: 639128 Speaker 1: You're now sitting at the top as CEO of one of the world's largest pharmaceutical companies. Speaker 2: Well it looks like you're sitting at the top. Actually my job is to support the people in the company so, on the org chart I'm at the top. But my job is purely a support person. Speaker 1: But my question to you is, I mean you often hear, you know people talk about--I mean people celebrate you. And they're very proud, African American head of one of the largest pharmaceuticals companies in the world. He meets with the president of the United States [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]--I mean the world is his oyster. But they also say that it, it's lonely at the top. Is that true? Speaker 2: It's absolutely lonely at the top because the thing that is the most significant difference in this job and any other job importantly even when I was running as president or running the business. I could always say something that the CEO could either nod or shake his head, no. There is nobody now other than me. The buck stops with me. Every decision that I make is the decision and more importantly, people watch me and try to discern what I want them to do. So I have to keep my own council, I have--other than my wife [Andrea Wilkerson Frazier] who I talked to about these things. And I have to be willing to do things that make me unpopular. Like the layoffs last year, people would stop me in the cafeteria and it would be so painful, because they would say that my predecessor would not have done this. They say, you know, Dick Clark [Richard T. Clark] would never have laid off this many Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.] people. And that's not a comfortable feeling but it's my job to do what's in the long term best interest of this company. Story_ID: 639129 Speaker 1: How do you balance this, then I'll come back to another question with a son [James Frazier] and a daughter [Lauren Frazier] and a wife [Andrea Wilkerson Frazier], how do you make it to the baseball games and the football games--I mean are able to have a life outside of this, this bubble that you're in? Speaker 2: So I--the politically correct thing to say is, how much I value my family and how I spend time, my family is used to the fact that I put my job first. That's all there is to it. So my son, last year I think I made it to one of his high school football games. I try to make it to my daughter's plays 'cause they tend to be in, at night or, but, but no, I think if I didn't have a wife who is full time and committed to the children, the children wouldn't have been as happy and successful and well adjusted as they are. Speaker 1: So, so your wife in a sense is like the mother that you remember? Speaker 2: Um-hm. She is, she's very smart but she's dedicated her life to her children and she's allowed me to be in effect a negligent father. Story_ID: 639130 Speaker 1: Now you're also involved in other, many, many other activities. And one of them relates to your, your alma mater. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania]. You're on the board of trustees. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about that. The most recent Sandusky incident and your role in that, and how it has impacted you. Speaker 2: Well first thing I have to say is Penn State is a great school. It's much better than what's commonly become sort of the public discourse about Jerry Sandusky and, and the crimes that were committed against children. Speaker 1: Let's put this in historical context. This happened in two--this is a trial that went on in 2012 that was recently-- Speaker 2: Yes. Gerald Sandusky, who's a former assistant football coach at Penn State was recently convicted, I believe it was in June of 2012 of forty-five counts of child sexual abuse. Many of those incidents occurred on the Penn State campus. And as a result the board, the administration, the university alums had plunged into period of incredible loss of identity and faith and everything they thought they believed in. As a result of that we have had to fire the president of the school [Graham Spanier], the head football coach of the school [Joe Paterno], and we did and internal investigation which I headed up. We hired a former director of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] Louis Freeh to do that investigation. We did it in a completely hands off, independent way. We said, "Come and look at everything; we're not gonna edit, sanitize or whitewash anything you have to say. You come and you tell us exactly what you find." And he released a report recently, which I have to say was a scathing report, where he actually held accountable everybody, starting with the board of trustees. For our failure to take the steps that would've created either the accountability of the people who should've acted and didn't act or in the case of those individuals, their failure to, to, to protect children. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so those--that's the historical facts behind. But tell us more about the impact on you 'cause you're still CEO, running Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.] and the same time being involved in one of the largest cases going on in, in the United States. Speaker 2: Well I mean there's not enough hours in a day, and I'm thankful that my colleagues here at Merck sort of help pick up the slack so that I could spend a lot of time. My board has supported me doing this I didn't--they did not want me to do this as a first year CEO. But they understood that when you're asked to do something like this, and you're already on the board, you can't walk away. I think that the board could legitimately look at me and say because of my legal background and maybe my Vioxx background, I was the right person to, to, to take the lead in this. But there's not enough hours in a day, and I have to say I sometimes feel like I'm not doing a good job for Penn State or for Merck. Because something's, is always intruding. Speaker 1: But from a personal perspective at your core, and not being your father [Otis Frazier], but being--I mean going to your core, how did you feel having to--this is your alma ma- mater, a place that you loved. Speaker 2: Well I felt like all our alums. I feel that loss of identity, that sense of portrayal, the anger, frustration, hurt. But at the same time we're not the victims. Those children were the victims. And I had the opportunity early in my life to represent abused and neglected children. And I know that children who are sexually abused often live with that, those scars for the rest of their lives, and, you know, I said publically when I was addressing the country and, and talking about these findings, I said, "We are deeply ashamed." And some people have said, "Well why did you say that?" And I said, "The reason I used those words is because I was trying to say to all the kids out there who are victims of child sexual abuse, you shouldn't be ashamed. The shame is with us, the society that often looks past what's happening to you and doesn't interact or stop the predator. It's our responsibility." I think the obligation, the duty, the desire, the compulsion to protect the young is a fundamental of civilization, and that broke down at Penn State for reasons that I still don't fully understand, but which I don't think we can excuse under any set of circumstances. Story_ID: 639131 Speaker 1: So now I, I wanna go and talk a little bit about what we call some of our legacy, you know, looking forward kind of, kind of things. And I guess one, one of the things I wanna ask you is, you know, when you look at your life, is there something that you wish you had of, had of done that you haven't done that yet? Speaker 2: Well I keep saying that I wanna do public service at some sta- stage in my life. I've never had a job in the public sector, you know, when my work is done here at Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.], either voluntarily or at the behest of my board. The next thing I would wanna do is to, to do something that was more in the public service thing. Speaker 1: So perhaps going into a presidential cabinet? Speaker 2: I hadn't thought about it in such lofty terms. I think my issue, my fundamental issue is education and I'd like to do something that actually helped our society do a better job of educating children particularly disadvantage children. I think one of the great lies of our society is that children are constrained by the circumstances that they are born and raised in. I think some people think that's true. I happen to think that the sol- that the solution to poverty is education. And I think that we've lost that and we've lost the desire to ensure that our neighbor's child has the same opportunity that our children have. And so to me I would like to work in the field of education. Speaker 1: Well you started, I think at a young age, you were in your twenties, you started a Christian charter school [Cornerstone Christian Academy, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Is that correct? Speaker 2: I wasn't quite in my twenties. The school was twenty-six years old and I'm fifty-seven, so I was in my thirties but yes, it's a twenty-six year old private intercity Christian school. And I'm proud to say that in the last few years we've sent kids to--kids have been admitted to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] among other places and I think it's in, it's in the poor, it's in the poor census track in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. I don't think it's in the poor census track in Philadelphia and Southwest Philadelphia. And again, these kids lived in environments of huge deprivation and chaos. And if you put them in an environment where their safe and where high academic standards are expected, they can perform to those standards. Speaker 1: And so that's in keeping with your desire to be involved in education? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you've, you've continued working with that school since you were thirty years old? Speaker 2: Well it's thirty-one, right. Story_ID: 639132 Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you have lived your life? And is there anything that you would have done differently? Speaker 2: Well I have to say I've been very fortunate. By accident of birth, I was born at a time when the social engineers in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] decided to engage in what they called school desegregation, so I was sent to the best schools. I had lots of benefits that, that I didn't earn myself. I've worked hard in my life. But by no means do I think I've lived my life in an exemplary way. I think that I am a person who has been self-centered. I'm married to a wonderful woman [Andrea Wilkerson Frazier] who has tolerated all my faults through these years and my desire to do what I wanted to do, and I'm still trying to get what I think is the most important thing that one can get in life and that is awareness, greater awareness. Speaker 1: Awareness in what regard? Speaker 2: I don't think I can answer that question. I think, I think if you look--and I don't wanna be overly philosophical, I think what all the great prophets have always told us that we should be seeking, is greater awareness. So this person that you call I. Who is this person really and what do you really stand for fundamentally? And if you're not here anymore, what will people say about you when you're gone? And I--by no means do I think that because you've been successful as a lawyer and become a CEO of a company have you begun to scratch the surface of those questions. Story_ID: 639133 Speaker 1: In that regard, what do you want your children [Lauren Frazier and James Frazier] and grandchildren to say and think about you? Speaker 2: I would hope that my children--I won't speak of my grandchildren because I haven't met them yet. Hope I do meet them but my--would hope my children understood that I love them and that I believed in them and that I did everything that I could to make their physical wellbeing as good as it could be. I thi- I hope that they will forgive me though for my absenteeism, for the amount of time that I've spent first a jury trial lawyer and then as an executive in Corporate America. I, I know that they will not have the same memories of me that I have of my father [Otis Frazier] because I haven't been there as much for them. Speaker 1: What would your father say about you if he were here today? Speaker 2: Oh that's an easy one. He would say, "The boy did exactly what he should have done, given that I raised him to do that." Speaker 1: And what would your mother [Clara Frazier] say? Speaker 2: I think if my mother were here, she would say, "I wanted him to be a Christian. Instead he turned out to be a lawyer." Speaker 1: Now, but religion has played a role in your life. Is that correct? Speaker 2: Yes. As I've gotten older I've learned to distinguish religion and spirituality and I would say that spirituality plays a role in my life. Story_ID: 639134 Speaker 1: Now I'd like to ask you a little bit about your views on African Americans and what our future looks like. I wanna just give you a little example. Toni Morrison has written a book called 'What Moves at the Margin.' Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: And she tells it--the short story, so just bear with me, I have to tell you this little bit of the story. She tells the sto- similar to the story that you tell, of her grandparents, her grandfather [John Solomon Willis] was born into slavery and she says that when it was announced that the Emancipation Proclamation was coming, he climbed under his bed and didn't wanna come out. Because he believed that white people would never ever treat African Americans equitably in this society. That was her grandfather's position and he had been a carpenter and very skilled, could not get a job, had a violin and ended up playing violin to support his family. And she called him an ultimate pessimistic black man. Her grandmother [Ardelia Willis] on the other hand saw the world totally different. She says her grandmother listened to her grandfather's stories, listened to his music and lis- looked into his sad eyes. But she saw it as a slow march of trees moving forward up a plane to mountains. And she would cite the great progress that African Americans have made. People like you, who are CEOs and lawyers and doctors. Toni Morrison then concludes that she's not sure if that's progress or just movement. So my question to you is, what is your view of where we've been and where do think we're going as African Americans? Speaker 2: Well I have to say that there's no question that African Americans have made tremendous progress, you know, if you look at the fact that Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] sits at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue [Washington, D.C.]. I don't think that there could be any clear manifestation of progress than having a black president in this country. He is an African American, but that, we can have that conversation in a classic sense of how they've been derived from the slave tradition. But the fact of the matter is the people who voted for him didn't make that distinction. So, so I think that there's been progress. I think there has been less progress. I think that even the most pessimistic African Americans of a century ago would've expected to us, to have made by this time. And I think a lot of that is because, while we wanna believe that we live in a color blind society, I know we don't live in a color blind society. But I think the most important issue here, at least from my perspective, and this is--now I'm just sharing with you my life, and I think what made my life different from the other kids that grew up in the inner city was that my father's narrative was different. My father [Otis Frazier] grew up, he was born in 1900. He would say to us, "I was forty years of age before I saw this country respect a black man." That was in the context of sports, when Joe Louis knocked Max Schmeling out and became the heavyweight champion on the eve of World War II [WWII]. He--my father said, "That was the first time I ever saw America celebrate a black man." And then Jackie Robinson in 1947. And so my father lived forty years of his life and saw only disrespect. But, yet when it changed, his eyes were open. He could see that world was different. So when we came along, he would tell us stories about Jackie Robinson and Thurgood Marshall and Ralph Bunche and he would say, "You can be like them. Don't listen to these people around you who are saying you're constrained by your skin color. You can be like Jackie." 'Cause Jackie was to him an exemplar of excellence. So I think that the big issue is the narrative. The story that Toni Morrison tells in some ways reminds me of the story in Exodus. You know the Jews they crossed the Red Sea and Pharaoh's army gets drowned and we know that part of the story, but we don't know what happens next. For forty years they wander around in the wilderness, and every time they run into some kind of obstacle or dilemma or crises, they say, "Stone Moses, stone Aaron, take us back to pharaoh. Because at least we knew how to act in bondage." So they were free physically, but they didn't know how to be free. I think the same parallel is true in the African American community. It isn't much more than forty years since the Civil Rights Movement. And if you go back and you look at that story, freedom is what you have in your mind. One of my favorite movies is a movie called 'The Shawshank Redemption.' It's about men in prison, but the whole movie is about, you can be free behind bars. That's what Nelson Mandela was talking about. He said, "My jailers are in captivity, I'm not in captivity." So to me the future of our people comes down to whether we allow people to have that narrative. Again awareness, are you aware of what's going to happen to you. You take--the analogy I would use is, you take a dog and you put that collar on its neck and when it goes to the periphery of the property, it gets an electrical shock. If you take that collar off that dog, that dog is not leaving. Because in its mind, there is a barrier. So I would just say at the end of the day, there are barriers out there. But my father's question is the question and that is, can you be stopped? And if you expand it, the question is. What do people like you and me do to help young people in this country growing up to understand that they have unlimited potential? Because if they really believe that, then the world would be different. They can change the world. Story_ID: 639135 Speaker 1: Do you think that people will now be saying to their children, "Yes there are barriers, but there're Kenny Fraziers [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier] of the world?" Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I guess I have to say that I, I'm sure that, that probably happens, but I'm, you know, I, I go back to what I said. I don't think my father [Otis Frazier] would have believed in his wildest dreams that he would've lived and he didn't live to see a black man [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] in 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue [Washington, D.C.]. If you see that every day. It struck me there was one weekend there were, twenty-five people were shot in Chicago [Illinois] and I'm thinking this man is from Chicago. Do people not see that this is possible? So I don't think I can actually--I think role models are a little bit overrated if our president doesn't change people's ways of thinking, I--I'm not so sure I can, but I--but what I can do is I can reach out to some people and tell my father's story and that--when my father was buried I sai- my promise was that I would tell his story because it was his story that made my life possible. Because it was his grandfather [sic. father, Richard Frazier] who saw the future enough to send him north, and as a result of that, he saw the future enough to demand that I get an education. And my life is the way it is because of what those two men believed was possible. I find it fascinating that if you look at the infrastructure of black colleges [HBCUs], those colleges were built by ex-slaves. So what were they thinking about the future when they created those schools? And how is that mindset different than our mindset today, if you get my drift? Are we creating institutions for people in the future or we not? I think again, it shows you that the mindset is the most important thing. Speaker 1: Is there anything that I haven't asked you that you'd like to tell us? Speaker 2: Deborah [HistoryMaker Deborah Lathen] you've asked me more than I could've conceived of at the beginning of this interview. And I just have to apologize to you and the videographer for going on at such lengths. Speaker 1: No. It is our pleasure. It is our pleasure and we thank you very much for this. We really very much appreciate it. Speaker 2: Thank you. It's been my pleasure and it's been an honor to be interviewed by The HistoryMakers. Story_ID: 639136 Speaker 1: So that, that picture that's up there now is a picture of myself when I was general counsel with two of the leaders of the internal Merck pro bono program [Merck and Co., Inc.]. The woman who's in the red or pink is named Mary Ellen Kosch K-O-S-C-H Fleming [sic. Mary Ellen Koscs Fleming] and the woman to her left is Kathryn Steinbugler, S-T-E-I-N B-U-G-L-E-R. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think that's a picture of me as CEO interacting with Merck employees. Speaker 2: This is a picture of, this is a picture of me and a, a public official in Ethiopia. Speaker 1: This a picture of me standing here in this room, I believe or a room around you. It's not this room, right okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and several of my colleagues when I was general counsel in the legal department. We had accepted an award for our pro bono program. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and Festus Mogae, M-O-G-A-E. He is the former president of Botswana. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me giving blood (laughter) with our nurse. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me talking to Merck employees. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me with a cheetah in Botswana. No. No. Oh it's, it's one that's in a game park. It knows humans, right. Speaker 1: Me and a colleague of mine, Linda Distlerath, D-I-S-T-L-E-R-A-T-H and a cheetah and it's a live cheetah. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me addressing Merck employees. Speaker 1: This is a picture of me in this room, in this instance (laughter)...