 Story_ID: 545385 Speaker 1: Good morning. We're going to get started by slating. My name is Adrienne Jones, and I am the interviewer. Neculai Burghelea is the videographer. And there are no observers. Good morning. Speaker 2: Good morning. Speaker 1: Please state and spell your name for us, including your middle name. Speaker 2: Okay. It's [HistoryMaker] Alfred Richard Fornay. And the first word is spelled A-L-F-R-E-D; the middle name is Richard, R-I-C-H-A-R-D, and the last word is Fornay, F-O-R-N-A-Y. Speaker 1: And what's the date and location of your birth? Speaker 2: June 8th, 1941, and that's Cincinnati, Ohio, as the birthplace. Speaker 1: What's today's date? Speaker 2: Today is July the 19th, 2007. Speaker 1: And what is the location, the fabulous location of this interview, and the address here? Speaker 2: Oh, we're in Harlem, New York, my new home. The address is 34 Mount Morris Park West, and that's New York, New York. Speaker 1: And if you would please tell us your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I wear many hats. I usually say author, cosmetic executive, image consultant, magazine editor. Story_ID: 545386 Speaker 1: So, to start I'm going to ask you five People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food has to be southern style garden salads. And when I say southern salads, I mean it's the lettuce, tomato, onion, garlic. And when those ingredients are put together with the spices and the mayonnaise, it's really a good salad (laughter). Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Oh, it would have to be spring and fall. I consider those to be energy, colorful months, and I thrive on those, those seasons. Speaker 1: What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Green. I think of nature and renewal, and the color green is just peaceful and meditative to me. So that would be one of my choices, yes. Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Oh, Bermuda, I love Bermuda. And it's because you can just jump on the plane and two hours later you're sitting out in the middle of the ocean and at peace with yourself. You know, it's a beautiful place to go. And Paris, France; I love Paris, it's a beautiful city. Some people say the people are arrogant, but so are New Yorkers. So I just say here we are, you know, and deal with it. I just love the architecture and the creative juices that flow there, in terms of the art culture and the fashion culture and whatever. It's a beautiful city. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Eleanor Roosevelt has a very--I quote her on this. She says to develop a skin as thick as a rhinoceros hide. And I like that, and I've had to do that (laughter). Story_ID: 545387 Speaker 1: So, the next thing we're going to do is start to talk about your family background. I would like to start with talking about your mother. Can you tell us what is her name, where was she born, and could you spell her name for us? Speaker 2: She is Marguerite Agnes Weatherford [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay]; that is her former name. Her maiden name before Fornay. And she spells it M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E. Agnes is A-G-N-E-S, and Weatherford is W-E-A-T-H-E-R-F-O-R-D, and she wore that name proudly. Speaker 1: And where did she grow up? Speaker 2: She was born in Chicago, Illinois, but spent her life in Cincinnati, Ohio. That's where they migrated from. They actually migrated from the South to Chicago and settled in Cincinnati, Ohio. Speaker 1: And did she tell you some stories about that movement from the South? Speaker 2: She hated the South. Speaker 1: Where did she live in the South? Speaker 2: My grandmother is originally from Meridian, Mississippi. She was born in Birmingham, Alabama. And-- Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Erma Agnes Pitchford [Erma Pitchford Weatherford], and she became a Weatherford. And she spells her name E-R-M-A, Agnes, A-G-N-E-S, and P-I-T-C-H-F-O-R-D, Weatherford. But she--we cannot make the--we've never really done a real family tree. And we haven't made the connection as to how Birmingham, Meridian, and Chicago--that connection. But my mother spent most of her life in Cincinnati, that's where they finally settled. But her birthplace was Chicago. Speaker 1: And you said that she, your mother was born in Chicago? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then she moved to Cincinnati? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And her family moved from the South? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you said your mother disliked the South (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--she never-- Speaker 1: Or your grandmother? Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother migrated because of work and her seeking a better way of living, seeking a better place. Because according to her, Mississippi was a very hard, difficult, place to live and try to work and be yourself. But my mother would visit there I guess on occasions when they would make visits back there or whatever. And we couldn't really find out, but I'm sure there was some racial unsettledness or whatever. Because she detested the South, she really did not like the South. In fact my father [Alfred Fornay], who is from North Carolina, had hinted when he was retiring that perhaps he would like to go back and spend some time in the South and maybe move there. And we really thought they were going to break up the marriage (laughter) because she said, "I'm not going," you know. Obviously, she just made that a fact. She never got over the fact of the incidents of the South and the bad things that happened in the South to black men and to women. She just never got over that. Story_ID: 545388 Speaker 1: And do you know what kind of work your [maternal] grandparents [Erma Pitchford Weatherford and Henry Weatherford] were doing in Mississippi? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: What kind of a situation they were in? Speaker 2: Oh, domestic, they were domestic people. My grand- her mother, my grandmother's mother, they did laundry. The men in the family hauled wood and ice. That was when they had the ice boxes and they would-- Speaker 1: These are your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And are they slaves, or are they free people who are just trying to make a living in Mississippi? Speaker 2: They were just trying to make a living in Mississippi. And I hedge on that, because my grandmother was, it was very difficult to get that information from her. It was painful. She never really talked unless she was really in a very relaxed mood. And from what we gather, it was a very painful, difficult existence, and she preferred to talk about the good things. And to her the good things were the food that they ate, the churches that they attended, and the functions, you know, all that kind of stuff. But as far as the difficulties and the hard things of life, it was very difficult for her to talk about it. On the other hand, my father [Alfred Fornay], he spoke very well about it. But my, my grandmother had a real difficult time. So, the information we got from her was very limited regarding some of those things. Speaker 1: And you said that your mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] wore her name proudly? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What do you mean by that? Speaker 2: Well, the women in my family--and this is the good part that my grandmother refers to--they dressed very well. My grandmother was your complexion, she was a darker complexioned woman. My mother was fair. But they just dressed well. And when I say dressed well, I mean the grooming and the hair and the clothes they made. When they stepped out, they were really elegant women; they were elegant women. And I don't mean pretty with the aquiline chin and the pointed nose. I'm talking about when they put all the elements together, they were well put together. And when they'd enter a room, my mother was very conscious about how people spoke, how people sat, and all the courtesies, you know. They were very conscious of that. And people respected them in the community and in the church for that, the way they carried themselves. And that inspired me, in terms of where I am at the present time. Story_ID: 545389 Speaker 1: So, just to take us back a little bit. Did your mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] tell you any, any stories or anecdotal information about her upbringing in Cincinnati [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was very disappointed. My father [Alfred Fornay] was a very handy man. He could put a bathroom together. I mean he used to do all kind of contractual work. People thought he was trained. He was self-taught, and learned from brothers and family, in terms of plumbing and masonry and construction work. And he was just amazing. I would go with him sometimes when I was young, after school, and he would go back and pick up his money for doing a job, and I would look at the work. He would do bathrooms, the tiles, he laid floors. His, his father [Harvey Fornay] made cedar chests and did woodworking in the South. And all this, he just brought together. Well, in Cincinnati I was told he applied at the plumbers union there. And of course, it was racially divided, and they were not accepting black people at the time to join those unions to get the kind of wages that he wanted. And he became a little bitter about that, because he was being compared--when he would go for these job sites, people would pass his name on, and they would say, "Well, are you part of the union or whatever?" And he would say, "No," and he would come back, of course, upset. And my mother would be upset, and she would want to know what she could to do help or whatever. It was a very tense kind of situation. Story_ID: 545390 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I want to take you back and talk about your mom's [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] childhood. So, do you know any stories about your mom's raising? And then we'll talk about your father [Alfred Fornay]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, sure. Speaker 1: I don't want to lose that information. Speaker 2: Okay. She was, my mother-- Speaker 1: She grew up in Cincinnati [Ohio]? Speaker 2: She grew up in Cincinnati. Speaker 1: And what type of place was Cincinnati for your mother? Speaker 2: There's a neighborhood called Avondale [Cincinnati, Ohio]. It was predominantly European Jews, and they would pronounce it, (pronunciation) Avondale. And the black people would call it (pronunciation) Avondale (laughter). And we were, we were an interesting family, because my mother just insisted on just being part of the community. My grandmother always spoke of her as being, I guess a person who was always a little pushy, to use her term. But I like that quality, and I think I have to sometimes harness my own self when it comes to that. But anyway, she wanted to always live in a mixed neighborhood. She always-- Speaker 1: As a child? Speaker 2: As a child. And my grandmother used to say she never knew where that came from, because--and they would always look for places where there was a mixed neighborhood, you know, or on the periphery of a white neighborhood where blacks would live, or whatever. And of course, most of the Jewish neighborhoods were, they allowed certain families to integrate their neighborhoods. But Avondale was one of those neighborhoods in Cincinnati. And the schools in Cincinnati as opposed to the schools in Kentucky--because Cincinnati is right across the river from Covington, Kentucky. And I had aunts who lived in Kentucky, and you would go right over the river, the bridge there, and you would see signs for colored only and white only. Whereas in Cincinnati, it was a little more sophisticated. But there was division there, you know. And the signs weren't there, but you knew not to cross over. And my mother just, I think she almost lived in a dream world, because she just refused to see all of this. And my grandparents [Erma Pitchford Weatherford and Henry Weatherford] used to say she--you know, they would buy her these beautiful blonde dolls and whatever. And she would insist on, she said, "Well, where is the doll that looks like me? You know, I want the doll that looks like me, you know." And they would have to find these painted black dolls at the time, because there were nothing but white dolls that they would just paint over at the time. And she would be satisfied having both the white and the black doll. But she, this was just--to this day we don't know where this came from. But she had that drive, and she had that vision. And she has passed it on to us, I mean in different kinds of ways, which I'm sure we'll talk about. But she grew up going to integrated schools. She liked the elementary school that she attended. She did not graduate. Speaker 1: Do you know, did you know the name of that elementary school? Speaker 2: It was the Avondale School [Cincinnati, Ohio]. (Unclear), yeah. Speaker 1: And she did not graduate from elementary school? Speaker 2: No, she didn't graduate from elementary school. She had to work, she went to work. And-- Speaker 1: At what age did she go to work? Speaker 2: I think she was in her teens, because she married at nineteen. So, she had to be sixteen or seventeen years old. Speaker 1: So, just to flush that out a bit. She's in elementary school for how long? Speaker 2: Probably up until the fifth or sixth grade. Speaker 1: And then what kind of work does she stop and do? Speaker 2: Domestic work. She went to clean people's homes. Speaker 1: And what year would you say she's cleaning homes? An estimate will do. Speaker 2: You know, she married in 19--that's a good question. It had to be in the--I have to think about that. Speaker 1: Okay. What year were your parents married, when your mother was nineteen? Speaker 2: In 1921. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, yeah, 1921. Oh, I have to get these dates together. No, that's when my father was born, in 1921. So it had to be in the, it had to be in the--I was born in '41 [1941], so it had to be in the '30s [1930s]. It had to be in the '30s [1930s], 'cause I was born in 1941 and she was nineteen. Story_ID: 545391 Speaker 1: And do you know what, what year your [maternal] grandmother [Erma Pitchford Weatherford] and her family migrated from Mississippi? Speaker 2: In the 1900s. She never really told us too much. It had to be in the 1900s. Speaker 1: So, you would define them as a part of the Great Migration? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And lots of people moving with them? Speaker 2: Oh, she talks about that, yeah. Speaker 1: What does she say? Speaker 2: She said people--oh yeah, she said people literally left property and everything to come north. You know, they just walked off of the land, because they were being threatened. People wanted their property, people were killing them. It was a very difficult time, a very painful time. And she said that they actually walked away from property and got (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The property they owned? Speaker 2: That they owned. And they got in their little Ford automobile--until they ran out--sometimes they had to even leave the automobile and walk-- Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: --to the next destination. Because if a Greyhound bus passed them and was full, they couldn't get on it, because all the white people were in the front and there was no room in the back. You know, she told us some very interesting stories. But yeah, she was part of that migration, the Great Migration. Story_ID: 545392 Speaker 1: So, let's just talk a little bit more about your mom [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay], and then we'll talk about her parents [Erma Pitchford Weatherford and Henry Weatherford]-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --just to keep it organized. So what you're describing is your mom isn't just interested in living in an integrated neighborhoods, I mean she really is in appreciation of integration, living with whites and herself. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Not that she, you know, wants to be a white person. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She really wants to live in an integrated situation. And how did that play out in her professional life? Speaker 2: Yeah, she was vain. (Laughter) We used to make fun of her, because she--and I use vanity in a very complimentary way. She just did not want to be ordinary. She just didn't feel that she just had to live like other people. She just dealt with what she had. Because even as a domestic going to work, you would have never thought she was going to work, the way she dressed to go to work, you know. Speaker 1: What would she wear? Speaker 2: She would wear good clothes. And when we say good clothes, that means your Sunday Sabbath clothes, you know. She was, she came from a Catholic family, and became a Seventh-day Adventist early on. But she, she--and when you say good clothes, you're wearing your best clothes, you know, to go to work. And she never, we never saw her in run over shoes, and ashy feet, and stuff like that. I mean she always just pointed that out, that she just didn't feel like she was put on this earth to look like that, or to act like that, you know. And we've been trying to figure out where this came from. And my sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] say the Bible--I said but she had a Bible before then; she was out partying with my father [Alfred Fornay], you know. But she, she, had these attributes of wanting to just move forward and be better. And people loved her. She didn't think she was better than other people. She was a very warm, caring, giving person. But there were standards, and there were just things that she set in terms of goals. And it was just amazing how she put her life together. She was very disturbed when she had to drop out of school [Avondale School, Cincinnati, Ohio]; she really wanted to finish school. And she talked about it into her adult life, and later on she did go back to school and she got her GED [General Educational Development]. And she was very proud of that, and she became a nurse's aide. And in those days that was nice, you know. So, she felt good about that. But she, she was considered to be a good girl. My aunts and people who helped raise her would say that she was, they didn't have to worry about her. She had standards and goals, and people respected her, you know. And-- Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about how she maintained her honor, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she said that when my father, who she said was un-churched, used to want to take her out and take her places. You know, she didn't drink and she didn't smoke. And she would go with my father, who was a very handsome man, tall and very debonair and dressed well, you know. And he liked the way she would dress. And I have some pictures I can show you. They really look fabulous. But she said that she would sit there and act like she wanted to smoke, and people would light her cigarette. She said because when you put your hand up, they would light your cigarette, and she would smoke. (Laughter) And she said it was not a pretty sight, the coughing and the lack of sophistication from not indulging in that kind of smoking. And the drinking, she said that my father would offer her whiskey, and she thought it was the most bitter liquid that she'd ever tasted. But she would do this to be part of the social scene or whatever, you know. And she would feel guilty about it, and would share it with the aunts and everything. And they would, they would get on him when they would see him and say, "She's not that kind of girl. She's not that--" whatever, you know. And I thought that was cute. Story_ID: 545393 Speaker 1: So your mom [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] was raised Catholic? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: And what was that like for her? Ultimately she made a change. So maybe you could talk a little bit about her upbringing, and then how she chose Seventh-day Adventism. Speaker 2: My grandmother [Erma Pitchford Weatherford] was Roman Catholic, and her sisters were Roman Catholic. And my aunts on my grandmother's side and on my mother's side, they were Catholics. And I think that's where some of that prim and proper came from, because of the rituals of the church and the discipline that you were supposed to indulge in as a Catholic woman and all that. But what was so humorous to us was because my grandmother, she dipped snuff, and she drank beer. (Laughter) And so we don't know--she was Catholic on Sunday, (laughter) and through the week she indulged in all her little vices, you know. She was quite a rowdy woman, so to speak in those days, you know. And that's where you see the difference between my mother and my grandmother, because my grandmother, I mean she would say words, and we'd have to close our ears. I mean that's just the kind of woman she was. And then when you would see her in public with her lace gloves on, and her bag and her purse, you would think she was so prim, you know. And she carried it off very nicely. But she had her moments, and we loved it, you know. Speaker 1: So how did your mother, did your mother tell you any stories about when she was practicing Catholicism? And then-- Speaker 2: She didn't really--my mother was a very intelligent woman. She didn't really buy the Catholic church. She just went because she was told to, and that was part of it, whatever. She liked the Protestant way of worshipping God. Because my father [Alfred Fornay] was Baptist and Presbyterian, and she latched on to that immediately. And as a young girl, there was a Seventh-day Adventist church in Cincinnati [Ohio], in the downtown part of Cincinnati that they called, I think they called it Laurel [ph.]. I think they called it Over-the-Rhine [Cincinnati, Ohio], or Laurel or something. But it was downtown Cincinnati, that's where most of the blacks in the city lived at the time. And there was a church there, and she just loved the singing. She said the singing was just beautiful. And they had active youth programs or whatever, and she found herself going. And when my grandmother found out where she was going, she didn't object to it, because she saw what the good that it was about in terms of the youth that were attending and whatever. And that's how she became a Seventh-day Adventist. Speaker 1: And was it an integrated church, or was it a black church (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was a black church. There was a white Seventh-day Adventist church and there was a black Seventh-day Adventist church. That has somewhat changed now, but they were in the black community. And it was a beautiful church. I mean we went there as young people, to the same church. And it was one of these old beautiful Jewish synagogues that the Seventh-day Adventist church had taken over, with the beautiful stained glass. And it was, it was a beautiful sanctuary, yeah. Story_ID: 545394 Speaker 1: So, let's talk a little bit about your [maternal] grandmother [Erma Pitchford Weatherford] and what she's told you about migrating, about her life in Mississippi if you know any anecdotes about her growing up there, and about her move, and everyone's move to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: She talked more about Chicago than she did Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Birmingham [Alabama], she was born in Birmingham, so we didn't know how she got from Birmingham to Mississippi. But we knew about Mississippi to Chicago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: And in Mississippi, they walked away from their property? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. And she lived in Chicago, and she said Chicago was a hard life but you could find work. They worked (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of work did she do? Speaker 2: Domestic. She was--and she made the point to let you know that she only worked in the best homes. She didn't work for any quote unquote, white person. She said, "If I'm going to work for a white person, it has to be one of the better white people," you know. Those were her words. And she did. She worked in some of the finest homes in the Hyde Park section of Chicago at the time. Speaker 1: And about what year was this? About what time is your grandmother working in Chicago? Speaker 2: It had to be in the '20s [1920s], you know, it had to be in the '20s [1920s]. Because she came to Cincinnati [Ohio] in the '30s [1930s], so it had to be in the '20s [1920s]. Story_ID: 545395 Speaker 1: So, can we talk a little bit more about your [maternal] grandmother? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was her name again? Speaker 2: Erma. Speaker 1: Erma? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What's her full name? Speaker 2: Erma Agnes Weatherford [Erma Pitchford Weatherford]. Speaker 1: And when she moved from Mississippi to Chicago [Illinois] to do domestic work, did she travel with her entire family? How did that work? Speaker 2: We don't know. My grandmother, as you will see in the photograph, had a lot of Cherokee Indian [Native American] in her. And about ten years ago, my sisters found some relatives, the Pitchfords, because that was her maiden name. And they had a powwow, a family reunion in central Ohio. And my sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] went there and they saw images of my grandmother, and the squaws with the braided hair and whatever. And we just have not been able to make the connection there, you know. And she wouldn't give us much information. She was not very proud of whatever happened, and that's why my sisters and I, we plan sometime to do a family tree and just try to find out what was going on. But she did not have an entourage traveling with her to Chicago. We have gathered that she went there on her own. When she went to Cincinnati [Ohio], that's when we discovered the aunts, our Aunt Bea, Beatrice [ph.], and some of the other aunts that lived in Covington [Kentucky] and some parts of Ohio. And I think that's probably why she went back to Cincinnati. And that's where she met my grandfather and married. But there's not much we know, there's not much we know about that. Speaker 1: And what do you know about your grandfather? Speaker 2: Not much either. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: His, oh, it was Henry Weatherford, yes, Henry Weatherford. And people used to call him Buck, B-U-C-K, because he was a big strong--a very black, strong man. And they called him Buck, and he was a very warm man. He was very big and strong but he was very warm, I remember that. Speaker 1: And do you know where he was from? Speaker 2: He was from the South, too. And I called my sister last night because I anticipated the question. And we think he was from the--what's the, Georgia area. And she's trying to research that. We don't know, we really don't know. Speaker 1: And what kind of work did he do? Speaker 2: Oh, just labor work. He, he drove trucks. He would haul furniture, he would stoke furnaces for people; he would do landscaping work, always worked. In fact, he died working. He died when we were very young. We were only about seven years old when he passed away; had a heart attack and died. Story_ID: 545396 Speaker 1: Tell me about your father. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: You told us a little earlier, but if you could actually repeat some of that. What was his name, and where was he born? Speaker 2: Okay, his name was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And if you could spell his name. Speaker 2: Okay. His name is Alfred, Harvey is his middle name; A-L-F-R-E-D, and Harvey, H-A-R-V-E-Y, Fornay [Alfred Fornay]. And he--now this is where--on one of our birth certificates it says Virginia. On my sister's birth certificate it says Union Mills, North Carolina. So, we don't know (laughter). Now, his family is from Union Mills, North Carolina. So my sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] and I think that his mother [Mattie Long Fornay] must have had the birth in Virginia, in traveling or something, and that was his birthplace. But he was raised with his other nine brothers and sisters from Union Mills, North Carolina. And again, they left North Carolina years ago, in the '30s [1930s] again, in seeking better work conditions, employment. And we were also told there were health reasons why they wanted to leave as well, because my father and one of his sisters were very sickly. And-- Speaker 1: What kind of illnesses? Speaker 2: We, from what we gather, it was probably--they used to talk about gout and pneumonia, and what was that? It was something else, but they were things we take for granted now. I mean those were life threatening--I was try to think of--it was a disease that they suffer with. I'll try to remember it. But I recall them mentioning something there. But anyway, coming to Cincinnati [Ohio], I understand that there were better health facilities at the time where blacks could go to and get help. And those were some of the reasons why they came north. Speaker 1: Did your father tell you any stories about his growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He had a sister that was raped in North Carolina. He wouldn't tell us which sister, but-- Speaker 1: How many sisters did he have? Speaker 2: He had--one, two, three--he had three sisters (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You said nine children? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Three sisters? Speaker 2: Three sisters, um-hm. Speaker 1: And what were their names? Speaker 2: Ah-- Speaker 1: Can you name the nine? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think now (laughter). Lottie [Lottie Fornay (ph.)], Lois [Lois Fornay (ph.)]--what was the other aunt, she was the older one--Pearl [Pearl Fornay (ph.)], okay, Pearl. And Loby [Loby Fornay], Justin [Justin Fornay], Alfred, and who? Bernard [Bernard Fornay (ph.)]. Story_ID: 545397 Speaker 1: So you were about to tell us a story about their childhood? Speaker 2: Yes. He, he said that they--my father [Alfred Fornay] didn't go to school. They went to grade school for, he said for kindergarten up to about the third or fourth grade or whatever. He said that they had to work; they could not exist unless they worked. And most of it was farming, they owned their own farm. They had cattle, they had pigs, they had hogs, they had--I used to go summers there and get up at five o'clock and make the rounds with my aunts. And it was a working farm. They, they raised sweet potatoes, white potatoes; they had all kinds of vegetables that they grew. They stored them in caves underneath the ground that was cool as an icebox in the summertime. It was amazing. And that's how they stored all the food, wintertime. The canning, we would go down there during canning season where they would do the tomatoes, the squash, the pickles, the fruits like peaches and apples or whatever. That was all done and preserved for the winter for eating. And they had orchards, they had hay which they bundled to sell. It was, it was a working place. But it was hard work, and for young people growing up, it was very hard work. And there was no caring for you in terms of getting sick. And he said people were always ailing and getting sick from different diseases and whatever. And there was no help, because in North Carolina they would not help. There was not a public place where blacks at the time could go and get help. And-- Speaker 1: This is the early '30s [1930s]? Speaker 2: The early '30s [1930s], yeah. And if there was a black doctor, he usually just catered to those who could afford to go to him for help, you know. It was a very difficult time, according to him. Story_ID: 545398 Speaker 1: And how does your father [Alfred Fornay] come to move from Union City, North Carolina? Speaker 2: Union Mills. Speaker 1: Union Mills, North Carolina to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He-- Speaker 1: --Cincinnati [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yes. They decided to leave Cincinnati as a family. Speaker 1: To Union Mills? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: They decided to leave Union Mills? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: To move to Cincinnati. And I'm trying to think of--yeah, Cincinnati. And my father--my uncle, we called him Jet, but his name was Justin [Justin Fornay]--and Loby [Loby Fornay]--they had heard about the mills in Cincinnati. I don't know if you know anything about Ohio. But at the time, Ohio was one of the main manufacturing centers. In fact, Cincinnati was referred to as the queen city, because of the economy there in terms of industry. Speaker 1: What type of manufacturing? Speaker 2: Oh, Formica tabletops. The Cincinnati Milling Machine [Cincinnati Milling Machine Company], which now is called the Milacron [Milacron, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio], was a steel foundry where they did all the steel, stainless steel railroad tracks. All that came from parts of Ohio. The Fisher Body plant [Fisher Body Corporation], which was part of General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] had one of the huge installations there for Chevrolet and Ford [Ford Motor Company]. And it was a thriving town industry. Philip Carey [Philip Carey Manufacturing Corporation], the Jergens lotion company [Jergens Soap Company], Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company, Cincinnati, Ohio]--they bounced around for all those different companies over a period of time, and worked there. Speaker 1: Your father and his brothers? Speaker 2: And his brothers, um-hm. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And my aunts. Speaker 1: And your aunts? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What years are they working? Is this the mid-'30s [1930s]? Speaker 2: It was the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s], yeah, and the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: And how did they literally travel from Union City to--did they tell you any stories about that move? Speaker 2: From Union Mills? Speaker 1: I'm sorry, Union Mills, North Carolina. Speaker 2: Some came by boxcar, on the freights on the train. Some--most--my father was very proud; he drove, he couldn't--he had to drive his car, you know. And he died with a car, I mean that's just the way he was, you know (laughter). In fact, until he could prove that he had social security and all that stuff, he did chauffeur work. He used to chauffeur some of the executives at Procter and Gamble, that was his connection there, and at Philip Carey. And that's how he got, he lucked up on a job at the Cincinnati Milling Machine, which is Milacron. And he worked there for the remainder of his life, and retired there. But that's how he got in from chauffeuring, because he found out the connection through these executives. And that's how he ended up making over their homes, their bathrooms, their landscaping; he did that on the side as extra work. So he dealt with some of the best executives in Cincinnati at the time, and made very good money for that period of time. We lived well. When I look back, we lived like middle class black people at the time. Speaker 1: In the, in the mid-1940s? Speaker 2: In the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s], yeah. Story_ID: 545399 Speaker 1: So do you know anything about your father's parents [Mattie Long Fornay and Harvey Fornay]? Do you know where they're from, and anything about their-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they're from, they're from North Carolina; they're all from North Carolina. In fact, the majority of his family are still in North Carolina, the young ones who grew up who were left there. I, I didn't--his mother was white, and my Uncle Justin [Justin Fornay] used to tell me that his father was a Mills. Now, the town was called Union Mills [North Carolina], so you do the math (laughter). And if you go there, all the cemetery is Mills, white and black, you know. Of course the blacks were over in a separate area and the whites were in a separate area. But there are Mills white, and there are Mills black. And so I'm sure the name Fornay became a plantation name. The Mills is definitely a plantation name, and still exists to this day. It's such a small place that until the '60s [1960s], it wasn't even on the map; that's just how small the place is. It's on the postal map, but it wasn't on the legit map in terms of finding the place, the geographic map. But now I understand that it exists now. But he encouraged his brothers and sisters to come to Cincinnati [Ohio], and that's where the majority of the family on his side settled, and that's where most of them have retired and died. Story_ID: 545400 Speaker 1: You said that your father [Alfred Fornay] was Baptist and, or Pres- Presbyterian? Speaker 2: Presbyterian, um-hm. Speaker 1: He's Presbyterian? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And was that the religion, the church that his family belonged to? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, in Cincinnati [Ohio], he became Presbyterian because he was then trying to become a social climber. Because with his job and his salary, and his family--my Aunt Lois [Lois Fornay (ph.)] became a Presbyterian so he started attending. But he said he was always a Baptist, and so he vacillated between Baptist and Presbyterian. And the church in Union Mills [North Carolina] was a beautiful white church with a little steeple, I mean it was so classic--a wood frame, you know. After service we would go out in the back and they would have a tub full of ice and they would drink their beer and have their lunch and whatever. It was, I enjoyed those days, those visits to, in the summer. My sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] went once or twice, but they were not encouraged to go much, because it was the wells and the outhouse and stuff, and they just didn't feel that my sisters would enjoy that too much. But I had a ball. Speaker 1: It was a bit primitive? Speaker 2: Yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Perhaps. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 545401 Speaker 1: So your parents [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay and Alfred Fornay] meet. Wait, first of all, you spoke a little bit earlier about what your father did for a living. Could you just repeat some of that? Like you said that he was--initially was a chauffeur, but then he also seemed like a skilled man. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Can you just--as if you had not before-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --tell us a little bit about that. Speaker 2: Plumbing was his thing. He loved plumbing, and landscaping, and bathrooms. He loved doing bathrooms and kitchens over. Speaker 1: Where did he learn those skills? Speaker 2: I do not know. Now, the only thing that I can say is that his uncles and brothers [Justin Fornay and Loby Fornay] were taught carpentry. They used to make cedar cabinets and chests and things. I mean all their homes in Union Mills [North Carolina] had all this cedar. I mean the smell was wonderful. And beautiful--they would stain them different colors in terms of the mahogany versus the blonde wood or whatever, beautiful stuff. And their beds were made out of it. The kitchen cabinets, the closets, you know, it was all made out of cedar (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess that's common for a milling town. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Yes, go ahead. Speaker 1: So your father, he and his brothers were all skilled craftsmen? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: And he is parlaying his chauffeur-ism-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --into home remodeling and landscaping? Speaker 2: Yes. I think coming to, quote unquote, the big city of Cincinnati [Ohio], he wanted to move into the industries that were there in the city. And I think he played down there a little bit until he realized that people were admiring him because of those skills. And so, he had really two jobs. Because he would work a full job at the mill [Cincinnati Milling Machine Company; Milacron, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio], and then he would come home and eat and change his clothes and go out. And sometimes we wouldn't see him until nine or ten o'clock at night, and he would be back up at six o'clock in the morning going to work at his regular job. But he would makeover bathrooms, kitchens, plumbing, and did excellent landscaping. Our home on the strip where we lived, most of the neighbors were people who worked at the same plant who'd bought homes on the same street. His home, the hedges and the grass and stuff, I mean it was just beautiful. Speaker 1: And you said initially that your father was chauffeuring executives? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Was that his job at the mill throughout his years there? Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no-- Speaker 1: Or did he take a mill job? Speaker 2: No. He became an employee at the mill. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he became a warehouse man. And he eventually worked himself up--his job title up to supervisor, and remained in that job until he retired. And we were very proud of him, because he had to learn the ropes of a warehouse. I mean there was no sophistication in terms of numbers and paperwork and supervising people, and stuff like that. He learned that--he listened to the people he worked with, and they were impressed with the way he learned. And from the way he spoke and talked, I think he was a fair boss, and tried to bring in other black men into the warehousing business or whatever. And if he said this was a good guy, the other bosses would hire them. And when they messed up, and there were a few who did, big time, even members of my own family--we'll never forget, because one of our younger cousins messed up, as they say. And my father came down on him and his family like a ton of bricks, because his reputation was on the line, and he cherished that. And that's how he was looked upon at the job, you know, as a person who had integrity who would get the job done. He was always on time. To this day, I get up at six o'clock. (Laughter) Our whole household woke up at six o'clock, because my father would wake up--with the alarm clock or without the alarm clock, he was on his feet at six o'clock. He was, my mother would be up fixing, preparing his breakfast. He would be out of the door at 7:00, and he was expected at work at 8:15. And we knew at 5:30, quarter to 6:00, we'd be sitting in the driveway waiting for him to pull up in the driveway, because that was his schedule, you know. And then he would relax and read the paper, maybe cut the lawn, and then change his clothes and go to the second job, you know. And we wouldn't see him, because we would be put in bed at eight o'clock, when the sun set. And maybe my mother would read us a story or something and then we'd be in the bed. And we wouldn't see him until the next morning, you know. Story_ID: 545402 Speaker 1: How did your father [Alfred Fornay] and mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] meet? Speaker 2: My father was a flirt, because--he was, was still a flirt. He used to flirt with all the people in the neighborhood [Avondale, Cincinnati, Ohio], he was a ladies' man. And my mother said that she was with some other girls, they had gone out. I don't know if you're familiar with the Cotton Club [New York, New York], but all the different black neighborhoods had a Cotton Club, and there was a Cotton Club in Cincinnati [Ohio]. And they went to the Cotton Club and some of the girls said, "There's a guy over there that's been looking at you and admiring you." And my mother said, "Oh, please." I can just hear her saying, "Oh, please," that was one of her, you know, expressions. And to cut to the chase, she went back several times and they met and they became friends. And it didn't take very long because in a year after they were dating or something, they were married. And he was twenty-one and she was nineteen. Speaker 1: And was your mother a Seventh-day Adventist already? Speaker 2: No, she was, she hadn't joined the church yet, yeah. That's where the tension came in. Because they used to go out together and party and whatever. And then when she became a Seventh-day Adventist that all stopped, and that changed their relationship quite a bit. It was a lot of tension there. Story_ID: 545403 Speaker 1: I feel I was remiss with your mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay]. How many siblings does your mother have? Speaker 2: She only had a brother. Speaker 1: Okay, and what's his name? Speaker 2: Wallace. Speaker 1: So he's-- Speaker 2: Wallace Weatherford. Speaker 1: Okay. And so, I just didn't want to leave him out. You spoke about several aunts. Those are your mother's aunts? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: As opposed to her sisters? Speaker 2: Um-hm, and my father's aunts. Speaker 1: And your father's aunts? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I see. And then your father [Alfred Fornay] had the eight brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: And your mother had one brother? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 545404 Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Alfred Fornay]? Speaker 2: My father resented the fact that he could not be a foreman [at the Cincinnati Milling Machine Company; Milacron, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio]. I had to come with grips with that, because he was very difficult to deal with when it came to education. My mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] was very strong about education, wanting us to be educated. My father worked all his life, and he felt that if you got a good job and if you worked, that was it. And the Seventh-day Adventist church was high on education. They, it was just part of the growth, you had to be educated. And my mother picked on--she, she latched on to that like she had been searching for that all her life, and she prepared us to enter school. And her salary put us through school and through the boarding academies because the system is like the Catholic church. You go to grade school as an Adventist, and you go to boarding school as a Seventh-day Adventist. I went to boarding school in Pennsylvania [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania]. It was a black boarding school, one of five or six in the country at the time, a beautiful place. And my father resented the fact that my mother was spending all this time and money preparing for our education. And she went back to school with the goal in mind to qualify to become a nurse's aide so she could work in nursing homes in Cincinnati [Ohio]. Story_ID: 545405 Speaker 1: So, tell me a little bit about your parents' [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay and Alfred Fornay] marriage before your mother--so your mom's a practicing Catholic? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And she's still attending Catholic church? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And your father is now a Presbyterian? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Perhaps socially. And they're able to party together. And they--so can you tell us a little bit about their relationship, and then how your mother came to choose Seventh-day Adventism? Speaker 2: Yeah, she--their social life I understand was nice. People thought they were the ideal couple. They were a handsome couple, they lived well. She dressed well, she spoke well. They were socially accepted, having no education. I mean they did well, in terms of being recognized in the community. That changed abruptly when she joined the Adventist church, Seventh-day Adventist church. Speaker 1: How many years into their relationship does that happen? Speaker 2: It was early on, because we were raised as Seventh-day Adventists. So, it had to be around, it had to be around 19--it was in the early '30s [1930s]. Because I was born in 1941, so she had to--they were married. So it had to be like three or four years after they were married. Speaker 1: What year were they married? Speaker 2: Ah-- Speaker 1: An approximate date will do. Speaker 2: I think it was 1935, 1938, something like that. Speaker 1: And long were they together before they get married? Speaker 2: About-- Speaker 1: You said about a year. Speaker 2: Um-hm, about two years, about two years, and then they were married. Speaker 1: So in the next three years, so about 1938 or '39 [1939], your mom has become a Seventh-day Adventist? Speaker 2: Probably, I would probably say around 1940, Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-one [1941], um-hm. And that's when--because we were raised as Seventh-day Adventists. Story_ID: 545406 Speaker 1: So in the late '30s [1930s], early perhaps 1940, your mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] becomes a Seventh-day Adventist? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what does that mean? And how does that rel- affect the relationship with your father [Alfred Fornay]? Speaker 2: It affected the relationship because my father looked at my mother as being a cosmopolitan woman, a woman not worldly, but who would go out and party and have a good time and still go to church and still be respected, et cetera, whereas when she became a Seventh-day Adventist, the partying was not part of her religious life, and the drinking and the smoking. And even though she did it moderately, it was unacceptable at the church. And the church had a very healthy health message. And she, that's when we became vegetarians. I mean, she really just picked up on all of that, you know. And they were high on education. It was just all the things that she wanted to do, you know. A lot of people misunderstand Seventh-day Adventists. They think it's a lot of restrictions or whatever, but it's a very disciplined religion. And she picked up on that, and I think that's what motivated her more so than anything else. Speaker 1: And so, did your father continue to live with you? I mean, how did it work out? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: How did they work out, how did they work out the tension? Speaker 2: They were separated at one point, because he just didn't quite understand why she just immersed herself into this new religion. And-- Speaker 1: I apologize. They're still childless at this point? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, they are staying together despite this shift of your mother? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, yeah. And it happened very fast. Because shortly after I was born is when she really, I'm told, immersed herself into this religion. And my father resented it, my father resented it. He went along with it, and he respected the fact that we were being trained well and that people respected her for that, and holding the family together and all that. But there was this undercurrent of resentment. Because when they met and became friends or whatever, they were just the ideal couple, and partied and had a good time. And he had no ambition to go beyond what he had reached in terms of his skills, and he was comfortable with the way he was living and the money that he was making. We were one of the first families in the neighborhood [Avondale, Cincinnati, Ohio] who had a television. We were one of the first families in the neighborhood who had a washer and a dryer and all these things, you know, that other families were struggling to get. We had them. And so he felt like we had arrived, in so many words, you know. My mother was, she was not settled. She didn't feel like we had arrived. She felt that there was just so much more to achieve and accomplish, to the point where I think my father really thought that she was becoming a little arrogant, a little uppity, a little out of her league so to speak, as I said, you know. Speaker 1: And did he participate in any of the Seventh-day Adventist activities? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Did he try it out at all? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he would come. Like we would have our little programs at church and our little recitals and things, and he would show up reluctantly. Because he wanted to be known as the father, you know. And he did his fatherly thing, but it wasn't, it wasn't done with the warmth and the caring and the nurturing. It was done because of need and recognition and prestige, you know, it was that kind of thing. And later in the years we felt that; we felt it as children. Speaker 1: Later as children you felt that from your mother? Speaker 2: No, from my father, the resentment. Speaker 1: The resentment? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, it was evident. Speaker 1: And did he take that out on you? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He took it out on me and our family. I mean, he--when I decided to do what I wanted to do in life--and I'm jumping forward, but we can come back. But I will just touch on it a little. He, he just didn't understand why I was interested in the career path that I was envisioning. And it was the same with my sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn], you know, wanting to go to boarding school [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania] and wanting to go to college. He couldn't understand why we just couldn't go to a local high school and be there with no money involved, and the whole thing, you know. My mother was amazing, because she paid three statements every month at this boarding school on her little meager salary. So we think it was divine intervention, because we don't know what she did, you know, short of prostitution. (Laughter) Because you know, we don't know how she did it, you know, but she did. Story_ID: 545407 Speaker 1: How many children do your parents [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay and Alfred Fornay] have, and how close are you in age? Speaker 2: It's three of us. I have two sisters, and we were born one year after the other. Speaker 1: And what are your sisters' names? Speaker 2: Beverly [Beverly Fornay English] is the oldest sister, and Elizabeth [Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] is the youngest. Speaker 1: Would you spell their names? Speaker 2: Yes. Beverly is B-E-V-E-R-L-Y. And Elizabeth is E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H. Story_ID: 545408 Speaker 1: So, what was your earliest memory of growing up? What can you, what's the first thing you can remember? Speaker 2: I, my father [Alfred Fornay] had a good job. And the Cincinnati Milling Machine Company, which is now called Milacron [Milacron, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio], because they do plastics and steel and all that kind of stuff, and aluminum. And it was a family oriented company. And Christmas and Easter, and I think the July 4th weekend, they would have these elaborate family events for families. The Cincinnati Gardens [Cincinnati, Ohio], which was one of the big arenas at the time, they would bring the ice skating traveling extravaganza; it was sponsored by the Milacron company. And we would go as a family, free. And this was a big event, you know, I mean thousands of employees. And July 4th, they had this big outing at Coney Island, our Coney Island in Cincinnati [Ohio], and it was a segregated place. And we would go to the rides, but we couldn't swim, because they would not allow blacks and whites to swim together at the time. There were no signs, nothing-- Speaker 1: This is 1944? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And it was an unwritten rule, but you knew that this was a rule, and it was practiced. And there were blacks who tested the waters but landed in jail and all kinds of things. But it was a big deal for you to be associated with the companies at this time because of the employment of your parents. And we looked forward to these events. And people, kids in the neighborhood [Avondale, Cincinnati, Ohio] envied us because of these big events, and the fact that we were being picked up by the bus and taken to the place, you know. It was really quite exciting. The Seventh-day Adventist church had organizations that were quite popular. The Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] and the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] were very popular, but the Seventh-day Adventist church has a Pathfinders club [Pathfinder Club], which was for girls and boys. And we had uniforms and jamborees and everything, just like the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts. It's a great organization. And we'd have competitions and oral presentations. We would have campouts and skating; that's where I learned to skate, those kinds of things. So it was a happy childhood, it was. We had things to do, and it was a fun time to be alive at that time. Story_ID: 545409 Speaker 1: So, describe a little bit about your life in the church as a youngster. Did it take up much of your time? So were you and your mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] and your sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] engaged with the church most days of the week? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no. We would--sundown Friday to sundown Saturday is the Sabbath, Saturday (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: And we would, we were engaged in that. But as far as during the week, we attended-- Speaker 1: So, what was your family life like during the week? Speaker 2: During the week, we were involved with the community [in Cincinnati, Ohio], and going to school, and the regular mundane things that other people were doing, you know. It was not a rigid--we would have morning devotional. And in the evening if my mother felt like it, you know, depending on how tired she was or whatever, she would read us bible stories that were published. And when we got our television in our home, we were able to watch 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'] and all those little things before we went to bed. And that was it, you know. Story_ID: 545410 Speaker 1: Do you remember any more about what you watched besides 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show']? Speaker 2: Yeah. The things that bothered me most were those horrible films of blacks, African pictures, you know, with--I just thought--my mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] would ask me why I was so upset. I just could not understand why they would show these black people with these big instruments in their lips and these huge distortions. And they didn't show the regular parts, you know. And I always asked my mother, I said, "Well, where are the people that look like us?" And she said, "Well, those are our ancestors," or whatever. And we said, "Unh-uh, I don't think so." (Laughter) You know, not looking like that, you know. And then of course when I got older I realized that that was just part of the denigration of black people on television, and it was horrible. And I, I recognized that early on. And my mother used to talk about that, as, as my being disturbed about seeing those images at such an early age like that, you know. Speaker 1: And besides the African National Geographic type shows, were there any black people on television? Speaker 2: Well, 'Amos 'n' Andy,' you know. And what was the other one we used to look at all the time? 'Amos 'n' Andy,' and I forget the other one that was quite popular. But a lot of the children shows--Cincinnati [Ohio] had a good children's lineup of shows in terms of the different stations there, and we would watch most of the children's shows and some permissible movies, and that's about it. But on Sundays, we would look at the Ed--what's the--Ed Mack? Oh, what was the entertainment show? I forget. Speaker 1: Ed McMahon? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: McMahon? Speaker 2: No, it was--oh, the Ted Mack variety show ['The Original Amateur Hour']. It was big, you know. And then of course Ed Sullivan ['The Ed Sullivan Show']. But I was in love with Loretta Young. I thought she was the most beautiful woman I'd ever seen. And the way she used to make her entrances and whatever, it was such a beautiful situation. Speaker 1: Who's Loretta Young? Speaker 2: Oh, she was one of the glamour stars back in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s], and she had her own television show, and it was called 'The Loretta Young Show,' and we used to watch that. And there was another woman, I forget. She was very popular, too. But these were all considered to be the family shows. And on Sunday, we looked forward to looking at those kinds of shows. Story_ID: 545411 Speaker 1: What were holidays like at the Fornays? Speaker 2: Our families used to get together. Later on they used to have, every now and then, the family reunions. But we would go from house to house. We loved to go to my Aunt Lois' [Lois Fornay (ph.)] home because she, she worked at the Cincinnati General Hospital, which at the time was the big hospital where most of the blacks in Cincinnati [Ohio] were born. And then there was a Jewish hospital, but now it's considered to be the University of Cincinnati Medical Center [Cincinnati, Ohio]. But at the time, those were two separate institutions. And my Aunt Lois, she had a good job there, too, one of my father's [Alfred Fornay] sisters. And she had a big house-- Speaker 1: What did she do there? Speaker 2: She was in the kitchen. She was one of the, to hear her tell it, dieticians. But we knew what she was. She was a food server, you know. And she always wore her white uniform and dressed well. She had a beautiful home. She and my Uncle Inez [ph.], they had bought a home over in the southern part of Avondale [Cincinnati, Ohio], which was considered to be the backside of the zoo, the Cincinnati Zoo [Cincinnati Zoo and Botanical Garden, Cincinnati, Ohio]. At that time the Cincinnati Opera was in the zoo, I don't know if you're aware of that. But they have since moved to the Music Hall [Cincinnati Music Hall, Cincinnati, Ohio]. But they used to have this big opera in the center, in the heart of the Cincinnati Zoo. And it wouldn't be unusual to hear a lion roar, or a moo or something in the midst of 'La Traviata' [Giuseppe Verdi] or whatever. We could hear it all on the back side of the zoo, because we could sit in her house and hear the whole (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was this? Speaker 2: Oh, this was in the '50s [1950s]. This was in the '50s [1950s], yeah, when I was growing up. Story_ID: 545412 Speaker 1: Well, what street did you live on? Speaker 2: Oh, we--the first address that I remember, where I was born, was Havens Street, and that was still in (pronunciation) Avondale, Avondale [Cincinnati, Ohio]. And that's where--that part of Avondale was where people lived who had the good jobs and had the good apartments or a house and were trying to move to Madisonville. Madisonville was a suburb out--in the periphery of the incorporation limits of Cincinnati [Ohio]. And you were to move from Avondale to Madisonville when you arrived, because that's where all the real beautiful homes were for blacks in Cincinnati. And of course that has shifted. There's Wyoming [Ohio] and Mariemont [Ohio] and other places now where people live, Rosedale [sic. Roselawn, Cincinnati, Ohio] and Bond Hill [Cincinnati, Ohio] or whatever. Those were areas where we were off limits at the time. But blacks live there now, and live very well. But you were supposed to move from Avondale to Madisonville, and we eventually moved to Madisonville. Speaker 1: And did you live in integrated neighborhoods? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, those were. Well, what they called integrated neighborhoods was where the neighborhoods met. And you were on the peripheral side and they were on the--you know. But there was some intercourse of community activity or whatever, you know, or buying in their stores, et cetera. That was considered to be a peaceful coexistence, and they called it integration, you know. But there were neighborhoods that you wouldn't dare put your foot in, like Norwood [Ohio], Bond Hill, Roselawn. Those areas, you would not--it's just like in Chicago [Illinois] when you pass Monroe Street going to the South Side of Chicago. That's where the majority of blacks live, and on the North Side there're the whites. But in Cincinnati, if you passed over Springfield--or Spring Grove Avenue, that's where the majority of whites lived, and on the south side the majority of blacks lived at the time. Story_ID: 545413 Speaker 1: So, what sights and sounds and smells remind you of where you grew up? Speaker 2: I, that's interesting that you would ask that. Because I'm a very sensitive person when it comes to colors and sounds and sensitivities. We had a lawn, and when my father [Alfred Fornay] would cut the grass, I just loved the smell of fresh cut grass. And that's why I think I appreciate the color green, because we had luscious trees. And there was a cherry tree that I cherished in my yard when it would bloom and offer the fruit. And that's, that was a childhood smell. Because I had, my room was on the ground level on the back side of the house. And when my father would cut the grass or I would cut the grass, I would just lay in the room when I was studying or something and just--the wind would blow this fresh smell of green, cut grass. And of course, you know, you had onions and everything else that was cut, and you would smell all that. And to me that was just such a refreshing smell. And to this day, I appreciate the aroma and smell of fresh vegetables and grass and greenery. That's a good question. Speaker 1: So, we have sights and sounds and smells. Do you have any sounds or sights? Speaker 2: You know, colors. Sounds--oh, sounds. In the midst of night, in industrial Ohio, to hear the freights, the trains, the sound of the engine. Even though we were not close to the rails, that would just flow through the community of Cincinnati [Ohio]. You could just hear it, you know. And even when I was living at the boarding school in Pennsylvania [Pine Grove Academy, Pine Grove, Pennsylvania], we would go shopping in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or sometimes in Pottstown [Pennsylvania] and Allentown, Pennsylvania. And we'd hear the trains, and it would just remind me of the experiences in Ohio and even here in New York [New York] when I was living and I would travel to Upstate New York and see trains or whatever. There was a fascination and association. Story_ID: 545414 Speaker 1: And I had an uncle, my Uncle Bernard [ph.], he was one of the first black Pullmans in Cincinnati [Ohio]. And I used to love to see-- Speaker 2: Bernard Fornay? Speaker 1: No, his name was--no, it's, what was his name, the last name? No, he was the uncle of my--I can't think of his last name. But he was not one of my father's [Alfred Fornay] brothers. And he was not my mother's [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay]--but we called him Uncle Bernard. And I'm trying to remember his last name. Speaker 2: Anyway, he was one of the first Pullman? Speaker 1: He was one of the first black Pullman porters. And I just admired him because--I don't know if you remember the grey uniforms they had? Speaker 2: I don't. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, you're so much younger. I forget, you know. (Laughter) I forget. But they were just looked upon like--my uncles who were in the [U.S.] military, they'd come home with the uniforms or whatever. When he would come, I would just wait for him to come back from trips or whatever, because he would just share with us the experiences on the rails, and the people that he would meet. And he was just so suave in his uniform, and dressed so well, and was so neat. Those were good jobs in those days, and they were highly respected. But he was one of the first Pullman that I remember in the community of Cincinnati, you know, and highly respected. Story_ID: 545415 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend? Speaker 2: Hm. Well, before we started attending the Seventh-day Adventist school, we went to Avondale School [Cincinnati, Ohio], which was part of the community. And we were there for a few years before we transferred to the Shiloh Seventh-day Adventist grammar school [Shiloh Preparatory School, Cincinnati, Ohio], a parochial school. And so, it was a mixed situation there. Speaker 1: And was there anyone, any specific teachers who influenced you during your elementary school years? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Miss Foote [ph.], I remember her; her name was Miss Foote. Speaker 1: And she was at the-- Speaker 2: Avondale School, the public school. Speaker 1: Okay, fantastic. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell us about her. Speaker 2: She was Jewish woman. And I say that because she was proud of her Jewishness. And on holidays or whatever, she was always absent, and we knew she was out because she was Jewish or whatever. So that's why I mentioned that. But she just took a liking to me. She was just so encouraging, and would tell my mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] what to do with me and whatever. And I just never forgot her. I mean all these years, she just stuck with me as a grade school teacher, you know. Speaker 1: And was the, were the public schools segregated? Speaker 2: To a degree. But Cincinnati [Ohio] tried to be different than Kentucky and Indiana. They didn't have the signs or whatever. They did try to integrate, so yes, I sat in the classroom with white and black students. But you knew you were different. I mean there was always that line of being treated differently, you know. And-- Speaker 1: And you're attending elementary school from, what year did you start? Speaker 2: I started from kindergarten up to about the third or fourth or fifth grade, I think it is. Speaker 1: And what years, what literal years are those? Speaker 2: Oh, well, it had to be the early '50s [1950s]. It had to be the early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 545416 Speaker 1: You've told us about Miss Foote [ph.] at the Avondale School [Cincinnati, Ohio]. Anything else about that school? Speaker 2: Well, there was a Miss Rogers [ph.], too. She was over the--she put on all the prog- the school programs. And I'm trying to remember what she did. But I think she was over the--it wasn't entertainment. But we were taught to--oh, she was social studies. She was the social studies teacher, but she was in charge of putting on the school programs. And my sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] and I were always selected to be in her programs. And in fact, we were usually the only blacks in the school programs, you know. And I think they just liked the fact that we were just more outgoing, and the fact that they didn't have problems with us resenting them and whatever. Because my mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] just, you know, when she found that there were slights, she was on the scene. They knew better than to mess with us. And she didn't curse and swear and all of that, but she would let them know. Because there was an incident where I had to be part of a donkey (laughter). And I was in the front, and this white guy was in the back. And the white guy's mother found out that he was in the back, and preferred him to be in the front and I should be in the back. Well, she made the switch, because my mother had to make the donkey outfit, because each parent whose kid was in it had to make the outfit, you know. So, my mother made the outfit. And when I told her that they had switched and I was going to be in the back, she said "Well, why?" I said, "Well, his mother wanted him in the front." She said, "The mother?" She said, "Well, isn't he from the neighborhood?" And I said, "No, he's not from the neighborhood." She said, "He's white?" And I said, "Yes." Well, the next morning she was up at the school, and she wanted to know from Miss Rogers, she says, "Why the shift? You know, because I designed it for him, you know. And why the shift?" And Miss Rogers said, "Well, his mother wanted to--." She said, "No, no, no, no, no. If he's going to be in the play, he will be in the front." And I forget the guy's name would be in the back. She said, "Well, there won't be any donkey, because he will not have the donkey outfit because I won't finish making it, you know." And that's how I got in the front; I had the donkey outfit. So, my mother had her own way of being revolutionary during those days, you know, without being on the marching front or whatever. But Miss Rogers had respect for that, I think. And I think she respected the way my mother handled the situation, you know. And later on, we didn't quite understand what was going on at the time, but as I matured we just looked at my mother in amazement, because when you compared her with the other mothers in the neighborhood [Avondale, Cincinnati, Ohio] or whatever, they just didn't have that kind of oomph, you know, that kind of drive, and didn't--so we just knew we were dealing with a very different kind of mother, you know. Story_ID: 545417 Speaker 1: And what kind of a student were you at Avondale [Avondale School, Cincinnati, Ohio]? Speaker 2: We were good students; we were good students. I don't think my mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] would have it any other way. And we were not driven to have all A's, and all this and whatever, but she just let us know that if you were going to achieve, there was a way to achieve. And if you were going to be recognized, there's a way to be recognized and to meet those standards. But I never was reprimanded because I couldn't get an A, if I got a B or whatever. And when my mother saw that there was a need--like I had a speech impediment, and it was brought to her attention. And she said she went to the school and said, "Well, what can we do about this?" Well, they provided a speech therapist, and I went there and whatever. You know, so I have learned how to articulate and use my tongue well or whatever, from that early stage. But that was the kind of concern that she would have, you know. Because I had a friend who had an impediment, and their parents said, "Oh, you know, we're black and that's the way we talk." You know, it was that kind of feeling, you know. Well, my mother said, "Well, I don't know what that means." She said, "We speak English," and that's the way we were, you know. She said, "There's only certain ways that you pronounce a word, and that's the way I want you to pronounce it," you know. (Laughter) And so that's the way we did it, you know. Story_ID: 545418 Speaker 1: Okay, so you attended Avondale elementary [Avondale School, Cincinnati, Ohio]. Or what is it, Avon- (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Avondale [Cincinnati, Ohio], yes, or (pronunciation) Avondale (laughter). Speaker 1: Avondale elementary. And then your mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] enrolls you in the Seventh-day Adventist parochial school? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: What school is that? And what was that school called? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And what was that like? Speaker 2: Okay. It's the Shiloh parochial school [Shiloh Preparatory School], and it's part of the Seventh-day Adventist school system, and it was in Cincinnati, Ohio. And it's spelled S-H-I-L-O-H, and it was on the elementary level. And it was the most beautiful experience I ever had. It was a black school, because the white school was down over at the white church, Adventist church. But we had black teachers. I had never had black teachers, and I had never had a black principal and never had a black food server or anything; it was a white world. Speaker 1: What year did you arrive at Shiloh? Speaker 2: It was in the '50s [1950s]. Again, it had to be--because I went off-- Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953], '54 [1954]? Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, go on, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: And we had--the school was a small school. So therefore classes were small, and we had more attention. Speaker 1: How small? Speaker 2: In one class there would be like ten or twelve students in the rooms. And the teacher was certified by the board of education of Cincinnati, so there was a quality teacher there. But the mother had to come and meet the teacher, and the teacher had to explain the curriculum. We didn't just carry report cards home. The parents were called to the school, and the report card was given to the parent. And then the parent and myself, we would sit and discuss the grades and what was the shortcomings and whatever. It was, I loved it. It was a wonderful experience. And that's where my pride, race pride, really started. Because I had never seen a black authority figure, other than the minister of our church, express themselves on a daily basis like that. And this woman was from the South, and-- Speaker 1: The principal of the school was a woman? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was her name? And-- Speaker 2: Pearlie Phillips [ph.], and she is eighty-something, almost ninety-something now, and living in Huntsville, Alabama, a beautiful woman. And she is, I--everyone who's been trained by her, we just talk about the wonderful experiences we had in her classroom. Story_ID: 545419 Speaker 1: And what was so great about it? What, I mean, if you could just use a word to describe what you liked best about Shiloh [Shiloh Preparatory School, Cincinnati, Ohio], what is it? Speaker 2: Oh, I would say the sophistication, the elegance of the room. When you walked into her room--you know the script that you'd have to write, we'd have the penmanship--that's where I learned how to write well. People talk about my penmanship being so good; we practiced that. And she, she took an interest in that, you know. Your presentations--when you did something well, she would take your photograph and have it on the board. But it wasn't just pinned on the board, she would design a spot and have you walk in the next day and there was this presentation, you know. There would be goldfish, plants; the environment was just warm and inviting. And we didn't have a cafeteria, per se. There was an area in the basement where they prepared the food and whatever, but we ate at our desk. But the food was brought to the classroom and the teacher served you, you know, and made sure that you had everything necessary to eat and whatever. It was just a good experience, it really was. Now on the other hand, when you messed up, (laughter) she had a green ruler. And in those days they were allowed to hit you. And one day I got out of hand and she took that green ruler and swatted me across the hand. And I told--I started crying. I told her she had no right to hit me or whatever. She said, "Alfred [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay], stand up." And she said, "You stand there." She got my coat, wrapped me up, pinned a note on my coat, and sent me home. And my mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] wanted to know why I was home. And she--and I said, "Well, Miss Phillips [Pearlie Phillips (ph.)]--." And she said, "Miss Phillips? No, what do you mean?" Well, she put her coat on, and the next thing, I was standing back at the school. And Miss Phillips said, "Your son," so and so and so on. She said, "Well, you didn't tell me that, you know." And I said, "Well, I meant to tell you." She said, "No, you lied." So, not only did I get the spanking with the ruler, but when my father [Alfred Fornay] came home--and my father didn't whip you immediately. He would talk to you and say, "Well, you just take care of yourself, and we don't want to hear nothing about this again," or whatever. A week later, he would come in the room with this belt and say "Do you remember when so and so--?" And I said, "No, I don't remember." He would give me my whipping, and I remembered. And of course we never had that disciplinary problem again, you know. That's the way we handled things, you know. But I laugh at people now who say they can't hit their children or whatever. We were whipped or whatever, and we survived. We weren't beat up, but we, we were paddled and we were told why we were being paddled or whatever. I don't have a problem with that, you know. But when you abuse a child, of course I think that's stepping over the line. But I talk to people my age who have come through the same system of discipline, and Catholic kids who were going to Catholic school who were paddled and whatever, and we just all say we survived and there's nothing wrong with us, you know. And I think the little disciplinary tension on the, on the hand and the backside is necessary sometimes, I really do. Story_ID: 545420 Speaker 1: So, was that incident reflective of the type of student that you were? What type of student were you generally? Speaker 2: I had too much mouth. I always had too much mouth. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, my sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] were very quiet and very submissive. I always questioned and wanted to know why, and that turned into something good. But sometimes it would be in a sassy kind of way. And in those days it just wasn't tolerated, you know. And I just didn't feel like--if you couldn't tell me--if you didn't have a good answer or whatever, I just wanted to know why and whatever, and it would just get out of hand. And Miss Phillips [Pearlie Phillips (ph.)] used to laugh at me. I would see her years later, and she said, "Alfred [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay], I love you dearly, but you were one of my most difficult students, you know." And I said, "Sister," we called her Sister Phillips. I said, "Sister Phillips, what do you mean?" She said, "Everyone else would, when I would say something they would sit down and do it. But you would say--your hand would be up and you would always say, 'Miss Phillips, I don't understand why does so and so--?'" And she said, "That would just irk me to no end," you know. And we used to laugh about it, you know. She's still alive. Speaker 1: What did you, what did you study at Shiloh [Shiloh Preparatory School, Cincinnati, Ohio]? What kind of subjects? Speaker 2: It was, it was the grammar, it was arithmetic, social studies, some art, and of course the religious courses and bible study. We had physical ed [physical education], and lunch and (unclear), and that was about it. Story_ID: 545421 Speaker 1: And what about, what, what school did you attend next? Did you attend a junior high school, or was Shiloh [Shiloh Preparatory School, Cincinnati, Ohio] an extended school until you left for high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Eighth grade was the final grade at the Shiloh school, and then you were to go off to the boarding school [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy]. That's where all the little small churches would go, to this boarding school which is in Pine Forge, Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: So what, what kind of dreams and aspirations did you have as a grade school student? I mean what was your, what were your favorite subject? What was your focus? Speaker 2: I don't know what I wanted to do. My sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] always knew what they wanted to do, but I didn't know what I wanted to do. I knew I had a creative--I knew the creative--I was attracted to the creative side of things. Because I always liked to paint, and I always loved to create things. My mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] used to say that, and my grandmother [Erma Pitchford Weatherford] used to say that. I don't know--well, I keep saying if you remember. But my mother was creative in her home--dying stuff, and making clothes and stuff. My sisters know how to sew to this day, because of my mother's skills. And I think I was affected by some of that. And my father [Alfred Fornay]--in terms of making over bathrooms and creating landscapes and whatever, I was attracted to all of that, the creative side of things. I never was attracted to math and science, but I loved the world of media. I, I, I liked news. To this day, I'm a news hound. I love knowing about things firsthand, and unearthing new topics and stuff like that. I've always been interested in that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 545422 Speaker 1: And during this period, obviously you and your sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] and your mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] are attending church? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you're going on Friday evenings. What's that like? Speaker 2: Well, no, we didn't attend on Friday evenings. But we attended on Saturday all day. We were at Sabbath school, which is, most people say Sunday school, in the morning. And then at eleven o'clock, divine service. And then we would go home and eat and go back in the afternoon for the youth programs which were quite lively, and I was quite active in them. And then in the evenings you would either go skating with the young people, or they would have a hayride. There was just some kind of youth activity. And then there was also some kind of missionary work that you had to be involved in as well. And we used to raise money for senior citizens organizations. We raised money for overseas missionaries, and stuff like that. Speaker 1: So, what, can you tell us a little bit about Seventh-day Adventism? Is it like Judaism? Is it like Jehovah's Witness [Jehovah's Witnesses]? Can you just describe it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm familiar with the structure of the church and the history of the church. And one of the--how should I say--things that irk the Seventh-day Adventist church is not being clearly defined by the public. And for some reason we're always confused with Jehovah's Witness, the Mormon church, and there's another organization I was trying to think of. But we're, we're compared to those organizations. But we are Protestants, and we claim the Protestant Bible, which is the King James Version of the Bible, the NIV [New International Version], and all the others. But it's the King James origin of the Bible. The Mormons have their own Bible, and the Jehovah's Witness have their own Bible. So, they are not Protestant organizations, but we are. We practice death and life, in terms of burial and resurrection. We look forward to the second coming of Christ. We feel that there's a day of worship, which we choose as Sabbath. And there are facts that the Catholic church changed the day of worship from Saturday to Sunday, so that's factual, people know this. But we choose the original Sabbath day, which is Saturday, and we practice it. And we're not the only group. There are Seventh Day Baptists, there are of course the Jewish religion, and many other splinter groups that choose to worship on Saturday as a day of worship. Most of the Eastern religions chose, even the Muslim faith or whatever, they recognize Friday and Saturday as being part of Sabbath worship or whatever. So, we're not too far off base. But we basically claim to be a Protestant people. Story_ID: 545423 Speaker 1: So, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: My high school experience is a boarding academy. And that's Pine Forge Academy [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy] in Pine Forge, Pennsylvania. It's outside of, about ninety miles outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. The closest city of note that probably some people would recognize is Allentown, Pennsylvania, or Valley Forge [Pennsylvania], where there're quite a few academies there--the Valley Forge Academy [Valley Forge Military Academy and College, Wayne, Pennsylvania], and five or six private schools in that region. And it's a black boarding school that's sponsored by the Seventh-day Adventist church, primarily for people of color. And again, that was one of the best experiences I had. Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about the development of the segregated Seventh-day Adventist experience? So, I mean, you described a wonderful experience in the black churches and in the schools, which you're going to tell us more about. But how did they come to be separate from the white church, and why did they exist, you know? Speaker 2: It's basically that they function the way society functions, unfortunately. And that has always been a contention with me because I just cannot--I've always been taught that Christ was colorblind and the church was colorblind, and then you run into this racism in the church. And like Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said years ago before he died, that the most segregated hour in America is on Sunday morning. Well, the Seventh-day Adventist church is no different. Unfortunately, there were mixed congregations around the world and in America. But the majority of churches still function within parameters of neighborhoods. In New York [New York], for example, we have Spanish churches; we have Asian Seventh-day Adventist churches; we have German Seventh-day Adventist churches; we have black Seventh-day Adventist churches; we have Caribbean; we have African American. I mean they are all segregated churches, you know. And I just don't understand that, you know. When you call yourself a Christian and you say that you're colorblind, and we're all supposed to be going to the same place, why can't we get it together here before we get there, you know? So, unfortunately, the Seventh-day Adventist church has a lot of housecleaning to do, too, as well as some of the other churches when it comes to this issue. Speaker 1: And what year do you leave Shiloh [Shiloh Preparatory School, Cincinnati, Ohio] and go to Pine Forge? Speaker 2: Oh, dear. Okay, I think it was 19--so it had to be about '56 [1956], '57 [1957], okay. Yeah, I was a freshman, sophomore, and junior there. And then I went back to Cincinnati [Ohio] and graduated from a public school [Hughes High School; Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio]. Story_ID: 545424 Speaker 1: So can you tell us about your time at Pine Forge [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania]? What kind of, what were your influences there? And again, what kind of student were you? And what were you dreaming about and aspiring to do? Speaker 2: Okay. You're programmed to go to these schools (laughter). And even after Pine Forge, you're programmed to go to Oakwood College [Oakwood University] in Huntsville, Alabama; it's a black college [HBCU] in Huntsville. I mean that's just the way black students were fed into the Seventh-day Adventist school system. And then after that, it was the university [Andrews University] in Berrien Springs, Michigan. That was the track. But Bucks County, Pennsylvania, which is the Dutch county in an area in Pennsylvania, it's one of the most beautiful settings that you could find yourself in. I would sit in classrooms and you would see deer in the snow passing the windows, and jumping in the snow. It was the most beautiful setting. In our dormitories, at night we would see cubby bears. And we would have to work for some of our boarding expenses, and I would work in the orchard and whatever. And we would see peacocks, we would see all kinds of different animals and nature. It was just beautiful. There was a beautiful creek that passed the school. And after I studied and worked, I would walk all the way down these roads up and around the Bucks County area. And you would see the Amish cars coming by, carriages coming by with people. It was just a beautiful setting, you know, for a school. Again, I was impressed with the black staff. This was more than Shiloh [Shiloh Preparatory School, Cincinnati, Ohio]. This was a real operation of a boarding school. And you had deans who were black, you had dormitory personnel who were black, you had cafeteria personnel that were black, you had a full scale gymnasium. You had a workforce, I mean all these people. I'd just never seen people in these positions. Our scientists in our labs were black, our social studies teachers were black, our bible school--I mean we'd just never seen these professional people accomplish teaching in this kind of curriculum environment. And then that's when I discovered the world. We had students from Africa, we had students from the Caribbean, we had students from Bermuda. We had students from all over the United States go out to this campus. And it was just a beautiful mosaic of, of black people of different cultures. And it was the first time I was exposed to it. Story_ID: 545425 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of education did your teachers have [at Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania]? Were they Ph.D.'s or master's [degree]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. That's what I meant by the status. I had never been introduced to blacks on this level of education, and I was just in awe of them, you know. That's where I-- Speaker 1: Did you have any sense of where they were educated? I mean, probably not where all of them were, but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Most of them were educated in black southern schools, and became Adventists and decided to teach in the Adventist system of schools. But most of them were from the South. One or two of them were from the Caribbean. And we had one, no, we had two instructors that were raised and educated in Africa and schooled in London [England] and taught at the boarding school there in Pennsylvania. Mr. Nembhard [Clarence Nembhard], he was from Africa, and now he's teaching in a college in Huntsville, Alabama. But he, he was an accomplished scientist, and had an accent. That was the first accent that I had heard in my life in terms of a black man. And he was educated, and I was just in awe of these people. I had just never seen them. They lived well, were educated, and had off campus houses that were built up in the hills of Pennsylvania. They lived well, you know. It was just an eye opener for all us, I mean my sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] and I there on campus. It was really quite an experience. We had a world renowned choir, and I thought I was a great singer, but I was told that I would just sing with the local school choir. (Laughter) But my sister had a beautiful soprano voice, and she traveled all over the world with this choir and had a chance to see the world before I did, in terms of traveling-- Speaker 1: She's traveling the world during high school? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: As a member of the choir? Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a period where they--because they had tutors on the road. And they would have traveled, I think a month or two months out of the year in different places to raise money for the school, and singing. It was a nice experience for her. Speaker 1: So, did any teachers inspire you particularly? Speaker 2: Yeah, Professor Jones [Paul R. Jones], and Mrs. Gill [Esther N. Gill], who just retired from Oakwood College [Oakwood University] in Huntsville. She was the one who taught me typing. Because they, at that time they felt all black students had to learn typing. And I'm so glad, because even as a computer literate person now, my dexterity in terms of--those typing experiences have put me ahead in some of the classes when I was taking computer courses and whatever. So, it paid off. But I will remember her for that. I took Gregg shorthand. They felt like if you were going to do research and all that, that Gregg shorthand would come into being. And she, those teachers were just--they spoke well, and you knew they were trained well and disciplined and educated. We didn't have to worry about them cursing and--I mean, it was just a different kind of discipline, and I just appreciated it. I, I just never had seen black people perform the way they did in, as they did daily in the classroom. Story_ID: 545426 Speaker 1: And did you feel like you were well accepted in the school [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania], that you were able to sort of exercise your strengths and weaknesses at will (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I grew. I, I, I, blossomed, as they say. I, I just was--my roommate was from Baton Rouge, Alabama [sic. Baton Rouge, Louisiana], George Miller. And he is now a very prominent minister in the Baptist faith now, he's a Baptist minister. And I learned a lot from him, because he was from the Deep South, and I was from the Midwest. And he had never been away from home and I had never been away from home, so we bonded in that way. My mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] taught us how to take care of ourselves. My sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] knew how to make their own clothes. I knew how to iron. I earned my skating money and change by ironing other guys' shirts and stuff at the dormitory, because I could iron well. And there was just so many ways that I interfaced with--I paid for my own books doing those kind of chores in the dormitory and stuff and whatever. So I grew in terms of becoming an entrepreneur, in terms of realizing that just the luxury of attending a boarding school that there was, there were--I had to be concerned about how we were going to maintain ourselves there beyond the statement that my mother paid for. And so I, my sisters and I decided that we could not be asking my mother for all this extra money, because of the burden that she already had. So, we had to find out kinds of ways to become mercenaries, in terms of trying to build our own little nest egg so that we could survive, you know. And it was fun, it was really fun. I also learned how to take my place in life. We were taught that our reason for being alive was to plan and build a character. You were to build a character of integrity, of value, of worth. You were to be concerned about your fellow man, and at the same time, planning for eternity. All of that was drilled and drummed into our head daily. Story_ID: 545427 Speaker 1: And what about the requirements of the faith, like vege- being a vegetarian, observing the Sabbath on Friday evening and Saturday throughout the day. You said you all focused on Saturday. Did you ever feel limited by any of the, what seemed to outside observers, strict requirements of the faith? Speaker 2: We knew we were different. But we, but when it came to competition in terms of schools and qualifying, we met the same demands that everyone else was required to meet. But the Sabbath was an issue, and we had to adjust. We were not strict vegetarians at home. My father [Alfred Fornay] ate meat. And when meatloaf was made, we all ate meatloaf, you know. When a vegetarian meal was made, we ate vegetarian. But when you arrived at the campus at boarding school [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania], it was all vegetarian, you know. So we would sneak off campus at night sometimes and go to Douglass County [sic. Douglass Township, Pennsylvania] and get a Philly cheesesteak, and sin (laughter). And it was wonderful. But the dietary food there was vegetarian, and we lived, we survived. And it was a healthy time for us. All of us decided that this was a healthy state, a healthy time for us to eat and build our bodies. And as a health message, we were always told that you didn't earn your way or work your way to heaven. And becoming a vegetarian was no guarantee to go to heaven. But the reason for the health message is to live longer and to live healthy, and to feel good and to be free of disease, and, and to procreate and all that. That's what the, that's what was drummed into our heads. Story_ID: 545428 Speaker 1: Can we talk a little bit about your dreams and aspirations while you're at Pine Forge [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania]. What do you, what are you doing there, and what do you think you want to do with your life? Speaker 2: Okay. Now at Pine Forge, you are molded to, like I said, make a difference in the world. That means being a teacher, going into medicine, going into being a missionary, being a minister, being a nurse, being a doctor, all of those sort of so-so kinds of things, you know. That was just part, that was just how you were supposed to end up. I just couldn't see myself doing any of those things (laughter). My sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn], they fell into that, you know. We had college days in my junior year there, and we went to Oakwood [Oakwood College; Oakwood University, Huntsville, Alabama]. This was preconditioning. And the career counselor that I spoke with there said, "Oh, you'll fit into our home ec [home economics] course. We have tailoring, we have cooking, we have whatever." And so on the way back on the bus back to Pine Forge, I told myself, I said, "There's no way I'm going to be in cooking or tailoring, or whatever, you know." (Laughter) I said, "If that's all they have to offer in the area that I want to go--." Because I told them I was interested in the creative, or whatever. And that's all they could come up with. I said, "We're going to have a problem here, you know." My mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay], her health--she wasn't getting sick but there was something going on, and we couldn't quite put our finger on it. And I think it started because she was just really working herself to death trying to pay our tuition. And I woke up one morning and I told the principal, Dr. Watson [Ercell I. Watson], he is now deceased, and I told him, "You know, my mother is paying all three of these tuitions, and I don't like the way she sounds." When I was home on the holidays I said, "I just can't allow her to do this." And I don't know what prompted me to feel that way or whatever, but that's when I started resenting my father [Alfred Fornay]. I started getting very angry with my father. And when I was home during Christmas, I said, "Daddy, why don't you help us, you know?" He says, "Why don't you come home and go to school where I pay taxes," you know. And my mother said, "Please don't start that. Everything is fine. I will take care of it." I said, "No." You know, so I had started a little contention there, you know. And I just couldn't get that out of my mind. And my youngest sister, she wanted to come. And I said, I told my mother, I said, "I'm leaving." I said, "I'm coming home." She said, "No, don't do that." I got a Greyhound bus. I asked the school for the money and they gave me the fare home, because they understood, you know. And I took a Greyhound bus home and I pulled up in front of the house. I took a taxi from the depot, and I knocked on the door and my mother just burst out and started crying. She said, "No, no, no." My father was glad to see me, you know. And I said, "Oh, dear." Story_ID: 545429 Speaker 1: So the next morning I enrolled at Hughes High School [Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio], which was one of the big public high schools. Speaker 2: And what year is this that you are now transferring yourself from Pine Forge boarding academy [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania] to, is it Hughes? Speaker 1: Hughes High School, yes. Speaker 2: Hughes High School, which is a local high school in the area? Speaker 1: Um-hm. I, that had to be 1957 or '58 [1958]. Yeah, '58 [1958]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It had to be '58 [1958] because I left there in '60 [1960]; I graduated in 1960. So, it had to be-- Speaker 2: You graduated from Hughes in 1960? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, it had to be the end of the junior year of '58 [1958] or '59 [1959] or '60 [1960]. Yeah, so it was '58 [1958]. So I, I, I started there the next semester. And everybody was surprised at my church, because they used to send me care packages of food and stuff and whatever. And they wanted to know; they thought I had failed. I mean, all the stigmas that everybody could think of, you know. I said, "No, mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] was sort of--." "No, your mother was working." I said, "Oh, god." So I didn't, you know, I couldn't fight that, so I just enrolled and went to school. And my mother was very relieved, and she was, after a while she was, she could handle the two [Fornay's sisters, Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn], you know. I even got a part-time job and started contributing. And then my father [Alfred Fornay], he started feeling guilty because he saw what was happening, and the sacrifice, and he was feeling bad. So I had to deal with that and the contention. It was just really a mess. Speaker 2: What kind of job did you take? Speaker 1: I worked at the Losantiville Country Club [Cincinnati, Ohio]. They allowed me to do dishes in the evening and summers. Speaker 2: And was that a white country club? Speaker 1: Yes, a very prestigious country club at the time. I don't know if it still exists or whatever. But my father would drop me by early afternoon and I would wash dishes. I was so short at the time. They had me on a crate box, because they had this automatic washer and whatever, and I would feed and wash the dishes in it. And the black personnel there that were the waiters or whatever, they were just really magnificent. They really supported me, because they just couldn't imagine me trying to do this, you know. And they had--I'll never forget. I'm going to digress a minute. That they had a Christmas party once, and the guy that was supposed to come in and help me was sick. And everybody had left, and I called my father and I said, "Daddy, all these dishes have piled up and everything." I was overwhelmed, you know, and I was the only one there. So my father got in the car and came over, and we were there doing dishes together. It was really--I never forget that. I wish I had a camera, 'cause no one will believe that he did this with me, you know (simultaneous). Story_ID: 545430 Speaker 1: Well, I'd like to ask about that, that relationship between your parents [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay and Alfred Fornay]. I mean you expressed that it became at least resentful on your father's side. And then in our story, at a point, you and your sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] leave home. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So one, does your mother have disdain for your father's lack of, seeming lack of aspiration? And what is the relationship like while you all are gone? Speaker 2: It was, that was, that's interesting. Because she would say everything was all right, but we knew everything wasn't all right, you know. And I don't think she was happy, you know. I think she still loved my father. And we loved him, but it was just different, things were just different. And we were maturing and we were becoming more independent, and everyone was just going on with their lives, you know. But my mother was not happy. Speaker 1: But they seem also--were they committed to staying together? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Or was it just-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was a formality. It was holding it all together, as they say, you know, the front, you know. Because when I tell people about the distinction and the temporary separation they went through at one time, people's mouth fall open and they can't believe it, because we were looked upon as being the ideal family; we were doing all the right things. But it really was not a happy household a lot of times, it was not. And we made it work. And I think that's why we're so resilient and flexible with people and stuff now, because my mother made it work. And she died of bad health, and I think it was because of stress. Because you can only hold but so much in, and be this bulwark. But so, you know, she suffered, she really did. Speaker 1: And we can talk about this within the regular time, but what, when did your mother die? Speaker 2: In '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Oh, so not too long after this period. Speaker 2: Yeah. People in my family died in their eighties and nineties. My parents died early. My father died of heart failure, and that was because of drinking. And my mother died when she was sixty-seven, sixty-seven. And, but that's young now, you know. I mean most people are living, who treat their bodies well, at least into their eighties or nineties now and beyond. But she died early. Story_ID: 545431 Speaker 1: So, back to your time at home. You've now come home, you're, you're taking some care of your mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay], which sounds like it's working. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You told us the story about washing dishes [at Losantiville Country Club, Cincinnati, Ohio] with your father [Alfred Fornay]. Anything else about that high school experience as you--what are you thinking at, is it Hughes [Hughes High School; Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Hughes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: At Hughes about what you're going to do after you graduate, in relationship to your mother's health? Speaker 2: Well, I was determined to leave Cincinnati [Ohio], and I was determined to leave my home, because I was not happy. And it pained me because my mother wasn't happy, and I knew she wasn't going to leave my father. She surprised me and came to New York [New York] for a while and stayed with me for a while. And she realized that wasn't the right thing to do in terms of her--you know, I was happy to have her here. But she decided to go back and they moved to a smaller home, and that's where they both died. But my aspirations grew. I knew my direction had been set. I knew that I wanted to move either to Chicago [Illinois] or New York. And the way I was thinking at the time, I knew it had to be New York City. It frightened me for a while. I had made friends at Pine Forge [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania] who lived here. In fact my friend Everly [ph.], who lived in Newark [New Jersey], that's who I stayed with when I first came to New York. I stayed with him for about three weeks before I found a place in New York and moved to Harlem [New York, New York]. That was the first room I had in a rooming house where I stayed before I moved to Brooklyn [New York]. But I made it work at home. There were violent outbreaks of frustration with my father, because I just didn't appreciate the neglect that he was showing towards my sisters [Beverly Fornay English and Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn] being away from home, and the needs that were there. And it wasn't because the money wasn't there, or whatever. He just didn't believe in what my mother was trying to do. Now at a later date when all the accolades started coming in, and all the proudness and whatever, my father died of a broken heart, because he realized that he really didn't participate in that, you know. And he could have been a major participant in helping this become a reality that the whole family embrace and celebrate. Because people in the neighborhood [Avondale, Cincinnati, Ohio] used to tell me, "Your father really thinks you're--." And I would come and ask him, I'd say, "You never told me that," you know. "Well, I--." And then it dawned on me that he was embarrassed because he realized that he didn't really have anything to really do with it, you know. And then when all the attention shifted to my mother, I think he really got a little jealous, because she really did it, you know. And like I told you early on, we were still amazed as to how she did it on that salary--all those hours she worked and the commitment that she made, and the discipline that she had in terms of paying those three statements that she had to pay. Speaker 1: How much money are you talking about when you say she's paying three tuitions for Pine Forge? Speaker 2: Oh, in those--oh, it was like six hundred dollars a month, for each one of us. Speaker 1: What year is that? Let's just repeat. Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s], in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Six hundred dollars. Speaker 2: And you know what kind of salaries are in Cincinnati, Ohio. You know, they weren't like salaries in New York City, you know. And even though things were cheaper, but they didn't have the salaries for those, in those areas like that. And, but she worked, and she--the church helped, the aunts and uncles helped, because she asked them. And they would donate whatever, you know. And she didn't consider it charity or whatever. She just felt like "Well, these are your nieces and nephews, and we didn't have the opportunity, so help me out." And they did, you know. And we applauded her for doing that, you know. I just wish she had lived longer, where I could have really just allowed her to see what the real investment was, and, and benefit from that. That's the sad part of remembering. Story_ID: 545432 Speaker 1: So, what year do you graduate from Hughes [Hughes High School; Hughes STEM High School, Cincinnati, Ohio]? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960]. Speaker 1: And what, what do you do from there? Speaker 2: Well, I took a battery of tests. I came to New York [New York] and I consulted some career counselors, and I was thinking about going to--what college was that? It wasn't City [City College of New York, New York, New York] at the time. It was one of the-- Speaker 1: The Wilfred Academy of Beauty [Wilfred Academy of Hair and Beauty Culture, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. It was one of the colleges. It was, oh, it was a community college; it was the Brooklyn community college. And they gave me a battery of tests to find out my--yes? Speaker 1: Wait just one second. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You're saying that you graduated from Hughes in 1960? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you immediately leave for New York? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the next year I left. Speaker 1: So in 1961, you're gone to the city? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And now you're being assessed to determine-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --what you're going to do educationally? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They thought I had lost my mind. I had left in 1961, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was determined to come to New York. And I started working in the floral market at the time on the West Side of New York in the 20s, and got a job there counting there counting flowers and packing flowers, artificial flowers as well as natural flowers. And I started reading all the educational material and riding the 118 bus back to Newark, where I was staying at the time with my friend in Newark, New Jersey. And I was talking to people on the job, and they said, "Why don't you go to a career counselor?" So I went and took these batteries of tests. And the career counselor said, "You ought to be in fashion, or beauty, or art, or something like that, or whatever." And I said, "Well, I don't know." She said, "No, you, you--I don't see you--you know." And it was a white woman, and unfortunately I hadn't had too much faith in what white people were saying in terms of my destiny in education or whatever. But she sounded so sincere, and she looked at me and she said, "May I call you Alfred [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay]?" I'll never forget it. And I said, "Yes." She said, "You really have--," how did she say it--, "an opportunity to make a difference in a field that is not explored by people of color," or whatever like that. And that just hit me, you know. And I said, "Okay, thank you so much." So I started talking to some people at my church and whatever. And so some people said, "Why don't you go to beauty school?" And I said, "Beauty school?" I said, "I want to go to college." They said, "Why don't you go to beauty school?" I said, "No." So I started working at different jobs, little tacky jobs that I got through employment agencies, working and whatever. Then I started to think. I said, "You know, I better really start doing what I want to do." So, I went to the Fashion Institute of Technology [New York, New York] and started the process of, of being interested. Story_ID: 545433 Speaker 1: Then I found out about a program at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] where they were trying to get minorities to come into city colleges [City University of New York, New York, New York], called the SEEK program [Search for Education, Elevation and Knowledge]. I don't know if you've heard of that or not. Speaker 2: I have, it still exists. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, I was told that. I didn't know it was still in existence. Speaker 2: I worked at the City College, and the SEEK office used to be right next door from where I am. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, that's how I became aware of City College. Speaker 2: So you mentioned that, and I just want to be clear about your development. Did you decide to go to beauty school? Speaker 1: No, I didn't do any of those, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. So instead, you go to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]. Do you do any coursework there? Speaker 1: No, I didn't do anything. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I had just applied and then I decided that maybe this isn't--I was actually afraid. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I was getting wet feet. And I was familiar with the liberal arts, you know, in terms of the basics and whatever. So when I was told about the SEEK program, I went and applied and I was immediately accepted. And so, I took all the liberal art courses and all the liberal stuff and whatever. And I met an English teacher there, and he was admiring my writing skills. And he said--because they had gotten the test evaluation scores that I had sent to them from the evaluations I had taken, and he had recognized the creative side. He said, "Mr. Fornay [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay], why don't you explore the Fashion Institute of Technology?" And I said, "I started to apply there, and I--." He said, "No, they have a business curriculum. You don't have to be a fashion designer. They have a business curriculum." I said, "I didn't know they had a business curriculum." I said, "I was applying to be a fashion designer." He said, "No. Under the business curriculum, they cross all the disciplines--art, art culture, the fashion, the beauty, communication or whatever." So that curriculum was called Fashion Buying, Merchandising, and Communication. And when I explored that, I was hooked, you know. Speaker 2: What year are you at City College, at, in the SEEK program? Speaker 1: Sixty--wait a minute. So I graduated from FIT in '71 [1971], so I was there from '69 [1969], '70 [1970], '71 [1971]. So I was at City College in '66 [1966], '67 [1967], '68 [1968]. Yeah, '69 [1969], because I left there in June and then went to FIT that September in '69 [1969]. Story_ID: 545434 Speaker 1: So you're hooked at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]. What's so fantastic about there? Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, I went bananas at FIT. I mean that was to me utopia, you know. And of course all my religious friends or whatever, they'd say, "You're supposed to be at Oakwood College [Oakwood University] in Huntsville, Alabama." I said, "No, I'm at FIT at 27th Street and 7th Avenue in New York City," you know. And that's when I joined the church here in Harlem [New York, New York], and I've been a member there for forty-two years. Speaker 1: And this is the Seventh-day Adventist church? Speaker 2: Yes, it's the Ephesus Church [Ephesus Seventh-day Adventist Church] here at 123rd [Street] and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Would you repeat the name of the church? Speaker 2: Ephesus, E-P-H-E-S-U-S, Seventh-day Adventist Church. And that's been my support. And I spoke to the minister there who is now deceased, who was a high achiever himself. He was the first union black president in the structure of the church. And I went to him, and I said, "Can I be a Seventh-day Adventist and be in fashion, beauty, or whatever?" He said, "Mr. Fornay [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay], this morning--I got up this morning and I had to put deodorant under my arms. I had to shave, I had to put on clothes; I had to do whatever." He said, "Who do you think made those things?" You know, he says, "Why can't you be?" And I said, "Oh, thank you so much." I was just so relieved. And that's all I needed. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Pastor Carter, Robert Carter. And he was oh, such a beautiful man, he and his wife. She was an accomplished musician and had studied to be a musician or whatever. They were beautiful people, but forward thinking and had a vision. And so, that was music to my ears. And so I enrolled in FIT. And-- Speaker 1: And what do your parents [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay and Alfred Fornay] think about these-- Speaker 2: They didn't know what to think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father didn't know what to think. He said, "Oh, you're going to be sitting in a salon rolling up hair, you know, or whatever." I said, "What?" (Laughter) He said, "I thought you were going to--." And my mother said, "I don't, I don't understand." (Laughter) She kept saying, "I don't understand." She said, "I thought you wanted to be a teacher. I thought you wanted to be a, whatever." I said, "I am, I am going to teach, but I'm going to be a teacher in the area of fashion, beauty, grooming, or whatever." And she said, "How?" I said, "There are companies that need training directors. There are companies--." She said, "Oh, I didn't know that." I said, "Yeah." So I found that I had to educate them, because they didn't know the world that I was entering. So, every opportunity I got to share with them, they started really understanding what I was trying to do, you know. And then my mother became one of my strongest supporters, because she just didn't see that other side, you know. And then I realized that she didn't know about it, you know, so how could she? So, I became a model student at FIT. I became the first black vice president of student council. I had won all kinds of awards from the institution and whatever. It was just wonderful for me. Story_ID: 545435 Speaker 1: What was so wonderful? What was the space and the atmosphere at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] like? Was it multicultural? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was it a large community or a small group (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Five thousand students. Speaker 1: Like (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I have this--there were people there from all over the world, and they were creative people. They--one of my best friends who has passed away, he went into textile design and became one of the first black wallpaper designers in terms of-- Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: Earl White [ph.]. Oh, he won all kind of awards or whatever. We became good friends. We would sit up at night and do our projects together. And of course, I had to work. I worked at Mount Sinai Hospital [New York, New York] in their reception from eight o'clock in the morning until twelve noon, depending on the day, and then I'd go to classes, and went to beauty school [Wilfred Academy of Hair and Beauty Culture, New York, New York] at night. And then I did my homework, and it was back to the same routine. But he had the same routine. It was, I just felt like I was in heaven. And when I look back, I just feel like, I just don't know how I did it. But the creative atmosphere that I was in--marketing people-- Speaker 1: Who was there with you? You said Earl White, who became a textile designer-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and one of the first wallpaper people. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Who else was there that we might know of, or that we might need to know? Speaker 2: Calvin Klein, Calvin Klein. Oh, god, now this is where I'm trying to think of these notable people. Speaker 1: Okay. Let's try this. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Who was influencing those of you who were at FIT? Speaker 2: Oh, our teachers-- Speaker 1: In the New York [New York] and-- Speaker 2: --from the industry. Speaker 1: --your, your teachers? Speaker 2: Yeah. Just being in this environment, just being in New York City--because we had to do lab work outside of the institution. For instance we had to go to textile mills, we had to go to interview beauty editors, we had to go to magazine institutions, we had to go to fashion shows, to cover fashion shows. We had to go to marketing places like Clairol [Clairol, Inc.]. And this is how they feed these creative juices into you. And so, it just wasn't classwork. It was also the laboratories here in New York City, meaning the fashion industry and the beauty industry. Speaker 1: And who's hot in the fashion industry when you're at FIT? Speaker 2: (Pause) I haven't thought about this in a long time. I can see the people, but I can't think of their names. I have to come back to that. Story_ID: 545436 Speaker 1: Your focus at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] is merchandising and marketing? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: And do you do--what kind of projects do you do while you're at FIT? Speaker 2: We had to take business law. See, people think it was all this beauty and whatever. We had to take business law. I had to take merchandising, in terms of strategies, in terms of--we had to do a whole project from beginning to end, and planning the introduction of a product. For instance if we were thinking about a cosmetic powder, or a bottle of deodorant, or shampoo or whatever, from beginning to end, from concept to product entry, we had to plan the whole product. We had to do mockups, we had to do presentations. If we were doing a fashion presentation, we had to plan the fashion show. We had to plan and select the models, the creative personnel--the whole thing. Marketing, we had to put a marketing paper together in terms of how we planned to execute from beginning to end. Textile was--the Jewish kids who came from backgrounds of textile had it up on a lot of us, because we just didn't have that. So, we had to do theory. We had to learn to feel fabric, and identify fabric and colors. And we had to do season forecasting in terms of trends that would eventually meet the market, and concept. It was just a good time, just a good time learning the business. Story_ID: 545437 Speaker 1: And are there any--on television who are you--are there any black people on television doing fashion and beauty work at this time? And are there any black designers on 7th Avenue while you're at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah, there were--there was a black furrier on 7th Avenue. There were blacks, but not that many in the areas now where you see blacks. The Ebony Fashion Fair show was very influential to a lot of the blacks that were in school at that time--at Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York], and at Parsons [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York], and at FIT. I would recognize these students. All of us would attend the shows that would come to the Hilton Hotel [New York Hilton Hotel and Towers; New York Hilton Midtown, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: And who is producing the Ebony Fashion Fair shows? Speaker 2: Oh, that was Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois], Ebony magazine. Audrey Smaltz [HistoryMaker Audrey Lavinia Smaltz] at the time was the commentator at the time. And we'd just marvel at the fact that she was in command of rolling off these international designers, and the fashion terms, and describing the garments as they walk the runway. Story_ID: 545438 Speaker 1: You're at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], in college, and we're talking about the atmosphere and other black designers and fashion industry people. You were talking a little bit about the Ebony Fashion Fair and Audrey Smaltz [HistoryMaker Audrey Lavinia Smaltz]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You all were impressed with her? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well, before Audrey, there was a lady named Terri Springer, I must mention her. And the reason why I mention her is because she was a very dark-skinned woman, and at that time dark-skinned women were not given those plum jobs, especially in fashion and beauty. I don't know if you heard the name Helen Williams as well. She was another top model who was very dark, and Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] and Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] used her for black print. But she landed those jobs. Those people influenced me tremendously while at FIT. But Audrey Smaltz brought the flair and the razzle dazzle to a sort of mundane kind of situation. And across this country and the Caribbean and London [England] and Paris [France], she brought the flair of American, African American women to the forefront. Because the world had not seen a troupe traveling like this wearing those kind of clothes, representing middle class black people who were reading a middle class magazine at the time. It was quite a phenomenon going on, and we were impressed with that. Speaker 1: And how long had Ebony magazine itself been in existence by-- Speaker 2: Oh, they were about-- Speaker 1: --nineteen sixty-five [1965] when Audrey Smaltz was working with Ebony? Speaker 2: Probably about thirty-something years, about thirty-five years. Speaker 1: And would that have been, would Ebony magazine have been something that you would have experienced at home or at Pine Forge [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania], or in your former life? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I, I, patiently waited each month for Ebony to arrive on my doorstep in Cincinnati [Ohio]. Speaker 1: And at that time, it was a bigger magazine, was it not? Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes. Speaker 1: It did not-- Speaker 2: I have a size, I'll show you. (Laughter) It's, it's, it was Sepia magazine and Ebony. And some people called it (pronunciation) Sepia, but it was those two magazines. And people said that Sepia was a copycat of Ebony. But they carried fashion and beauty, and that was the only taste you got other than Jet. Speaker 1: Which was also Ebony. Speaker 2: Which was also part of Ebony magazine, other than the church fashion shows and maybe one or two breakthrough fashion designers who, you know, who were notable at the time. One woman who, I think her name was Logan or Anna [sic. Ann Lowe], I forget. But she designed one of the Kennedy's [Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis] gowns, and she was a fashion designer. She was on the lips of people at that time as well, and I think her name was Logan. But Audrey really was recognized by 7th Avenue, and recognized by the fashion industry as being an authority on fashion. And to my knowledge, that had never been done before. And those of us who were in the fashion schools or whatever followed her every move, because she was the, in the spotlight at the time, you know. Story_ID: 545439 Speaker 1: Were you influenced by [HistoryMaker] Rose Morgan? Speaker 2: Oh, Rose Morgan, I used to hear my mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] talk about Rose Morgan. And people would come from all over the country to have their hair done in Rose Morgan's salon [Rose Morgan House of Beauty, New York, New York]. I don't know if you've seen some of the prints of some of the early salons that she owned, but they were rival any salon downtown on 5th Avenue at the time in staff and clientele. When I was attending Wilfred beauty academy [Wilfred Academy of Hair and Beauty Culture, New York, New York] to get my beauty license, Rose Morgan would allow students to come and work in her salon on 145th Street in Harlem [New York, New York], and that was my first encounter. Delores [ph.], a girl who now lives in California, and I, decided we wanted to go uptown. Because they were sending us--I went to the Abraham and Straus beauty salon in Brooklyn [New York] to work as an intern, and was one of the first blacks to do so before it became Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.]. And, but we wanted the black experience, and so we asked the school if we could go to Rose Morgan. And they called her and she said, "Oh, of course, I would love it." She welcomed the internship. And I worked there for a year. Story_ID: 545440 Speaker 1: You're attending Wilfred Academy [Wilfred Academy of Hair and Beauty Culture, New York, New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wilfred Academy. Speaker 1: At night-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --during the time that you're at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: During the day. Speaker 1: And so then you're--please correct me and just explain the setup of your educational and your workday. Speaker 2: Yeah. The flexibility you have in beauty schools, it's the number of hours that you put in, in terms of school. It's not as rigid as the classroom structure of college and whatever. So, I had to put in fifteen hundred hours in order to qualify for a license and beauty school in terms of doing hair. And so I would put in three hours here, four hours here, five hours here. And on weekends maybe eight hours here or whatever. And eventually got my license for attending in the evenings. And then I would go full-time in the daytime and work on a part-time job, when I was able to do so, at Mount Sinai Hospital [New York, New York]. And the beauty school gave me the creativity of understanding structure of hair, hair textures, the different quality of hair texture, and not just black hair. We were taught on Asian hair, Caucasian hair, Latino hair, Afro-Latino hair. That's what was good about Wilfred Academy. They wanted you to learn all the different types of textures of hair. I had the opportunity to go to Apex [Apex School of Beauty Culture] or to Orchard Beauty School, which were in full operation at the time in Harlem [New York, New York] as black schools. But I saw the wind blowing and shifting, and I really wanted to be able to qualify to work anywhere, and Wilfred at the time was the school to go to. And I wanted to always go to the best, that's why I went to FIT, which is considered to be the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] of fashion schools, and that's why I went there. But the planes of the face, the structure of the face, the different textures of skin, nails, pedicures, body conditioning--all this was taught in beauty school. And I saw the two coming together as fashion and beauty. And as we will talk further, that's how I landed the job as beauty editor at Essence and Ebony, because of those qualifications and the fact that I could speak and write about those subjects intelligently from one package, you know. Story_ID: 545441 Speaker 1: So, speak about your time interning with [HistoryMaker] Rose Morgan. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Rose Morgan was a disciplined, is a disciplined woman; she is still alive. She practiced what she preached. She was known for a particular hairstyle that won people over, it was a very sophisticated style. It was a bouffant, and came around on the sides. This was one of her classic styles. And if you could achieve that, then you were in favor of her. Well, I did, and she applauded me. Poor Delores [ph.], my friend, cried. She couldn't get it (laughter). And Miss Morgan said, "Well, you can help us with facials, and you can help us with this and that and the other." But I sort of mastered that hairdo. And even some of the stylists in the salon [Rose Morgan House of Beauty, New York, New York] were impressed with the fact that I accomplished that, and she was impressed. She also at the time was specializing in styling wigs with the same style, and I attempted to do that as well. But I liked the discipline that she had in terms of the stations, the products. She manufactured her own products and had her own labels, in terms of her makeup and creams and lotions and hair preparations. And she had a reception desk, she had people making appointments. It was just a well run business. And to this day, I don't know of a black salon that rivals that setup, and that's sad to say. I'm sure there're others in other parts of the country now that I know of since I said that--that do operate and have nice--but I just like the fact that a black woman could walk in and she was pampered from the time she entered the room. There was no mess. I mean it was just an elegant atmosphere, no loud talking, no loud radios, no cursing. I mean she really planned the experience when you walked into that salon. And people spoke intelligently, you know. It was just a good time. And I appreciated the fact that she wanted the best for black women, you know. Speaker 1: So, do you remember which year you did that internship with Rose Morgan? Speaker 2: Oh, I knew you were going to ask that. Speaker 1: I'm just trying to pin you down on the calendar there. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, it was, it was in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: It was while you were at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], so we're looking at between 1966 and 19--or 1969 you said you attended FIT and then you graduated in 1971. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was at Wilfred [Wilfred Academy of Hair and Beauty Culture, New York, New York] in '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, into '69 [1969]. So it had to be '68 [1968], '69 [1969], that time period, if I remember correctly. Story_ID: 545442 Speaker 1: And other influences was [HistoryMaker] Ophelia DeVore one of your influences (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I went to her school [Ophelia DeVore School of Self-Development and Modeling, New York, New York]. She had a division for men for grooming. And I wanted to make sure that I presented myself-- Speaker 1: Is this during that same time period? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, but it was--how was that now? That was even before I went into Wilfred [Wilfred Academy of Hair and Beauty Culture, New York, New York]. Yeah, that was before I went to Wilfred. That was while I was working still, and I was feeling my way around. And someone said, "Well, why don't you go?" And there was a course they were teaching then. And the emphasis was on modeling, but it was for how to present yourself, how to hold your hands when you're presenting a product. And you'll see in some of the photos I have from Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] or whatever that it came in handy. Because when I was called upon to make presentations, there's a way to hold a product and whatever, according to the industry. And I had already gotten that, you know, and I felt good about it. But that's what she was teaching--presentation in terms of your presence, how to sit as a man, how to speak in terms of speech, business attire, how to shake a hand, how to--those kinds of things. It was really nice. Speaker 1: And who was she? How did she have that expertise? Speaker 2: She was a former model. In her heyday, she was big time. And opened a modeling school, it was a charm school, and it had a male and female division. At that time John Robert Powers [John Robert Powers Modeling School] and Patricia Stevens [Patricia Stevens Model and Talent Agency] were the top schools. And Mary Gibson [ph.] was another black woman that had a charm school where she was teaching those kinds of things as well. That's my ambition, to open a personal development school like that, in terms of teaching etiquette and grooming and development. The cycle has come full circle, there's a need for that now, you know. Story_ID: 545443 Speaker 1: And in terms of makeup artists, was Way Bandy a makeup artist during the time that you were at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Joey Mills, I don't know if you know that name too, but he was over at Conde Nast, and he was making up all these big notable white women, and I was over at Ebony and Essence making up all these big notable black people. Way Bandy was a very good friend of [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor, and he had been hired in the early days to help launch Essence. And at that time there really weren't any notable fash- makeup artists on that level that I'm aware of. And so they turned to him. And I kept seeing this name, Way Bandy, Way Bandy, Way Bandy. So, when I found out that he was not a man of color, I said, "Now this is the only black woman's magazine." I said, "It's time for, there's room for someone like myself and others," and whatever. So I wrote Susan a letter. I said, "Susan, I am a black makeup artist, and nobody else will hire me. I want to make up, you know--." Susan picked up the phone, called me and said, "Nobody has ever written me a letter like this. I'm going to put a letter in the mail to you, and the next time you're in New York City [New York, New York], please stop by." Well, the next week I was in New York, because I was traveling back and forth to Cincinnati [Ohio], back and forth everywhere, because I didn't know what I was doing. And my first cover was Essence magazine, and that was the launching pad. Because that's when Libra Cosmetics, which was Chattem Drug and Chemical Company [Chattem Chemicals, Inc.] out of Chattanooga, Tennessee--they were--and this was a white woman out of Tennessee, Joyce Sample. She had seen the cover of Essence, and she called. And in Women's Wear Daily there was this big announcement that they were getting ready to launch this line for black women in department stores. And she called me when she was in New York. I was at FIT. And she said, "We can use you on weekends. We can use you anytime you're available, or whatever." So they flew me to Chattanooga and trained me on their products one weekend. And the next weekend, I was free. I was in Hudson's Department Store [J.L. Hudson Department Store; J.L. Hudson Building] in Detroit, Michigan conducting a seminar for them, and it was covered in Women's Wear Daily. And the officials at FIT said, "What are you doing on the weekends," or whatever. They were so impressed with this, whatever, you know. And that was really my climb. It was really--that's where it really all started. Story_ID: 545444 Speaker 1: After I graduated from FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], I was hired at Clairol [Clairol, Inc.]. Speaker 2: And when did you graduate from FIT? Speaker 1: In '71 [1971], 1971. Speaker 2: And so, you're hired by Clairol. And what are you doing for Clairol? Speaker 1: Clairol hired me as their ethnic marketing manager (laughter). Speaker 2: What is an ethnic marketing manager do? Speaker 1: In those days, you were the black ethnic marketing manager. (Laughter) So they gave you this nice title, ethnic. You dealt with ethnic activity. I hated that name, but it made sense because you were dealing with people of ethnicity and the word black was sensitive. The word Hispanic was sensitive or whatever, so the title was ethnic marketing. And there was a gentleman there who was the first black man there at Bristol-Myers [Bristol-Myers Squibb], who at the time owned Clairol. Because Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company] now owns Clairol. But his name-- Speaker 2: What's his name? Speaker 1: --was Ben Wright, Benjamin Wright. His brother was a noted psychiatrist, at--Nathan Wright [Nathan Wright, Jr.], at SUNY [State University of New York at Albany, Albany, New York] in Upstate New York. And he was, he hired me as his assistant. And I was thrilled, because I had heard about this man, and he was the vice president of Bristol-Myers and vice president of Clairol. And I was his assistant for two years, three years. Speaker 2: And so, was Clairol in 1971 selling cosmetics to black women? Speaker 1: No. But they wanted to, and that's why I was hired--to help develop pamphlets and materials directed to ethnic people--seminars directed to ethnic people. That's how I went through the Clairol Institute [Clairol Institute of Hair Coloring], which is a prestigious institute in terms of hair coloring. Because once you come out of there as a technician you can work in any salon as a colorist or technician--you know, cosmetics, hair coloring, the whole shebang, for men and women. And also product entry, because at the time they had rollers that were heated, and appliances that were--all of this was being directed at, for the first time to ethnic women. Story_ID: 545445 Speaker 1: And in 1971 or the early '70s [1970s], is there makeup--are there cosmetics available for women of color? Speaker 2: Well, there was Barbara Walden [Barbara Walden Cosmetics, Inc.]. There was Libra Cosmetics. There was Gazelle [Gazelle Cosmetics, Inc.]. There was--Avon [Avon Products Inc.] had started adding colors. Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] had started research, and I ended up working at Revlon on one of their black lines. So, it was a beginning. There were colors that black women were using floating around that they mixed and whatever, but not a real high class line. Now they had approached Lena Horne early on to do a line, and that fizzled out. [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson was approached in the '70s [1970s], and they tried to launch a line and it changed stores and that fizzled out. Ultra Sheen came along with Johnson-- Speaker 1: And did Ultra Sheen--that's [HistoryMaker] George Johnson. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Johnson Products [Johnson Products Company]. Speaker 1: Did they do makeup? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Because I'm really familiar with their hair-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, Ultra Soft Sheen. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was called Ultra Glow. Speaker 1: Ultra Sheen--Ultra Glow. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Ultra Sheen, Ultra Glow. And they started a line, but it was a chain store, it was not a department store. It was only years later that Flori Roberts [Flori Roberts Cosmetics], Barbara Walden, Libra, and then Fashion Fair invaded--and Gazelle, who was a black woman, Patricia [Patricia French]--invaded the department store market and brought it to a different level in terms of merchandising to black women and middle class black women. And I was all part of that, and that was a real fabulous time to be alive to see this finally happening. Because Overton's Nut Brown--everybody looked like a red beet who wore it. My [maternal] grandmother [Erma Pitchford Weatherford] used to wear it, everybody used to wear it, Overton's powder. But that's all they had. And it worked for the moment, but it was good to see the collections of powders and the array of colors that were being expanded for women of color. Story_ID: 545446 Speaker 1: What about being in New York [New York] at this time? You know, my understanding is the fashion industry is in--also involved in music and art. So are you out on the town? Are you meeting musicians and entertainers? Are you exercising the Saturday Sabbath? So, does that conflict at all with your entertainment life (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm, yeah. I didn't work on Saturdays. And that's what people--that's what puzzled people, because Saturday was a big day, you know. And, but I had gained notoriety with my efforts in seminars and the publicity I was getting in the newspapers and the training programs, etc. And so, I could call my own shots. That's how I met Iman at Revlon [Revlon, Inc.]. And Revlon was developing a line called Polished Ambers. Bill Pinkney [HistoryMaker Captain William "Bill" Pinkney], who is associated with Amistad or whatever, he was in the early stages of developing the Polished Ambers collection. And I, I was able to get into their training program under Naomi Stern, who was one of the top training people in the industry, and I was trained under her. And these are names out of the past, but products like Moon Glow [sic. Moon Drops], Touch and Glow, Natural Wonder, Charlie, all that was part of group one, of which Polished Ambers was developed. And I had the privilege of making up Iman for the press, and for the advertisement for Polished Ambers and Revlon at the time. And I did some covers with her, and that was my introduction to the real notoriety. And then there's a whole list of people that I've made up since then. Story_ID: 545447 Speaker 1: But you don't go directly from Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] to Revlon [Revlon, Inc.]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You first go to, become the associate beauty editor for Essence? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: How did that happen? And who was involved? Speaker 2: Okay. There's a--the fashion editor for the New York Times Sunday supplement magazine [The New York Times Magazine] decided to do a six page color spread in The New York Times in the '70s [1970s]; it was the first time ever. And she was pinpointing the fact that there is a new face on the block, and it's the black woman, African American woman. And she was recognizing the fact that the industry was taking note of her. And she hired Barbara Summers; Jolie Jones [Jolie Jones Levine], [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones' daughter; and some other notable black women, and I was asked to make them up. And this was all in color in The New York Times. And Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis], who was the publisher, along with Smith [Clarence Smith] and Cecil Hollingsworth at the time, saw the spread and called me and asked me to come over and see them and talk to them, you know. And I thought they wanted me to come over and do some makeup or do something with Clairol or whatever. They said, "No, we're offering you a job, you know." (Laughter) And so I met Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] and-- Speaker 1: And what was her relationship to Essence at that time? Speaker 2: She was the fashion, beauty editor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they hired a young lady to be her fashion assistant, and they hired me to be her associate beauty editor. And that's how I was hired at Essence. Story_ID: 545448 Speaker 1: Do you have any anecdotes about Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis]? You were telling us a story about his understanding about makeup a little bit earlier. Speaker 2: Oh, that was Mr. Johnson. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: That was [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson, yeah. Lewis understood makeup and the beauty industry and whatever. And he was--but I will share with you, since you wanted an anecdote with Essence--I don't know if you remember Breck's shampoo. You know, that was the--and Bonne Bell, you know, those were exclusively middle class upper white products. I mean, they just didn't touch black at all. Well, Essence went after them as products, in terms of advertising. So, they asked me to go on their go sees with the advertising people. And Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor] went as the beauty editor and I went as her assistant. And we had to prove to them that there were at least twenty different textures of black hair. There's not just one black texture of hair, just like there is a collection of white textures of hair--Italian versus Irish versus--you know, whatever. And it was just amazing to see these MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Wharton business school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] marketing people sitting at this table. It was just like a glaze that came over their eyes. They just didn't understand what we were talking about. And the first pitch that we made, they declined, you know. And then Smith [Clarence Smith], who was over advertising at the time, they went back a second time to prove the purchasing power of blacks. And when they proved to them that blacks were buying Breck--even though they were not targeting them, directly advertising to them or whatever--in some cities black women were buying more bottles of Breck shampoo than white women were. And that's when they came into the book. But all that proving, and all that fuss, you know. It was the same thing with Bonne Bell, the astringent for oily skin. We had to prove to them that black women were--and they knew they were buying it, you know. But there was just this distinction that they just didn't want the identification of black women with white women, you know, in terms of buying the same product. So those were, we were pioneers. Those were the days when we were breaking down barriers with products; with ethnic attitudes toward our products; getting black people to believe that there really was a sincere effort on the part of Essence, trying to change attitudes and develop new ways that black women could beautify themselves in a dignified fashion. So, that was a good time. Speaker 1: And were you impressed with Ed Lewis? Speaker 2: I was impressed with all of them, all of them--the editors. Susan was just marvelous. For a woman who had no education at the time, in terms of a college degree, she did a fantastic job with planning the philosophy and the theory, and breaking down attitudes and things. Because I honestly, I just didn't, I knew that there were attitudes, but I didn't know the myths that were traveling around in the beauty industry against black women. Story_ID: 545449 Speaker 1: You were saying that [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor had a great vision for the Essence magazine. Speaker 2: Yes, she set the focus for the publication, and innovative ideas. Glamour magazine was traveling to the white campuses in terms of doing makeovers and seminars (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) College campuses? Speaker 2: College campuses. And I mentioned to Susan, I said, "Susan, we should do the same thing for black colleges [HBCUs]." She said, "Oh, I love the idea." So we put our heads together and came up with the college tours, and did a college issue every year. And we went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], went to Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina], went to all the different colleges in terms of tours. And-- Speaker 1: What would you do on the college tours? Speaker 2: We would talk about the publication and introduce the publication. But at the same time, we would bring in personnel--hairdressers, makeup artists, stylists, fashion stylists--bring clothes with us and do makeovers for manufacturers. And we would select honor students, people who were doing things on campus, and we'd do a whole fashion spread with them and hold seminars in terms of teaching them makeup and hair styling and whatever. They loved it, it was a hit. And that's how we really got the attention of the college readership. And to this day they do the same thing. Speaker 1: Now was Glamour, were magazines like Glamour doing tours also? Or were they just focusing on college readers? Speaker 2: Well, they weren't doing any black colleges, they were doing white colleges. Speaker 1: But at the white colleges, were they giving that type of attention to their readers? Speaker 2: Not the way we were doing. Speaker 1: Were they providing seminars? Speaker 2: No, not the way we were doing. What they would do is on the spot beauty, you know. But we would do spreads; we would do them for two days, you know. And they would select a woman for a page or two or whatever, but we did fashion spreads. We would do actual shootings on location there. So we would bring a whole staff, a team of photographers and whatever. And the colleges loved it, they had never gotten that kind of publicity and attention, you know, for women like that. Speaker 1: And how long were you at Essence-- Speaker 2: Three years. Speaker 1: --at that point? Story_ID: 545450 Speaker 1: What did you progress to next? Speaker 2: Fashion Fair cosmetics came calling. Speaker 1: And who called? Speaker 2: Joyce Sample, the lady who used to be with Libra Cosmetics that I had mentioned earlier. She was hired as a consultant to the Fashion Fair cosmetic line in terms of helping Mrs. Johnson [Eunice Johnson] and her staff develop colors for this new Fashion Fair collection. And so, Joyce called me. She said, "Alfred [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay], I'm going to be in New York [New York]. Are you going to be in New York?" I said, "I will be, you know." So I arranged to be there, and had lunch with her. And she said, "You have to swear to secrecy." She said, "I'm starting, I'm working as a consultant with Fashion Fair cosmetics with [HistoryMaker] John H. Johnson. He wants to go into department stores." And she said, "Not any department store. We plan to go to Neiman Marcus." And that was the first launching, at Neiman Marcus and all the other luxury stores. And she asked me would I be interested. I said, "Yes, I would be interested, absolutely." So the next thing I knew there was a call from Mr. John H. Johnson himself. And he says, "I understand you're interested in the line." I said, "Yes." He said, "Well, I'm going to arrange with Joyce to bring you to Chicago [Illinois]." So I took some time off and I went to Chicago and met Mr. Johnson. Well, you know, I thought I had arrived, you know. You could have just knocked me over, you know. And his brand new building, too, you know, they had just gone into their brand new building there on-- Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: Oh, this had to be 19-- Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-three [1973]? Speaker 2: Four [1974]. Nineteen seventy-four [1974], '73 [1973], '74 [1974], something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: And where was that new building located? Speaker 2: 820 South Michigan Avenue, facing Lake Michigan, yeah, a beautiful building. And I said, "I can really see myself here, you know." (Laughter) And they also had offices in Rockefeller Center [New York, New York] on the thirtieth floor, you know, at Radio music center [Radio City Music Hall]. I said, um-hm, I'm either going to be in that New York office or this Chicago office. So anyway I met Mr. Johnson, and Mr. Johnson talked to me. Mr. Johnson is not an easy man to talk to. I discovered that instantly, on day one. I was accustomed to the formalities and whatever, you know. And Mr. Johnson said, "Have you ever made up prostitutes?" And I said, "No." He said, "Well, you might have to." He said, "They buy makeup." And I said, "Yeah." I said, "But I don't know--." He said, "You don't know how to make up all different kinds of women?" And I said, "Well, yes." You know, it just threw me out of left field. I really lost, I lost it, you know, the whole interview just went down the tubes. And I think he was just testing me, you know. And I think he wanted to know if I knew how to address all different kinds of women and talk to all different kinds of women or whatever. And he just threw me completely off. And I said, "You know, Mr. Johnson," I said, "You're going to have to educate me about this." I said, "I--." He said, "Educate you?" He said, "I brought you from New York. You're supposed to be telling me, you know." (Laughter) And so, so, needless to say, he told Joyce Sample, he said, "I don't know about Mr. Fornay. He just doesn't have the flair. He just doesn't have the whatever." Joyce said, "I wouldn't have suggested this man and put my reputation on the line if I didn't think he could handle it." She said, "He was the one who put Libra in all the stores and whatever." And that's how I got hired. Story_ID: 545451 Speaker 1: When I showed up for work, after I resigned from [Essence magazine] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You are now moving to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 1: No, this is how they tricked me. They hired me in the New York [New York] office, and I had this nice office overlooking Rockefeller Center and the plaza [Rockefeller Plaza, New York, New York] and whatever, you know. And I was just--oh, you couldn't tell me--you know, it was the thirtieth floor, Rockefeller Center. I just knew I had arrived. Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] was in town. He came and he said, "Well, how are you doing?" I said, "I'm fine." I said, "I'm settling in or whatever." He said, "Well, yeah, we need you in Chicago." He said, "All my key people are in Chicago. And so, when can you leave?" I said, "I'm not moving to--I can't move to Chicago." I said, "I left Cincinnati [Ohio] to come to New York." He said, "When are you coming to Chicago?" And I said, "As soon as I can get there." (Laughter) And I found myself living on the South Side of Chicago in the Lake Meadows complex [Lake Meadows Apartments], and then moved to Prairie Shores [Chicago, Illinois], and I lived there for almost four years. And then they knew I was restless, and eventually moved me back to New York. And so I was happy again, you know. But I lived in Chicago and tried to be a Chicagoan, but I love New York. New York is where I wanted to be, and they knew it. So, when they made me the editor of Ebony Man magazine, that's when they moved me back to New York. Speaker 2: Who are the players in Chicago? So who's in that Chicago office, and who's important to Ebony magazine and to Fashion Fair? Speaker 1: Well, at the time [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett was the editor-in-chief, and he called the shots, you know. Mr. Johnson had the last word in everything, you know. Lance, J. Lance Clarke, is the one who runs Fashion Fair cosmetics, and who I reported to. And then the Ebony Man magazine, of course, I had to go out there each month to meet with Mr. Johnson and Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Johnson Rice] regarding the production of the magazine, et cetera. But those were the key people that were in my life in terms of how I related to Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]. But the entire staff out there was very supportive. But I had entree to Mr. Johnson's office, and that brought a lot of envy and jealousy. Because when I--I had to sign all kinds of releases and everything, because I had contracts. And Johnson Publishing wasn't really a contract kind of company. And that's the only way I was operating at the time, because I wanted security. Family owned businesses, even like Estee Lauder [The Estee Lauder Companies Inc.], you know, if you rub one of the family members the wrong way, you can find yourself on the outside looking in, you know. So, I, early on just asked for assurances in terms of contracts. And I had to keep it a secret because most of his key people didn't have contracts at the time. They--it was all word of mouth, and that his bond and that was it, you know. But I demanded certain things, and when certain people found out about it, it was, it brought a little contention. And so, I found myself fighting all kind of battles. And I would just pick up the phone and ask for Mr. Johnson, and he would answer the phone. And he understood what I was going through, and that was the kind of relationship I had with him. And that was the only way that I could exist there at the time, really. Mr. Clarke was a fine gentleman, but he had nothing to do with Ebony, and Ebony Man. He was just really dealing with Fashion Fair cosmetics which I was part of it. Speaker 2: What about Mr. Bennett? Speaker 1: Mr. Bennett was an idol of mine, because I had read his 'Before the Mayflower' ['Before the Mayflower: A History of Black America,' Lerone Bennett] I mean, he was one of the stars of Ebony, you know, and was very respectful to me, as a know nothing journalist, you know. (Laughter) He was very encouraging. Whenever he saw something that met his approval, he was most complimentary about what I was doing. A lot of the serious journalists there sort of resented the fact that I was bringing in beauty, you know, even the covers of the magazine that I was in charge of in terms of--I was in charge of four covers a year in terms of beauty and fashion. And a lot of them were complaining that I was trying to make into a woman's magazine. But those covers, at the newsstand, I didn't have to say much, you know, after the, the numbers came in, because they jumped off the shelves, you know. Story_ID: 545452 Speaker 1: So in the corp- the family business mind-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --this was a magazine directed to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a general news-- Speaker 1: --women and men? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Not just women? Speaker 2: Yes. It's a general news magazine that covers all the subjects and whatever, but we were heavy on beauty. But Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] was attracting health and beauty advertisers, which is now in most magazines the bread and butter, you know. And he wanted more of that kind of flair, because he was trying to attract more of those advertisers. And I knew what he was trying to do, and so I upped the ante. I mean I really made it glamorous, and they really didn't--some of the editors really didn't go along with that too much, you know. They wanted the Colin Powells [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] and the, you know, Condi Rice [Condoleezza Rice] kind of images and whatever, you know. I said, "No, y'all have to throw some glamour in here if you want to sell some magazines, you know." (Laughter) And they sold, they sold. Those covers performed well at the newsstand, and that's the bottom line. Speaker 1: Who was on the cover? Who were you putting on the cover at--? Speaker 2: We had Barbara Summers, we had-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I have one of the covers here. I can't think of the names now, but they were not--they were models. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. And they were notable models of the day. And they sold well to news--at the newsstand. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Rolling. Speaker 2: Oh, so I was asking about some of your Ebony magazine covers, which tended to be more glamorous than what had preceded that. Speaker 1: Yeah. I just happen to have (laughter) two of the covers that I worked on. This was the first one. This was Von Gretchen Shepard. And she is one of the first really dark-skinned models, if you please, on the cover of Ebony. And you want anecdotes; I'm going to tell you a little anecdote. I was in the room with the editors, and we were talking about the covers of the magazine. And this girl on the inside was--one of the editors wanted her on the cover, wanted this girl on the cover. And she is a beautiful woman, and we used her, and it's beautiful. But I wanted a dark-skinned woman. And everyone was saying, "Well," and I don't think they appreciated the fact that I was at a black magazine talking about putting a dark-skinned woman on the cover of the magazine. And Mr. Johnson was hemming and hawing. And I looked at him and I said, "I didn't think I'd have a problem with you." He said, "Okay, Mr. Fornay [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay]. Von Gretchen will be on the cover." Because he's the same color she is, you know. I said, "Please," you know. And that's the fun we had, and that's the bond I had with Mr. Johnson, because he knew what I was trying to do. We were rotating the different complexion tones of models on the cover. Now, they've had dark-skinned people of other disciplines or whatever, but I was talking a model in terms of representing beauty and women. And this woman here, I was trying to think of her name, I'm bad at names. But she--this cover sold extremely well on the cover. I think we can use that on the cover today; that's just how timely the cover is. But black women liked the fact that it was just so sophisticated, with color. And, and the same with the color and the eyes and the cheeks and the lips here. And this was all Fashion Fair cosmetics, and they got over with this. I was pleased to be part of that. Story_ID: 545453 Speaker 1: And you were there for how long? I think we asked you already. Speaker 2: Well, I have a nineteen year association with Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: So you were there, and then not there? And-- Speaker 2: Well, I fell out with the, the Fashion Fair [cosmetics] division when they didn't want to give me any more money. (Laughter) And that's when I moved back to New York [New York] and joined Revlon [Revlon, Inc.]. And when they found out that Revlon was giving me more money and giving me this big title, that's when Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] talked to me again and I went back to Fashion Fair. But I joined Revlon and became their creative director for Polished Ambers, which is the black line that they were launching at the time which was a beautiful collection. And that's the line that William Pinkney [HistoryMaker Captain William "Bill" Pinkney] worked on, and Gregory Smith [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Gregory Smith], who is now a prominent Methodist minister here in Harlem [New York, New York] at the A.M.E. church [Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church] here in Harlem. And he worked on that collection as well. So, I had the opportunity to take over, and they made me creative director and I became a member of the Revlon family. And I loved it. Story_ID: 545454 Speaker 1: Can you tell us, give us an anecdote about working with Gregory Smith [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Gregory Smith]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Gregory, as you know, is a very composing man. He is a big man, tall. And he just, he just didn't fit in at Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] in terms of the image, you know. But Greg is a brilliant man, and I think people didn't quite understand him when he talked about beauty, you know. But when I met him, I thought he was fabulous; we, we hit it off. And he was the one who encouraged me to move into different areas, you know. Because they were actually just hiring me to become a seminar person, in terms of traveling around to the different department stores and holding clinics and making public appearances and whatever. But he spoke to the powers that be, and suggested that the line needed direction, and needed someone in the creative area in terms of developing and overseeing products and whatever. And that's how we met. But he, I used to just snigger at him sometimes, because you know, Revlon is a very glamorous place with glamorous people, and everybody was out chic-ing everyone and whatever. And he would just walk in with his tie loose and cross his legs, and everybody would just turn and look at him. But his title and his brain kept him there, you understand what I'm saying? But he and I got along very well. But I find him to be an amazing character, because my jaw fell open when he shared with me that his lifelong ambition was really to be, you know, a missionary in terms of spreading the word, you know, and I was just really amazed at that. And now he is heading up one of the most prestigious Methodist churches on the East Coast. Speaker 1: Mother A.M.E. Zion [Mother African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes, you know. Story_ID: 545455 Speaker 1: Did Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] have some tension with [HistoryMaker] George Johnson and his Ultra Sheen in terms of the use of lye in the products? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that a little? Speaker 2: Yeah. There was, yeah--I don't quite understand the whole story, because see, the--that's the professional division. I was in the retail division, and that's two different markets. But there was some complaints about him copying some of--and then the truth be told, they were copying off of him, you know, they were stealing his ideas. And I don't think the press was fair to Johnson Products [Johnson Products Company], because Revlon had them in their, you know, in their hand. But the facts are that they were infringing on the rights and the copyrights and the legal rights of Johnson Products. Because their product was selling off the shelves, and it was moving Revlon's Realistic products to the side, and the salon people were buying Soft Sheen and Ultra Sheen at the same time, and their sales were going down. And they were fighting back, I mean they were really fighting back. But they didn't realize the power of the black woman. The black woman's choice was still Johnson Products. And then when they were trying to duplicate--you know, people copy, but you don't copy formula for formula, you know. I've ripped off people, I mean everybody does. You know, you take a phrase here or something here or whatever, but not blatantly the formula, you know. And that's what they were doing. And they took them to court and they won. Speaker 1: Who took whom to court? Speaker 2: Johnson Products. Speaker 1: And they won against Revlon? Speaker 2: Yeah, in terms of infringement, yeah. Speaker 1: And did they win money damages? Speaker 2: I don't know about money, but I think, you know, their little heart was upset, you know. I think they settled that, yeah. Story_ID: 545456 Speaker 1: You ever work on the Soft Sheen product line? Speaker 2: No. I did some demonstrations. You know, you're something else, because I used to sneak around and do everything. Yeah, I did a seminar for Ultra Sheen once, you know, in between a little--I represented them and even came back with their--even did something for Carsons [Carson, Inc.], chemical you know. But anyway, that's another story. But I tiptoed through the tulips, as they say, (laughter) and did my little thing with the different lines. You know, I really wanted to know what black people wanted, and what they were doing, and these were revolutionary moves that these companies were making. And I wanted to explore every nook and corner so that when I would be able to talk as an authority, I understood what was going on. And that has been my success, in being able to speak clearly, intelligently, and to articulate what is really going on in the industry and how it affects black women in terms of usage of products. Speaker 1: And can we have an anecdote with Gregory--George, I'm sorry, [HistoryMaker] George Johnson? Speaker 2: I didn't know him. Speaker 1: Did he have an understanding of-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --makeup and color? Speaker 2: Not really. You know, I didn't get that impression, you know. His wife did, Joan [Joan Henderson Johnson]. I met her several times, but I didn't have a good relationship with him, you know. I shouldn't say good, I just didn't have a relationship with him. And I was hired by regional people to work for the company [Johnson Products Company] at the time that I did the seminars for them. Story_ID: 545457 Speaker 1: At Revlon [Revlon, Inc.], who did you work with at Revlon? And are there any impressive names of people who you made up with Polished Ambers, or worked with on that line? Speaker 2: Well, Iman. Iman was the star at the time when I was there, and many other--yes, many other stars. But Iman stood out because she was the--how should I say--the new entry into the market, and the mystery of Africa, being introduced to the African American market. And I had the privilege, because it was really an opportunity to make her up. She didn't quite understand what Revlon really wanted her to do initially, you know, because it was an American company, and they really wanted her to flaunt glamour. She really, in my opinion and understanding, she really wanted to give the philosophy of the makeup and what women are about, and whatever. And she certainly does that with her line now. But at the time, we just wanted her to be the mouthpiece and the spokesperson for the line. And so they had to glamour her up, because she really wasn't--I have a photograph of her if you wanted to see that. And she, she--if you were to pass her on the street, she'd just look like any ordinary person, you know. But then they started glamourizing her, and that's when the real glamour started. And she was the spokesperson and the mouthpiece, along with myself with the Polished Ambers collection. Story_ID: 545458 Speaker 1: I'm going to step back a bit, because we haven't, I haven't asked you about the impact of Beverly Johnson's 1974 Vogue cover. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: We've kind of gone past 1974. Could you talk about that? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Did that make a difference? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, that was a turning point in terms of glamour for the upscale publications like Town and Country, Bazaar, and Vogue, and even Cosmopolitan, in terms of what the cover represented in terms of beauty and fashion and glamour. But Beverly Johnson was, was on Glamour magazine first before she went to Vogue, but she was the first black woman on Vogue publications. But she was looked upon as being this wholesome, clean, next--girl next door kind of look, but glamorous. But when she was on the cover of Vogue, it was a signal that was sent throughout the whole industry, if not the world, that black women, African American women, if you please, have arrived. And that's just how prestigious the Vogue cover is. Because for years they did not put Iman on the cover, and people thought it was racial. And there could have been a little tint of that, too, but it was an international--it is not an international publication, it's an American publication. And they have an international Vogue which she was on the cover, but the American Vogue featured at the time just American women. And Beverly Johnson certainly was glamorous, and I think she brought the new attitude about the emerging black woman in terms of middle income women wanting more and demanding more. And she didn't look like Aunt Bessie, and she didn't have a rag on her head, and she wasn't grinning, and she wasn't a buffoon. She was really a glamorous woman. She had beautiful hands, she had beautiful teeth, she had a beautiful face, and she was representative of a segment of the market. Story_ID: 545459 Speaker 1: This tenor of, or this expansion of makeup and exposure for black women in the 1970s, do you think that came out of the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Oh, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What created the space for that revolution? Speaker 2: Oh, the whole black beauty thing, the black is beautiful thing. I mean that had a tremendous impact on the beauty industry. We've come a long ways, but there's still much work to be done. Black women still have not been raised to the pedestal that they deserve in terms of being flaunted and glamourized. I mean, just--when have you seen a black woman in a luxurious bath situation, or, I mean--the glamour--they're usually pushing Pine Sol or Jello or something. But the real--if it wasn't for Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company]--and Procter and Gamble really have made a significant change with their Pantene product, with their Olay product, with their--I forget the other one. But they have really glamourized the images of black women. And L'Oreal [L'Oreal S.A.] now has come into the picture, and they're doing the same thing. But, but Procter and Gamble really made the bold moves in terms of black women with hair, and black women with hair that moves, and glamour. And when I say glamour, I don't say that people have to look like Diana Ross twenty-four hours a day. I'm talking about pampering and personal development in terms of grooming, and looking at a woman who runs a household and looking at a woman who is sports conscious, and looking at a woman who luxurizes herself and goes to spas. I mean there are black spas all over this country, so somebody's going to them, you know, and they're going there for a reason, to be luxurized, you know, and beautified. So that has begun to come finally, and that came from the Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 545460 Speaker 1: Mr. Fornay [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay], we've been talking with you. We've just begun to talk with you about your career, which started in the early '70s [1970s]. And just to establish an historical context, could you tell us a little bit about the difference between the makeup in the black beauty industry before 1970 and after? And if you could start by telling us about the images, performers, and the beauty industry of the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] when you were growing up. Speaker 2: The entertainment industry--and you're probably too young to know that Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] had a publication called Tan, T-A-N, magazine, and it covered the entertainment industry. And people like Ethel Waters, people like Lena Horne, even--I'm trying to think of some of the younger ones. But they all were covered by that magazine. I knew the editor before she passed away. And so it was the forerunner of magazines like Vibe and all the other ones, but those were the Vibes of the day. Tan publication--they had Ebony, Tan, Ebony Jr.!, Jet, and Black World [Negro Digest; Black World]. All of those publications covered the industry. And we had an insight of beauty on those covers of those magazines. Families like myself waited patiently every month for Ebony and Tan. And you just weren't black unless you had those coming to your house in the mail, (background noise) you know (laughter). Speaker 1: So, Johnson and Johnson [sic.] has a number of magazines-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --available to black families in the '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And we were one of those families that waited patiently in Cincinnati [Ohio] for it to arrive on our doorstep, anticipating the glamorous black women, because that's what they sold us. And I was hooked on that. I come from a family of women who just took pride, as my [maternal] grandmother [Erma Pitchford Weatherford] would say, gussying themselves up; they were gussied up. And I, that was when I really started appreciating women of color, because the tradeoff between television, and even in some of the films that we were privileged to see, they just didn't portray black women in, in terms of beauty. Story_ID: 545461 Speaker 1: What kind of movies were popular in which you were not seeing glamorous black women? Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: Obviously, it's over a time period. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's over a time period, I have to think. Louise Beavers was a name of the past. She was--I'm trying to think of some of the titles of some of those--I can't think of their name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sorry. Speaker 1: So, in contrast to film and television? Speaker 2: Um-hm, during that period they just were not--they did not dignify elegant, glamorous women--and I'm speaking of poses and close ups and whatever. We were always--the people that I talk to now don't understand when people are sensitive about full lips and broad noses and whatever. But those were pointed out as being negatives. They would always show Africans who had those plates in their lips, and not explaining that those were tribal rituals and signs of beauty. Those were standards of beauty in those tribes and on the continent. But by the time they were translated here in America, it was identified by the white film industry was being ignorant, backward, primitive and unattractive, you know. So, we've had to rewire our thinking, and I had to be very careful when I was working with Corporate America in the meetings. When the ignorance of those who would not include people of color in a dignified way in meetings, I felt an obligation to correct myth. So, it meant a lot of study and a lot of research in terms of making sure I was politically correct and not angry when I delivered these statements, because, of course, that turns off everyone. You know, I didn't want to be the angry black man of beauty. So you had to be intelligent to introduce--and let them know that you are aware of history if they were not, and that you were going to make sure that the right perspective was going to come out. Regardless of if they used the information or not, I wanted to be on record that we had a beauty industry, there were standards, and there was respect for our features, et cetera. And the reason why I bring up features and details like that, when Iman, for example, came to this country, I was appalled at a beauty editor at a very famous magazine who was talking about the pigment in her eyes. Now, everybody knows that everyone has pigment. But the darker you are, the more pigment shows in your eye. And Africans are plagued with that, in terms of veins that are deep in color in the eyes. But that's what they had airbrushing for. All the other races were airbrushed, and you would never know those little crystal white eyes and little healthy glows--that's airbrushing, so we're getting rid of the flaws. But all of a sudden, here's this flawed individual who has this pigment in her eyes, which is considered to be another negative, you know. And I was constantly correcting and introducing the fact that we're no different than anyone else that has to have airbrushing to highlight and to emphasize. The same thing with the uneven hairlines. Black women, the black models were always plagued with--, "Oh, we can't use her because she has a--." All people have an uneven hairline. There's no such thing as an even hairline. But because our hair is kinkier, it is more obvious, you know. But again, they were made to feel sensitive about something to me that was this--that should have been directed to the fact that we were just different, you know. And if you're going to use us, use us the way you're using everyone else, but deal with the feature, you know. Naomi Sims had very dark gums. And very dark people sometimes have very purplish nails. And again, I would hear some of the photographers say, "Oh, why are her gums so dark?" I said, "Why are some Irish people's gums so red?" I said, "Some of them look bloody red." I said, "If you can answer that, I'll be delighted to answer how, why they have darker gums, you know." Dark gums are healthy, but it, that is just another characteristic of beauty that we appreciate, you know. Story_ID: 545462 Speaker 1: So during the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s] when you were leaving at home and when you were away at school [Pine Forge Institute; Pine Forge Academy, Pine Forge, Pennsylvania], are the images that you're--are the magazines of Johnson and Johnson's [sic. Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] the only glamorous black images that you're seeing? Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] always had Cosmopolitan, Ladies' Home Journal, and Look magazine, and Life magazine, we had all of those. And we would see the beautiful women on the cover, you know. And then you would look in the paper, the local black paper or the local white paper, and there was always someone who was stabbed to death or someone was killed, or someone who chopped off someone's head, as if we were the primitive people in the community. There was nothing glamorous, nothing soft, nothing beautiful, nothing colorful. It was always the tragic that associated with our beauty, you know. I just, I don't know where it came from. I just have to say it probably came from my grandmother [Erma Pitchford Weatherford] and my mother and my fabulous [paternal] aunts--that I just wanted to make a difference in the beauty industry way back when no one understood me at the time. The men in my family thought I had lost it. And I just, I don't know what kept me focused. And I finally found the right track after exploring on my own which direction I wanted to take in terms of a career, and the difference that I wanted to make. But the beauty side of it, I just loved people like--people don't talk enough about people like Ethel Waters. Ethel Waters was a beautiful woman, and she was a beautiful dark-skinned woman. And she was looked upon as being the one to play the beautiful dark-skinned maid. She was the upscale of 'Gone with the Wind,' I forget her name, Hattie McDaniel and Louise Beavers. She was prettier, quote unquote, the way I've heard it, than those people. So therefore there was room for her because of her beauty. And of course, you were unique if you were dark and beautiful. That's the way it was looked upon. It was not beautiful and dark, it was always trumpeted that way. And I always liked the fact that she knew what colors to wear. She knew what wigs to allow them to put on the head, on her head, rather, and the color of her garment. In other words, there were never these festive quote unquote jungle colors that they usually associated with dark-skinned women in film. And I, I recognized that early on, and decided that one of the negatives that I wanted to deal with was dark-skinned women in makeup, in hair, and the fashions that they wore. And I've had an excellent career in doing so. Story_ID: 545463 Speaker 1: Did those images change in the 1960s? Speaker 2: They changed because there was a demand for them to change. That's when the black is beautiful statements were all over, and people were examining, what is black beauty? And what was black beauty from the beginning to that present time? And who creates the standard of beauty for whom, you know? And who were we emulating, you know? And how does that translate into who we are and what we want to be, in terms of the future. And I wanted to be part of that. While others were talking about housing and the betterment and how we should move in education, et cetera, I felt that I was an educated--I thought I would become an educator in terms of beauty, and in terms of fashion for people of color. And not only from the standard that was set up--because I challenged, even when I was in fashion school [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]--I mean, in my reports and everything, I always wanted to know why a cobbler, for example, was not included in our textile classes. And there were black people who made shoes, you know. So, why weren't they there, you know? And my teacher was always expecting--, "Mr. Fornay [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay], did you find out?" I said, "Oh, yes, absolutely." I wanted to make sure that everyone in this room understood that we were moving along like everyone else--not as sophisticated, not as glamorous sometimes--but we were there, and we were producing, and we were part of history, you know. Speaker 1: So, what kind of change occurred in the beauty industry after the Civil Rights Movement? Does it make opportunities available for people? Speaker 2: No, not really. The beauty companies really did a disservice to black women for years. And I speak of it because I'm part of the industry, but I, I, I often wondered--years ago, the companies started ethnic departments, you know. We call it diversity now, but the word ethnic was just thrown all over the beauty industry. I worked for a company where they had an ethnic division [Clairol, Inc.], you know. And that responsibility was to develop brochures to complement the appliances and to include photographs, in terms of step by step, in all of their products, so that black people would feel comfortable about buying them. But at the same time there was no research to back to all up. It just happened to work, and if it worked, fine. But there was not much research done in terms of turning out products for black women. Story_ID: 545464 Speaker 1: So what products were available? We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Carmen De Lavallade, and she talked about the limitations on her makeup, and using something called Negro number two. Can you talk a little bit about that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in the professional industry, that was quite popular. They were--our skin textures were compared to Egyptians--Egypt--and they were called Negro one, Negro two, Negro three, Negro four. And they were basically what we call light, medium, and dark now. Speaker 1: And what company made that? Speaker 2: Max Factor was one of the top companies at the time. And there were several other major theatrical companies that they had to turn to. This was not for the consumer; it was expensive and it was difficult to find. It was basically coming from the theatrical theater and film industry. But if you were fortunate enough that you could get your hands on them, they worked for the moment for people. But it was for fair-skinned Egyptians, fair-skinned to medium, and then medium to dark, and then dark. And in America, they titled them Negro one, Negro two, Negro three. And they worked, you know. And they had black, dark grease pencils for eyebrows. They had black, dark mascaras and liner. It was just so limited. The lipsticks that were red had red undertones. They didn't have the yellow bases that they have now that brings more warmth and more variety to the red section of colors, you know. I always tell people when they go to look for colors, just don't entertain the trend color for the moment. You know, there're thirteen or fourteen different hues of red in the cosmetic industry. So, you have to become discerning and find out what products look best on you--those that have the deeper blue tints to them or those that have the more yellowish-brown tints to them. And it doesn't--you don't have to be a rocket scientist to do that. It's either light, medium, or dark, you know. Story_ID: 545465 Speaker 1: So, by the time you're at Ebony magazine, the first time, have, has the cosmetic industry opened up at all for black women? Speaker 2: Yeah, there were--not the mainstream, not the mainstream companies, no. The little companies, that--the toiletry companies that wanted to make--I call them companies that just want to fill in where the big companies don't, or didn't. And I mentioned early on a company out of Chattanooga, Tennessee, which was Libra Cosmetics. The parent company at the time was called Chattem Drug and Chemical [Chattem Drug and Chemical Company; Chattem Chemicals, Inc.]. They call it, it's a whole different kind of name now. But they're the makers of tampon, and they're huge. And they were very much interested in going into department stores and bringing in products. The companies that were out there was Vera Moore [Vera Moore Cosmetics]. There was another company out there, Barbara Walden [Barbara Walden Cosmetics, Inc.] out of, from the West Coast. There's another big company that was--William Pinkney [HistoryMaker Captain William "Bill" Pinkney], who was at Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] for a while--I'm trying to think of that. Spectrum [Spectrum Cosmetics], it was called Spectrum. And it was the first collection that had been put together. Stanley Kohlenberg and William Pinkney came together and developed this collection. It was one of the most outstanding collections. They had Afrocentric (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About what year was that? Speaker 2: That was in the '60s [1960s]. That had to be like '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. And they were trying to get the major companies to back them up, but they went out on their own and it lasted for a moment. But I think it was just too early. I don't know if you know the name Pat Evans, but Pat Evans was one of the first models that had a bald head. But she had these beautiful black features and long lashes and whatever, and they used her as an image, and they used Afrocentric names. And the bottles were beautiful; the packaging was beautiful. It could rival any line today, it was a beautiful collection. And there were high hopes for it, but it petered out because the buyers in the department stores at the time did not want to put this beautiful line in next to the Lauders [The Estee Lauder Companies Inc.] and the Helena Rubinsteins [Helena Rubinstein, Inc.] and the Elizabeth Ardens [Elizabeth Arden, Inc.] and whatever. It was just before its time. And unfortunately, the beauty salons didn't have the cache and the sophistication or the money. Because you had to be in a certain range in order to back the line and whatever, so it petered out and died. Story_ID: 545466 Speaker 1: So we talked a bit, a little bit about your time at Essence and then Ebony. Does it eventually become clear to you that you are a magazine man, and so you are interested in communicating beauty information through journalism? Speaker 2: Um-hm. I saw magazines as another vehicle to get my story out, and I was sort of pushed into it. I had taken communications in college [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], and I've always liked the printed word and the process, and selecting people, and all that kind of stuff. And when Essence approached me, I just saw that as an opportunity and jumped on it. [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor and Marcia Gillespie [HistoryMaker Marcia Ann Gillespie] were just wonderful in terms of guiding me. Marcia was the editor-in-chief at the time. She's a brilliant woman. I had never seen a person of color until I met [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett later on, who had just come through the ranks and was so talented and just had such a command with the English language, and then the respect that a young editor brought to Essence. Because she was young at the time, and she was being thrust into the spotlight. And black women were very demanding at that time. And so, under their tutelage and guidance and monitoring, we were able to produce some beauty pages that I'm still very proud of today. Speaker 1: And then you left your first station at Essence and went to Fashion Fair cosmetics? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And afterwards, did you go into a magazine called Elan? Speaker 2: Yeah, Elan magazine. Oh, you've done your homework. I forgot about Elan. Elan was being launched by [HistoryMaker] Marie Brown. Marie Brown is a book agent, and happened to turn out to be my first agent of the first book ['Fornay's Guide to Skin Care and Makeup for Women of Color,' Alfred Fornay] that was published at Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.]. She was at Doubleday [Doubleday and Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Company], and was asked to come over to Elan, and then went to Simon and Schuster. But yes, they had asked me to come be their beauty editor. And I was there for a year. Speaker 1: And what kind of magazine was that? Speaker 2: Oh, it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or who, who was the audience intended? Speaker 2: Oh, they were going after the upscale middle class woman, the middle class family. And they wanted it to be a stylish, upscale publication. Speaker 1: For black women? Speaker 2: For black women, um-hm. And it was no competition with Essence. Essence was going after a younger market. It was more of a general market magazine, whereas Elan wanted to be more of a fashion, contemporary type of publication. Speaker 1: And does that set you up with the skills you needed to become the beauty and fashion editor for Ebony magazine? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I had gotten--between Essence and Elan and several other little magazines I had done work with. I had worked as a consultant to Businessweek's careers publication as a contributing beauty editor. And also, at Big Beautiful Woman had come out in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], BBW. I had done several articles with them. So, yeah, when I arrived at Ebony, I was ready. Story_ID: 545467 Speaker 1: And I've just learned that [HistoryMaker] Marie Brown is also a HistoryMaker. Do you have any anecdotes about working with her? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Marie is--well, I was introduced to Melody Ecadara [ph.], who is now head of Atria Books division at Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.]. She was working with Marie Brown at Simon and Schuster at the time. And I was riding home on the train, and I saw this beautiful young lady sitting across from me. And she noticed that I was thumbing through some pages, and I had this dream of doing my own beauty book. So I had put an outline together and had told several people, "I want to do my beauty book." They said, "Good luck," you know, no encouragement whatsoever. So, we got off the train and Melody Ecadara, being the curious editor that she is, she saw me again just reading and going up the steps. And she said, "Are you an editor?" And I said, "No." I said, "I want to do my own beauty book." And she said, "Well, I'm Melody Ecadara." I said, "I'm Alfred Fornay [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay]." She said, "Oh, I know who you are. You're with such and such." And I said "Yeah." I said, "Well, I really want to do my own beauty book. She said, "Well, when you get your first chapter and get your pages together, send it to me." Well, you know who got it together (laughter). And I sent her the outline and the first chapter, and she then sent it to Marie Brown. Because she called and told me, she said, "You need an agent." She said, "It's not good to deal with big companies unless you have an agent to represent you." And that's how and when I was introduced to Marie Brown. And she walked me through putting together my first book. And we asked Tracey Ross, who is now on 'Passions,' on the soap. She agreed to be on my first cover, because I had used her a lot in the various jobs that I'd done. So I went to her, and she's very popular. She had just won, I forget the sidekick of Johnny Carson--Ed McMahon. He had had an entertainment show on television for a short time, and she had won the category of being the most famous model or whatever, and that's what propelled her into the limelight for the moment. And we hooked up, and I used to do her makeup, along with Jayne Kennedy. And so I was making a choice of putting Jayne or her on the cover. But she was in New York [New York], so she agreed, and didn't charge me anything. So, she was on the cover. But Marie Brown let me know that the beauty category was a very difficult category to market, and especially a person of color. And we had done our research. Naomi Sims had been the only successful person at the time who had published a beauty book with some notoriety and respect, in terms of sales. And so I did my research and found out that the first person that actually published a beauty book was Leslie Uggams, the actress, and, and Doubleday [Doubleday and Company Inc.; Knopf Doubleday Publishing Company] was the publisher. And this was all the way back in the '50s [1950s] or '60s [1960s]. And I got all that together and made my presentations and let them know it's time for a beauty book of this type. And because I positioned it that way, Simon and Schuster accepted it. And I had the first black beauty book ['Fornay's Guide to Skin Care and Makeup for Women of Color,' Alfred Fornay] for that period published at the time, and it, it was, it was all because of Marie Brown. Story_ID: 545468 Speaker 1: I tried to let you start talking about being a beauty editor at Ebony, but we've got to go back to Elan-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and talk about Roxanna Floyd. What was her relationship to the magazine, and what was your relationship with her? Speaker 2: I discovered Roxanna Floyd, and Ellie Winslow, and Larry Cherry. I'm going to mention all three of them, because I helped launch their careers. They were entering a market, especially in the '70s [1970s], really the '80s [1980s], because they're much younger than I am. But the unions were giving them a difficult time, and the union wages are it--you know. And hiring, to be hired by the film industry and the theater, you had to be part of the union. And I encouraged Ellie and Roxanna and Larry. I said, "You have to, I don't care how many times they turn you down or whatever, you have to keep going back and take those tests." And they did, and they passed them. But until then, people like Spike Lee would use the waiver as producers to hire them, you know. Because I encouraged them to apply to these different places. Well, I had the opportunity, because the covers are powerful. When you give credit to a makeup artist, that gives them an edge, in terms of presenting their credentials to another publication or another beauty house or whatever. Roxanna, as a woman in a man's world--because most of the makeup artists at the time were men. And women were used, but not on the glamour level of the magazines, et cetera. It was very rare at the time to see a woman. Isn't that something? It was basically men that were doing most of the beauty. So, I started, I told Marie [HistoryMaker Marie Brown] and [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor and Ebony magazine, I said, "We have to use women, you know, in these areas because they're lined up and nowhere to go, you know. And they're interested in the industry." Well, we used Roxanna Floyd, and her makeup was so good on the covers that we used, that all the agencies came calling. When I used her on the cover of Ebony, those covers were just drop dead beauty. And this was her segue way into the big agencies, and I'm talking about Ford [Ford Modeling Agency; Ford Models] and, you know, the big agencies that hired the makeup artists. Ellie Winslow and Larry Cherry, they're treated like king and queens now. They travel all over the world with all the top celebrities, et cetera. But I take pride in giving them somewhat their first breaks in terms of covers and editorials, et cetera. Story_ID: 545469 Speaker 1: Now, you became beauty and fashion editor for Ebony magazine? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: At, around 1982? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And who's the editor-in-chief at that time? Speaker 2: Of? Speaker 1: Ebony magazine. Speaker 2: Of Ebony? Okay, when I entered, it was [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett. Lerone Bennett was the chief editor. And between Jet and Ebony, I was asked to do beauty articles. It was a unique situation, because I was heading Fashion Fair cosmetics, and they were using me at the time in Ebony and Jet to do beauty articles and little bites and sidebars, et cetera, about beauty. And the fear at Ebony was that we were just doing too much beauty, because they considered themselves to be a serious general news reporting magazine dealing with serious topics. But we brought some fanfare there that marketing and circulation and advertisers liked. And that was the bottom line--more advertising, more distribution, et cetera. And when they saw that I was able to increase circulation and bring a little more flair to the publication, I didn't have too difficult of a time. But again, we have to--you know, like I tell people; you have to use your strategy, you have to use your head. And I came with soft topics sometimes, rather than the real drop dead glamour until I got my feet wet and earned the respect of the other editors. And then I started talking about real beauty and real heavy glamour, et cetera. And we, we existed, we co-existed, but it was an uncomfortable existence. Because they just thought my mission was to turn Ebony into a beauty publication, and that wasn't it at all. I was just happy to be there, and part of Ebony, period. Story_ID: 545470 Speaker 1: And how does Ebony Man magazine come about? Speaker 2: We started doing a column for men in Ebony called Ebony Man, and the response was just tremendous. I mean, the inquiries--Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] was just surprised of the response. And I was just doing it to keep everybody happy, you know. I really--my interest was female beauty; it wasn't really in the male spectrum at the time. And Mr. Johnson said, "We're going to expand your one page to a couple of pages. We'll do editorial spreads four times a year." So, I started doing formalwear, because black men were big in formalwear around the graduation times, et cetera. So, we attracted the formalwear industry as advertisers in the publication for the first time. We started doing fragrances for men, until Mr. Johnson brought out with his own fragrance and we had to kill that for a while. So, it was that kind of trend. And the momentum started building and I was called into Chicago [Illinois], because I was back and forth between New York [New York] and Chicago at the time. And Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Johnson Rice], his daughter, and Mr. Johnson met with me. And he said, "Mr. Fornay [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay], we're going to start a men's publication. And we can't think of anyone better to head the publication but you." Well, my mouth fell open, I just couldn't believe it. I mean, this is a dream come true. And that's how it got started. And then the plum was that we were going to do it out of New York. And so, I was able to work out of the New York office on this new publication. Developed the logo, developed the tagline, hired all the editors, hired all the creative help, and launched the publication. Speaker 1: You said that you were doing some small--first just one column, and then the quarterly pieces. What were you including in the magazine to inform men about beauty in Ebony Man? Speaker 2: We were talking about the problems that black men have, like razor bumps for example. We did things on shaving and what products were available, what methods were available. We would include interviews with doctors who specialized in problems with black men. And to my knowledge, that wasn't being done on a regular basis with a major black publication. We got the attention of the toiletry industry and the shaving industry, which was Gillette [The Gillette Company], that came in as advertisers at that time. We even got the Gold American Express card to come into Ebony Man, which had never come into Ebony. We got it first, before they even went into Ebony, because they liked the segment of the market that we were targeting at the time. We even got a complimentary letter from GQ and Esquire, complimenting us and welcoming us to the industry, you know. So it was--the kinds of articles were dressing, dieting, good health. We were talking about--we were ahead of our time, talking about some of the health issues with black men and grooming tips, et cetera, that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: How long did you remain the editor of Ebony Man? Speaker 2: Three years. Speaker 1: And is the magazine still in existence? Speaker 2: No, they moved it back to Chicago. And now, this is my personal opinion and assessment. They started putting centerfolds of--how can I say it? They weren't nude, but sort of like the Jet calendar, you know. And it was a turnoff for that segment of the market. They started talking about where to meet women in the bars, you know. We were beyond bars; we were talking about the elegant places that men who were spending money on good suits and fine wine were going to meet women, et cetera, you know. And in my opinion, I think that was the demise of the publication, because in my opinion it lacked the sophistication that we were trying to establish. Story_ID: 545471 Speaker 1: After your three years at Ebony Man, what do you do next? Speaker 2: Well, that's when the books came calling. I decided that it was just time for me to sort of look at myself. And I started doing consulting work with Cover Girl and, out of Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company], and a lot of consulting work with various cosmetics clients--with Naomi Sims, with Carson chemicals [Carson, Inc.], they were developing a line, a cosmetic line, and I was consulting with them. I started doing seminars. And then when my first and second book ['African American Woman's Guide to Successful Make-up and Skin Care,' Alfred Fornay] came out, I was asked to do tours and seminars, and we went all over the country doing that. Speaker 1: What are the titles of your first two books? And why did you write them? Speaker 2: I wanted--you know, I like instruction. I like how to. And all the beauty books that, up to that point were beautiful pictures, beautiful colors, and I'm all for that. But I wanted charts, and I wanted steps--instruction. And most people in the industry, in the echelon of beauty books, they said that my book was one of the first that actually taught women how to put makeup on. Speaker 1: What's the title of your book? Speaker 2: It's 'The African American' (laughter) something, 'For Skin Care and Makeup for Women of Color' [sic. 'Fornay's Guide to Skin Care and Makeup for Women of Color,' Alfred Fornay] Oh, dear, you forget the title of your own, of your own publication. But those publications--and there's a little anecdote about that too, you know. We were calling--I'm going to back up. Some of the--this was, as you know, still in the '60s [sic.] when this first book came out, you know. And the marketing people had problems with the word black, and they said they were having a hard time selling the book with the word black in the southern markets. Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: This is 19--the first book came out in-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: We're dealing with a lot of history here, so I really have to refresh my own-- Speaker 1: That's quite all right. Speaker 2: I have to look and see. I think it was 19--the first one we did was, to be exact, 1989. That's when the first one came out. Yes, 1989. Speaker 1: And is it at this time that you're having difficulty with the title? Speaker 2: Yes, the title. We, we, were calling it 'Fornay's Guide to Skin Care and Makeup for Black Women.' And I got this nice little polite note to please come in and meet with the editors, because they were having problems with the marketing of the book. And I just thought it was so funny. I just couldn't believe this was going on in 1989. Well, actually it was '87 [1987] when I started working on the book--in '88 [1988]--and then it was published in 1989. And we sat down, and everybody was very polite and whatever. And he said, "We just want to soften the title, because some of the marketing men in the South are having problems marketing the book to booksellers." And I said, "Well, what might be the problem," you know. And they went all around the bush and finally said, "Well, one letter here says that one of the reps was having problems with the word black." And I said, "Well, who are we talking about, you know?" And they said, "Well, yeah, black people. But some people say colored." And I said, "Well, my [maternal] grandmother [Erma Pitchford Weatherford] did in the '30s [1930s] and in the '40s [1940s]." You know, I said, "But--." So they said, "We can use the word 'For Women of Color.'" And I said, "Yes, that would be inclusive of Afro-Latinos and other people, or whatever." And so that's the way we worked it out, you know. But after that, I was insistent on using the title African American, and that's what I've stuck with. And anyone who has a problem with that, then I have to move on to someone else, because I was quite offended. And sometimes you have to compromise, as long as you're not compromising principle, and move on until you get your feet wet and get in the door and can change things. Story_ID: 545472 Speaker 1: So you wrote two books initially? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then your third book is directed towards teenagers? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you've also done some work with teens, the Boys and Girls Choir of Harlem [Boys Choir of Harlem]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I was wondering if there was a connection, and if after the first two books you felt that you needed to move to the younger set in order to get women started earlier in understanding beauty and how to. Speaker 2: Well, there were two books on the market that were being directed to teenagers. Bobbi Brown had come out with a book on teenagers ['Bobbi Brown Teenage Beauty: Everything You Need to Look Pretty, Natural, Sexy and Awesome' Bobbi Brown and Annmarie Iverson], and Tyra Banks had come out with a book on teenagers as well ['Tyra's Beauty Inside and Out,' Tyra Banks and Vanessa Thomas Bush]. Tyra Banks' book was directed toward more glamour--the real silver and the gold and the glitz and whatever, and that was fine. Because I even called the company and asked them if I could work with her on the book when I found out what direction it was going, and I was told that someone else had been asked to work on the book. Bobbi Brown's book is excellent. There were some nice photos of black women there and whatever, but not enough information for the market that I was accustomed to going after. So, I decided that in order to address the market intelligently, I approached the editors and asked them would they entertain a book for teenagers, and they thought it was a good idea. And the working title was 'Born Beautiful' ['Born Beautiful: The African American Teenager's Complete Beauty Guide,' Alfred Fornay] and we stuck with that because they liked it, and it went over well with the marketing and the circulation people. So, again, I took the step of how to--a step by step approach to teenagers. And I also wanted to address teenagers respectfully. I didn't want a lot of slang and I didn't want a lot of--we put some hip hop photographs in there to please people, and whatever. But I used none of the language, because I really wanted to address teenagers who were coming out of puberty and coming--you know, just approaching teenage. And I wanted to show them the right way to handle themselves in terms of cleansing their skin, and caring for their skin, and talking about deodorant, without all the slang and laughter. It's a serious book, but we had some humor. But we wanted to address issues from their point of view; we did it their way. Story_ID: 545473 Speaker 1: And did you learn any of that from your work with the choir, the black choirs in Harlem [New York, New York]? I have a note that you worked with the girls choir, and I have the impression that you did some styling work with them. What kind of things--when was that, and what did you do? And did you use any of that in your book (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was, that was in the '80s [1980s] and the '90s [1990s]. They had asked me to be a consultant, in terms of helping them to groom. They had, they brought in their own hairstylists and people and whatever, but just to lecture them about grooming and the choices of fragrance and how to smell good when you're in a group setting, and walking and sitting, and presenting yourself in a dignified way. No put on, no airs, but just how to behave in public and how to select clothing that's complementary to your frame. Those were the kinds of topics that we were talking about. You asked several times about where did I get that education in terms of addressing teenage issues? I didn't have any formal training in terms of dealing with teenagers, but I used my psychology courses from college in terms of opening up minds to receive and accept what has not been provided through the mainstream media. For instance, no one really talked to black teenagers in a dignified--and I use that word dignified a lot, because with dignity comes respect, in a respectful way without having to point out the problem. I didn't see black teenagers as (air quotes) the problem. I see them as developing people who've been deprived of certain educational opportunities, even in beauty and grooming and fashion. So therefore, the responsibility comes to us who have had the exposure to address those issues. So with traveling, and talking to parents, and little classes that I would have at our church [Ephesus Seventh-day Adventist Church, New York, New York]--we had outreach programs at our church, and I would conduct grooming programs for those in training to get better jobs. We had, Clairol [Clairol, Inc.] would donate products to the training site. We would use them to show them how to style their hair and grooming, et cetera. So, that was the pre-educational emphasis on how to reach teenagers. And if I may say, it worked. The formula that we put together for 'Born Beautiful' ['Born Beautiful: The African American Teenager's Complete Beauty Guide,' Alfred Fornay] is still working. And I say that I know it worked, because the parents of those who purchased the books for those teenagers have written and complimented what we have tried to do. Story_ID: 545474 Speaker 1: We haven't asked you just a straightforward question about who you've done makeup for who's famous and fabulous, and if you could tell us any anecdotes about those women and men. Speaker 2: And men, yes. [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson was the first person I made up. And I just thought she was the most fabulous woman I had ever met. And she was so kind, because she had been made up by people all over the world, and she didn't know who I was. Fashion Fair [cosmetics] had recommended me, and she came to the Fashion Fair salon. They have a salon in the establishment there at the home office, and I made her up there and she loved it. And every time she came to New York [New York], if I was in the vicinity she would hire me to do her makeup. And when I did my first book I asked her if we could use several of her photographs, and she agreed. And that was my relationship with her. Gladys Knight was the second person that I made up, and she was another wonderful person that I was meeting for the first time. And they realized that I was in awe of them, you know. So, I met her in one of the New York hotels, and I'll never forget. She came--I had arrived early, trying to be prompt. And rather than have me wait in the lobby or whatever, she said, "Oh, send him up." I came up, and she came to the door in her pajamas, her pink pajamas, I'll never forget it. And I had, I had breakfast with her while she was getting ready for the shoot. And then the other people from Essence at the time came over and we had an excellent shoot. But that was my first introduction to her, and I've used many of her photographs and made her up many times for various magazines. The third person I made up was, oh, she just passed away; she was a jazz musician. I'll think of it in a minute. But Aretha Franklin, I don't know if you remember--you probably remember when she lost all her weight. She lost it, went on this diet and lost all this weight, whatever. Well, I was called because they said she wanted a new look; she wanted new people around her or whatever. So, she was being made up for the cover of Essence magazine, and she arrived like the queen. She came in this big limousine with her entourage, and she had to have a moment in her dressing room before we entered the room, et cetera. She wasn't that easy to work with, for me. She was very demanding, and she was accustomed to people that she had worked with before. And I was new, so there was that period. We had to go through a warming up, and making sure, you know. And every time I did something, she had to see it and make sure it was done properly and whatever. But it turned out to be her first cover on a woman's magazine, and I understand she liked it. Who else? Speaker 1: Natalie Cole. Speaker 2: Natalie Cole, yes. Natalie Cole, I just loved her, because my whole family adored her father [Nat King Cole]. So, her name was just magic around our house. And she was just so wonderful. When I walked in the room she said, "I know I'm not the grandest beauty. I'm no Diana Ross." She says, "But you're going to make me beautiful, aren't you?" And I said, "Oh, yes, absolutely." And she did; she looked wonderful. I never had the opportunity to make her up again; I only had that one opportunity. I was hoping that our paths would cross again, but it was just that one opportunity. Oh, another one that comes to mind is Mavis Staples of The Staple Singers. Mavis was wonderful, too. She had never worn her hair in cornrows, and they had wanted to put her in this whole natural setting. They put this African print on her with the round earrings, so they decided to put her hair in a natural setting. And she'd never had it done, so she kept her eyes closed most of the time when the work was done. And when we did the makeup and when she opened her eyes, we were just surprised she really liked it, you know. Because she basically grew up with her hair always straightened, and she didn't know how it was going to look, you know. But she allowed us to shoot her, and it was a beautiful cover. Story_ID: 545475 Speaker 1: Moving away from people who you've made up, could you talk a little bit about [HistoryMaker] Stephen Burrows? Speaker 2: We used a lot of Stephen Burrows' clothes. At the time he was the resident designer at one of the department stores here in New York City [New York, New York], and the first to be honored at Bendels [Henri Bendel]. And he had at the time this lattice trim which was around the edge of his clothing and whatever. It was just beautiful, and the colors that he was using. Tommy Hilfiger's colors remind me of the kind of colors that he was using at the time. Stephen was just--the fabric and the draping and the detailing was one of his calling cards, in terms of what made him famous and stood out from the others. But Essence used his clothing a lot, and pushed his line. And many of his models we had the opportunity to make up as well. Story_ID: 545476 Speaker 1: What difference does it make whether or not black women are portrayed in a glamorous fashion? You know, ultimately, my question is what is the future of black glamour? But I would like to start it out with, is what difference does glamour make? Speaker 2: Well, I always have to deal with the negatives. Because there is racism, and there is the business of beauty. And there are decisions that are made on business sometimes, and sometimes based on race and business. And in the business that we're in, you have to entertain all of that. Choices are made in regional differences, national differences. I mean there's a lot that goes into making choices. But I'm old enough and have been around long enough to realize that there are slights that are made with various women because of who they are. And I was with a very well known photographer once, and a choice had been made with our magazine. And we had hired him, and he was a white photographer. And when the model walked in the room, he said, "Oh, my god, she's so dark." And I turned to him, and I looked at him and I said, "Oh, my god, you're so white." Story_ID: 545477 Speaker 1: We were talking about why black glamour matters. And you were telling a story about a photographer, astounded at the dark pigmentation of a fantastic model. Speaker 2: Yes. And I had to remind him that he was white and this girl was dark black, and that she was chosen because of her beauty and the fact that she was African American, and that we didn't choose her because she was quote, unquote dark black, you know. And we had to have lunch, definitely, because I had to let him know that if he was going to work with us, the black client, that he was going to have not only a black girl like her, but a blue-black sometimes, you know. And it was just a natural response coming from him. He had--in all his travels around the world--Africa--he said he'd never shot a woman that dark. And I could have gotten angry, and I could have--because it was unsettling. I mean I would not be honest if I said--first I was shocked, and then secondly, I collected myself because I had to get the job done at hand. And then I said I have to let this man know that if we're going to work together, there's a way that we can shoot all different colors within a culture, and he's certainly going to have to learn to do that with African American women. So after we had our talk, he realized that this was an education for even him, even with the lighting and the textures. Because I told him that I wanted to see--at that time we had to take the Polaroids; we didn't have the digital that we have now. And I wanted to see the Polaroids to make sure that the lighting was right and whatever. I said, "I'm not carrying this back to--," at the time my boss Susan [HistoryMaker Susan Taylor], "--without seeing this and making sure that the lighting and the tones were right for what we wanted to do at Essence magazine." And it was an education, but it was an education for me to realize that I don't care how educated people are, or how many degrees they have behind their name, if they haven't had the cultural experiences, it's going to come through in everything that we do. And you, as a professional person have to learn how to deal with it. And I quoted Eleanor Roosevelt earlier, but another saying she had was, no one will respect you or disrespect you, only if you allow them to disrespect you. And I caught on to that immediately, and I do not allow people to disrespect me. And then you have to make sure you're right, and that you're going to be part of the solution of the problem. So, we, this photographer, we worked together for years, and now have a very good working relationship. But there was no way that I could have allowed that not to be discussed or let him know that that was politically incorrect. Speaker 1: And you did that presumably because the glamorization of this person was important? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So-- Story_ID: 545478 Speaker 1: What's so important about having glamorous or just a beautiful, beautiful pictures of black people portrayed? Speaker 2: Well, to me, it's important because most of us do not have the opportunity to see a balanced picture. I don't think you have to walk around twenty-four hours a day glamorous. And when I say glamorous, I mean perfect hair, flawless skin, eye color, cheek color, lip color, whatever. No. But I do feel that when it's time for that--there's a time and place for that. When the occasion arises, one ought to be able to put themselves together to meet the occasion. The media does not bring a balanced picture. You can look at any television all day long, look at all the different magazines across a newsstand, or in the theater, and you will see a balanced presentation of white women in terms of being glamorous, being unmade, housewife, et cetera. I have looked at television for a week to look for quote, unquote the glamorous black woman, and haven't seen her. But I have seen the Pine Sol woman. I've seen the woman cleaning the floors. I've seen the woman cleaning the bathroom. I've seen the woman doing all those things, but I haven't seen one being luxuriated in a bathtub. I haven't seen one, you know, spinning across Central Park [New York, New York] in a beautiful dress, you know. I haven't seen one in the glamorous hair ads, et cetera. That's what I mean about glamourized. And we live in a glamorous society, and if you don't bring that balance, then you get a lopsided picture. And in most of the photographs, you will see the beautiful white woman leaning on the black woman. You've never seen the black woman leaning on the white woman. And some people say, "Oh, this is petty." No, someone had to make that decision to say, "You will lean on the black woman." And there's a reason for that, you know. I've been saying, correct the picture and bring the balance to the picture across the spectrum. And if a woman wants to be natural, fine. If you want to show her in straight hair, fine. Well, now we're on the spin where if you see television now and most of magazines, some of those hairdos they look like rugs on their head. I mean it seems like the kinkier--and I will say quote, unquote (air quotes) the nappier the hair that's what all black women are doing now. And it's not true. The majority of women still relax and straighten their hair. Bring that balance in there. Show her; show her sometimes; show the natural woman sometimes, et cetera. We see blond women, we see brunette women, we see black haired women, we see Italian women, we see Irish women, we see Polish women. I mean, those are by design. So, put forth the same effort that you bring to balance the picture. And I'm talking about the advertising agencies, the companies, et cetera. Do that for black women as well. And yes, we've come a long way, but there's still much, much, much more improvement that can be made. Story_ID: 545479 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you a more final question, but based upon what you just talked about, can you talk a little bit about the impact of Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company] on what's available today for black women in terms of beauty products? Speaker 2: Yeah. I like their approach as a company. Apparently, I haven't been able to get my hands on it, but there must be some document or guidelines in diversity that probably came out of the diversity department that suggested inclusion; must include African American women in a positive way. Most of their products, from Max Factor, Pantene, Clairol [Clairol, Inc.]--even their housecleaning products, they seem to--Olay for example. They project women in a very beautiful, positive, glamorous way, as well as regular, and I mean ordinary circumstances--family situations. McDonald [ph.] did that in the early days very good. They're getting a little crazy now, but it had that family, wholesome girl next door, as well as the hip hop, the jive, and the jazz, et cetera, again, looking for the balance to the picture. And I think Procter and Gamble has done a wonderful job. Procter and Gamble is now in the beauty business in a major way. They have snapped up a lot of beauty companies and have become a major contender in the beauty industry. But the other beauty houses really ought to take note of what Procter and Gamble is doing. Story_ID: 545480 Speaker 1: What's the future of black glamour? Do you feel that we're going to achieve the kind of balanced representation that you're talking about? And if you don't feel that that's imminent, what needs to happen in order to make that happen? Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I'm quite vocal about situations, because I'm around enough and I know enough to talk about trends. And one trend that is very disturbing is how, again, the agencies are pitting African women, Caribbean women, and African American women against each other. I, and I think we're going to have to correct that, in terms of liking ourselves as black people, period, regardless of what cultural background you come from. But I have heard, and I know people who work in the industry who have overheard--principal people--say, you know, that sometimes the Caribbean woman looks a little better than the African American woman, or the African American woman is more beautiful in hair texture than the African woman, et cetera, and there are some blacks who buy into that. And again, I was shocked, because I thought that African Americans were the only ones who had that problem. But when you listen to Africans talk, African women, they can be very negative against African Americans. When you hear Caribbean women, especially those from Trinidad and those from Jamaica talk about African American women, it's disturbing, it's disturbing. And I, I just really feel that we have to break down these cultural barriers, because they're being used against us in media. And someone said, "Oh, is it a conspiracy?" No, I don't say it's a conspiracy. It's allowed to happen, and if we continue to have a blind eye to it, it's going to continue to grow and manifest itself. My concern is that I, as a beauty person, have recognized it, and I make sure that any program that I have in church, out of church, in school, out of school, in business--that I include all the different cultural people, so that people will see the variety of blackness and all of its beauty. And I want to continue to be part of that. Story_ID: 545481 Speaker 1: If you at this early age had to articulate what you'd like your legacy to be, what would you say about that? Speaker 2: Oh, that I've made a difference in the beauty industry. If someone just said, "Oh, Mr. Fornay [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay]," and I've had people who've said that. If someone would say, "We know what Mr. Fornay stands for. We know his principles, we know--et cetera, and that's why we invite him to come." I've had that response, and that makes me feel good. I'm not a rich man. I plan to change that hopefully in the future. But I can carry away my pride, my dignity, my integrity, my principles. I just feel that is what this world is all about. And I have touched the lives of people all over this world on every continent of every color, and I've had the opportunity to be honest and to share my experiences and make a difference. And I think that's the bottom line. Story_ID: 545482 Speaker 1: Are you working on your own magazine [Luxe Living]? Speaker 2: I had this dream of being this big publishing mogul. But it's been rough and it's been tough, and I've put the dream on hold for the moment. But we were, there was a team of us who wanted--who came together who wanted to launch a publication similar to Town and Country, in its format and its content, but playing up black people who have worked hard all their lives and have accumulated not just material wealth, but have become doctors and lawyers and professional people, and who are making a difference in the communities that we serve. And I always ask the question when I'm asked to come and do a lecture, "Can you imagine, if it wasn't for the middle class blacks in communities, what our communities would be like?" They do not get the credit in terms of the charity and the differences they make on the community boards and the organizations and the churches. This is all middle class black people who have done this over the years, and made to look as if no one is doing anything. But I assure you, if all that was taken away, we would not be able to live in our communities as they are today. So, I, I applaud those people, and we want that kind of publication--talking about their soft moments, their family moments, their housing, their beauty, where they travel, their homecomings, their reunions. It was going to cover that kind of stuff, including fashion and beauty, of course. But we've had to put it on hold, because some of the big boys just didn't feel they were ready for us to make our debut. But it's a dream on hold. Story_ID: 545483 Speaker 1: Presently I am working on my own new project, which we're calling gracious manners. And it is a grooming program that will address public behavior, etiquette, personal grooming. And we want to direct it to private black academies and inner city schools, and corporate if they will have us, and business schools. We have a personal staff that will be addressing protocol. I will be addressing personal grooming and development, and we have another person who will be addressing speech and development and techniques as how to handle yourself in business. I have sworn to secrecy, but there are some very prominent people that I have met with over the years who were ready to have a luncheon with the president or vice president of a company, and didn't know how to pick up the right fork. I have spent evenings and weekends sitting down with people and just telling them how to address social issues in order to be correct. And you can--I've heard people say, "Oh, you don't need to know that stuff or whatever." Well, if you want the job that you want and you've been singled out, they want people around them who know already; not to be taught, but already know how to conduct themselves. I used to represent Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] abroad. And the places--Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], who has passed away--but he used to tell me, and he used to tell other people in the company, "I don't have to worry about Mr. Fornay [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay] when we send him out, because we know that he will represent the culture of the company as well as represent us socially." And I had to earn that. I mean, I had to learn how to do that. That was nothing someone handed to me. And I consider a person to be ignorant and lazy who does not address the need to be part of the big picture, you know. There's no such thing as living in a black world, you know, or an Asian world, or whatever. We live in a country that is multicultural, et cetera, and we experience each other's culture. So, we have to know how to live with each other's culture. I do, and I find it to be the only way to be successful and consider yourself to be truly free. Story_ID: 545484 Speaker 1: Are you working on a book for older women? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. I'm getting old, so I can relate to this subject for sure. We're calling it 'Beauty for Life,' and I really want to address people who have lived well, and have taken care of themselves and look good, and who know that if you want to live well and enjoy the fruits of your labor, you have to take care of your health. And so, I wanted to profile those people who have done so, and not so much the very famous, but people who have really made a difference in their community. Like, Mrs. Obama [Michelle Obama]; no one knew who she was. She's been around a long time. I mean, her husband's [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] been in the Illinois Senate and everything else, you know. But all of a sudden, there's Mrs. Obama. But she's graceful, she's gracious, she knows how to talk, she knows how--you know, and she's in her fifties, and she knows how to behave, you know. She earned that, and now she's ready to function as the president's wife. So I, I, I just want to profile those types of women who have had experiences, lived well, raised families, and looking forward to a golden age. Story_ID: 545485 Speaker 1: I'm listening to you talk about what you want to include in your magazines in terms of illuminating black people and families who have really endured over time and learned graces. Do you think that these--do you perceive that as people attempting to be white? What's the relationship between the kind of magazine that you're talking about, Town and Country, and you called it--I'm not sure what your magazine was called. But, you know-- Speaker 2: Luxe Living. Speaker 1: --are you attempting to make Luxe Living into--are you attempting to make these into white people? Any comment on-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --that idea of wanting to be white? Speaker 2: I'm glad you asked the question, because it's something that I've had to deal with in the industries that I've represented and have been part of over the years. One of the shockers, as my niece would say, that I've experienced over the years is when I traveled and had to make up African women. And I kept hearing the word, "I want to be clear." And I had to ask for interpretation. I said, "What do they mean by clear?" He said, "Oh, they want to be white." And honestly, I almost dropped my brush when I was making up a woman. Because I was shocked, because I really thought we had to look to Africa in terms of settling our mind, and getting our mind together. But then I realized that colonialism started in Africa and spread all the way over, and we just brought the problem to the United States. So the Caribbean, Africans, and African Americans, and those who live in Canada, et cetera, we have to really understand who we are, and accept who we are, and skin color has always been the reference. And unfortunately we have bought into that, and sometimes we can be our worst enemy. And what I'm leading up to is that there are--I have made up Haitian women, I have made up dark skinned Jamaican women, I have made up dark skinned southern women, African Americans who were slaves that escaped to Canada; I have been to Halifax [Canada] where there're West Indians and African Americans who had escaped to there. And one of the things that used to just really bother me is the fact that if I were to choose to correct the foundation color to match their skin, there was always this concern, "Do you think that shade is too dark?" And I would simply say, "Look at your ears, look at your neck, and look at your chin line." If a foundation color spreads from the center of your face to the jawline and sinks into the color, it should be the right color. In other words, there should be no line of demarcation between the chin and the neck area and whatever. But, "I want a lighter color." So I will put a lighter color on, and then the skin starts taking on an ashen look. When I would turn the subject around in the chair and they see the mirror, they would look in the mirror and say, "Oh, it looks so ashy." I'd say, "Because it's the wrong color." And the way I would say it--and they'd look at me and I'd look at them: "Could we try the other color?" I'd say "Sure." I would take that off and put the other color on. That person came to recognizing what she has been doing to herself all along. And this is just in cosmetics; I've had the same with hair textures and whatever. Story_ID: 545486 Speaker 1: But then I had a Haitian woman who really disturbed me, because she had been made up in London, England. And she had been convinced that the lighter shades on her dark skin was the way to go. And you still see in some of the Caribbean communities, you see this very powder, floury looking, ashen look. And even on some of the medium complexions you will see that lighter look, because they've been told that the lighter shades is what you want, the lighter shade. In other words, you will be a better person if you are lighter in complexion and powder. And a lot of times, the beauty advisors at those cosmetic counters get the blame of selling the wrong color. But we're there to please, and if a person says, "I want this," the bottom line is after you've shown them and educated them, if they make the choice, that is their choice. I used to tell women, I'd say, "Please don't tell them that you were at the Fashion Fair counter." And they would get mad, you know, and we would all start laughing at the counter, because it was just bad news, you know. Now, I've had a black woman tell me, "But there are white women who want to look tan." I said, "Because they want to look darker, and it is complimentary." I said, "I know black people who want to look tan, too, you know, it brings out the glow of your skin or whatever." I said, "But I don't know too many white people who want to change the complexion of their skin." And I said, "And you're suggesting that we go one shade lighter in terms of beyond what your complexion tone is, you know." I've had seminars where we've talked about nothing but skin color. And I have discovered that in Africa, in the Caribbean, and in America, until we decide that dark is right and black is truly beautiful in terms of skin color, it will never be settled. No other nationality, no other culture will be able to tell us it's right until we say it's right. And I think it should be discussed more, not in a dogmatic way, not saying you've been wrong or whatever. I think the show and tell and the how to has been the way for me. And there are women to this day, when they hear my name they will say that Mr. Fornay [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay] truly brought it home to me and let me know that this is the way we should be treating our skin or complementing our color. Story_ID: 545487 Speaker 1: Lastly, would you talk a little bit about your volunteer work with StyleWorks? Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: And the transformations that are made there? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: What is StyleWorks? Speaker 2: StyleWorks is an organization that--I forget the comedian's name--Rock. What's his name? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Chris, Chris. Speaker 2: Chris Rock, thank you. When I'm immediately talking about these people--I may not remember these people. But his wife [Malaak Compton Rock] started an organization where she would bring together women who have been to prison, are on welfare, or just neglected and fallen through the cracks. And she provides a service when they are ready to go out for employment interviews or going out looking for work, et cetera, she has provided services of clothing, makeup, and hair. So, she went to a collection of beauty salons and asked could she use their beauty salons to deliver this service. She has to come to people like myself as volunteers to make up these women on the day of their interviews. And she went to clothing houses and fashion houses to get clothes to donate to these women. And we did a complete makeover, and honestly it was just like night and day. And these women would just walk out with their chest high and feeling very good. And most of them were hired for the jobs that they were going out to look for--working toward the goal of getting off welfare, breaking the cycle of being on welfare, and becoming gainfully employed. I haven't been that active with the organization recently, but it was one of the most rewarding experiences that I've had. Speaker 1: I want to thank you for your work, your seminal work in black beauty, and behind the scenes at Ebony and Essence with our fantastic stars, and the creation of your how to books. We really appreciate that work, and we really appreciate you speaking with us. Speaker 2: Well, I look forward to seeing myself on the video (laughter). Story_ID: 545488 Speaker 1: This is my Grandmother Weatherford [Fornay's maternal grandmother, Erma Pitchford Weatherford]. Her maiden name was Pitchford. And I say that because she was so proud of these -ford names. We all know that they were slave names, but she was very proud of them. She was born in the 1900s, but this photograph was taken in the '30s [1930s]. And it was one of her first photographs that she had made for the family, I'm told. But I just love it because of her hairstyle and the fact that she wore powder and she had a little lip color on. And you can imagine during those days that nothing was made for them, but she made herself up for this photograph. But this was one of her casual photographs, and she always dressed up for these kinds of occasions, meaning church and weddings, et cetera. But we loved her as she is. She's part Cherokee Indian [Native American] and African American, and she was proud of both of those heritages. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is my mother. I love my mother, and my sisters, we love her too, because she sacrificed her life for us in so many ways. But she never neglected her health and her beauty and the way she presented herself. There were standards, and those values and principles we have inherited and cherished. Because people in the community looked up to my mother for advice. At the church, no decision was made until my mother made decisions with or for them. Her name is Marguerite Weatherford Fornay, and she spelled her name M-A-R-G-U-E-R-I-T-E. That was a given; you had to call her Marguerite. And we would tease her a lot and call her Marge and all kinds of nicknames, but she was proud of those names. A wonderful lady who lived a full life, and we're very proud of her. Speaker 2: Next, please. Speaker 1: If anyone thought they were cool, this man thought he was cool. This is my father. This is Alfred, Sr. [Alfred Fornay], and he really thought he was sharp. And I have to give it to him. For a man who came from nine brothers and sisters who had no real training educationally or whatever, he knew how to put himself together. And of course, he got most of the cues from the people he worked for. But I have to give it to him. When it came to a suit and shoes and coat and hat, he wore them well, and we were very proud of him. He was a ladies' man. Women would just gravitate to him anywhere we would go, and he ate it up. And of course, my mother hated it. But we loved him as a father, and this is his presentation in this photo. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Well, this is my life. This is my family and my best friends. These ladies are my sisters. And to the far left is Elizabeth [Elizabeth Fornay Wilburn], and in the center is Beverly English [Beverly Fornay English]. And Elizabeth's last name is Wilburn. It's Elizabeth Wilburn and Beverly English. Both reside in Cincinnati, Ohio now, but they're my best friends, and have been very supportive of what I do from day one. Every manuscript, every article, everything that I've done, they've read first, and they would give me the feedback. And then I felt confident about making my presentations at the Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], Park Avenue and Madison Avenue companies [New York, New York] that I've worked for. And usually they were right, in terms of opinions about black women and how far to go, and if more was needed. Very gracious women, very feminine women who have raised families and nurtured their children. We broke the cycle. We were the first in our generation to go to college and now we're raising nieces and nephews and their families who will be college graduates, and hopefully that cycle will continue to grow. But again, these are my best friends. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Obviously, this is a younger photograph of myself, I had more hair. And this is Marcia Tenior [ph.]. She has since gotten married and is raising a family. But she was one of the models that Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] would use in their promotion for the Polished Ambers collection. And this was one of those advertisements that was sent out to all the different magazines and newspapers for publicity. And she's wearing the Revlon Polished Ambers collection at the time. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm very proud of this cover. This was one of the first beauty covers that was produced for Ebony magazine in February, 1977. This is Von Gretchen Shepard, one of the dark skinned beauties that I fell in love with and was able to persuade them to use her on the cover. She's also a former Ebony Fashion Fair model, and did some work for Fashion Fair cosmetics. And as you can see, the makeup was appropriately applied for her type of skin, and that was part of the article theme in February of 1977. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: Well, this is Alfred, Jr. [HistoryMaker Alfred Richard Fornay], obviously as a toddler. This was taken in Cincinnati, Ohio in the community that we called Avondale, affectionately called (pronunciation) Avondale (laughter). And this was one of many photographs I'm told that was taken by a well known photographer in the community, and one that the family cherishes. This is from my sister's archives. She kept this, and plans to make copies for the rest of the family. But this is me at a younger age. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is a promotion piece for Clairol [Clairol, Inc.]. Again, the publicity department had a model set for us who actually was an employee for the company, and has married a very wealthy doctor now and lives very well. But she was supposed to be an example of the middle class woman in casual attire, and the emphasis of course is on good grooming for your hair. And I think this was one of the Vitapointe advertisements for Clairol. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: This was one of the first seminars for hair grooming and hair health maintenance conducted at Clairol out of the hair color institute. You can see the old film machine in the back. And note those Afros. Practically every person in the room has a healthy head of Afro. And at that time, you really had to condition that type of hairdo in order for it to stay healthy and radiant. But this was one of the first seminars. And please note how thin I was in that photograph (laughter). Speaker 2: Next, please. Speaker 1: This is a celebration awards ceremony that we were attending here. And to your far right is Iman, the model, who I had just been introduced to, who Revlon had hired as the spokesperson for Polished Ambers collection, a line for ethnic women and women of color. And I had the privilege to make her up for those promotions and for numerous covers for magazines. So, this was a time of celebration. And most of the people in the photograph were staff people from Revlon, and publicity people who were there attending the awards ceremony. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is another seminar for Clairol, and here we're talking about hair coloring for the Afro. At the time, no one really wanted to wear brighter colors. That has since changed, obviously. But we had a collection of colors, if I remember correctly, called the beautiful browns. And there were colors that had auburn and there were some colors in the berry families that were being introduced to women who wanted to just bring highlight to the Afro and a little healthy sheen. And this was used either by a permanent hair color or just those who wanted temporary coloring, which we call the hair color rinse. Story_ID: 545489 Speaker 1: This is a creative photographer, because it looks like I, I have a twin. But I'm looking in a mirror there holding a product. And I was doing a test for possibly a commercial which never panned out. But there was an agency, an in house agency that was trying to groom me for possibly doing a commercial with one of the Clairol products [Clairol, Inc.]. That's the hairspray product that we had that was being promoted for women of color who had the Afro. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is the best photograph I've ever taken for promotions. Everybody loved this photograph. And there was a photographer that I had shared with you earlier. I made reference to him in terms of the skin color, et cetera (laughter). But he took this photograph, and I think he was trying to prove to me that he was worthy, and worthy he was. I like this photograph, and my mother [Marguerite Weatherford Fornay] loved it. And I'm wearing makeup here, and I say that because I have told men that in photography, the camera takes a photograph and picks up things that the normal naked eye does not see in an ordinary setting. So, it behooves a person who does not have quote, quote flawless, smooth skin to even out the skin tone and bring a smooth texture to the skin for photography. And I was one of the first men to wear a beard in the beauty industry. And so I had to quote, unquote, step outside the box because I think I looked best with a beard. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: I'm proud of this photograph, because we actually put this advertising photograph together for a potential advertiser, and got the advertisement. This is an advertisement and editorial that appeared in Ebony Man magazine. So we selected the model, we got the Gingiss formalwear outfit [Gingiss Group, Inc.], and it was an editorial spread in one of our publications and also an advertisement. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is Gail Kendrick, one of the models that I had the privilege to work with, who is now a mother and homemaker. And this is one of the beauty statements that we made in one of the issues of Ebony for spring. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is one of the first articles that I did for one of our fall issues. And my name appeared on the masthead as well as on the article, so this was a high day for me. But it was the first statement that we made for the Fashion Fair cosmetics line, where we hired a hairstylist and made a theme cover story as well as an editorial for the fall statement of color for women who were African American or Afro-Latino. So, I'm very proud of this. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is one of our advertisements for Fashion Fair cosmetics. And we worked with the brand managers in making statements for color each season. And this is one of the collections we call the casino colors that sold very well in the department stores. But this turned out to be a promo piece as well as an advertisement for the Fashion Fair cosmetics line. Speaker 2: Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is what we call a glamor cover. We wanted to make a statement for hairstyles and makeup, and we wanted to be bold with it, and I think we achieved it. And if the newsstands sales were any way to measure success, and it is usually is for those in the circulation business, we did well. This was one of the top sellers in 1983, if I remember, as the cover for Ebony magazine for the fall. This was for September, and I'm very proud of this. And by the way, my cousin, Byron [ph.], who is also a makeup artist, did the makeup on this. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: I'm proud of this cover, too. This is one of the first covers that I had control over in terms of the color of her skin and the kind of look that I wanted. I didn't want hair fighting the makeup. And we kept it very plain and simple, and it was a successful entry into the market. This was the how to addition of the guide that we put together for African American women on skin care and makeup. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: This is an early prototype of the magazine of my dreams, to launch sometime in the future. But at the time we were calling it Posh, and we thought that was the ultimate word to use for the collection that we wanted to bring out in the magazine industry. However, a legal glitch arose from our attorney, who told us that there was a magazine called Posh in the nautical industry, and they did not want us to use it, even though it was a commercial magazine, and they were willing to take us to court. So we had no money, so we acquiesced and they have the title (laughter). Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: Yes. Well, enter Luxe Living magazine. This is the prototype that we have come up with and consider to be the title of the publication that we would like to launch in the future. And it is a publication for discerning middle class, upper income black women and men. And we will deal with fashion, beauty, travel, food, home decor, decorating, outdoor landscaping, backyard barbecue, but definitely upscale, and even those people who are notable people in the church who live well very well. A lot of people think these people are just getting by. But a lot of them are wealthy people, and we would like to cater to them as well. Speaker 2: Next. Speaker 1: These are my nieces, and I live for them. If you notice any of my books, I always put credit and acknowledgement to my nieces. And I have a nephew, Troy [ph.], who is older. But I want them to see their uncle in high achievements, because we expect them to achieve. And we want them to live a healthy, happy, prosperous life, and hopefully we as adults are fine examples for them. But these are three of the seven nieces that I have...