 Story_ID: 656466 Speaker 1: --My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer. And Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us. Speaker 2: I'm Shelley Fisher, Jr. [HistoryMaker Shelley Fisher], S-H-E-L-L-E-Y, F-I-S-H-E-R, Jr. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I don't use the Jr. anymore though. Speaker 1: Okay. Can we have your birthdate? Speaker 2: April 6th, 1942. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: Today is November 23, 2013. Speaker 1: And I'd like to have our location. Speaker 2: We're in the MGM Mirage casino [The Mirage] in Las Vegas [Nevada]. Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a songwriter, entertainer, actor, educator, and motivational speaker. Story_ID: 656467 Speaker 1: And I'd like to ask five People magazine-ish questions, short answers. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, oatmeal. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's Matthew [Matthew Hickey]. (Laughter) He was just talking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll tell you why later (laughter). Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Sardinia. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Speaking Swedish) Om du vill har de mor duma first see a--om du--om du har im du ya har mor dottern du must forst see har pa mor. Speaker 1: Can you translate that to us? Speaker 2: If you really want to look at the daughter, first look at her mother. Speaker 1: Oh, at the daughter. First, look at the, that is true-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when people say that. You know, it's interesting 'cause you said red, and red is behind you. So that's sort of nice (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that's one of my favorite sayings, that one and try harder. Story_ID: 656468 Speaker 1: So, let's start. I'd like to have you--let's talk about your family. So I'm gonna start with your father. And since you're a junior, and I'd like you to tell me what you know about him, including his date or year or birth and his background, where he was born. Speaker 2: My dad, Reverend Shelley Fisher, Sr., was born in July 4th, 1919, in Starkville, Mississippi, to Icybell Fisher [Icybell Hemphill Fisher], a single mother. That's (unclear) it. Speaker 1: So can you tell me what you know of his background more than that, if you, if you do know, if he talked about it? Speaker 2: My, my dad was a high school graduate. On my birth certificate, his listed occupation was odd jobs. I didn't meet dad until I was about two years old 'cause he was in the Philippines fighting a war [World War II, WWII]. And, and so, in the meantime, my mom [Martha Ann Robinson Fisher] had died, but we'll talk about--but my first memories of dad I was sitting on the floor waiting everybody was talking about, "Shelley's coming home." Shelley Fisher, Sr. And I remember looking up at this tall man in this uniform. And he picked me up, and that's, that's my first memories of him. Speaker 1: So he was a pastor or a minister of what, what congregation or what-- Speaker 2: He was a Baptist minister. Speaker 1: Baptist. Speaker 2: He was a Baptist minister, and my dad was also a 33rd degree Mason. He was grandmaster of the St. John's Lodge, St. John's Lodge [Most Worshipful St. John's Grand Lodge] in Chicago [Illinois]. He was the first black man to be hired at Westinghouse [Westinghouse Electric Corporation] other than a janitor, 'cause he was very skilled with electronics. And yeah that's-- Speaker 1: So do you know any, what about his family? You much--know much about his family at all? Speaker 2: My grandmother, Icybell, my paternal grandmother, that I said, she was a teenage mom. I had an uncle after, after my dad, Uncle Johnny [ph.]. I don't think they were full brothers. My grandmother, when she was about sixteen, she married an older, much older man whose name was Silas [Silas Fisher], who was the, I wanna say, grandson, certainly grandson, doesn't go back farther, of a slave. And of course, in those days when the, when a man took a, took a young woman with children, they took his name. And that's as far as I can trace Fisher back. I was somewhere. I remember asking, the, the question came up, you know as they always did, they don't talk about those things unless you have to. But the question came up, and I, I got some knowledge of, that my granddad might have been a dentist in St. Louis [Missouri] named Bouvier [ph.], but I don't have any documentation of that. Speaker 1: So, so that, that part of the family tree is sort of-- Speaker 2: On my father's side, yes. Speaker 1: --is, is, is, it's (unclear) that happens. Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter). Story_ID: 656469 Speaker 1: Now on your mother, can you give me her name? Speaker 2: My mom was Martha Ann Robinson [Martha Ann Robinson Fisher] was her maiden name. She and my dad [Shelley Fisher, Sr.] were married. On my birth certificate she's listed as housewife. Her father was a preacher, Baptist preacher, named George O. Robinson [George Robinson], G.O Robinson. And my maternal, maternal grandmother was Mariah Robinson. I had an aunt with me, on my mother's side, Aunt Atlene [Atlene Robinson]. And an uncle, her brother, was named Major Robinson, who was also a minister in Chicago [Illinois]. I haven't heard from him in a while. He might not be on this side anymore. But he had a nice congregation on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] for, for a while. Story_ID: 656470 Speaker 1: So you come from a strong Baptist tradition then, on both sides, was there bap- Speaker 2: Conflict--my [paternal] grandmother was a holy roller, Bible carrying, Aunt Esther, what can I say? Yeah, every day you read the Bible. And our--you know, that, I knew so much about the Bible by the time I was ten years old, I could teach it. Granddad, granddad-- Speaker 1: On your mother's [Martha Ann Robinson Fisher] side? Speaker 2: On my, on my, on my dad's [Shelley Fisher, Sr.] side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is, this is on my dad, yeah. Icybell [Icybell Hemphill Fisher] was the-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --is--on my dad--on my, my grandfather [Fisher's paternal step-grandfather], the Silas Fisher, the man who took--changed his name in the family, may- the patriarch, he didn't believe in too much. But to keep grandma, you know, quiet, he joined the Baptist church. It didn't last too long, because granddad had--the, the minister came one month and said, "All right, brothers and sisters, the roof is leaking. We've got to fix this roof; next, next congrege- not--next month, when it come, I want you men to bring me ten dollars; you sisters bring me five dollars; and you chillen save some of that candy money for the Lord." Now ten dollars was a lot of money, talk about two hundred dollars--two dollars a bale for a hundred pound of cotton. Anyway, he came; he gave him the money. He came back the next month in a brand new Chevrolet. The roof still wasn't fixed, and my granddad cussed him out. And they throw my granddad out of the church (laughter) and wasn't even allowed to be buried in Baptist cemetery. Speaker 1: He was like, he's not buying a, a brand new car. Speaker 2: Yeah. And he called him every name (laughter) he could think of. And you know, and the, and several people must said well, yeah. Then you had the other ones who was, who, "How could you talk to the preacher like that?" You know, but that was, that's how that balanced. But my father wanted to please my mom, so that's why he became a preacher. Story_ID: 656471 Speaker 1: So you're mother's side though, that was Baptist preacher (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was--they were Baptist pre- but preachers' daughters marry preachers' sons-- Speaker 1: Right. So-- Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: --so what, what year was your mother [Martha Ann Robinson Fisher] born? Speaker 2: I want to say 1921. Speaker 1: So there was--and you said your father [Shelley Fisher, Sr.] was 19-- Speaker 2: Nineteen [1919]. Speaker 1: --nineteen [1919], so two years' difference. Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: So now, what, what can you tell me about your mother? Speaker 2: Mom was mom. Mom had a--well, I had a stepbrother before I was born, so his name was Robert Lee Smith, who was, who was, who was born out of wedlock. And I think when I came along, it was either you'd get out of this house or you, you married (unclear) with black people, African American people, we have strong ethics. And a daughter to, to come home once pregnant was okay, but when you come home twice, that ain't gonna wash. So, they got married. My mom died two months after I was born, mostly from neglect, probably something now, probably--an infection that a prescription would have cleared up. But I never, so I never knew my mom. And I, I'm write--my book is called 'A Motherless Child' [Shelley Fisher] because a person that doesn't know mother, a mother's love is--you got a hard row to hoe. And, but, so, when she passed, it was decided that my paternal--my dad's mom [Icybell Hemphill Fisher] would raise me. So they brought me up from Clarksdale, Mississippi, where I'm born, to Crenshaw [Mississippi], about thirty-six miles north. Story_ID: 656472 Speaker 1: Oh, to Crenshaw, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and so, so you were raised by your, your father's [Shelley Fisher, Sr.]--your grandparents [Icybell Hemphill Fisher and Fisher's paternal step-grandfather, Silas Fisher]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, essentially. Speaker 2: 'Cause dad was in--he was in, in the war [World War II, WWII]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --mom [Martha Ann Robinson Fisher] was gone. So the, and the other parents, my mother's father [George Robinson], was a very mean man. He had a, he had a--he used to beat his son [Major Robinson] with a horsewhip. He, he was a--family of beaters, you know. It was decided that I was--you know, they didn't want, they didn't want that. You know, I'm skinny; I'm--because my mother had nursed me while she was ill. Speaker 1: She had or had not? She had not? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: She had or had not? Speaker 2: She did, 'cause there was, there was no food (unclear) you're gonna--she's, you know, so she nursed me, 'cause (unclear) I think it built up a lot of antibodies in my body, 'cause I've had, been blessed with health, no health issues (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so what is--tell me--so you're growing up in your grandparents' home. So tell me what life was like. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I was raised as a girl until I was five years old. Nobody in the Fisher--in Crenshaw, Mississippi, population three hundred maybe, knew that the Fishers' little girl was a, was a, was a male child until I went to, for, to start to school. The children down--I was not allowed to go to the bathrooms with, with other children. Down the road was the Harris girls, Jean [Jean Harris] and Joyce [Joyce Harris]. I was able--I could play with them, but I had to stay--we had to stay in a road where my grandmother could see us. She was a seamstress, the town seamstress. Ah, and this woman could sew. So she'd sit there on the front porch with her Singer sewing machine and keep an eye on me. I was not allowed to go in anybody's house. So the shock that went through Crenshaw, Mississippi, the day that I started school (laughter), and the nurses came around and discovered-- Story_ID: 656473 Speaker 1: So why did she do that? Speaker 2: Grandma [Fisher's paternal grandmother, Icybell Hemphill Fisher] was, was not well. Grandma, and I think she resented having to take care of me. She, her punishments were gross. Speaker 1: Were what? Speaker 2: Were, were, were over the, over the, over the top. Speaker 1: Over the top. Speaker 2: 'Cause you know, in those, in those days, from a family of beaters, you beat, you beat. That's why I made sure I've never hit one of my children [Monique Fisher Calloway, Martha Fisher and William Persson]. And so I was--I remember once, one summer, I was--we were over at Sister Croft's [ph.], one of the other ladies, sisters in the church. And I was playing out in the front yard kicking up dust. And the sisters, they were sitting on the front and quoting scriptures from the Bible. And, and Sister Croft yelled at me, "Sonny," and that was my nickname, "quit kicking up all that dust out there, boy." And I said, "When I get grown, I'm gonna travel. Ain't nobody gonna tell me what to do." I got a--when I got home, I had to go pull them three branches from the weeping willow that stood in front of the--and she'd sit there and she'd plait them and tell me how she was gonna beat the devil out of me. Well, that lasted, I was around six, seven years old, and somebody gave me a puppy. I brought the puppy home, and she made me take that puppy and put him in the stream over by where the, where the railroad track ran and drowned him, some cold stuff for a young, for a developing male. So I started acting out. And one night I was (laughter), Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], I was laying in the bed. The house was quiet and you know, and it wasn't no electricity at that point. The house was quiet. We just put out the light, the lamplight. And I lay in the bed, and I started cussing. I said every bad word, yelled every bad word I could think of, and I wanted them to hear me; I wasn't mumbling--murmuring. And they thought I was crazy (laughter). They were gonna (laughter), they were gonna commit me. But my grandfather [Fisher's paternal step-grandfather, Silas Fisher] stopped her from killing me, I reckon (laughter), 'cause he was, granddad was all right. What I--he, he is my male image. He was a strong old man, could pick cotton. He could do his job. If things got too far, he'd put his foot down. But otherwise, mom had him--grandma had him under his control. But that's, that's sort of, sort of like what, what it was like, and-- Speaker 1: But how was he allowing you to be raised as a girl or dressed like a-- Speaker 2: My grandfather? Speaker 1: --(unclear)? Speaker 2: He condoned it. Speaker 1: And why did he condone it? Speaker 2: She was the boss. And she had--grandfather had another family in town. He had a family. Before he met her, he had a family across town, American Native--Native American lady, long, straight hair, black hair. And but that's, you know, so that's, you had that hush-hush going, you know that-- Speaker 1: And this town is how large? Speaker 2: At the time, Crenshaw [Mississippi] was maybe, maybe three hundred. That's white and black on both sides of the track. Story_ID: 656474 Speaker 1: When they found out you were a gir- I mean a boy--sorry--what, what, do you remember what happened? Speaker 2: I remember I was taken out of--taken back to the principal's office and Mr. Fred Smith [ph.]. There were no phones at the time. And they, they put me in a room, and they was out talking. And the, this nurse, was a white nurse, would come back and she would, she asked me questions. And then finally somebody called--got, got word to my granddad [Fisher's paternal step-grandfather, Silas Fisher]. He was picking cotton over at the Claytons [ph.]. And he came, and they gave him hell. And he took me home, and I stayed out of school for four or five months. That wasn't easy. So they made-- Speaker 1: Now-- Speaker 2: --me pray a lot. Speaker 1: Your par- grandparents? Speaker 2: My grandmother [Icybell Hemphill Fisher]. Speaker 1: How--why did she make you pray a lot? Speaker 2: Well, she was asking me to pray for her. She, she was the one that wanted the forgiveness, but I should do the praying. Speaker 1: So did--you aware that you were viewed as a girl? What was your name then? Speaker 2: Shelley [HistoryMaker Shelley Fisher]. Speaker 1: So Shelley can go either way. Speaker 2: Shelley or, or Shirley. My best buddy--no, one of my best--not my best buddy but my good friend, Ernest Jenkins, in Chicago [Illinois]. Ernest is from Mississippi. Ernest calls me Shirley (laughter). I mean it's just, just, you know, so it's a gender neutral name, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: I still get mail, "Dear Ms. Fisher." Speaker 1: But did you, did you realize what was going on-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --at the time? You didn't? Speaker 2: Not--I didn't--sex, sexuality, I wasn't, I was not sexual. I was a child. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: I didn't discover my sexuality until about--I mean sexuality, you know, by playing doctor, until I played doctor with my cousin. I was about seven years old. Nobody still explained it to me until Stella Mae [ph.] did. Speaker 1: And Stella Mae was who? Speaker 2: Stella Mae was my third--she was my grandmother's sister's daughter, about thirteen years old. And in those--in the South, this front porch is often--what can I say--screen, screen wire to keep the, that mosquitoes and--coming in. Grandma had to go--mama--had to go downtown to the post office for some other business. Stella Mae was there with me. And it started to rain. And as kids do, we started exploring. And, I mean it's, it's child, child exploring, you know. But I remember--I hope I can I just say you did (unclear), but I remember saying, "Stella Mae, I got to pee." And she said, "Go ahead here." (Laughter) (Unclear) from then on I was a man (laughter), or I thought I was. Speaker 1: So she said you're not a girl. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What, what happened? Speaker 2: Who? Who, the-- Speaker 1: No, Stella Mae--you said I have-- Speaker 2: Stella-- Speaker 1: --to pee. Speaker 2: --Stella Mae was my, was my-- Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: --my, my cousin-- Speaker 1: --cousin, right. Speaker 2: --my, my cousin's twice removed. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: So I said--so, so she go ahead and--oh, and I, I don't think it was the ejaculation-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --but it was a release. Speaker 1: Right (laughter), right. Speaker 2: You know what I mean (laughter)? But she said go ahead (laughter). Speaker 1: But you knew you were a male at that point. Speaker 2: By that time, I-- Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, I, yeah, I was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know, I was, I coming around, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and, and I, but I never had--I wasn't acting feminine. At five years old, all the kids act alike. And around about when they're with--if they, if they're gonna be gay, I think that starts to transgress about around twelve, ten, twelve years old. But I don't think any child at five or six years old can say, "I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm bisexual, I'm gay sexual"-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --what have you. I remember my daughter, Martha [Martha Fisher], asking me, while she was taking a shower, and she said, "Papa, can I pee in the shower?" And I said, "Well, it's not nice, Martha." I said, "But if you got to, go ahead." I said, "But you standing up." And she--and I said, "That's, that's--boys pee standing up." She said, "Well, sometimes I feel like a boy." She was three years old. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Did-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --that manifest later with Martha? Speaker 2: No. Martha's cool. Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Martha--children, if you let them grow, if they grow, they, they're just, they, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 656475 Speaker 1: So let me ask you what--if you take yourself back--now you were in--this is not Clarksdale [Mississippi], but it's--what is the name of the? Speaker 2: Crenshaw [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Crenshaw. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were in Crenshaw until what age? Speaker 2: Should be--what that bring me, '40 [1940], '49 [1949]--'til about eight, nine. This, the, the stuff hit the fan when my [paternal] grandmother [Icybell Hemphill Fisher] was chasing me down in the corn field with a shotgun, 'cause was too--she used to wrestle me and threaten to rud- rat poison. This is--and I, I, but I was too strong for her to do that. So she, this day, she said, "I'm gonna, I'm gonna kill you. I'm sending you to the devil." And she got the shotgun, and I took off out the front porch and went down to the corn field and jumped the fence. And that's when I got in touch with my dad [Shelley Fisher, Sr.]. By then, dad had came back from the Philippines. He had married, divorced, and married again. And that family, with his third, and his third wife [Ida Mae Jones Fisher], moved to Chicago [Illinois]. She had--am I going too fast? Am I skipping? She had two sons. And they thought it would be better for me if I was, was in Chicago, you know, to come and get him (laughter), one, one of the, one of those two scenarios. Speaker 1: Do you think your father grew up that way? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, sure. My dad, I love my dad, and my--but he was emotionless. He was emotionless, and he was controlled by his wife. She forgive me for saying it. It was the truth. He died from sorrow. Diabetes didn't--he could have had--he could have took care of the diabetes. He could have--lot of other things, but he didn't care. And he didn't care because he had been beat down mentally, being the only black in the, in, at work, making, what, sixty-five dollars in, at Westinghouse [Westinghouse Electric Corporation], you know. And, and I can say, when we--when I got to Chicago, we wasn't--I wasn't a burden, 'cause me and the--Jesse and James, my two stepbrothers, we either had paper routes, or we were bagging groceries, or washing cars. We were doing something; and we were paying rent from--I think maybe I got away with rent free one year in my (laughter) dad's house. Otherwi- we went to work. Story_ID: 656476 Speaker 1: I'm gonna take you back to Crenshaw [Mississippi]. And can you tell me what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood there? Speaker 2: The cotton gin, that, that, linseed that, that oil in the cotton. The sights--Emmett Till was lynched five miles down the road. There was also another reason--that was Carolina, Mississippi [sic.]. But the sights, the railroad track that run through the center of town, with the Greyhound bus station. Everything was on the white side of town. Blacks were not--unless you worked over there, you're not over there after six o'clock, when sun with down. The theater, African Americans sat upstairs and everybody else downstairs. I remember my grandfather [Fisher's paternal step-grandfather, Silas Fisher] saying, "Yes sir, no sir," to sixteen year old boys. I remember sounds. I wasn't allowed to listen to radio. There was once WDIA [WDIA Radio] in Memphis, Tennessee, was, it was very clear. But I could only hear, listen to Gabriel Heatter, the Jack Benny show ['The Jack Benny Program'], 'Amos 'n' Andy,' and it was another religious--it was a religious show. That, that, that was about sounds, you know. And I had an ear for piano at the time, but I wasn't allowed to take piano, 'cause I was playing (makes sounds), the, the devil's music. And I learned that at school. Somebody taught me. And I played it at church, one, one Sunday (laughter). That was while every--before the services. And so I wasn't--no more piano. And yeah, that's--we didn't go near the juke joints. Speaker 1: But there were juke joints in town? Speaker 2: Juke joints, oh yeah. Even though Mississippi was dry--it was a dry state, no--prohibition--there was always the moonshine and somebody coming down from Memphis, men with a big bottle, big jug. Speaker 1: Do you remember who was on your street? Or was, was it a street? Speaker 2: It was a road. Speaker 1: A road (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was road. I think they got it paved a couple of years after I left. Speaker 1: So who-- Speaker 2: It was a dirt road. Speaker 1: So who, who was on your road? Speaker 2: Well, I could--the camera's not seeing it. Next, on our left, was Ms. Mary Gordon [ph.] and her live in boyfriend, Deek [ph.], Deek--I forget Deek's last name. On the right was Mr. Duffy [ph.]. Mr. Duffy was old widow. And he and granddad used to sit out there and listen to the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers]. Next door to them were the Flowers [ph.], a family name the Flowers. In front of us was just, it was a vacant patch, which was the pick--they planted cotton in the, in, in, in the, in the season. And next to the cotton was the Harris family. Next to them was a man named Jim O'Bryant, who was my granddad's distant cousin. And that was the end of the road. Story_ID: 656477 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, but did you hear--do you remember that as it happened, or is this grownups telling you afterwards? Speaker 2: I remember her pulling up my dress. I remember the shock and the gossip. I remember feeling ashamed. And then after they had me pray, I was okay. Speaker 1: So what was the gossip, if you remember? Speaker 2: That, that I wasn't a boy--that I wasn't a girl; I was a boy. That spreads fast. Speaker 1: Did you ever hear any people talking about your [paternal] grandmother [Icybell Hemphill Fisher]? Speaker 2: You mean behind her back? You mean-- Speaker 1: Or just anything. Speaker 2: (Unclear) Not really, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], she--people--all the women in town came to her, white and black, not all of them, but she was a seamstress. She could look at a Sears, Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], Spiegel [Spiegel Inc.], a, a catalog, take your measurements, and make you that dress in, in a week and a half. Speaker 1: So she was very talented (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Clever, very. And I learned how to hem. I would hem and sew the buttons on. Speaker 1: So it was, it was a, a hard childhood then there? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So did--who are you playing with? Speaker 2: When, when in-- Speaker 1: When were--seven--I mean you said a-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --(unclear)-- Speaker 2: --I get--until I--after--before-- Speaker 1: In Crenshaw [Mississippi]. Speaker 2: --before the-- Speaker 1: I'm talking Crenshaw. Speaker 2: --the, the two Harris girls [Jean Harris and Joyce Harris] down the road. Speaker 1: That's it? Okay, okay. So when you go, you--she takes the shotgun, and you go running. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Then what? She catches you or-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, no, grandma, grandma was 1904, um-hm, she wasn't gonna catch me (laughter). I'm running for my life. Speaker 1: And so what, what happened after that then? How did you end up getting to Chicago [Illinois]? Your fa-- Speaker 2: Father. Speaker 1: Was your father still in town? Speaker 2: No, no. He was, he was in Chicago. No, I ran to, I ran to sister--not Ms. Gordon's [ph.] house, sister, Ms. Genie's [ph.]. Ms. Genie was, and her sister, forget her sister's name, but I ran to their house. And they sit me down, and they, 'cause they knew the whole story. And then they walked me back home, and they talked to her. Speaker 1: What did they say to her? Do you know? Speaker 2: I don't know. I was, you know--that they talked. They'd--'cause when they left, it was already, she had made up her mind. See, I think she had made up her mind before then that I was gonna go to Chicago. But, but once they left, that's when she, you know, said, "Well, we're gonna, we're gonna get in touch with Shelley [Shelley Fisher, Sr.]," my father, "tomorrow, 'cause you gonna make me kill you." And I believed her. Speaker 1: Were you--did you think you were, you were acting out or mischievous, or she--were you both acting out, or you think she was just naturally not well and somewhat abusive? Speaker 2: Well, I think, no, she was not well. She was, she had some things in the head. I mean it's not natural for a, for a grandmother to want her grandson to suck her breast. It's easy for me to talk 'cause I've been through a couple of psychiatrists about this mess. So that's why I can--but that's not-- Speaker 1: You (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) nat- that's not natural though. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And she was angry, and she hid behind a lot of it by being in church, Church of God in Christ. They didn't believe in the--they didn't--I never went to a doc- I didn't go to a doctor 'til I--in fact, we ain't got to Chicago. That's another story. I got to Chicago, I never went to a dentist or a doctor 'til I was sixteen years old, when I went in the [U.S.] Air Force. And I had two bilateral inguinal hernias from birth. I mean from, you know, because I'd been extremely constipated as a, as an infant. I, my, in--my intestine, my wall had burst, and I--and so until I was a teenager, I was--that gangbanger on the West Side of Chicago pushing my, my hernias back in, 'til I went in the Air Force, and they fixed them. It was a rough childhood. Speaker 1: It's a rough childhood. Speaker 2: Um-hm, that was not, you know, you don't just--if a tooth got, got a cavity or whatever, (gesture) (makes sound). Story_ID: 656478 Speaker 1: Well, there was no love is what you're saying in the childhood. Speaker 2: There was no love. I, I asked my dad [Shelley Fisher, Sr.] that, where, just, not, not too long, I was asked this here--I was in, in Chicago [Illinois] on vacation from Europe. And I wanted--and something had been bothering me. And we were down in the basement, and I asked him, "Dad, why nobody ever--why we never say I love you?" And he said, "Well, we do the best we can." Was that [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou who said, "If they knew better, they'd do better"? Speaker 1: It's true. Well, life was hard too. Speaker 2: Yeah, life was--yeah, for, for him and-- Speaker 1: It was hard. Speaker 2: --and he had a lot of things on his plate. He had a lot, had a lot of things on his plate. He was not happy. Unless you're happy with your- yourself, it's very difficult to say I love you to someone else. Speaker 1: Right, that's right. So you came to Chicago. You're eight? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: So this is like 1950, 1940-- Speaker 2: School days, I'm assuming they're 1949, '50 [1950], yeah. I remember that ride. We took--we had to go from Crenshaw [Mississippi] 'cause they--the Illinois Central Railroad had stopped the trains and from going through Crenshaw. The trains used to--that used to be my best friend, the cow I used to graze. I'd take her to graze her by the railroad track. And the black engineer would ride by on the train. We'd wave. And Flossy was my best friend. I could talk to Flossy. See, she understood. And the railroad man, he had, he, he was going somewhere where I wanted to go. He was headed dead up north to Chicago, Illinois Central. But the train had stopped on that--so that long Sunday ride we took from Crenshaw over to Batesville [Mississippi], where the train-- Speaker 1: Who took, who took the ride? Speaker 2: My [paternal] grandmother [Icybell Hemphill Fisher], my grandfather [Fisher's paternal step-grandfather, Silas Fisher], and the man who drove us in his pickup, in this--. No, it was a Buick, Mr. Singletary [ph.]. You know, and I had my suitcase and a bag of fried chicken and whatever else in there, very quiet ride. Now--I had, I had picked cotton. I'm--there was no Santa Claus in my, in, in my, in, in my grandparents' home. When I look through that Spiegel catalog [Spiegel Inc.] and I saw that pretty red bike, she said, "Well, if you want it, you're gonna have to go out there and pick cotton." Me and granddaddy went out. I remember--took--he looked, surveyed the rows took--looked at the two thick rows, looked at the other one, said, "Now you take that one, Sonny." And he gave me a piece of philosophy. He said, "Now, pick, you pick hard in the, in the morning so you don't have to work so hard in the afternoon." That's philosophy. We work real hard when we're young so hopefully we don't have to, uh. Now and later I've learned it too. Anyway, so, where were we? Speaker 1: We were on the ride-- Speaker 2: On the ride to Chicago, so-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --we wait at train. Seemed like it would never come. And I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm wait- I'm, I want it to hurry up and come, and in a way I didn't want it to come, 'cause this woman had saved my life. And even though I couldn't, didn't analyze it or, or process it that way, that was the closest thing to mother's love that I had ever known. So the train came, everybody crying tears and, and the hugs, and, "You be a good boy up there, boy." And on to Chicago. Landed train--12th and Roosevelt Road [Central Station, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter). Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: No, Roosevelt Road--12th Street is Roose- Roosevelt and Michigan Avenue, yeah. Speaker 1: That's, that's right. That's where everyone came in at. Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, on the Illinois Central train is--I wanna say--was it the City of New Orleans going backwards? But it was the same train. Speaker 1: Right. I think it is the City of New Orleans. Speaker 2: City of New Orl- yeah, going both, both ways. Yeah, that was it. Story_ID: 656479 Speaker 1: So you, you get there. And is your, is your father there t- and your stepbrothers there to meet you? Speaker 2: Yes, they were all there. They were, yeah, all there. Speaker 1: So what was life like then? What did it become? Speaker 2: It was just heaven those first couple of months. Then Christmas came, and you remember, I was--there's no Santa Claus. Well, my stepmom [Ida Mae Jones Fisher] and my stepdad [sic.] had been providing Christmas for my stepbrothers, right, and here I come along (laughter), revealing the truth. "What you talking about ain't no Santa Claus?" I said, "Come on." We went down in the basement, and I showed them their toys. Mama, mo'dear and dad, Shelley [Shelley Fisher, Sr.], came home. "Mama, mo'dear, Shelley [HistoryMaker Shelley Fisher] say ain't no Santa Claus, and he showed our presents." And they kicked my butt. And my question was to them was: if you want me to tell the truth, then don't ask me to lie. And that made him even worse, 'cause I pissed him off. I'm too smart. And my father was a beater. He'd beat you with the--he'd take the ironing cord, or electric, you know, the extension cord, or his belt. And he, he had a lot to be angry about. And as time grew on, I said I've, you know--in my--Mississippi, I was a straight A student. I got to Chicago [Illinois] and everything just fell out the bottom. I got mannish. There was no supervision 'cause dad was working nights. He was working at Westinghouse [Westinghouse Electric Corporation] double shifts and nights so he wasn't around to supervise, so we got mannish. Speaker 1: You got what? Speaker 2: Mannish. Speaker 1: Mannish. Speaker 2: Mannish. Speaker 1: Oh, man- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, you heard that word-- Speaker 1: Yeah, so you-- Speaker 2: --mannish. Speaker 1: --became a young man, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, out of control. And-- Speaker 1: Is it you and your stepbrothers or just you? Speaker 2: Well, Jesse, my, the--James was the oldest. He's born in '41 [1941]. And my other stepbrother, Jesse, we're only two months apart, so we hung closer. James was the, James was gonna be a boxer. He was--had the mentality and the, and the stamina for it. So Jesse and, Jesse and I were getting in trouble, and James was the one that supposed to keep us in line, but we were smarter than he was (laughter), so. So your question, I'm getting, having a-- Speaker 1: No, no, I was asking--I--well, we were talk--you said you were getting mannish. Speaker 2: Mannish, yeah. We got caught ditching school with some--we lived in the second--first floor rear. You know those six story, six flat buildings on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], fifteen--and we lived on the first floor rear. And we seducted some girls into the--let's see, about four boys and four girls. And my aunty, the landlord upstairs, second floor front, heard it, called my father at work, and he came home. I got the latch on the door. The man can't get in his own house (laughter). I got the latch on the door, so he went back downstairs and waited for the other kids to run out and go. They all, everybody's scrambling and going on. And he came in on me. And this man, I've never seen anybody so angry. He started kicking my, my butt (laughter). I drove--dove through a plate glass window like, like a stuntman. I didn't--just a few scratches. And he wanted to beat me some more, and I looked up, I looked him dead in the eye and said, "Don't hit me no more." And he went like, if I'd said it to a ten year old--somebody--(unclear). He let me--I, I saw a weakness. Because by that time, I was, I was starting to get into gangs. Story_ID: 656480 Speaker 1: So you were how old at that point? Speaker 2: (Pause) Twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wanna say twelve. Speaker 1: Now which--where were you living? What was your address? Speaker 2: Fif- you want--1509 South Millard [Avenue] 60623, Lawndale [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, I thought you said you were on the West Side. Speaker 2: That is on the West Side-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: 15th [Street] and Lawndale [Avenue]-- Speaker 1: Yes, okay, that's true. Speaker 2: --you can't get any more west. Speaker 1: No, that is true, okay, southwest, okay. Speaker 2: Now that's-- Speaker 1: Oh no, the West Side. Speaker 2: That's West Side. Speaker 1: That is West Side. That's right. Speaker 2: That's, that's K-Town [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois] and-- Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: --and Lawndale-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and Douglas Park [Chicago, Illinois] and-- Speaker 1: That's right. So you got in, you started getting into the gangs. What gangs? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Clovers [14th Street Clovers]. Speaker 1: Clovers. They say those gangs now are, don't even compare to what we got now. Speaker 2: No. With the Clovers, we--I was skinny and still had the, the hernia. I'm, I'm playing baseball and basketball growing up and without regard for these, but I was smart enough to, to not get in--try not to get into too many fights. I had my, my share, but you know. And I was a war counselor. In another words, if you gonna fight the Chaplains [Imperial Chaplains] or the King--the Cobras [Egyptian Cobras; Mickey Cobras] on the, or the boys on the, across Pulaski [Road]. Anyway, we had the meeting about it, and I would have the final say of where we're gonna fight, when we're gonna fight. I was the war counselor. I was the secretary of defense of called the Colin chaplain of Lawndale (laughter), Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] of Lawndale (laughter). And it was rough. We, we had, we fought more--we fought mostly fists and chains. Then, by the time I got wise enough, Ernie Jenkins [Ernest Jenkins] pulled my coat. They--we were in the--we had a few zip guns. And there had been some horrible beatings, some, Chicago Sun-Times ran an expose on us. By this time I'm sixteen, going on sixteen. Let me know if I'm going--you wanna (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, I'm just-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --I'm, I'm thinking 1958. Okay, go on. Speaker 2: Yeah, this, yeah, so, a friend--I won't mention his name, said, "Shelley [HistoryMaker Shelley Fisher], you're gonna get killed, or you're going to jail." He said, "You got too much on the ball. You've got, you, you know, you can be anything you want to be. Why you out here." He said--and there was a photography class. And they showed me how to change my two to a one, '41 [1941] to--and I went in the [U.S.] Air Force, passed the physical exam with my--when they say turn your head, I went, you know. I controlled them. And, and that's, that's what saved me. Speaker 1: Going into the service? Speaker 2: Going into the service, 'cause I was, ooh, I was headed for--I, I had, I, I, I was lost. Looking back, I was lo- I was--I didn't--it didn't, nothing mattered. Only thing that matter when--was fun on the, on--we got out and sing under the streetlights, the harmony, you know, under the streetlights or in the hallways, where the echo is nice. That was fun. That was good. I was getting attention. Speaker 1: Did you have a voice then? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I had a voice, but I had no discipline. Story_ID: 656481 Speaker 1: So who were the, the, who, who were you listening to, or who did--who were you trying to emulate? Speaker 2: (Singing), "Earth angel" ['Earth Angel'], Dee Clark, Martha--Louis Jordan, Ray Charles. I think Jerry, Jerry was just kicking, [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler was just starting to kick off too. Lou Rawls hadn't come a long yet--had all--but, when I first got and started to really get serious about music, Sinatra [Frank Sinatra] was my favorite. Speaker 1: But that, was that at that age? No. Speaker 2: No. That was after-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --I'd gone in the [U.S. military] service, had came back and decided that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --this is what-- Speaker 1: So, let me ask you about the gangs. Ha- I mean, what were you guy--or were you in school at all during this time? No. Speaker 2: (Unclear), I'd go to school to meet the guys and (laughter) you know. But I was not a good student. Speaker 1: So who were, who were the--how would you spend your days? And you know, how were the, the gangs broken up? And you know, who--you know, you said you were in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Clovers [14th Street Clovers]. Speaker 1: The what? Speaker 2: Clovers. Speaker 1: Clovers. Sounds pretty innocent. So you--so, what, what was, what, what were you doing? I mean what was your territories? Were you divided by territory? Speaker 2: Ah yes. Our terri- Clovers territory was from--well, African Americans wasn't much further north than I would say Harrison [Street] on the north to Cermak [Road] on the south. Clovers, we ended at Central Park [Avenue] on the east to Pulaski Road on the west. That's, and in that area was the BBR, the Boys' Brotherhood Republic, [HistoryMaker] Warner Saunders and some of those people who did great jobs of--that was our place to come, and those who did want to help us could keep an eye on us. Speaker 1: So did you participate at all at the Better Boys Foundation [BBF Family Services, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. That's where we went to play ball, ba- basketball and you know. That was our office, I mean (laughter) you might say. That was our office. That's where decisions was made and out on the schoolyard. Speaker 1: So when gangs--so what were you fighting at, or at what time? And you were beat--you said you were mainly--you, you didn't have--you didn't use knives as much, right? Speaker 2: There were some knives used, there were knives used. Speaker 1: But what is-- Speaker 2: But most, but most them was, was 'cause some guy got in some argument with somebody's sister over in the other gang or somebody wanted to be initiated, and so they would choose the weak, the weakest one, and they'd pick a fight with him. But most of the time it was about girls. Speaker 1: So were there girl gangs too? Speaker 2: Um-hm, the Cloverettes [ph.]. Speaker 1: Cloverettes, okay. Speaker 2: And when we would, would, would be going on our way to the, to the, to say down--do you know 16th Street very well? Speaker 1: I know 16th Street, not on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. I know 16th Street. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, when we would be going our way to fight the gang, fight the gang over in Franklin Park [Chicago, Illinois] or whatever, the streets were clear. And the girls would be on that side, and--and the Cloverette--Clovers would be on that side, would be. And to fuel ourselves up, we drank a pint of Silver Satin, with a pack of Kool-Aid in it, and drink it. I mean (demonstrates), and the fire would rise. And you were not, you, you're the baddest on the street then. And there we would go; we would fight through our, you know, with the fists, with the chains, 'til somebody won. And we--that fight was over. Speaker 1: Now you-- Speaker 2: Sel-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Seldom did anybody get killed. I don't remember anybody getting killed. We never lost one, one person in Clovers or, or in, in the Imperial Chaplains. That's, those were the, you know. Speaker 1: So, did you have, did you have ways of communicating with each other? Had it gotten developed into that? Speaker 2: The gangs? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No gang signs-- Speaker 2: Those were--the other girls--the girls would run a, would run a message if there was, if there was a--but we had to meet, for instance, we had to, in--I was Farragut [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] at that time. We had to meet at Central Park and 16th to go to school, 'cause you couldn't go to school by yourself knowing that you came from that side of the block. So it was our family. It was our security. Many of us, it was our family. We certainly related more to each other than, you know, than we could with our parents. Story_ID: 656482 Speaker 1: Did you--what is the, the worst fight or situation that you got involved with? You said some things were pretty bad or brutal. You said that. Speaker 2: The worst fight that I ever have ever gotten into or that I would see? Speaker 1: Both. Speaker 2: Worst fight that I have ever gotten was, I've gotten into was a kid named Zeke [ph.]. He was in the Imperial Chaplains, and he was mean. This boy, I don't know what his issue, but it was double--he was, he was certainly mean. And he wanted my behind, for whatever reason. I don't, I don't remember ever having any ca- conflict over a girl or anything. And he got the best of me. And he had my head down, and he was banging my brains out. I mean, you know, on concrete. And finally said, I said, "I give, I give." That was the worst. That was the, that was the only fight I ever got whipped in, 'cause I, I was pretty good. We--I was the el- the freight elevator operator at the Midwest boxing gym [Midwest Gym], where Ray Robinson [Sugar Ray Robinson], Kid Gavilan, Bobby--trained, and as a result, I got free training. And my brother, my stepbrother being a boxer, that's where he trained at. So I, and I got fifteen dollars a week, and I could use the gym. So I knew how to hit, and I knew how to ta- take care of myself, but I still had these afflictions. And I knew if I got kicked in my groin area, (makes sound), that, that, might be it Speaker 1: But you didn't know that you had those afflictions. Speaker 2: Yes, I did. Speaker 1: Oh, you did? Speaker 2: Of course. These things were like eggs, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --on both side of my scrotum, just above the scrotum. And when you--and there's a hole inside your, your, your, your stomach lining. And when you relax that, the, your intestines go through that hole, and you push them back in. I had two of them. Story_ID: 656483 Speaker 1: Who are you--is there anyone on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], either politicians or someone who may have been on the other side of the law that you're sort of looking up to or you hear about? Speaker 2: That was on the other side of the law. Speaker 1: You know. Well, you know, I--what was his name? But I think he was on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], Two-Gun Pete [Sylvester Washington]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he's a cop out on-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --35th Street. Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right. Speaker 2: No, we didn't. I had--when there was no policemen--that I really looked up to because I didn't--we didn't allow ourselves to get to know them. Speaker 1: No, but I meant if you--was there anyone like on the criminal side that you, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, there was a--I wanna say now this is, this was just before I was, went in the [U.S.] Air Force. Okay, he's gone now, so I can tell his name. His name is Bartell, Bartell Keithley. He was an old south--old guy from the South Side. I guess Bartell must have been in his late fifties then. And he'd come over to the West Side and pick up a couple of us, and we'd go rob. And the biggest robbery (laughter)--I was--we robbed a policy wheel over on, it was out 55th [Street] down, it was down in a basement. And my, my, the buddy, guy who was work--was robbing with me was named Shorty. And Shorty later died from cancer of the throat I think, but he had a (demonstrates)--he had one (demonstrates) at certain times he was nervous or whatever, he'd go (demonstrates), and then his eyes would bug out. And--'cause he was a butt of a few jokes. But, so Shorty and I, I got the pistol; Shorty got the shotgun. We cased the place. There was, the policy where they turned in the money was down in the basement. Then there was a fence, a chain, chain link fence, into a yard, and there was the other side of the fence. And Bartell was gonna be waiting for us on the street on the other side of that--so we go in. We (makes sound), sli- slap a few people upside the head, and we get the money. I jump over the fence first. Now, keep--Shorty is about 5'6" (laughter). I jump over the fence. I make it to the other side and over, and Shorty's behind me. When he jumps down, these Doberman Pinschers (laughter) come out of the basement. And he's screaming, and the dogs was biting him. And he's (unclear), and when he finally made it over the fence at 5'6", Shorty was like in a Olympian (laughter). That, that reminds--and another time we were, we were at, it was a poker game, and we were gonna stick up the poker game. And Shorty was the one who was setting it up. And so Bartell and I go in, the old man, the older man and I. We're go and then we do our gangster thing and get them. And about one o'clock in the morning, I'm at home and the phone rings and my dad [Shelley Fisher, Sr.], "Somebody on the phone for you." I got it. It was Shorty (laughter)--no, it was Bartell, saying, "Man, Shorty just called me. We got to take that," (laughter), "money back over there." Shorty said, "Man, y'all got to bring that money back over here. These niggers are getting ready to kill me," (laughter). And they (laughter), and they (unclear). That was--to me it's comical. I look that-- Speaker 1: Well, they found the--they found that you had taken it? Speaker 2: He told. You get slapped-- Speaker 1: But he-- Speaker 2: --upside your head for a couple of times with a .38 (laughter). Excuse me. Bless his heart (laughter). Yeah, that was the life. That was what we were doing. Story_ID: 656484 Speaker 1: So then, who tells you about the service? Who is--you said-- Speaker 2: I'm, I'm not gonna call his name because he still might be alive. But that's, that's statute of limitation, isn't it? Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah he, his name was Jim [ph.]. And he was the photographer, teaching photography at the BBR. Speaker 1: BBR is? Speaker 2: The Boys' Brotherhood Republic, 15th [Street] and, and Hamlin [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Now what was the Boys' Brotherhood Republic? Speaker 2: It was a, it was gym, I mean, mean, what it, it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's where you said that people trained. No, no, no, that's different. Speaker 2: No, no. The, the that's where the Boys' Broth- that's where--it was a social club, where boys and girls came and they learned home, home--should learn, home economics and after, somewhere to go after school. We had basketball court, and tournaments were arranged, and social, you know, outings were arranged, for a while. Then the money ran out, and you know how that goes. But that's--but Jim showed me how to, to change the negative, fix--from 1942 to 1941. And my dad [Shelley Fisher, Sr.] was very happy to sign to, and to, to--'cause you had to be, at sixteen, you had to be with your parents' permission. Speaker 1: So he was happy 'cause you were just gonna go-- Speaker 2: I'm out--hey, I'm gone. And maybe it'll, may- maybe--I'm speaking on--maybe, maybe he said, "Well, that'll, that'll save him." The [U.S.] Air Force certainly did save a lot of young people. Story_ID: 656485 Speaker 1: So he tells you that--so you signed to go into the service. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You said the Air Force? Speaker 2: U.S. Air Force. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Basic training's in Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio [Texas]. And, but I knew how I could get out any day I wanted to when I went in. I have flat feet. And so I went in, and I brought some of my street ways with me. And I was making too much money. So they said, "Well, either you're going to Fairbanks," (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So were your street ways with you with drugs? Speaker 2: Not with drugs, not with drugs but with--cigarettes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --booze. I was not in--I wasn't gonna sell no drugs when I'm-- Speaker 1: That's okay (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Go on. Speaker 2: Anyway, yeah, I mean I, in my life I have-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --I mean, you know, ba- I'm not gonna lie about that. But not, that wasn't-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: My reason was (unclear) and there was a girl that somebody else liked and she liked me better, so I was going to Fairbanks, Alaska. So my feet started hurting me really, really (laughter), a lot. Speaker 1: Your feet started-- Speaker 2: My feet-- Speaker 1: --hurting? Speaker 2: --my flat feet, 'cause I, you know, I, you know, I want a, I want an honorable discharge. But I'm not gonna be putting up with all this crap that's going on in here. Speaker 1: So you didn't like the discipline? Speaker 2: Yes. And you can understand why. Speaker 1: Right. So what happened? Speaker 2: I got an honorable discharge. Speaker 1: And how long were you in for? Speaker 2: Six months. Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you go then? You came back [to Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I came back. I took a job as a, selling magazines--no, I worked--which came first, Turner--I got a job at Turner Manufacturing Company over on Cermak [Road]. It was a company that made picture frames and for mass distribution. And I was a stock boy. So I kept my, I kept the job--no, that was I'd got--that was a job I had before I went to the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. When I first got--the first job I had when I came back was selling magazines for the nationwide circulation bureau. I was one of the nine sit-in students who had been expelled for participating in sit in demonstrations. And I'm in your neighborhood this afternoon to try and register--to get points to go to register for college. You can help me by renewing your periodicals by signing--renewing your subscription. Story_ID: 656486 Speaker 1: That was a sham. Speaker 2: From the streets. We went from Chicago [Illinois] to St. Louis [Missouri]. I sold Chuck Berry. I sold Chuck Berry magazines. He was so enthrilled by my, my entertaining story (laughter), that he said, "Come on in. I ain't got nothing else to do." But I hung with Chuck Berry in his house. And there's was another, Eleanor Sweets [ph.]. I don't know if you know the name, but she is an educator from--was it St. Louis Univer- Washington U- [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri]? Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: You, you've heard that name? Speaker 1: I think I have, yes. Speaker 2: Okay, well, from St. Louis to Indianapolis [Indiana], I met a woman named Korey King [sic. Loray White]. She was the woman they were gonna make Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] marry. Went from Indianapolis to--I don't think we stopped in Ohio. It was like a group of us. You know, I don't know if you know about these magazine crews. But it's like four or five cars, and they take you out and then put you out on a corner, and they pick you up later on. In your meantime, you go around and you, you give your pitch and you say--and learn to be a salesman. That--I, I learned to be a salesman. But I got tired of lying to people, talking about I was the nine, one of the nine--so when we got to New York [New York], they'd drop us--me off over in Long Island [New York]. I would take the train back and go up to Harlem [New York, New York] and go up to the, the north sky, the, sky starlight, what, tenth, whatever floor, top floor, and just go into the office and say, "Hi, my name is [HistoryMaker] Shelley Fisher. And I'm here--." I--would, would you--with some short story but not the, that lie. "But would you renew your Ebony and your Jet?" And, and, and they, they knew. They said, "Well, he's earning money. We're gonna renew them anyway." So they'd si- I was making more money than the people out there telling lies. But I learned salesmen, 'cause I learned that you had to sale yourself before that--nobody cared about magazines. I could have been selling new Chevrolets for twenty dollars a, you know--but you've got to sell it. And so we would have our meetings. And this is how I got into music. Stop me if I'm going too fast. But, but each morning we would have our inspirational, motivational meeting. And a guy named Ted Fryeson [ph.] was a old vaudevillian, and he would sing. And so I knew one song, 'Going to Chicago Blues,' and I wanted to sing, 'cause I wanted some attention. Sammy Davis says the reason the entertainers risk getting up on a stage, make an ass out of themselves, exposing themselves totally, because we want attention. But anyway, so that, that ran--that got cold. That, that went dry for after about, did about three or four months and came back. And then that's when I got this job at Turner Manufacturing [Turner Manufacturing Company] over on-- Speaker 1: In Chicago? Speaker 2: Um-hm, over on Cermak [Road] and Kilpatrick [Avenue], I believe. Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And stayed there for--I was there long enough, but now that's when I took the civil service test for, for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. Story_ID: 656487 Speaker 1: So whose suggestion was that to take the civil service test [for the U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]? Speaker 2: Oh, I was smart enough to know that. They were paying $2.65 an hour. And I passed, and I'm, I'm a, you know, I'm a veteran; I'm clean, and so go take the test--took the--I passed as a click--clerk and was working down at the Main Post Office [Chicago Main Post Office, Chicago, Illinois]. And didn't like that, so then I found a way, and I became a ca- carrier down at--subcarrier at Prudential Plaza [One Prudential Plaza, Chicago, Illinois]. But it was a nicer job. We didn't go outside, just take the mail up on the elevator and threw it off and went to break. Speaker 1: You had--and so weren't you having a little hustle on the side too during the-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Not, not so much? Speaker 2: Not, no. No, I didn't, you know, I didn't, I didn't really need it, you know, you know. I didn't have any, any needs or habits that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --required my, my-- Speaker 1: So did you go--grow--what are your friends that were in the gangs with you, where are they now? Speaker 2: Ah, let's see-- Speaker 1: That's what I'm trying to understand. Speaker 2: You can still find [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush. You know Bobby Rush? Yeah, I saw your eyes going (laughter)--Bobby Rush, Hawk [Elijah Perkins], Donald, I believe Donald, Donald Lee is still alive, another good friend. He was not in the gangs, but Chuck Spruell is out on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Most of them are dead. Most of them are dead. The, the Christmas list gets shorter every year. Walter Rodgers, Walter's doing well. He's out in Country Club Hills [Illinois]. And at least they're doing--he's doing all right, but most fell by the wayside. Story_ID: 656488 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you come back. You're working at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], and then what happens after that? Speaker 2: I worked in-- Speaker 1: And this is, isn't this like nineteen sixty-- Speaker 2: Now you're talking 1963, '64 [1964]. I remembered--I mean I was sorting mail the day Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]--I remember some people say where were you when--so, '60s [1960s] about, but now I, so I enrolled in Crane Junior College [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois]. I got my GED [General Educational Development] from Wash- from Calvin Coolidge in Washington [Calvin Coolidge High School; Calvin Coolidge Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. So I enrolled in college and with the intentions of being a lawyer. That was 'cause I thought I could be a damn good lawyer. And a girl changed my whole life. She was the finest thing God has ever made. If he kept it for himself--caramel colored, and her family had groomed her. She was so perfect. And Crane Junior College was having its fiftieth jubilee. And she was a ballerina. And I, in my wisdom, wise mind, figured if I could get into the show (cough), excuse me, we would have lots of time to discuss our future (laughter). So I went and auditioned for this show. And James Mack, the man of--or if you ever have a chance to give him honors, please. He listened to me sing 'Going to Chicago Blues.' (Singing), "You keep your New York--." And he said, you know, he says you, "You have an instrument." He said, "If you discipline yourself, you might make some money." And plus I, you know, my, my future wonder lady is there. And, and in my, our class, James Mack was teaching, like I said, Tom Tom G- [Tom Tom Washington]. He had the best musician. Louis Satterfield, the, the, the rhythm section at Chess Records, Louis Satterfield, Pete Cosey, these are guys who--Fontella Bass--on all those hits were in his class. And he taught us not only the circle of the fifths and, and music theory, when you got, when you're pro- proficient enough, he sent you down to the union and got your card. That's when 10-208 [American Federation of Musicians Local 10-208; Chicago Federation of Musicians] at the black and white musicians had--merged. It used to be if you had to go out south to get that. But, and he had big band. He taught big band, and I was the singer with the big band. I'd sometimes have to sit around for an hour, well, of course while they were--but I wanted to sing. I'm gonna stay there, and they let me sing my couple of songs. And-- Speaker 1: Oh, this is at Crane Junior (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Crane Junior College. That man turned out more--he and Walter Dyett. Speaker 1: Walter Dyett. Speaker 2: Captain Dyett was the other one. But Mr. Mack was--and, and, and he also took, he took--he listened to the students. Many of them came from--didn't have food to--you know, and he'd come out his pocket. He was that kind of man. And after a while, I would go out and to his house. He lived 5025 Woodlawn [Avenue] not far from the Obamas, yeah. But and I'd go, and I'd--he'd tutor me for a couple of hours on Saturdays, 'cause he believed in me. And by then I think I, I had began--my [paternal] grandmother [Icybell Hemphill Fisher] hadn't passed yet, and I was raving to her so much about him. And, and she called him, and they had a long--I don't know what they talked about. But he understood me. He didn't understand all of my history, but he understood that this might be fertile soil. And so I wound up, the next show, that fiftieth jubilee anniversary, I wound up closing, opening and closing the show, down this long tread. I came down with a white--I'm sorry--this white smoking jacket, black pants (singing), "Come fly with me," ['Come Fly with Me']. I'm doing Sinatra [Frank Sinatra]. He let me do it. And we closed with--and in the or- it was an orchestra pit. I mean it was a full orchestra. This is my first time singing in public. I think Tom Tom, no, Fred Humphries was--Tom Tom was on piano. Maurice White was on drums or Morris Jennings. Some of the guys from the symphony orchestra, who were Mack's friends, came. And we had French horns. After that, I'm gone. After--so, we've--I'd finally--my whole life is music now. I'm sitting at the, at--I can't wait 'til Monday nights at the jam sessions to get there, to deejays fifth, what's the disc jockey at 63rd [Street] and Cottage [Cottage Grove Avenue]? It's Gene Ammons and the--Dexter and you know, and I'm growing. I went in one night and sat in with Dexter Gordon and Gene Ammons. That's, they let me do it, 'cause I was selling myself. Story_ID: 656489 Speaker 1: And af- a little after a while I became--and so after sixty--okay, I got it--then I, I quit the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] 'cause the Sutherland was--I'd moved into 4901 South Drexel [Boulevard], and the Sutherland lounge [Sutherland Hotel, Chicago, Illinois] was right up the street, the, the landmark. And I was spending more time in Sutherland. I wasn't--I was--I wasn't making it to work. So rather than get fired, I resigned. And I'm full fired, now I got to produce music. I got to, you know, I got to get out there and get it. Sometime, sometime there wasn't job, so I had a job at Chicago Defender as display advertising, selling--I sold Reverend Lou Rawls, Lou's uncle. And we sat down and we talked. And when I did come to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], he gave me Lou's number. The manager of the Wilmington Apartment [Wilmington Apartments, Chicago, Illinois]--I have to tell you this, at the Wilmington Apart- 4901 South Drexel, was Sam Cooke's father-in-law. So Sam came to town with Barbara [Barbara Campbell Cooke], his wife. And Mr. Marshall [ph.] came up and got me and drove down, and I met Sam Cooke. I'm, I'm, I'm being inspired. The same time, I'm following--this is, there's no practical reason for me to be doing this. And I'm sending my disp- advertising. I'm making a living from my, my girl--then, I was so good at that, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], LeRoy Jeffries, formerly of Johnson Publishing Company [Chicago, Illinois], heard about my ability. I was selling, doing so good. They stole me away from Chicago Defender. I was gonna be account executive for Johnson Publishing Company. We're talking about Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC], General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], who was just starting to let blacks get in, solid job. I forget what the salary was. Oscar Brown [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.] comes along with this new show called 'Summer in the City,' and I auditioned for it. He said, "Wow," said, "you got the part if you want it." I said, "Oscar, I just started this job over at"-- Speaker 2: At Johnson Pub-- Speaker 1: --"at Ebony over at Johnson Publishing Company." He said, he said, "Well, you got to make, make up your mind." I went and told and resigned (laughter). I did. And LeRoy Jeffries, he, after we met lat- years later in L.A., he said, "You've got to be crazy." He said man, "Oscar Brown, Oscar Brown," (laughter), "he ain't gonna feed you ten years from now." I said, "Well, I got to do it." And we met later, and I was doing quite well in Hollywood, and we all had a laugh about it. But I've always been kind of like a fly, flew by the pants. And I'm not a real religious guy, but I'm spiritual. And I believe my mama's [Martha Ann Robinson Fisher] out there, got her eye on someone looking out for--'cause she kept me from some stuff that I ain't supposed to be here. Story_ID: 656490 Speaker 1: We was coming home, walking from Farragut [Farragut High School; Farragut Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] one day. Speaker 2: When you were in high school? Speaker 1: In, in--yeah, when I was in high school. And a guy gave Jerome and I some heroin. I snorted it; we snorted it. It made me sick as a dog. I never touched it again. My friend, he got high, wound up doing twenty-five years in jail. He might be dead now. How life takes those little curves that-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --changes your path. Speaker 2: So what happened to your girlfriend? Speaker 1: I don't know what the woman--she married (unclear). You mean the one that, that I followed all the way up to-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --on that stage? She married a Beverly Hills [California] dentist. Speaker 2: How did she meet a--so you mean much later. Speaker 1: Much later, yeah, yeah. We'd--she never, she never would--she didn't care much--(unclear) is a musician. Her family would kill her if she brought me (unclear). They done spent all that money, you know, grooming her. And another friend of mine, Jacqueline Miller was her name, I was, I had came back home, and I was visiting Mr. Mack [James Mack] out in his home, my teacher. And he told me, he said, "Guess who was sitting here on this couch just the other night." And he said, "Madame Jacqueline Matisse." Jacqueline Miller from our old neighborhood is Madame Matisse. The--for those of you who don't know who I'm talking about, the artist, Matisse [Henri Matisse]. Speaker 2: Right. When did that happen? Speaker 1: Wiki- Wikipedia tell you--well this is '70s [1970s]--'60s [1960s], '70s [1970s]. Story_ID: 656491 Speaker 1: So why don't you describe the music scene in Chicago [Illinois] at the time you were-- Speaker 2: At that time? Speaker 1: At this time. Speaker 2: At, at this, now-- Speaker 1: No, nineteen si- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or, or then? Speaker 1: --the, that time with James Mack (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ah, it was great. It was it was, it was great. As I said, Chess Records and Willie Dixon, they had a, it was like, it was almost like a plantation situation. They, but they were kicking out hits, and the music was solid. The lyrics were solid. Bass players, I remember the--not--when 'Rescue Me'--remember one of Chess'--my best friend, Louis, Louis Satterfield, put that bass line under there, and, and it gave the rhythm movement. Fontella Bass was, was--the receptionist downstairs at the time was Minnie Riperton. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And Minnie--they, when they need background (singing), "Rescue me," Minnie would come up and do the background one. The music, it was fruitful. It, it was, it was nourishing. It was sensitive. It was, you listened. We would mostly listen to jazz and then the rhythm blues came on. And those of us who were hip enough went to the Pips [ph.]. You know the, the, the Pips on 47th Street? Well, we were listening to Latin music, Monchito. It was about it was love and love me baby. It wasn't, it wasn't about bitch, bring me my money. It was a kinder time. And musicians like Donald Myrick, the Earth, Wind and Fire, practiced their horn. They learned discipline. And we--and in big--I was fortunate enough to be Morris Ellis' vocalist for some years. There's nothing like eighteen or twenty musicians or larger sitting down concentrating on the same beat at the same time, everybody thinking their part to make the, the, the end result as perfect as we can make it. That's gone. Speaker 1: Can you take me back though to--I mean you are, but can you tell me what Michigan Avenue was like? 'Cause the Defender [Chicago Defender] is on 24th [Street] right? Speaker 2: 24th. Speaker 1: But Chess Records is, is-- Speaker 2: 22nd [Street]. Speaker 1: 22nd, okay. So what--but there are other little record companies. Speaker 2: Yeah, Vee-Jay-- Speaker 1: Vee-Jay of course. Speaker 2: --Records [Vee-Jay Records] was third--around thirteen something Michigan Avenue. That building also housed Okeh [Okeh Records], O-K-E-H, which--was that mark--Major Lance, Gene Chandler. Yeah, you have a few--you--yeah, it was, it was competitive. It was a competitive, and a lot of musicians got ripped off. That's why I never signed with any publishing company. I would have been better off maybe, but I couldn't see giving my copyright away. But the, the songwriters would come in. They would hear it. "Sign here." But, and made some money, but they threw it away, most of them. Story_ID: 656492 Speaker 1: What was the difference? 'Cause I've heard for Chess [Chess Records] that--I mean what were they like? 'Cause they ended up doing WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois], the Chess brothers. Speaker 2: Willie [Willie Dixon], Rod (unclear) [E. Rodney Jones], Pervis (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Spann. Speaker 2: --[HistoryMaker] Pervis Spann and smooth, the Cool Gent. Speaker 1: Yes-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Herb Kent, the Cool Gent. Speaker 2: Yeah, Cool, the Cool Gent (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's still on the air. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. I think Rodney's gone on. Speaker 1: Yeah, Rodney. Speaker 2: Is per- I don't know is Per- Pervis is still a-- Speaker 1: Pervis doesn't have his mind anymore. He has Alzheimer's. Speaker 2: So his daughter [HistoryMaker Melody Spann-Cooper], I know his daughter is doing well. Speaker 1: Has taking over the station. Speaker 2: Yeah. But no, well, VON, well, I don't know how much of this I can say. But I will say it, and you can cut it out if you feel--VO- VON, in those--in the '60s [1960s], many of the disc jockeys program on program directors' homes, their mortgages were held by record companies. For a while, after I was in, got into L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I worked for a, a company called Invictus [Invictus Records] Hot Wax [Hot Wax Records] Holland, Dozier and Holland [Brian Holland, Lamont Dozier and Eddie Holland] had got a late--they'd-- Speaker 1: After they left Motown [Motown Records]? Speaker 2: After they left. They got tired of Motown. They wasn't getting paid right at Motown. So they got a deal from Capitol [Capitol Records] to market. And because I had, had my own label [Aries Records] in Chicago [Illinois], I knew the business. So I got, I took the job under an alias with their--with the alias, 'cause I, I didn't want that to interfere with my professional--and my, my territory was San Diego [California] north, San Diego, L.A., San Francisco [California], Seattle [Washington], Denver [Colorado], Las Vegas [Nevada], and sometimes Phoenix [Arizona]. I was the first one to bring, to, to 'Bring the Boys Home,' [HistoryMaker] Freda Payne. I played that for a gentleman at KSAN [KSAN Radio; KSOL Radio, San Francisco, California]. Nobody wanted to play it, 'cause the politics was don't play that. And I induced him to, to play, to put it on the list, not just to play, and when I leave town you take it off, but to keep it on. They kept it on in a week, and it went (makes sound) (gesture) and had a great influence on the ending of the Vietnam War. Those strong lyrics, bring the boys home. I hope if that-- Speaker 1: But you were saying--I think what you were saying is that, you said a lot of the, the, the record companies held the mortgages. Speaker 2: For payola. Speaker 1: They'd pay, they paid? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, you're talking about payola. Speaker 2: We're talk-- Speaker 1: Payola's been-- Speaker 2: You're talking about big scale, on a grand scale there. You're talking about syndicated. I'm not talking about sort of VONs. I'm talking about the syndicated stations. Some of the--and many in, in the South and the Afri- black stations, you know, ounce of coke [cocaine], you know, or a couple of girls would get the job done, keep your music on the air, 'cause that's the way--and then, after your music on the air, was no reason it was gonna stay on there. You were given a certain amount of product, of albums, CDs [compact disc], 45s [45 rpm record]. And you went to the mom and pop stations, and you say, "Oh, Mrs. Smith, here's ten copies of Sonji Clay's 'Here I Am and Here I'll Stay.' Would you report when your--when the station calls on Fridays to find out what's moving?" That's how they keep their list. "Would you report that 'Here I Am and Here I'll Stay' is selling like hotcakes?" They made whatever they, they, whatever they, they, that was their product. The station went up, and soon or later--people can only buy what they hear. Everybody was knocking Miley Cyrus and all these people. Them girls getting money. And they exposed to--and the reason they don't hear any better music, because they ain't playing it. They're not listening to (unclear) you know, people who have some serious messages to their music. They are listening to what they are exposed to. If you expose me to all Kanye West--bless his heart. Anybody goes to the bank I'll bless him. But Kanye's music is setting us back years. Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's not music. It's not music (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I shouldn't say that, should I? Speaker 1: No but that's (unclear) (laughter)-- Speaker 2: He know it (laughter). Speaker 1: No, that's not--but-- Story_ID: 656493 Speaker 1: I want you to descri- so, there's payola going. You know, the black--I mean you have artists (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody. Speaker 1: --artists are being--I mean it's still white controlled and-- Speaker 2: It's controlled. It's controlled, but, but there's money; there's graft-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know. You want me, if you want my act on the, on, on the, if you--Arsenio show [Arsenio Hall], you got to bring this act. We're bringing him up so, you know, and same thing with concerts. I got a new act, you, you--we got a, got a top artist. Well, let's let him open for them and you know. Now here's yours. You get yours on the back end. Or, the radio station: here's how many tickets. Run up, run, run some sort of campaign. You'll, you'll get yours. They'll find a way. Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a lot--so, you know, I had also that you had studied with, is it Gisela-- Speaker 2: Gisela Goettling. Speaker 1: --Goettling. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, and when did that happen? Is that around this-- Speaker 2: That was around-- Speaker 1: --or later? Speaker 2: --that was '64 [1964]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --sixty-three [1963], '64 [1964]. At the Chicago conservatory of music [Chicago Musical College; The Music Conservatory of Chicago College of Performing Arts, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: So that's a lot--Chicago conservatory of music has a great history with the black community. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: A lot of people studied there. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I'm mean-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis (unclear). Speaker 2: Ramsey, yeah. Speaker 1: And he talked about that. And then we had-- Speaker 2: (Clears throat) Excuse me. Speaker 1: Well, that's on the jazz set. We had someone named Robert Wooten [HistoryMaker Robert Wooten, Sr.], but that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Barbara [sic.]?-- Speaker 1: Wooten, but he's more on the classical side. Speaker 2: Well, Gise- Gisela, Gisela, Frau Goettling was teaching me, my, my, my, was teaching me vocalises. She wasn't teaching me, we shall over. She was teaching me support, how to use your voice, and I never missed one night from being horse in forty year--more than forty years. Speaker 1: So what are people telling you about your voice? Speaker 2: Hm, what did-- Speaker 1: What are, what are they telling you? And who, who is really--because at this point in time, you know, Chicago [Illinois] has graduated some great, you know, great artists. They've--I mean I know Ramsey's there in the jazz scene. And do you know, do, do you know Daddy-O Daylie [HistoryMaker Holmes "Daddy-O" Daylie] at this point? Speaker 2: Daddy-O Daylie? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: From, from back in the day? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: W, W- of course I know Daddy-O Daylie. Story_ID: 656494 Speaker 1: You know, we were talking about that time period, and you know, we were talking about the Chicago conservatory of music [Chicago Musical College; The Music Conservatory of Chicago College of Performing Arts, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and how-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --it, you know, it had--a lot of people came through there. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was it the conservatory or was it-- Speaker 2: Part of Roosevelt that--it was part of Roosevelt, but Dr. Rudolph Ga- [Rudolph Ganz]-- Speaker 1: What? It was part of Roosevelt at the time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I don't think it's, not anymore [sic.]. Speaker 2: Not anymore. Speaker 1: I think it's a-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --standalone. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois] had a strong relationship with the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wi- liberal, with our liberal arts--yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: Because people like Tom Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell] went there. And a lot--I mean--oh, god, what's his name? He passed away. Real estate, he owned buildings. Speaker 2: Duff-- Speaker 1: He owned a lot of real estate. We're talking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He went--Dempsey? Speaker 1: Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis]. Speaker 2: Dempsey Travis. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So, your, so your roots in Chicago [Illinois] are very strong (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The, the--you know, when you leave though, they say you can never go home. I'm finding that to be very true. I've got--you know, after--I've--my--this show pays tribute to Lou Rawls, Nat Cole [Nat King Cole], and Joe Williams, 'Dem Boys From Chicago.' I get booked any--on ships, cruise ships, here in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], Japan. But I'm having a hard time bringing home Chicago. Speaker 1: Right. Well, Chicago's changed, and it's a complicated place right now. And I don't, well any way that's what I (unclear), got there. I'd never seen a city like--I fell in love with the old Chicago, so. You--so what do you sort of find--who are you wanting to be like? Are you wanting to be like a Nat King Cole? Speaker 2: I want to be like Jesus, without going to church. Speaker 1: So where are you performing? Where are you (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I go back to, I go to Japan on the 29th for a concert? Speaker 1: No, no, I'm saying (laughter) where are you performing back in 1963 (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, in '60 [1960]. Anywhere I could, anywhere I could. I played the Stan's Pad on 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois]. I, I, I played on the same bill with O.C. Smith, Arthur Prysock. I played the Sutherland [Sutherland Hotel, Chicago, Illinois], those, the Sutherland, which is I hope by now is our landmark. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: I don't think it's (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's a shame. I was there the night that Miles [Miles Davis] slapped Coltrane [John Coltrane]. I don't know if I (unclear). But, but anyway, I was--mostly freebies and sit-ins, building, building my repertoire. Story_ID: 656495 Speaker 1: Oscar Brown [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.] was, Oscar Brown (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear)-- Speaker 1: --(unclear)--huh? Speaker 2: So talk about Oscar Brown. I had the pleasure of interviewing him. And he, he loved our project. But okay, I digress. Speaker 1: Oscar (unclear)-- Speaker 2: But he was--you know, he gave such a powerful interview. But he, you know, Oscar was, you know, he was sort, he was a renegade of his all--in his own right, very creative. So, this, you're talking about, really, him at his prime. Speaker 1: First time I met Oscar I was carrying mail, and I was delivering my morning route on State [Street] and Washing- Madison [Street], State and Madison. And Oscar was standing on the corner on an acid trip (laughter). And I walked up and introduced myself. And he gleamed and I--he didn't forget that. And we talked, and I told him I knew who he was. And he, right, right on, brother, and ba- and I went on my way. And I didn't meet Oscar again until he was auditioning for something in '66 [1966]. Talent galore. He could put it together. He can make you believe that that desk over there can dance. If you play the music right it can dance, so talented, and his kids too. Speaker 2: Yes. Oh no. She is, his daughter's [Maggie Brown] doing quite well around town. Speaker 1: And, and his boys, son, Bo [Oscar Brown III], I remember when they were in the theater, in--theater in the way, getting-- Speaker 2: What is Bo doing? I haven't-- Speaker 1: Bo died. Bo died in a, a crash out, on Outer Drive [Lake Shore Drive]-- Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: --in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: Blew Oscar's mind, 'cause he was, he was playing a good bass, Bo was. Story_ID: 656496 Speaker 1: So anyway, you, you audition for 'Summer in the City'-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh Speaker 1: --and got the part. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that was at the--I--it says that it was at the Harper Court Theater [Harper Theater, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Harper Court Theater. Speaker 1: But I have that in 1966. 'Cause you had already--did you get it-- Speaker 2: That was in 1966. Oscar [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.] had, had another show up on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] called 'Joy '66' running at the same time. But 'Summer in the City' was 1966. Speaker 1: In 1966, there are lot, there's a lot happening though, civil rights, I mean politically, the national black arts, I mean, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was going on. Speaker 1: You had Gwendolyn Brooks. You've got Don, you know, Don Lee become Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the people I know, Don Lee, Gwendolyn Brooks, the, the first song, the, one of the songs from Oscar's show was the--to the 'Plain Black Boy' ['Elegy (Plain Black Boy)'] which I sang and, and got really terrific response from. I went on to record that song after I--after the show was closed. And who did I go to get the arrangement? My professor, Mr. Mack [James Mack]. And he told me many years later, after he'd done [HistoryMaker] Tyrone Davis and all, a lot of guys, he said, "You know, that was my first recording session." (Laughter) Yep, yep. But yeah, the music, it was, it was, it, it was a time of the country was revolting. We were getting our butts kicked down, down at the--for--on, on State Street. And I, I marched with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. I had a letter from Dr. King that got lost, and I'm so sorry for that, but working with Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. And, but the music, it was a purer time. We talked to each other. Even if we was getting ready to fight, we talked. We didn't take shit. We talked. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Party lines and pay phones, but we talked. Speaker 1: That's true. Good old party lines. That's true I forgot about party lines you'd call-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah (laughter). Uh-huh. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (laughter). Speaker 2: And you were careful what you said. Right, 'cause somebody heard it, it came back home. Speaker 1: Or they could listen and you not know it, so (laughter). Speaker 2: (Demonstrates) Shh, shh (laughter). Speaker 1: What are you thinking you want to be though? Speaker 2: I would like, as I, as I-- Speaker 1: Who was--wait. Who was in the production, 'Summer in the City,' besides you? Speaker 2: Gavin Christopher. I don't know if you (singing), "Once you--." He worked for Chaka Khan. He was a, he was a teen I think; Gavin was sixteen at the time, Spanky and Our Gang, Spanky McFarland [George "Spanky" McFarland]. The, they, they were like, not rivals, but they had (singing), "Like to get to know you" ['Like to Get to Know You']. A top white (unclear) Oscar was ja- homogeneous. And there--who else? Jimmy Ellis, Morris' [Morris Ellis] brother, was in the band. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: Jimmy Ellis, Jim- Morris' brother, play- was playing--Steve McCall, the great jazz drummer. I'm trying to think some of the, the other--Gloria [Gloria Lewis], what was Gloria's last name? We had a cast of about twelve. And the, the comedy of it was a little girl who could not keep rhythm. If the rhythm was going like that (snaps fingers), she was going like, where she was--she couldn't--it, that was the--her, her, her talent was she didn't have rhythm. And it brought the house down every night. Speaker 2: So all those people, that's pretty amazing. Oscar had, he had, had he taken off at that point-- Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: --international--he-- Speaker 1: Internationally? Speaker 2: No, he had not yet. Speaker 1: Oscar never really took off-- Speaker 2: Well it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) internationally, except for Brazil. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You go to Europe, yeah, they very--maybe Paris [France], Paris, perhaps. But they not as aware--they're not-- Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as aware of them. Speaker 2: --as aware of--okay. Speaker 1: And Japan. The only reason he wouldn't go to Japan, 'cause Oscar would not speak the language. He would (unclear) (laughter)--but he was very talented man and a very kind man. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He gave a lot of us our breaks. Story_ID: 656497 Speaker 1: So at--who, who are you wanting to be though? Have you i- identified that and-- Speaker 2: Who I want to be-- Speaker 1: Well, who had you wanted--who did you want to emulate (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Lou Rawls. Speaker 1: Lou Rawls. Speaker 2: Lou Rawls, Lou Rawls, since I couldn't be Sinatra [Frank Sinatra]. I wanted some Lou Rawls. When I heard Lou Rawls sing 'See See Rider.' And I got to know his uncle [Louis Rawls], and I got to know Lou. And I, I took a song out with me when I went out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I'd written for, with Lou Rawls in mind. And Lou said, "Damn." (Laughter) It was yesterday's (unclear) I mean it--well, I, I just liked the way Lou delivers. I like his, his reach. He can reach. He can go sit in the clouds. He can go Wally World chocolate factory get, and the blues. Story_ID: 656498 Speaker 1: What took you to L- wait, before that, when did you--'cause you've mentioned writing. When did you start writing? 'Cause you talked about, you know, I didn't want to sign, you know, this-- Speaker 2: I wrote a song called 'Girl I Love You.' And Garland Green, Garland Greens [sic.], do you know--if you know him--it was Garland's first hit. And Speaker 1: But what year was that? Speaker 2: Nineteen--that was 1966. It was, yeah. And the guy, Mel Collins [Melvin Collins], I, I, I, I produced a thing with Joshie Armstead [HistoryMaker Joshie Jo Armstead], another good person to interview. Speaker 1: Yes, we've been trying. She will not interview. I know (unclear) she's, she's New York [New York]. I met her-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at Nick [Nickolas Ashford] and Val's [HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson] place. And she, you know, 'cause she was an Ikette. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yes. She will not-- Speaker 2: Yeah with, and Ray Charles. She sang with, back of Ray Charles. Speaker 1: I've been try--I saw her name in your outline. Now I've, I'm very--she, she will not. And I was like-- Speaker 2: She just refused or-- Speaker 1: Refused. I've tried-- Speaker 2: --she wanted you to pay her? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Or she wanted you to pay her? Speaker 1: I don't know. I don't know about that part-- Speaker 2: Bless her heart. Speaker 1: --'cause you don't pay anyone (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I, I, I'm--we talk. Speaker 1: Okay. Because I've really--'cause she--I talked to her one evening, and I was fascinated, 'cause she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh. Speaker 1: --a lot of, lot of history. Speaker 2: Lot of history, talented woman. She can write. And so she and I had written several things. And then she was with this guy, Mel Collins, and they had--his, who, who somewhat relationship to Argia B. Collins [Argia B. Collins, Sr.], the barbecue guy there. They were putting money behind Garland. And they heard this song, and it was--they had played the song for a guy named Russ Regan, who was--MCA [MCA Records] was just getting--they hadn't done--was not doing black music. MCA did--was not doing black music before '66 [1966]. And they gave this guy, Russ Regan a budget to open a black rake--record company called Uni Revue [UNI Records and Revue Records]. And 'Girl I Love You' was the first release on Uni Revue. Speaker 1: So did you get paid? Speaker 2: Finally. Speaker 1: So it's-- Speaker 2: Nothing from the mechanicals. I finally--when I, I got my publishing and my performance rights later. But you, you know, unless you have it's, you know, a, a really major hit, your performance rights can be shaky. But it did all right for me. It let me know that I could write. Story_ID: 656499 Speaker 1: And then what, what--when did you--you said that you started a record label. When was that? Speaker 2: Right after 'Summer in the City' closed. I'd been doing that elegy to the 'Plain Black Boy' ['Elegy (Plain Black Boy)'], Gwen, Gwen, Gwen's [Gwendolyn Brooks] song. And I was getting such response, good response from it, so I formed a--I wasn't gonna--Chess Records, they weren't interested in nothing 'cause they didn't own the copyright. Well, I didn't own the copyright either. Oscar [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.] owned--E.B. Marks [E.B. Marks Music Corporation] owned the copyright. But I did have a--I wrote the B side. And a guy I knew had, had some money he was throwing around. We formed Aries Records. Speaker 1: A, like Aries? Speaker 2: Aries, my-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my-- Speaker 1: Sign? Speaker 2: My cursed sign (laughter). And released--and there was a time--we, we, we released right after--during or right after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. And the lyric even though it said, (singing), "He was born in Alabama. He was bred in Illinois. He was nothing, nothing but a plain black boy." Well, people (makes sound) (singing), "Swing low, swing low chariot. Nothing but a plain black boy, driving past the pool hall." It was Chicago [Illinois], and we had a hit. And that led me to opening for Stevie Wonder at the Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois]. And, but after I got into some, some personal issues, more than creative, Aries Records didn't--we, well, my partner went on and made some money. I think he did Sonji Clay, Tenison Stephens, 'Can't Take My Eyes Off Of You.' That was all from Aries Records. Speaker 1: That was all from Aries Records? Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: So what happened with-- Speaker 2: With James Mack doing all the arrangements-- Speaker 1: Oh (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) my producer. Speaker 1: Oh. So, so what, what happened, what happened to, you're saying what happened to you and Aries Records? Speaker 2: We--my partner--my wife at the time were having an argument, and he got in-- Speaker 1: So when did you get married? Speaker 2: Oh, I got married the first time 1963-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --before--that was January. My daughter [Monique Fisher Calloway] was born in June, and her mother and I were married in '63 [1963]. And that didn't last long. I was twenty-one. She was seventeen. And so that--you know, we still managed to raise a good daughter, but--a great lady, but that marriage didn't last long, and then I was out there and I was with a, with another lady, with a girl, not at the same time. But, and she was having some problems with, that required her to be married in order to get her son back. Huh? I'm sleeping with the woman, get her son, do a, do--so, we did and got her so back. But my buddy, we got into an argument. And he came, tried to get in between, and he and I wound up and almost killing each other. And I--then a couple of weeks later I was playing out at south at the Town Country [ph.] on Stony Island [Avenue]. And my ex-wife, or my wife at the time, phone them with a bomb threat. And didn't nobody want no singer in their (laughter) place with this, with his--gonna blow up the place. Sister woman was mad. So I decided with between all that going on (laughter), I--it was, the sun was shining in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] (laughter). Speaker 1: And you went to Los Angeles [California]? Speaker 2: Went to Los Angeles with a, I had a two way ticket, $280. And I had Lou Rawls' phone number. [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt had made a phone call for me. But I know-- Speaker 1: How had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know-- Speaker 1: How had you met Eartha Kitt? Speaker 2: I met Eartha--I'll show you on the poster there, we--you could see it later. Eartha and I, when she went to the White House [Washington, D.C.] and told Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] off, her, she came to the West Side. And for the Garfield Organization [Chicago, Illinois], she met with myself, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, and Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. In, in order was Eartha, the billing was Eartha Kitt, Dick Gregory, Jesse Jackson, [HistoryMaker] Shelley Fisher, and Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran]. I have a, a poster (unclear) it. And she was very much impressed with something about me. So the, that fair ended in--that weekend ended in tragedy. Our PR [public relations] man took, took his own life. So we didn't have a chance to, to have--say, you know, ceremony--celebrate goodbyes, but she did give me her number. And I, I phoned her, and she made a call for me. And when I got to L.A., I, I was there, L.A., about two months and I had work, Eartha Kitt. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And I ain't talking about washing dishes. I was playing sportsman lodge [Sportsmen's Lodge, Los Angeles, California] and the--with Bob Hope coming in once a month, around the piano bar Charo, George Kennedy in Beverly Hills [California]. I'm--you know. And I didn't, had not studied piano. Wanna hear that story? Speaker 1: Yes. Story_ID: 656500 Speaker 1: I got there it was raining. Got--never go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] hungry in December. It's the rainy season. And I went, I got there, and I figured if you're gonna jump in the water, get in the deep water, 'cause that's where the, you know, don't be--you know. So I checked in at the Continental hotel [Continental Hyatt House; Andaz West Hollywood, Los Angeles, California] there on Sunset [Boulevard]. Now I, remember I got $350 in my pocket. I think that lasted about three days, and I was out on the street. And I had some jewelry that I pawned, and I checked into the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. I went from the five star to the Y (laughter). And I, one day I was so, I didn't even have money to make the phone call to call the agent. I had to walk from Wilcox [Avenue] and Sunset, which is--I don't know if you know L.A.--to 8100 Sunset, which is almost Beverly Hills [California], walked just to see if I, if anybody had a job for me. And about two weeks went by and nobody, they said, "Sorry, we're working on it." And then one day I got a call. I mean I got a yes. And I said, "Well, where, where is it?" 'Cause I'd, I'd, when I went to California, I took music. I'd had charts, all the charts I used in Morris Ellis' band, and you know, I had music up the ying yang, no--I said, "How much music should I take?" He said, "Well, what do you mean?" (Laughter) I said, "Well, how many people in the band?" He said, "Well, you got on the, on your resume that you play piano." I said, "Oh, no problem," (laughter). I knew about ten tunes well enough to be played in public. And I was booked up at San Luis Obispo [California] at this--his brother [Jimmy Ellis] was used to be on 'Laugh-In' ['Rowan and Martin's Laugh-In']. He was--yeah, they was a fantastic restaurant. And so after I would play my ten song repertoire, I would get up and start getting the peop- doing 'Signifying Monkey,' [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr.'s (singing), "Said the signifying monkey to the lion one day, there's a great big elephant down the way." And I would go around table to table, and I'd make the people clap. They were my band. They were (laughter)--and in the daytime, I had my music books. I would get down--I was, I would build my repertoire. Speaker 2: And that's how you learned how to play the piano? Speaker 1: That's how I learned to earn a living playing the piano. Speaker 2: Playing the piano (laughter). But when, when had you learned the piano before that, that you've never (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, and now we studied in, in, in, in Crane [Crane Junior College; Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois] with sort of theory and harmony, theory, harmony, and compositions. I can look at the music and tell you what it sounds like. But elocution on the, on, on the--you know, when you play to be a piano viturso [sic. virtuoso], you got to go through years of da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da. I didn't have the patience for that. So, I learned to play, to, to play the--I could do a solo with my right hand, but I'm playing block chords, as I hear an orchestra playing. That way I had a more full sound, and it wasn't like no one else's, because it's very different. [HistoryMaker] B. B. King does not sing and play at the same time. Did you know that? Speaker 2: He plays and then he sings. Speaker 1: Then he sings. Speaker 2: I think I--'cause, yeah-- Speaker 1: Somebody pull your coat to that? But anyway, singing and-- Speaker 2: No, they didn't put--we worked with them. And I was just thinking, he does play and then he sings. Speaker 1: He play (makes sounds); then he sings. But playing and hearing all of those notes and executing those notes and singing, not very many people do that well. Nat Cole [Nat King Cole] was the one. Mr. Cole could do it. But so you--and, and in my case, I was, I'm playing, I'm playing the piano. Can't nobody say they can't, can't play piano. They say, "He's not Oscar Peterson." 'Cause I didn't have that ring. But I didn't back down from no gigs. I was good enough to go up and play with Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina Turner. So, to me I, and I still, I still, even though no matter how good you can play, I still allocate learning theory so you can communicate the language. You're, you're dealing with a language. And if you can go to Japan and say I want it in B flat, they can understand you. You go Switzerland: I want it in C sharp played from whatever. They can understand. So, but today's music, but the--all you gotta do is turn your boot up. And you know, nobody understands the language that they supposed to be speaking. Story_ID: 656501 Speaker 1: Recently I was, I'd been at a couple of weddings of younger people. And they, they have to play the older music 'cause they don't have music (laughter). Speaker 2: Ah. Speaker 1: So someone, one of the adults was like, "Do you see what they're playing?" The thing that I didn't ask about Morris Ellis orchestra--and before we go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], I mean, you know, before we get too much (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no we're hav- stop me if I'm-- Speaker 1: That's okay. Speaker 2: --I'm rambling, 'cause-- Speaker 1: So, but Morris Ellis, so when, when did you come to play with him, and who's in the orchestra-- Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966] again. Morris heard me--well, his brother was Jimmy [Jimmy Ellis], was-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --playing the reeds in the, in, in 'Summer in the City.' And Morris had come and saw me at, in, at the, at the Harper Theater [Chicago, Illinois] a couple of times, plus I was always anyway at the jam sessions. If the jam session they say is gonna start, we're gonna start playing at ten--you know, where all the musicians just bringing their horn and relaxing; they're not there to do nothing; they're just relaxing, do- doing what they do, and they wanted to have some fun; they don't want to be playing for no singers--I would be there at nine o'clock, waiting. And whoever was handling the list, my name was gonna be on top. Sometimes they would make me wait 'til twelve o'clock, 'cause they wouldn't be playing for some company and singers. But that's, I would wait. And finally I learn--earned the respect of the musicians. So at--after Summer in the Cit- Cit- 'Summer in the City,' I got a call from Morris and inviting me to audition. He already knew I could do it through--but he wanted to know what I knew in his book. And Morris Ellis now was another one that I owe credit, James Mack, Ernie Jenkins [Ernest Jenkins], and Morris Ellis. Morris is a businessman, fantastic music, but he's a businessman and a leader. If Morris said, "Fellows, the halftime is at--." We'll say the gig was gonna start at nine at one of the hotels downtown there. "The gig's at nine. The halftime is at 8:30." That meant at 8:30 you are there polishing your horn, setting your chair up, sorting your book out, and ready to hit at nine. Now you come in there, you come in there at quarter to nine, Morris gonna fine you. He gonna hit you in your pocketbook. If a note is played out of that orchestra, all them horns playing--I, I loved it when we was playing sixteen, eighteen pieces. Morris do this--great musician, great businessman, and a real brother. I loved that man, because he let me--you know how many singers in Chicago [Illinois]? I, I, I--at that time, I wasn't thinking. Of all these singers in Chicago, here I am up here doing 'Midnight Hour' with the Morris Ellis orchestra. And the people are grooving it, the Psi Phi [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] up there some of the, the sorority or some fraternity, they grooving it. They gonna call us back next year. Speaker 1: No, 'cause he has a very good orchestra. He play- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --very good, all the events (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, that's (unclear). Story_ID: 656502 Speaker 1: So you talk about being in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] because you, you know, you have to sort of get out of town in that way. Speaker 2: Well, if I won't, I, you know, it wasn't--it was, you know, you're burning out, and I got crazy. I got--I'm going through a crazy divorce. My business [Aries Records] is going bad now 'cause my, my, my business partner, we ain't, we ain't talking business anymore. We're talking about my wife now. And, and I had spoken with someone, Spanky's [George "Spanky" McFarland] manager, Curley Tait quite a reputable manager out in New York [New York]. And I told him that I wanted to grow. I wanted to get, do more acting. And, and he said, "Well, L.A. is, L.A. will eat you up." He said, "More people fail than, than succeed." He said, "So, know what you're doing before you go there. And, and don't let nobody be sticking this, putting stuff up your nose, and, and stay what you got, and you, you'll do all right." And that's what happened there. Speaker 1: So you, you start playing with the, you know, for the jet set. You, what places are you playing? Are you playing private parties? Speaker 2: No, no. I'm, I'm talking Sportsmen's Lodge-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the Valley [San Fernando Valley, California], if you know sportsman lodge. It's where Clark Gable and they used to catch the fish in the stream. And the chef would cook them and bring them to the room, that kind of place. Bob Hope would come in once a month, and the maitre d' would let me know. And when he, Bob, was walking out (singing), "Thanks for the memories" ['Thanks for the Memory']. It was that, you know, jet--Beverly Hilton [Beverly Hills, California], with a--crimin- I mean, cream of the creme. And they're listening. They staying. And they telling the maitre d', "Hey, we like that kid." 'Cause I was doing Nat Cole [Nat King Cole] by then. I was learning Nat's licks. And Nat had just passed, '65 [1965], so he was still--the love was still in people's hearts for his music. Speaker 1: And so you did that for how long? Speaker 2: What played, what, what, what do you mean? Did what? Speaker 1: You had play- what--because it said--you, you talked about acting, so when did you start-- Speaker 2: I got a part in a movie. Speaker 1: That was, now-- Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971], 'Calliope.' Speaker 1: 'Calliope.' Oh, I have that in '72 [1972], okay. Speaker 2: Unh-uh-- Speaker 1: I have it '72 [1972]. Speaker 2: --that's very hard to find. I think there's one-- Speaker 1: We were trying to find it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Calli- it's a, it's a place in Austin, Texas, that has the only copy that I know. And I'm trying to get him to give me a copy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The guy who directed was Matt Cimber. He was--what's her name, the, the blond actress' [Jayne Mansfield] husband, the one-- Speaker 1: So what, what role did you play? Speaker 2: The revolutionary. The story, the storyline was--it would really be a good movie today with this, with the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and all this going around. But the store clerk gets it on with the producer. The producer, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah and at, and at the end, I'm the revolutionary. And the director wanted me to, to, to put myself in a character like Muhammad Ali. I'm, you know, I'm--but be funny. And had my girlfriend, she does somebody, and she comes back home and brings it back to me. And at the end, at, of the vignettes, this--we all give our little--and I'm doing--I forget mine--something about, this ain't, "Black power can't hold up to this kind of power." And this was (laughter) some, they, they said some people said it was racially, you know--but I played my part. And I got other work from it, so. Story_ID: 656503 Speaker 1: "Yeah, yeah, how you been buddy?" I said, "Man, I'm, I'm trying to get a, a copy of 'Calliope.'" He said, "Yeah, me too." (Laughter) So I--but I did track it down to a theater in, in, in, in Texas. Speaker 2: You should try to get a hold of it and get them to make you a copy. Speaker 1: Well, yeah, but they, they did. He said--what did he--he said they were gonna--next time he showed, that he showed it, he was gonna try to burn me a copy. I'm gonna get that information. I won't worry about it now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I don't know maybe if, if you were looking for it as well-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it might put some fuel under the fire. Speaker 2: Right. We were trying to find it. Speaker 1: I'll get you the information. Speaker 2: My staff, my staff said they couldn't find it. Speaker 1: Who did? Speaker 2: They were trying to find it 'cause I said I wanted to see it. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's called an Austin--it's Austin--it's in Austin, Texas, the--it's a theater that shows-- Speaker 2: Do you remember any, any specific evening at the Sportsmen's Lodge [Los Angeles, California] that you would like to share with us any-- Speaker 1: I remember an afternoon. At the time, I was working for a--in other, in addition to doing my work, I was working for a lady who was at a publishing company. And my, part of my equipment was a phone and a briefcase, talking '66 [1966]. No, not, not '60 [1960]; we're talking '72 [1972], '73 [1973]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And one afternoon I went in to get the piano tuned, and [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy was having lunch. And I sit, was sitting over there, you know, away from he, out of sight. And I picked up this, my briefcase phone, dialed the maitre d' and paged Mr. Gordy. And he came to the phone, and I said, "Berry, I thought you liked Treasure Island--Thousand Island on your salad. What you eating that Russian stuff for?" He flipped, I mean blew his mind, 'cause he couldn't figure out where is this, you know, who knows what I'm eating. That was one of the most memorable-- Speaker 2: You did that? Speaker 1: Yeah, I did that. Speaker 2: How did you have his number? Speaker 1: I'm one of the few writers who has, had music published on Motown [Motown Records] and kept the publishing. I knew Berry. I knew the talent was, was Ray Singleton [Raynoma Gordy Singleton], his, his wife. Speaker 2: Oh, Ray, yes, okay, right, the one he--right. Did she-- Speaker 1: I knew Ray. I knew Ray. I knew Eddie Singleton, the, he's the--rest in peace. I, in fact, I did some demos for--what was Berry's last wife's name [Margaret Gordy]? You know, she wrote some songs, and I did the demos for (singing), "Think I'm falling in love" ['I'm Falling in Love with You'] with Marvin [Marvin Gaye], for Marvin-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --for her song. And it's Marvin--and he and Diana Ross wound up doing a duet LP [long play] on that. But I knew Motown. Speaker 2: You had dealings with Motown before-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: --before, either in-- Speaker 1: Not in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Not in Detroit-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: --but when they moved-- Speaker 1: In L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: --downtown L.A., okay. Speaker 1: Um-hm, because included in, in, in, in, included in the estate that I was managing the music and audio visual department, Bob, his name was Bob Hilliard, and Bob wrote (singing), "Any day now our day will come in the wee small hours" ['Any Day Now'], 79 million seller hits and died from a heart attack. And he had a vision--he could--of audiovisual, what we're doing today. He had leased a theater called the Vine Street Theatre [Los Angeles, California], 1110 South Vine [Street], with cyclorama, the complete--and nobody to run it. And Mrs. Hilliard [Jacqueline Dalya] had the lease with an option to buy the building. So I put together the prospectus. And from those people up in San Luis Obispo [California], where I first got that job, that signifying monkey, some cattlemen had some money to invest. And I had letters from Hertz [The Hertz Corporation], United Artists [United Artists Records], California prison system to do videos, to produce videos for training, American Airlines for training films and as well as musical videos, which hadn't even hit yet. And that was just too much power for Hollywood to let one unknown boy (laughter) handle. So they wound up breaking, break, breaking a wall so that we couldn't get insurance on the building. But you, you, that's how you asked me about Motown. We was talking--yeah. So I was in that-- Speaker 2: In that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was working, rolling-- Speaker 2: You-- Speaker 1: --on that level, as they say. Speaker 2: You were in that mix. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 656504 Speaker 1: 'Cause that, I mean a lot of--we've been interviewing people from Motown [Motown Records], the ones who stayed behind. You know, they were--not all of them, but. So, so what are you--are you--is this a highlight though of your time? Speaker 2: What, in today? Speaker 1: In the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] area? A lot of Chicagoans don't like L.A. Speaker 2: I don't like L.A. Short story, short: Mrs. Hilliard [Jacqueline Dalya] and I became a couple after a year. She was twenty years my senior and a lively woman, a beautiful looking woman, a former actress and with all the trimmings, with all the traps. And among, among those traps was a devil drug called cocaine. In the Hilliard home was a six to--eight track studio over the garage. We had lots of company. We were buying like an ounce of coke, pure cocaine a month, and it was pink, the color of pure cocaine, purest, pure. Then they chop it up, cut it up with white stuff. Marvin [Marvin Gaye] and other artists that I--and with all due respect--other artists that--some are still alive and writers. I won't mention their names. There was always company. And I had been pretty strong. I had been learning--I was pretty strong. But cocaine, I never smoked it. But we were taking Demerol to go to sleep, and a line to wake up. It was an era where you go to a meeting with record company executives, and instead of saying, "Well, let's get right down to business." They'd pull out the mirror first (makes sounds). This is from the top--from the, from the lowest to the top, to those people who were handling Whitney [Whitney Houston] and those people. Jackie [Jacqueline Dalya], Mrs. Hilliard, didn't have any heirs and hated her family 'cause they were all mooches. I was the sole beneficiary and executor of the estate, a bottomless well of money from home on the hill, [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy's home was a hundred yards up the hill--the Rolls [Rolls Royce], the blah, blah, all the, all the trappings. But I weighed 145 pounds. I wasn't gonna live to see it, even had I been playing her for her money. But I loved her, 'cause she was more of a mother than I had ever had. Forget about the incest, but somebody who loved me and nurtured. We went down--we did a song of her husband [Bob Hilliard] called 'Outside of Memphis.' And she and I--this is 1973, I wanna say, on Dalya Records, went to Memphis [Tennessee], this white lady. I mean we ain't too far out of, we talking '67 [1967] we in--a few years, right--went to Memphis. And we stopped in Memphis at the radio station, and I performed the song, lip synched the song. Then we went on down to Crenshaw [Mississippi]. And I bought my [paternal] grandmother a color TV so she could see the performance and did the, did the performance. Jackie told her, "Don't worry, Ms. Fisher [Icybell Hemphill Fisher]. I'm gonna take care of him." 'Cause they, they, they had been talking. And Jackie knew my story. And, but I, I wasn't gonna live to make it. I weighed 145 pounds. So I left, came back to Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Why didn't you--what scared you to make you leave? 'Cause you, you wouldn't necessarily (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wasn't myself. Speaker 1: But you knew that, or someone said that? Speaker 2: They didn't say it. They were acting like it, people that I, that I--and then I had some--I was--I had a good lawyer. I had--but nobody said, "Hey, Shelley [HistoryMaker Shelley Fisher], come here. Let me pull your coat." Said, "Look, it's gonna be all right if you can, you get back up off that crap, you know, stop, you know. But let them use that stuff, man. You, you stay, you, you--let's talk (unclear), let--you stay and you gonna get what you got--been working for." She done already went to the lawyer. Um-hm, that's a devil drug. That's why I can talk to these people some of these people in Chicago 'cause that's what they fighting about. They fighting about that chump, chump money over there on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], for that small bit of territory-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --to kill each other, and that's not what it's about. Anyway, I'm sorry. I didn't mean to get off track. Story_ID: 656505 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you realize something, 'cause--now, Jackie, what was Jackie Hilliard [Jacqueline Dalya]-- Speaker 2: Jackie Hilliard. Speaker 1: Now how had you met her? Speaker 2: I was playing down in Palm Springs [California] at Sinatra's Jilly's, Jilly's. Sinatra [Frank Sinatra] had a, it was a, they had a, was having an outdoor festival. And this little redhead girl come up to me, her name was Debby Sunshine, and was talking about production. She had been a singer of Bob Hilliard's. Bob had been producing her. Mr. Hilliard, Jackie's husband, had been producing her, and he suddenly died. And she wanted to, to know if, if I would be willing--what, interested in working with her and arranging and helping produce this song. And she was sure that Mrs. Hilliard would like to meet me. Mrs. Hilliard liked dark meat, which is all right too. And that's how I met, that, that's how I met, that's how I got up on her. She told Jackie about me. And when, and, and when I went to the hill, I was accepted. Speaker 1: And you became her paramour. Speaker 2: Paramour (laughter). I suppose. Speaker 1: That's what they called-- Speaker 2: That's, that's one word you could use. You (laughter)--no, I, I survived. Story_ID: 656506 Speaker 1: So you came back to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Came back. When I left the hill, when I, when I realized, you know, that I wasn't gonna--and plus, see, she [Jacqueline Dalya] was sick. She never told me. She had lung cancer, but she was still smoking Kools and coughing. And I'm like she not looking so well, shit. She gonna be dead soon, so let me just (laughter), let me be cool, go for, for vacation before-- Speaker 1: Before-- Speaker 2: --she change the--that wasn't in me. But she knew she was, she was that. So, but I'm, you know, when I would, I had some relatives out in the Crenshaw District in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I'd go by there, and they say, "Oh, you so skinny." That was their way of saying, "Boy," (laughter), "you messing with that junk." That's mess, and my, you know, bags, and just you know, the, you know. And I'm, and I'm, I'm pulling up in a Rolls Royce, so I ain't ragged. I, you know, I'm, you know, I'm okay. But, "Boy," something, "you ain't--are you eating all right?" No, I wasn't eating. And I wasn't gonna make it. I was in Japan it was seventy--she died in seventy--late '77 [1977]. I was in--just got to Japan, and I got the call that she had passed. But sometimes the spirit, my inst- I ain't, I ain't call Jehovah or God or (Unclear); I ain't call no names. But that spirit, that inner core, will tell you it's time to get off the bus. And if you've been trained to listen to know that there is a--that you--there's a spiritual side, of which grandma [Fisher's paternal grandmother, Icybell Hemphill Fisher] had trained me. I knew--I mean just, ooh, do I know, I know the Bible? I know what's coming (laughter). And you, but when you en- engage that spirit inside yourself, you know when you're getting ready to mess up. Speaker 1: So, so when you came back to Chicago, is that when you started working at Cabrini [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes, that's when I came back. And with the help of Jimmy Tillman--you know Jimmy and Jimmy (laughter), yes. Speaker 1: I'm trying to think if I know Jimmy Tillman. I know [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Tillman. Speaker 2: Jim--well, that's where the name came from. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, okay. She was married to him, and he-- Speaker 2: Jimmy was a drummer, was the drummer over at Crane Junior College [Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Oh, he was-- Speaker 2: He was in that, in that-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, but what happened with him? Speaker 2: He was--what's the girl that later that's got the theater up on the, the ensemble, the Black Ensemble [Black Ensemble Theater, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: That's, that's [HistoryMaker] Jackie Taylor. Speaker 2: Jackie Taylor. They were the, for a minute, and something happened with that. I haven't heard from Jimmy, and I've tried for a long time, 'cause I wanted to bring them boys to the--is it called the Com Theatre [Com Ed Performing Arts Theatre, Chicago, Illinois] now? But the old--the Regal [Regal Theater, Chicago, Illinois]. I wanted to bring the Regal, put it together, put it-- Speaker 1: Regal's closed now. Speaker 2: I know, I know, I know. What a waste. And Morris [Morris Ellis], Morris had even said, "Look, I got a guy," blah, blah, blah and said, "Let's, let's, let's, let's see something, and we can do this." We were gonna bring, bring Nat King Cole, Lou Rawls, and Joe Williams into the Regal Theater, to holy ground. And--we--she wouldn't let us have that theater. And Lou gave her the money to, for, the seed money. Speaker 1: That's true. Oh, you're talking about her theater. Speaker 2: Her theater. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm talking about-- Speaker 1: You're talk-- Speaker 2: --the Regal Theater-- Speaker 1: --Dorothy Till-- Speaker 2: --Comcast [sic.]- I'm talking about the money that Lou Rawls gave her to make it the Lou Rawls cultural center [Lou Rawls Theater and Cultural Center]. Speaker 1: No, but that's (laughter), that's called the, it's called the Harold Washington [Harold Washington Cultural Center, Chicago, Illinois], right. Speaker 2: That's right. Politics can change names. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But Lou gave her the seed money-- Speaker 1: No, that's right. Speaker 2: --to go-- Speaker 1: I remember when he came even to perform, I do. I remember that. Speaker 2: I talked to Lou when he came, when he first realized he was getting, was getting, getting, getting burned, broke his heart, 'cause that was Lou's stomping grounds. He--same way--Lou always felt the same way I--I'm not, I'm not saying that. But everybody wants to go home and wipe home out, just say I went home and did it. Story_ID: 656507 Speaker 1: So when you came back to Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and you were--how did you get that job? Speaker 2: With the, with--I had assisted Jimmy [Jimmy Tillman] the year before, in '76 [1976]. And he recommended me to--I forget her name, who was head of--I got a letter. I brought a copy of the letter from that, yeah, from the, from the (unclear). But he recommended me to do the blues program. So we wrote, we wrote the grant, we wrote the--for the Illinois Arts Council [Chicago, Illinois], and they were the liaison to NEA [National Endowment for the Arts]. That was a fan- that was a great experience. Speaker 1: So talk about that. How long did you do that for? Speaker 2: It was a three month program. And we used--we had kids from age ten to sixteen, over at the Schiller [Schiller Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], from the Schiller and the Newberry Schools [Newberry School; Walter L. Newberry Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois] there in Cabrini-Green. And it was diverse racially. And what we did, these kids would--we, we, we projected that we could raise their reading scores and have self-esteem if they were able to communicate their feelings through the blues. So, we taught them how to write their blues with an AAB format. (Singing), "They call it stormy Monday. Tuesday is just as bad. They call it stormy Monday. Tuesday is just as bad. Wednesday is worse. Thursday is--," AAB. And the kids started writing their blues songs. And we found out, Jimmy and I, that the problem with many in education is not the students; it's the teachers half the time. One young lady wrote about her boyfriend--her mother's boyfriend, who was a pimp. He was pimping her mother. And he walked with a limp. And I, I--forgive me for not remembering it 'cause it was such--using those, those rhymes, this girl--I got a picture of her--she wrote, and sang it; she wrote the song, so we would work with the teachers on grading on, on evaluation and so forth. And Will, Willie Dixon, Koko Taylor, some of the other artists would come in and would do performances, so, to inspire the kids. And this one English teacher gave this girl a failing grade. And the girl came, "Mr. Fisher [HistoryMaker Shelley Fisher], Ms. So and So blah, blah, blah," and it was 'cause the women did not, the teacher did not understand limp, knew very little about pimp and the other lyrics that the young lady was using that were rhyming and making sense in, in terms of the jargon of the hood. I had to explain that. Then they began to respect the program a bit. So we taught the kids guitar, because, let's face it, blues, after three chords it starts to become jazz. So they learned three, three chords and played tambourine and harmonica, and they learned to play their blues. And as a result, the finale was the, they wrote their own--I can't say--what's a--not a graduation but their, their ceremony, their success ceremony, and it was wonderful. It was wonderful what those kids did, how they--you know, it's--and we're talking about all kinds of kids, not just, not just black kids. Some of the white kids had better worse--had problems of abuse than, than, than Dora [ph.] did. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So everybody can be helped from music, when we understand it. But in order to understand it you gotta be able to communicate it. And if I'm just feeding you something, I'm not communicating to you. I'm, I'm marketing you. You're part of my demograph. And why nobody'll write something that anybody else can sing, our Mistys ['Misty'], our Stormy Weathers ['Stormy Weather'], our (singing), "Go down Moses," ['Go Down Moses']. Ain't nobody writing nothing that nobody else can sing. Jay-Z, bless his heart, and him and Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles], ain't nobody can sing that stuff but them (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, that, that's in '77 [1977], right? Seventy se-(simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy-seven [1977], the blues program. Story_ID: 656508 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. And then, but you leave to go to Japan in '78 [1978]. Why (unclear)-- Speaker 2: In the latter part of, after sev- latter part--we finished the program in July--no, no, no, school year, in June. Graduation was in June of '77 [1977]. And in November, I believe my passport says I was in Osaka [Japan]. Speaker 1: But why did you leave? And do you--what, what is happening? Are you performing at places like Joe's ja- Joe Segal's Jazz Showcase? Speaker 2: Here [Las Vegas, Nevada]? Speaker 1: No, in Chicago [Illinois] at that point. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. I worked up north. I worked up north at the--oh, my god. We're talking year--we're talking--since I've performed, it's been so many years since I performed regularly in Chicago. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: That was even--after summer I wasn't performing regularly. Back opened for The Dells out there at Atlanta Skyway [ph.] and you know, a few gigs here and there, but there ain't that many gigs, not like it was in California. Speaker 1: Now, oh, I see, okay. So why did you go to Japan? Speaker 2: I had nowhere else to go. Speaker 1: And how'd--what-- Speaker 2: Mean at that, on that day when the agent called and said, "Would you like to go to Japan?" Chicago wasn't knocking on my door. Hollywood wasn't asking me would I mind taking that role. Japan, yes. Speaker 1: So tell me about your Japan--'cause you were in Japan you said from '78 [1978] to '81 [1981]. Speaker 2: Eight- until--yeah, I would have to come out, go out the country to get my visa renewed. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I learned for the first time what it feels like to be illiterate, symbols and sounds, not phonetics. I learned how to drink tea from an empty cup. I learned discipline. I learned respect. I learned what the honor--the work ethic, what it means to be the best dishwasher in all of Osaka. I mean I wasn't a dishwasher, but to, but to, to, for the, the dishwasher in Osaka, his worth ethic is ganbatte ne, do your best. And that's not the worth I think that I had been privy to, you know, I mean not, not, not the way that they, that they, they puncturize [sic.] it in Japan. Everybody do your best. This was a country that was destroyed in '45 [1945], and now they are the, one of the industrial giants. It ain't from being smart and being lazy. It's from doing your best. And I learned. So, and my girlfriend young, young lady, every night I'd finish playing just five minutes--but she knew my program--five minutes before I would finish, she would leave. This went on for two and a half months. And several times a week, when I came out of my business hotel room, there were flowers there. Turned out she was a radio, TV personality who was coming to study what I was doing. And by the time I learned my way, which was popular then, in Japanese, she was impressed. So we became friends, and she taught me Japanese. And we're still greatest friends, friends today. She's married and--her daughter, but our daughters are, you know, same age and so forth. So, yeah, that's how I got to Japan, the first time. And it's all right to get there once, but you gotta get what? Invited back. That's when you know you, you're doing the job in Japan, 'cause if they don't like you, you ain't coming back. Story_ID: 656509 Speaker 1: Who brought you over? What was their system? Who--was it government money or was it-- Speaker 2: No. The, the-- Speaker 1: --or was it a promoter? Speaker 2: The, the promoter had, had, was, was booking mostly a--gaijin, clubs, foreigner clubs, we should say. But he had this one club called King George [ph.], which was just across the street from the Kansai TV [Kansai Telecasting Corporation], government TV, frequented with the highest class, the, the Japanese. And they saw my picture. They heard my demo tape. They said let's take a chance. Speaker 1: And so did you, did you--was it--that was your first time really in a foreign country like that, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, 'cause when you had been in the [U.S.] Air Force, you weren't there very long-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --and had--so how was-- Speaker 2: I didn't want to go to Alaska, Alaska (laughter). Speaker 1: How, how was that experience though? Speaker 2: In Japan the, the first time? Eye opening. I mean for the first two weeks, you know, you're like a child in wonderland, you know, and everybody's showing you. And then, if you don't know where to go, they, they take you, and they'll take you where you need to go, you know. And, and the Japanese people are just, when they like you, you, you, you're there. You can't do enough for you. And--small story: my favorite Chinese food is shrimp egg foo young, and, and shrimp fried rice. And this restaurant I found had the best I've ever tasted. And I used to go four or five times a week and eat shrimp egg foo young, yakimeshi tofu yung hai, is the--in Japanese. So the, the day before I was getting ready to finish, the waitress came up and said, "Matisyahu, my boss is very sad." I said, "Why?" She says, "He thinks that you think that's the only thing we sell," (laughter), "and that he wants to make a special--." That's, that is (laughter), that's the comedy. Making a fool out of yourself when you travel is one of the best things ever. Getting lost, you know, is one of the best exper- experiences, I think. Story_ID: 656510 Speaker 1: So then how do you go to British Columbia then, Vancouver [Canada] after that? Speaker 2: Okay, I had met an agent-- Speaker 1: Are you coming back to Chica- you're coming back to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --Chicago [Illinois] periodically. Speaker 2: No, no. I'd met, I'd met--oh, Melba Caldwell, did you ever hear that name? I think Melba's passed on. Melba Caldwell was a partner of Al Williams, one of the Four Step Brothers. And they had an office at 32 West Randolph [Street]. And I used to be their mailman. All the agents, I was their mailman and while I was becoming a musician. So I'm learning, and I'm asking; I'm talking, you know. And Melba Caldwell, who I hadn't spoken to for some years, but I called her and let her know I was back in town. And she booked me up in Winnipeg, Canada. And I went up there and I did well. And there was--what was it, a--it wasn't (unclear). It's a hotel chain, and they booked me across their hotels. Then I wound up in Vancouver, was--excuse me--Vancouver, one of the best kept secrets in the world. You--that's, it's so beautiful. Speaker 1: I hear it is. Speaker 2: And I went there. I found just great success. I, I had an apartment, well, in the hotel--no, no, no, I mean this one bedroom den apartment and the lounge right downstairs. So all I had to do was get up, take my shower, go downstairs and work for four hours, come back home. Canada was wonderful to me. Story_ID: 656511 Speaker 1: So what--so you go--so you enjoy--I, I've heard that British Col- I mean Vancouver [Canada] is just absolutely gorgeous. Speaker 2: Oh yes, expensive. It wasn't expensive when I, when I first went there. But after the, after Hong Kong, went back to China, they started literally selling passports. So you put enough money in the Bank of Nova Scotia, you got a--you got--and then it went sky high. But it's a beautiful city, one of the few places I know you can go skiing and to the beach at the, on the same day. Speaker 1: Yeah, they, they were starting to make a lot of movies there at one time. Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, I did 'The Three Wishes of Billy Grier' and the Letter with--to Three Wives in Vancouver. Speaker 1: Oh, you did? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: In what years? Speaker 2: 'Letter to Billy Grier' [sic.] 1984, and 'A Letter to Three Wives,' that was the last one I did before I went overseas with Loni Anderson; that was 1985. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a remake of the old movie, 'Letter to Three Wives.' Speaker 1: So really, everything that's happening in the states you're missing. Are-- Speaker 2: In the states? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean this, the '80s [1980s] are Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] in office and high interest rates and-- Speaker 2: I did miss, I did, I--well, you know might have been calendar--so I mean it's, you know, you flip--you got-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you see the news. I wasn't really missing it. I left here when Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] love it or leave it. I came back in 2000, when Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had--the economy was all right and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. My daughter had gotten old enough to assume her part of our relationship by not be, you know, she's, she, she don't want to be around me anyway anymore, so. But we, you know, so I, I came back, 'cause I wanted-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --to fulfill my dream at, to play downstairs. Speaker 1: Right, to play downstairs. Speaker 2: We're in The Mirage [Las Vegas, Nevada]. Speaker 1: Oh, right, okay. But, right-- Speaker 2: This, this used to be my job. This is (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. So, but, so you, so you are in, in Brit- is anything different? Like, is a musician's life basically it doesn't matter where at the location you may--wherever you lay your head is your home? Speaker 2: No, no. There are some awfully hard beds out there, you know (laughter). You gonna be having a hard time calling it home. Speaker 1: But are you living in the hotel the whole time you're, you're playing at, in Vancouver? Are you getting the places-- Speaker 2: No, I, no, no, no. I had a, I had an apartment. I had an apartment, and I had a girlfriend. And when a girl- when my--broke up, I was, I had the job in Puffin's [Puffin's Dining Room and Lounge], so yeah, it's got an empty space coming up. Speaker 1: Puffin? Okay, but Puffin's-- Speaker 2: Puffin's is-- Speaker 1: --is-- Speaker 2: --was in the Palisades Hotel [Pacific Palisades Hotel, Vancouver, Canada]. Speaker 1: No, no, but Puffin's is in (laughter), is in Nor- in Nor- Norway, or is it in Sweden? Speaker 2: No. Puffin's is in, in, is in Vancouver. Speaker 1: Oh, it's in Vancouver. Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-hm. Speaker 1: And what, what was Puffin's' reputation? Speaker 2: High rollers, fast crowd. Vancouver pretty much closes around twelve. It's not open all night. And so the ladies who applying their trade would come by for a cocktail. It was that kind of--it's the place to go. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: And truth be told (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay. So then-- Speaker 2: --because of the music. Story_ID: 656512 Speaker 1: Well, you keep with your narrative. So after that, what happens? Speaker 2: Now, we're, we're in Vancouver [Canada], or? Well, I got the--I was in Vancouver 'til '85 [1985], when I get the letter from Sweden to come. Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985]? Speaker 2: From, in '85 [1985]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --nineteen eighty-five [1985], when I get the letter from--that they had been recommended to contact me to come to, to Sweden to perform. And the job, it was organized between the Swedish agent and the Norwegian agent. So originally I was met in Norway. My first visa was for Norway for one month at the Britannia Hotel in, in Trondheim [Norway], where the Nazis--I mean I saw so much stuff there that--but anyway, that was my, that was--then I worked one month. Then I went to Sweden for two months, and then they wanted to renew, so, but I had to come back to the states. So I came back, not to the states, to Canada, came back and saw my apartment and went, and went back to Europe. Speaker 1: And what did you--'cause I think of--I, I hate to say this, but I even think--didn't you work in Finland at some point? Speaker 2: I worked, I did a motion--I worked in Finland several points. I used to do at the hock- Hotel Vaakuna [Original Sokos Hotel Vaakuna, Helsinki, Finland], which sits right in front of the train station over there, Vaakuna. And I worked at the, the ships that went over the, over the Black Sea, the, the Stena lines [Stena Line], which was--but most of the time they, the, the Finns, when they come on, they just come on for the cheap booze (laughter), 'cause it's, you know, tax free on the ships, and they never leave ship. That was some hard work. You gotta sit there. You gotta--now that was--and the sea and when the tide (laughter) was--that--you sit there (laughter). Yeah, but Finland--and, but my, the director and producer, Aki Kaurismaki, who produced the film Lonesome Tra- go-- Speaker 1: 'Lonesome Traveler' [sic.]. Speaker 2: --Drifting Cli- Clouds ['Drifting Clouds'], he was from, he was Finnish. He's like the Spielberg [Steven Spielberg] of Finland. Speaker 1: So when you--so you're doing a lot of either--you're doing a lot of, like, supper clubs or--not supper clubs, but you're playing in, in venues, hotels, boat, you know, on-- Speaker 2: This is in-- Speaker 1: --ships. Speaker 2: --in now day? We're in Scandinavia? That, that's what we're in? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, mostly at hotels, most of the, the hotel chains for, in, in, in Gothenburg [Sweden] or the Itaboy [ph.], the (unclear), they're hotel chains. And they bring you in for a month, and they put you, he puts you in a nice room; you, you eat; and you're--and get a salary. Speaker 1: And did, do those work differently than the states, or is it very similar? And who, who is owning those? You know, 'cause they're--'cause you know what? You're not performing in any jazz festivals when you're over there, because I had read that, I think about something-- Speaker 2: North Sea. Speaker 1: --Stockholm [Sweden] and also I think have jazz-- Speaker 2: What, it's, no, it's been, it's been-- Speaker 1: --festivals. Speaker 2: Remember, I came back in 2000. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I went back over 2000. I had contracts to fulfill in 2001. And then 2002, The Mirage [Las Vegas, Nevada]--I was getting ready back, to move back to Europe, 'cause at first some things was kind of skimpy, and the, the politics of Las Vegas [Nevada] can be (makes sound). And I was finding myself getting a bit discouraged. And I thought, I said hm, they got outs to this house. I'm not gonna be identified by a piece of property. They can have it. I'll go back to Europe, and they'll never see me again. And I took a job in Holland [the Netherlands]. And I got a call from the agent here in Vegas saying they want you at Mirage. Speaker 1: Hm (unclear)-- Speaker 2: And that was, those were words that I'd been waiting to hear. Speaker 1: --to hear. Because were you, did you feel for that time that you were sort of in the outpost? I, I'm just saying Scandinavia, I've never been there. But there are--it feel--like even looking at pictures, and I know they say, you know, that I think it's Oslo [Norway] that's very green, you know. Speaker 2: Scandinavia is very green. Speaker 1: Green. Speaker 2: Very. And the nature is beautiful. Speaker 1: Is--but they feel cold to me. I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --and I don't mean to come (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) they can be. Speaker 1: I'm not talking about temperature like. There's even the, the one thing on YouTube where you're performing-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, and you're, you're singing-- Speaker 2: That's typical Finnish. Speaker 1: --and these, and they're, they come in. I think it was, you know, people were eating at the restaurant where you're performing. Do you know the little piece I'm talking about? Speaker 2: Yes, of course, yes, yes, yes, Lonesome Tra- ['Lonesome Traveler'] that's typical Finnish. You do not show your feelings. They'd rather drink. They can, they'd--you know, and to my Finnish friends, you know, it's true. And you know, they (clears throat)--and they just drink. They, you know, they, they went through so much during that Russian--that, that Swedish conflict, when they didn't know whether they were gonna be Swedish or Russian. So they, you know, they drink. They, you know-- Story_ID: 656513 Speaker 1: But did you ever think you were gonna s- 'cause you had, you had two children there, a boy and a girl, Marie--Martha [Martha Fisher] and William [William Persson] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) William, um-hm. Speaker 1: And were you thinking that you were ever gonna stay there yourself? Speaker 2: I never expected to be buried in, in, in, in, away from, off the American soil. And when my, especially Martha's mother and I, we were in a solid relationship, and before we got into the relationship, I'd made it known that I was in Europe and Scandinavia to--but I wanted to go back to Canada or to the states. And if we're gonna be together, you should be prepared for that. Speaker 1: So it was under those conditions. Speaker 2: It was under those conditions. They always knew that, okay, I'm, I'm, yeah, I'm here. I'm gonna learn your language. I'm gonna pay your taxes. I'm gonna respect your laws. I'm gonna raise my kid. But I got a few things still to do that I'm not gonna be able to do over here, because once they think they know it, all of a sudden they started bringing in piano players, entertainers from the Eastern Bloc, Bulgaria and Hung- Hungary, who are excellent, excellent musicians, trained. And these guys come and they sit, and they watch you, and they watch you, and you play, and they're picking your licks, finding your licks. And they go back and learn them. Then they come back and, and say I'll play for a hundred dollars or less a week. So a lot of that was, was happening in, in, in, in Europe, aside from my kids growing older and me growing older, and a lesson that I'd learned from [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones. Quincy was in Scandinavia for years, writing and scoring for Sveriges TV [Sveriges Television AB], stock- and as soon as they thought they had, had his licks, that they'd copied his licks, the phone stopped ringing. They're nationalistic. America is the only country that you come in and, and that, that we have hosts, and they (laughter), they suddenly becoming the, the second minority. Speaker 1: So, but you were gone twenty years. Speaker 2: Twenty-three years. Speaker 1: Twent- okay. That's a long time to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, I mean, how are you changing as a person, or is this just all part of the experience, or-- Speaker 2: Part of the journey. Speaker 1: All part of the journey. Speaker 2: It's all part of the journey. Speaker 1: But what about your vocal--what about your, your wa- wa- are you writing any during this-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. In fact, I'm, now I'm writing with the electronic with my, with my son. He's an aspiring musician. He's also getting good grades in school, but he's, but he, he wants to perform. And he's studying theory and so, but we're working with Skype and with the electro IT [information technology] programs. Speaker 1: No, but I mean then. I'm talking about then. Speaker 2: Now? Speaker 1: No. I'm talking about then. Speaker 2: Then? Speaker 1: Then what were you doing? Were you writing? Were, are you performing? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You're performing, but are you, do you have--see, because what I keep hearing is that you wanted to do Las Vegas [Nevada]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But here you're sort of on the outpost. You're, you're making a living. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But you're not doing any jazz festivals or anything like that. Speaker 2: It wasn't like that in 2000. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: This thing changed. I was here and see, it was before I had my accident. The, somebody came, one of the, the managers, saying, "The new president is--got a new rule. He's, he's gonna come in here and get rid of all gray hair, meaning that this, this space here where this takes up this piano and this, and, and these people sitting around listening to you sing that beautiful music, we can make more money we put some slot machines in here." And I'm playing over there by the baccarat lounge downstairs. Speaker 1: Oh, you're talking about here now. Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: Okay, but not--wait, no-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay, I'm, okay, I'm sorry. I misunderstood (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, you're misunderstanding. So I'm trying to--before--we're gonna get here just in a little bit. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 656514 Speaker 1: But I'm trying to understand what those twenty-three years represent in terms of your career. Speaker 2: Lot of learning and productive that, you know, I'm, I'm writing. I'm doing commercials. I'm doing jingles. I'm doing--I'm making a living. I'm feeding my family and putting a little bit on the side. It was lucrative, especially if you were willing--I, I even, you know, I played Katowice, Poland. The Saturday--the, the Sunday after I'd finished, the bartender's wife took me to see Auschwitz and Birkenau [Auschwitz II-Birkenau]. I saw that. At six o'clock in the morning we went into Auschwitz where the fog is--and, and, and arbeit macht frei, work makes you free. I went through those. I saw that. There's so much--I never would have gotten that from here. Somebody offered me a gig in Katowice, Poland, in some little restaurant that he's, whatever. He wanted to have a black guy playing piano, you know--'Casablanca.' He wanted some of that. Okay, pay me, here I come. And in addition to that, I saw some stuff that you would not want to see every. Speaker 1: Like what? Speaker 2: When you go into Birk- in Auschwitz, you enter the la- the, it's, all the, the, the windows are blacked out. And then you see the, this holes, the bullet holes for the ones who were gonna make trouble. Then you go inside and you see rooms half as big as this suite, certainly as big as these two rooms, with nothing but hair, another room nothing but shoes, glasses, of, of, of space as big as square of this chair, where you slept. You, you--this is your punishment. You could not sit down. You slept there. That was your punishment, all sort of atrocities. And the last part of the tour of Auschwitz is your gas chambers. And when you go into that chamber and they close that door (makes sound), you can feel it, talking about the spirits I mean. Everyone I've talked to--then when you go outside, you get a redeeming factor where you see the noose that hung, where they hung (unclear). Then we went to Birkenau, where the 'Schindler's List,' where they brought the--on the trains. And you go inside the barracks, and the barracks--the bunk beds are four high. And they tell you why. If you had one of those top beds and you had to go to urinate in the middle of the night, you didn't get out of your bed. You just pee- peed down onto the next one, 'cause that's how cruel it was. I saw that. I saw that-- Speaker 1: I know. Speaker 2: --this little cotton picker from Mississippi. Speaker 1: I think our holocaust was worse though. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: I think you don't want to compare holocausts-- Speaker 2: This, this one-- Speaker 1: --but I think that-- Speaker 2: Oh-- Speaker 1: --the holocaust, our-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was just, but you know-- Speaker 1: --our holocaust was longer. Speaker 2: Yeah, and you had media (laughter)--yes it was. Speaker 1: That's longer. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Not to negate that, but it was longer. Story_ID: 656515 Speaker 1: Talk about the 'Drifting Clouds' production. Speaker 2: It was a f- it's, the plot of the film--it's, it's a very dark movie. It's about the, the, this impoverished couple in, in, in Helsinki [Finland]. He's lost his job, and she's--they, they don't--they're going through poverty. And the, the things that they go through to survive together and still make it laughable. He, he was able to do that. The guy lost his job, or a taxi driver gets, excuse me, gets beaten up over something silly, over some girl in--I mean it's silly. It's, it's a--I wish it as shown in the states. It's a craft movie, but it's dark. Speaker 1: So how did the project come into being? Who, who, who was the producer on the project (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Aki Kaurismaki-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's who you said, okay. Speaker 2: --who is the, also produced 'Leningrad Cowboy' ['Leningrad Cowboys Go America']. He's, he's well known all over the world except here. Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: He's just, he's does not play the Hollywood game. He would--he said, "I don't care if they don't show my movie in Hollywood." Speaker 1: So but how had, how did you get involved with it? Speaker 2: I was playing down in Zurich [Switzerland] at the Vita Hotel [ph.]. And I did a special party for a lady named Mrs. Kahunce [ph.], who is like one--she's Tina's, one of Tina Turner's neighbors in Kusnacht [Switzerland]. And they invited me to play just a private party at they, at their white grand and you know. And the producer was there and said, "I got an idea for a movie." It was totally off the wall, because there are no--the, the black people in, in Finland you can count them on one hand I mean. But he, but he wanted to put me--and he says, "Hey, you just do what you do. You play the piano in this, in this lounge, and we'll tell the rest of the story. You just go ahead and play." We'll leave--and the camera stayed on me three minutes. That's unheard of. Nobody in, in Hollywood have given me three minutes in the beginning of a major motion picture and let me keep the publishing rights. So that's how that came to be. Somebody saw me and liked me. The way it's been all my-- Speaker 1: 'Cause it won, it won second place in Ca- at the Cannes Film Festival. I think I heard that. Speaker 2: First place. Speaker 1: First place, okay. Speaker 2: Look at Wikipedia. It's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Look at wi- yeah-- Speaker 1: So were you at Cannes when, when that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, ma'am. Speaker 1: --happened. Speaker 2: I didn't play, but I was there partying (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a wonderful time (laughter). Story_ID: 656516 Speaker 1: So, you deci- so you really have your sights, as you've been saying, on Las Vegas [Nevada], okay. And why was that? Did you feel that your career wasn't going along the way you wanted it to be? Speaker 2: I had something to prove. I wanted to prove that I was good enough to play Las Vegas. I know a lot of entertainers. I don't know many of my homeboys say, "I played Vegas." I mean, okay, so you, you--that's my bragging right. I paid dues all over the world and in places where the piano had never been to. One guy told me when I asked him, "Can you tune this--can you get the piano?" And he said, "Well, it was just painted last month." I mean (laughter)--so I wanted to show that I could play Vegas. That's, that's what I wanted to show. And in terms of the climate, I, when I left, when I left Chicago [Illinois], and although I was in Scandinavia, and Vancouver's [Canada] quite chilly too, I promised God and three other responsible people: if I get a chance, I ain't gonna try to come back to no cold weather. I would now. I would now because I know some things. But I did not have--you know, being out in that cold weather and carrying the mail, and Chicago just cold. Speaker 1: It's gotten warmer with global warming. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So, so what--so you came here in 2000. Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000], March 3rd. Speaker 1: Okay. And they--so how did this deal happen here with The Mirage [Las Vegas, Nevada]? Speaker 2: I forced it. I played it. I started one--I'd came, I'd come, I'd been here and did an audition for an agent in '97 [1997]. And he, and he is the agent, you know. And he told me--I did a, I did a, a Nat Cole [Nat King Cole], a blues thing. Then I did (singing), "I see tree--" ['What a Wonderful World'], Lou- Louis Armstrong's--down at the New York-New York [New York-New York Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada]. The audience stood up and (claps hands). I walked outside and then he said--he was outside watching. He said, "Call me tomorrow. Give me a call tomorrow." So I'm thinking, when I call him tomorrow he's gonna say, "Wow, you're there, you're there, you're there." He says, "Well, I don't think there's anything that I can do for you." He says, "I, I wouldn't advise pulling up stakes and moving back, moving to Las Vegas." He says, "It's just not like that here." So I came back. And with the help of, of, of a guy I knew in, in, in Europe, Ray Glover--he's down at the Bellagio [Bellagio Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], one of the few men of color working on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada]. He's at the Bellagio in, in la--Ray got me an audition at the, work for the entertainment director at MGM [MGM Grand Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada]. And they liked what I brought. I brought an international flavor. I could address most of people in the, in the room in their own language, and I was playing good. I was--wasn't drinking up the bar. I was leaving on time and showing up on time, not taking nobody's wife home. And I got job--went, went from MGM Grand to New York-New York, The Venetian [The Venetian Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada], what's his name's [Sheldon Adelson] place, the, the guy who gave all that money to Romney [Mitt Romney]--it was, is a miracle I got in there, but, and in some, the local, the Texas theatre [Texas Station]. And I started getting a reputation. So then the agent phoned me, this guy who said, "I can't do anything for you." He phoned. He said, "I got a job down at Mirage." He says, "But there's no singing. It's just piano playing, just want you in the back of the background." So now they had a guy out on the, in the, in the, in the baccarat bar, who was doing it. But he was, he was using electronics, but he was using too heavy--it wasn't relaxing. So I'm over in the, this other bar playing 'Mona Lisa' and playing it, and somebody said well, can--almost the same thing that happened to Nat [Nat King Cole]. Somebody said, "Can you sing it?" I said, "Well, we don't have a microphone here, and they are not licensed." Well, he, he said, "Go ahead, sing it. You can, you can do it." And I think it was 'Nature Boy.' I sang 'Nature Boy.' And the guy came up and put four or five hundred--four hundred dollar bills on the piano. And I'd done it without a mic. So I started singing without a mic. I didn't care. I was making a living. And the people, the, the people in the restaurant, it was just, it was warm enough for them to enjoy it without being overbearing. The maitre d', the what, the hostess, everybody started--went to the hotel for the Mirage manager, said, "This guy ought to be over there in the baccarat lounge where the high rollers are." And that's how I go there, breaking-- Speaker 1: And didn't it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) rule--I broke a rule. No mic, here it is. God's got holding one right there for his only-- Story_ID: 656517 Speaker 1: So did you enjoy the experience? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah? Speaker 2: Yeah. It was so amazing how it happened. When you dream something, and you work, and it makes--and it can happens. We--I'm, I'm sorry for people who have not had that realization. Now, it was fun until one morning. I was in my third year, and I took two weeks off. And Martha [Martha Fisher] was coming from Oslo [Norway]. We were gonna meet in Chicago [Illinois]. So I'm gonna go a day early so I can be there and make sure that I'm there at the airport when she gets off the plane. And I'm driving along on the 24th--29th of, of June, seven o'clock in the morning, praising the spirit, thinking about things ain't too bad. I got a teenage daughter that's coming halfway around the world to see her daddy, got a dog that comes when I call him, and the house is getting paid off. Turn my signal to go off on long term parking, looked down. There was a car coming on my left. To keep from hitting the car, I over, over correct it, flipped three times, over the rail, down onto Paradise [Road], and skidded another sixty-eight feet I think the report said, with a Jeep Cherokee on that arm. I blanked--I went, went, must have went out right away, knocked me out. But when I woke up, the, the blood was shooting from that art- that main artery, and had the presence of mind to grab it with my boys-you know, yeah, what we learned, to, to clamp it. And by then the police--so I had been out I don't know how long. But now the cops are there, and they kick in the--and I said, and I said, "Get in here, get, get in here and call--," and I gave them my friend's number. "Call Roxanne [ph.]," blah, blah, blah, blah, the number. We got it; we got it. And I said to myself, "Damn, I'm gonna miss my plane." And died, bled out. They got me in the ambulance, got me over to UMC [University Medical Center of Southern Nevada, Las Vegas, Nevada]. I hope I'm not jumping the story, but see this--got me at UMC, and that's when I first realized that my day is ruined, 'cause my arm looked like a piece of liver. But they got me morphine up. And I think what saved this arm--'cause they'd sent for that, the, you know, the X [external fixation], the X fix. When I'm going into the operating arena, I said to the, to the chief physician, I said, "Well, I suppose I'm gonna have to change, consider changing careers," (laughter). That morphine (laughter). He said, "Well, what do you do?" I said, "Well, I'm the headlining pianist, headline pianist at the baccarat bar in The Mirage [Las Vegas, Nevada]." And I think that made him work a little bit harder. And again, God our mama--it was a vascular surgeon who wasn't even supposed to be in town--he was supposed to be up in Seattle [Washington]--came by the hospital to sign some papers, and he was off on his way. And they brought him in, and they took the big vein out of there and rewired it under there and da, da, da, da, da, da. And after eight more surgeries I'm able to (claps hands) do that, but I can't do that; I can't play piano. Speaker 1: You can't play. Story_ID: 656518 Speaker 1: But talking about experiences. So the minute that you think you riding high, got it--bam! But I was blessed to have good physicians, a very good friend who took--stood by me, and a good dog who had just--he's gone now, but he laid there by my side, big German Shepherd. And that's what it's been like. So after that, after dying twi- I died again on the operating table 'cause my body seized up when they put all the stuff I guess to sustain you. I was laying in the same place that Roy Horn--remember the guy the Siegfried [Siegfried Fischbacher] and Roy, the same--in ICU [intensive car unit]. I was laying in his bed. I'm watching them bring in people, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], bringing them in on stretchers, taking them out in bags. I'm thinking, now when is my turn coming? But I didn't--it--I'm out of there. I got out. And while--when I got out, it took another--while I'm recuperating, that's when I wrote 'Them Boys From Chicago' ['Dem Boys From Chicago']. But that day I wished I had never come back (laughter) to the states. That was a bad day. Speaker 2: It was a freak accident? Speaker 1: Yeah--no, it was a stupid accident. You got--the drivers in Las Vegas [Nevada] are the worst in the world, not in, in--in this country. But it was a freakish for me because I'm just--the car kept going. Nobody stopped, no, no, nobody to sue, but my life is ruined. Speaker 2: But that was 2004. Speaker 1: Four [2004], um-hm. Speaker 2: But you, you've worked your way back, right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I worked, worked my way back, but time is changing. While I'm recuperating, people are buying computers and calling themselves musicians, and playing hip hop, and rapping rhymes that don't reason. Work--what used to be a, a, a fabulous club downstairs is now casino area. What used to be one of the nicest clubs in the city is now a hip hop bar, where they pay car--Paris Hilton a hundred grand [$100,000] just to do a walk through. Champagne is ten grand a bottle, very hard--and music, jazz music and blues, you have to, you have to listen if you're gonna enjoy it. Nobody wants to listen in this country. I go to Japan in the elevator, I don't hear rap or pa- . I hear Ella Fitzgerald; I hear Ellington [Duke Ellington]. We do not appreciate, or not aware what it is, a, a--what--music, jazz music and blues is this country's greatest contribution. And the kids who are making music today couldn't tell you what middle C is on the piano, and le- and leave alone what key they singing in. Something's wrong with that. Story_ID: 656519 Speaker 1: In two thousand and--so you--how long does--so wait a minute. So you realized that you can't play piano anymore, that's gone. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But you still sing. Speaker 2: But my voice was--nothing, not, not another scratch on me, but my arm is almost torn off. Speaker 1: Right. So you, you wrote--so you've been performing. So talk about that, the-- Speaker 2: So I wrote, I wrote, I wrote two--one I wrote is one the beat. It's a music--tutorial for a teachers aid and for today's music. And, but to get back to work, I had to reinvent myself, because I can no longer accompany myself. And when you can accompany yourself, you can always work, 'cause--the overhead, the plane fare, blah, blah, blah, blah. So I had to come up with an idea, something that I can do that's marketable that is also, has some redeeming factor. You've been singing Lou Rawls' music, ah you--all these, these years. You've been--Nat Cole [Nat King Cole] has been your agent. This guy, Harry Weinstein [ph.] may call you his agent, but Nat Cole is my agent, 'cause they know what to expect. Joe Williams, I, you know. These people that I know about let me put this into a concept without being preachy, because you're not allowed to, to get into Mr. Cole's story. His life--his widow [Maria Cole] controls that, and she's very--but you can sing his music, and you can do segues. How you write the music and arrangement is what's gonna make it. With those three artists, as much joy and as much beautiful music as they have made, why can't we do it? We got the best musicians in Chicago [Illinois]. Let's go to Chicago. Let's tape it at the Chicago Theatre since we can't do it at the Regal [Regal Theater]. Let's, let's document it. Let's market it. I had three people who stood up. And this is including the Higginbottoms. Speaker 1: Elzie [HistoryMaker Elzie Higginbottom]. Three people that-- Speaker 2: I mean that, that--but, but who would say, "Yeah, I can get behind that." Everybody else was trying to find out how much could they make, how much of the show could they control, or, "Well, you know, people ain't going out that much no more." Or what's say, "Or the people who would go to see that, they ain't gonna do--they're so medicated, they gonna go to sleep anyway." All kind of crap like that. Instead, I'm saying (laughter), I'm still saying well, why don't we try to teach the, the young people about how they got here with this music? These are people--'cause Lou Rawls came to 43rd [Street] and Vincennes [Avenue]. Why don't we--43rd and Vincennes, 47th [Street] and, and, and Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] right around the corner. Why can't we show them how--why can't we do that? Tom Tom [Tom Tom Washington], Tom Tom said, "Man, I'll get you a (unclear). We'll, we'll, we'll blow this thing out." And Tom Tom don't get excited too much (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You did it though. Speaker 2: Not in Chicago. Speaker 1: Not in Chicago, but you did it here, right? Speaker 2: Did it here, here, on cruise ships until the cruise ships--the Carnival cruises [Carnival Cruise Line] started cutting back their budgets. I was going, I was, had two or three cruises every month, go out, meet the--go to Singapore, meet the ship on Sunday morning, perform on Wednesday, meet the ship in hung--leave the ship in Hong Kong on Sunday, come home. It's work that I felt, ef- I felt very good about. It was, it was rewarding. Then all of a sudden, somebody said, "We got a recession. Let's cut out the entertainers. Let's cut out them singers first." So the sing- so would--so now they're doing shows on the cruise ships with production crews, kids who work in the gift shops. They pay them a monthly salary, and, and one night a week they sing and dance. Story_ID: 656520 Speaker 1: So where are you now then? How do you feel about things? Speaker 2: I finished--I wanna--my priority now, to get my, I want to get my book ['A Motherless Child,' Shelley Fisher] finished by end of the year. And I'm gonna--I want, I want to go up for some other movie, some, some acting parts, but I was ta- I had a chance to get in--do Las--'Last Vegas,' Morgan Freeman's--but I couldn't pick up. I can only pick up so much, so I was out of that--ah, Conrad Murray. Somebody saw my, my zip- my, my promo and said, "He looks like Conrad Murray. Let's get him." And they brought me down to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. We did it. I don't think I look that much like Conrad Murray, but it was interesting. This kid they got to play Michael [Michael Jackson] looked just like--this boy had surgery (unclear) very, (makes sound). Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm (unclear)--he just got out. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. He's the fall guy. He's the fall guy on that one. He'll get paid. Speaker 1: He, he was doing things out here in Las Vegas [Nevada]. Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a home out here. He lost that at, you know. Speaker 1: My father [HistoryMaker Julius Richardson] taught him golf. Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: My father was his golf instructor. Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh. Speaker 1: Out here, um-hm. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh, uh-huh. Story_ID: 656521 Speaker 1: But let's talk about what you--well, we've talked about that, but let's talk about-- Speaker 2: Where do we go from here? Speaker 1: Yeah, or let's-- no, I don't want to do that. I think-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Let's talk about the, the legacy of, of Chicago [Illinois] and the music that it helped sort of create. Speaker 2: The legacy that's gonna come out that's gonna last I think, I think Earth, Wind and Fire is probably the greatest thing come out of Chicago, when it, when it comes down to it, when all the fat is boiled off. What do you--you, you--it, it ain't R. Kelly. Speaker 1: But there are a lot of good people who came out of Chicago. Speaker 2: But we're talking about the, the, the cream of the cream, the very best. Maurice [Maurice White] put that together. I watched Maurice. Ma- Maurice first came to, to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], he--I was one of the first-- Speaker 1: No, no, I'm talking about-- Speaker 2: (Unclear). I'm sorry. Speaker 1: But that's not the same music genre. That's not the same music genre. Speaker 2: Well, that's, that's the thing that Maurice did. He took all the genres and put them together, fusion. But you're thinking about jazz and blues mostly? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: You, you're speaking of blues and jazz, jazz and blues right here? Speaker 1: Yeah, because that's what you've been speaking of, so we can't go the other way. Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if I'm ever going to be able to--it ain't going back where it was. Art does not turn around. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, what new is old as-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: I disagree with that. Speaker 2: You don't, you don't think-- Speaker 1: I, I think that there are some things that are timeless. Now, what form they're in and who they're attributed to may be different, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But no, I, I, I don't; I disagree with that, 'cause I think those have, those have moved into classical forms. Speaker 2: You mean the, the Too Youngs ['Too Young'] and the Mona Lisas ['Mona Lisa'] and the You'll Never Finds ['You'll Never Find Another Love Like Mine'] and the--those artists you mean? Speaker 1: I think so. And you know, the young people, they come back to that sometimes (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If they're exposed to it. Speaker 1: If they're exposed, yeah. Story_ID: 656522 Speaker 1: When you look over your life, let's--'cause I'm gonna--when you look over your life, what do you want to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I took care of my kids [Monique Fisher Calloway, Martha Fisher and William Persson]. I went places and played music that, that exposed our culture. I want to teach that if you dream something and you work for it, you can get it. Be careful what you dream for, but you, you, but you have, you have to get it--it has to come from within. It ain't gonna come with a gun. You ain't gonna stick up nobody and get it. You ain't gonna sell enough dope to make, to get it. Dope dealers die or go to prison. You pick up a gun, somebody else has got a gun. You losing, you're gonna lose your life. So whatever, you better think up something that you can do, and you can do it better than anyone else, your idea, your concept. Nobody else can touch it. And try and hope that you can earn your daily bread from that. If you do, do, doing what you love to do and you can earn your daily bread, you're the richest you-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: I have friends who have got, got stuff (laughter) and can't--you have to put shades on to look at. But they would give all that if they could get up and walk around like I do, go out and play a game of golf with this bad arm, or just to breathe, or to have a conversat- the mind's strong enough to (unclear). One of the--my friend, when [HistoryMaker] Chuck Barksdale is not in good health now. Speaker 1: He's not that's what I-- Speaker 2: And him and Marvin Junior, we had some great--I remember looking back time--over the times. We have to use what we got. If you use--if we only got time and energy, if you use one wisely, you won't use the other one uselessly. So with the little time I got, or I hope, you know, time, but I'm coming up on seventy-two, so ain't many days 'til Christmas, is it? What I got left, I want to share and make a living, but to share and to leave--let these people know that it ain't all about smartphones and la- and pads and iPads. We've got to communicate. We got to sit down and talk about each other. "Hey, man, I didn't mean to insult your sister. And that gang, that, that gun over there, I don't--," you know? We gotta stop killing each other. Story_ID: 656523 Speaker 1: So what are your ho- hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: I'm hoping for, for the black community that we stop going backwards, pull up our pants, and open that book. We, we have such a rich heritage. If, if, if men, black men start wearing dresses next week, you can bet some courtier would have it figured out how to market and fashion it month after next. Whatever we do, if we start rapping, we start--whatever we do, it becomes--the world wants to know how to, how can we learn how to do that. We don't take advantage of that. Am I making any--being clear? We are, we are the, we're, we have so much talent, so much resources, but we like, we're like rats in a bucket. One's trying to get up, and the other one's pulling him back down, pulling him back down. We don't--if, if, if, if we start a group, by the time that we get a recording deal, we gotta figure--, "I'm the boss; no, you the boss; you ain't boss; I'm the boss." That, you know. And just we gotta respect ourselves. We can't--like the song: "You don't respect yourself, who, who else is gonna do it," ['Respect Yourself']? And you read the blogs--I go to Yahoo blogs sometimes when I got nothing else to do. I'm, I'm in the airport or something, and I'm reading. And it's always when they talk about the Tawana, the young girl that got killed out there last year, Tawana Brawley. No, that's, that's the girl in, from the east side. But that's the Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] thing. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The young mother that got killed recently in Chicago [Illinois], several of them, but one I put on my video. That, that, that, that, we got to stop that. And ain't no police gonna stop it, 'cause half the police in Chicago are, are somehow involved with the gang. I know that. They know when the, they when the shooting--when something getting ready to happen over there in, in the park. They go take coffee. Story_ID: 656524 Speaker 1: So you want to return to Chicago [Illinois]. Why, why had--why leave Las Vegas [Nevada] to go back to Chicago? Speaker 2: I've been here thirteen years. Now I didn't come here looking for no relationship. I'm never been--believe me I that--if anything, if I had to spend all the time working on my music that I spent working on women (laughter), they would have--they would tell Stevie Wonder go take some lessons from me. But I've been here thirteen years, Ms. Richardson [Julieanna Richardson]. I have not had a decent relationship. This town is full of what you got and when can I get it? And to survive in this town you got to hustle. You got to hustle in ways that I'm, I'm through with that. I got back when I got--I was so proud when I got back, I went up and after I'd gotten my first job in New York, New York, and I was working with a girl, and she brought--an Hispanic lady--and she brought her friend by to introduce me, and 'cause I'm a single guy, oh, an easy--whatever her description of me was. And so I made-when in Europe I, I learned to be a romantic. Well, I made a chicken alfredo with, with the works, a beautiful wine sauce with a, with, I mean with a cheese sauce with the, the whole works, and invited my new prospect, my whatever. So she came in, and she said, "Um, you mind if I look around?" I said, "No." 'Cause I'm throwing the cream, straining the pasta, whatever. She comes back. She say, "Ooh, you got lots of closet space." I said, "Let's eat, let's eat." 'Cause she's looking already in my closet. These women here want to know--I'm telling you. And I feel, you know--and, and I, and I'm not, I'm not, I'm not talking about young girls. I'm talking about people who have been hustled, who've been out hustled. They are now hustling you. And Las Vegas, the last time I did my show at the Starbright Theatre, the light man said to me, as we were--warm, doing our warm up, "Look, I got these new lights. Give me a hundred dollars, and I'll put them on for you." And I'm filling up his theater. I'm bringing him money. I'm bringing him revenue, and he wants me to pay for some lights that the community has bought. So I'm sick of Vegas. They got one brother playing down there at, at Bellagio [Bellagio Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada]. And his nose is so far up the, the president's butt that he gonna catch a disease in a minute and not be able to sneeze. But he's working. I don't--he's doing what he's got to do. He's feeding his family. But I ain't gonna do that. I'll go back to Japan before that, where I'll be welcome. Only thing, it's cold, and it's rigid, and you got to learn how to live in a short spaces, or even to Canada. But I, I will--hopefully my book ['A Motherless Child,' Shelley Fisher] will ring up some bells and, or somebody will say, "Hey, look, that, that sure is--that, that'll work; why don't we put that on the road or--?" 'Cause I, when I wrote it, I wrote it thinking Broadway. And the only thing that keeps it from Broadway is--and the female element. That was the only criticism I got from, from Las Vegas Review [Las Vegas Review-Journal], that, that there was no female element. But the show is 'Them Boys From Chicago' ['Dem Boys From Chicago']. But I've got to weave. In fact, I wanted--if we was gonna do it in Chicago, I wanted Maggie, Ms. Maggie Brown to narrate, to tell how our father blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. So it does need a female, but that's the only thing that's missing in the, in the--I'll find them one. Story_ID: 656525 Speaker 1: If you had to do your life again, over again, or if you were starting out, what would you do differently? Speaker 2: How much control do I have? That if, that if, that if is a big word. I played the hand I was dealt. So, when I consider looking or I consider the joy and the pain that I've brought to life, I brought more joy. I did more things right than I did wrong. Maybe I'll put that on my tombstone (laughter). But if I would, if I had the opportunity to do again, I would be, I would hopefully I would have one or two more friends who really were my friends. And I'll, I'd exercise a bit more discipline, because in acting out my emotions from the remnants of my childhood, there was no room for discipline. There was only room for acting out. Am I being clear? Yeah, so that's, that's, that's probably, that's, that's pretty much how I look at it. I--this, my book ['A Motherless Child,' Shelley Fisher] is going to, I don't know, maybe to sell two pieces, or maybe it won't sell any. But it will open--tell a lot of good stories about when I was working at--ba- when I--we'll go--I just have to tell you about this. We were working at the--when I was working at the boxing gym. I used to take my buddies down 'cause mostly we all trying to box. Above the--it's a freight elevator, and it opens on both sides--oops, I'm sorry, excuse me, it opens on both sides from the fir- from the basement to the thirteenth floor. And then it becomes only hotel on one side and ledges. It's the elevator shaft. The ledges is about no wide--eighteen inches wide. My boys and I used go up, stand on the open, that, that side of the elevator that was shut, the, the ledge was on, stand, close the elevator, and let the rest of the guys go down when we stand on that ledge, to prove we wasn't a punk. That's all it was about. That's what the gangs are about. That's all they're about, some kid wanna be a man. And his buddies say, "Hey, man, hey man, shoot that, show me." 'Cause now they got this new--knock--this new thing called the knockout. You ever heard about people just walk down the street and punching people to see if na- my stepbrother used to do that, the, the one that was gonna be a boxer. He--I, I thought I, I, I thought that was over--how old would he be now--forty years ago, forty, fifty years ago. He, he could do it. He just (unclear) and then pow, just to see if he could knock them out with one punch. You know how he wound up? A bullet in the heart. He came with a punch. Somebody came with a gun. Story_ID: 656526 Speaker 1: This was the publicity picture from--oh, I didn't get that, the, the CDs [compact disc] out for you. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's all right (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From, for 'Driving Home.' That was a-- Speaker 2: Year, year. Speaker 1: --and, and the pub members-- Speaker 2: Year. Speaker 1: --the pub-- Speaker 2: Year, year. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Do you--what, what year was that? Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: Two thousand three [2003]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, that's recent. Speaker 1: Haven't changed a bit, huh (laughter)? Speaker 2: That was, that's, that's just a casual shot for hopefully to get some modeling work. Speaker 1: In what year? Speaker 2: Two thousand, that was '4 [2004], before June, before the accident. Speaker 1: Wow, this, this is all recent. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's right at the, when I taught the Blues in the Schools program. That's George Patterson, who used to be the--he's gone now. He was a classmate at Crane [Crane Junior College; Malcolm X College, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Which one is George Patterson? Speaker 1: This brother here. And he was a director for The Isley Brothers. He arranged that 'Between the Sheets'--yeah. And that's me with a bald head and much lighter. See how skinny I was? Speaker 2: You're right here? Speaker 1: In the middle. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): With the microphone. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And that's, that's Bernard Reed, the bass player. He was ja- Bernard Reed played with everybody from Jackie Wilson to The Dells to--there's George Patterson again, Jimmy Tillman, Billy Branch, and Willie Woods on trombone. Speaker 1: That's one of my students. He was, he was bashful when we started the program, but he grew, came out of it quite a bit after he learned to play the harmonica a little bit and, and--that's the blues program in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's the cele- I'm sorry--that's at the celebration when they were, the kids were celebrating the success of the, of the program. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's, that's the lady who wrote the lyric--was telling you about, about the pimp and the limp. She's the one that, that wrote the lyric, and then she's singing her own song in the blues program there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You think you re- remember her name? Speaker 1: I'll send it to you. I'll send it to you because I, I do have it. I won't send--I'll make a note of that now. Speaker 2: So there, there they are again, beautiful kids. I had a good time doing that...