 Story_ID: 667497 Speaker 1: So, my name--I'm gonna slate the interview, okay (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. I want to have you start out by stating and spelling your name-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --including your middle name. Speaker 2: Okay. Derek Talmar Ferguson [HistoryMaker Derek Ferguson], D-E-R-E-K, T-A-L-M-A-R, F-E-R-G-U-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And your date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: Okay. April 20th, 1965, Yonkers, New York. Speaker 1: And today's date. Speaker 2: Today's date--tougher. July 15th, 2014. Speaker 1: And, the, your occupation. Speaker 2: Occupation. I am the chief growth officer of Combs Enterprises. Speaker 1: And the location of our interview. Speaker 2: New York, New York. Story_ID: 667498 Speaker 1: So, I want to have you, I want to have--we ask five People magazine-ish questions (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --as a warm up, just short answers. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food, I'm a seafood fanatic, so really anything seafood, but crabs, lobster, shrimp. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color. Actually maroon is one of them. Maroon and blue, as you can see. Speaker 1: As we could see. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Favorite time of year, summer. I love the water, being near the water on a boat or swimming, summer. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Favorite place to vacation, let's see. Lately we've been going really just south toward the beach, so South Carolina, North Carolina just any good beach, beach area. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Do you have one? Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying. Probably say scripture, Ephesians 2:10, "For we are God's workmanship created in Christ Jesus to do good work that was planned in advance for us to do." Story_ID: 667499 Speaker 1: So I'm going to start out by, can I first ask you about your middle name. Speaker 2: (Laughter) See Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], you are too good, you caught the middle name thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah because I-- Speaker 2: You caught that because there is a story behind it (laughter). You are too good, you caught that one. Speaker 1: I'm like where did that name come from? Speaker 2: Yeah, you got--there's a story behind it. So, my father, my father's middle name, my middle name is supposed to be my father's middle name, but my father's middle name really is actually Talmadge, named after the President Talmadge [sic.], and who, one of our presidents had a middle name, I think Talmadge. So his middle name is Talmadge, but, you know, growing up in the good ole South, the pronunciation was a bit off, so when people pronounced it, it would sounded more like Talmar, so when they gave me my middle name they spelled it T-A-L-M-A-R. That's the story. Speaker 1: You were born in New York though. Speaker 2: I was born in Yonkers [New York]. My family, my mother [Roberta Lewis Pieck] and father are both from Virginia, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, but who mispronounced the name then? Speaker 2: So when he was growing up, again, you know he's not looking at a birth certificate or anything, so he's going by how they pronounce it, so he, he basically thought his middle name was Talmar, but if you look at his birth certificate, it's actually Talmadge. Speaker 1: So you were, you were intended, well you weren't even a junior though, too, either. He was just giving you his, what he thought-- Speaker 2: Middle name, right. Speaker 1: --was his middle name. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So since we're talking about your father, can you give his name and year of birth, and tell me what you know about his growing up and background. Speaker 2: Okay. James Talmadge Ferguson [James Ferguson], born February 9th, 1938. So my father grew up in Virginia, segregated South. His father was an entrepreneur. He owned a trucking company. He developed the nickname Lime, Lime Man because he would haul lime trucks, trucks of lime back and forth across different places in Virginia. Largely during this period of time because it was the segregated South, he was a businessowner but he was also basically passing because not many African Americans were business owners, so he was doing business with, you know, it was not, you know, wasn't only exclusive to African Americans. He was doing business with big companies in the South and largely they just did not necessarily recognize him as African American. And so, but he, so he, he was a trucker. My father was always an entrepreneur. He, so growing up he was always very smart, very, played sports, smart, always top of his class. Actually it's interesting he and my mother grew up going to school together and the two of them were always kind of top of their class. And, but he always worked for his father, learned the trucking business and upon graduation initially moved to Baltimore [Maryland] and then eventually to New York and started his trucking company, which became the company that he developed for himself and worked for himself for his whole life. You know he ended up at one point acquiring, he had five trucks and six trailers, and had a pretty substantial business based in the Bronx, New York. Speaker 1: So what was your [paternal] grandfather's name? Speaker 2: My grandfather was Walter Bass Ferguson, Jr., no Walter Bass Ferguson, Sr. [Walter Ferguson, Sr.], yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And so did your grandfather ever live in New York or the work he did was in the Virginia region. Did he ever go to--? Speaker 2: He was based in Virginia and pretty much stayed there, never, other than visiting, never, never, never moved. Speaker 1: Did you ever know him growing up? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did. He passed away probably when I was twelve, thirteen. I knew him well. I mean he came and stayed with us in the, in the Bronx a few times and actually you know what, I'm sorry, he, I was, no, I had actually, I'm sorry, I was in my twenties when he passed away. I'm sorry I got that all confused. Probably twenty-four, twenty-five. I remember a great story that just defines my grandfather was when I graduated from the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], I was talking to him and he was a little sickly, you know, he was a little sickly at that time. He had diabetes and, so I was explaining to him, "Hey grandpa I just graduated from Harvard Business School," and he kind of looked at me a little confused because, you know, he knew I had graduated from college, so he was kind of like, he was a little confused, "I thought you already graduated from college." And so he was, you know, smiling and he looked at me and he says, you know, "Don't go getting all that education and go work for somebody." (Laughter) So very entrepreneurial. Entrepreneurship was through and through his bones and literal- literally he meant it. He was like you know, you know, work for yourself. It's the best way. Story_ID: 667500 Speaker 1: So he [Ferguson's paternal grandfather, Walter Ferguson, Sr.] had, he had seen what he could do. Now you talked also about him passing, and so when you say that, was he fair enough, complexion-wise, to pass? Can you talk about that a little? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, he was, he was pretty fair, but not, you know, to me it would have been, you know, to me it would be obvious that he was, you know, that he was African American, but I think in those days, you know, he, he pulled it off somehow, you know. So, but he's fair, he's kind of, I would say maybe, slightly, a little slightly darker than me, but around my complexion. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so your, your, your father [James Ferguson], did he share any other stories of growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean we, he shared some stories. You know his older brother was more of kind of the rebel rouser type, so he shared stories of them going into places that were, you know, whites only, and his brother being like, I'm going in, and, you know, them getting chased out, so he shared stories like that, but most of his stories are really good kind of family stories or school stories or just, I mean, my sense of them growing up, he had eight brothers and sisters, right? Speaker 1: Where did he fit in those eight brothers? Speaker 2: He was the second oldest, and the oldest was a boy. He was the second oldest, and, and then, and so when you go to their house where they grew up [Gladstone, Virginia], you go upstairs and literally there's this room that the ceiling can't be like five and a half feet high, and nine of them slept, in this long like, it was really like an attic. It's long, very long, so the girls slept in the front, the boys in the back. You couldn't stand up, but you had, I mean maybe, you know, maybe it was six feet high, but I know at a certain age, when if I would go up there, I couldn't stand up. And that's where they all slept. Very, very close brothers and sisters. I mean they're, when, when my wife [Regina Ferguson], my wife started meeting them and see how they interact, she's like "Wow, your family, like they, they enjoy each other. They love each other, they're like very close knit." But they grew up literally like sleeping on top of each other, and my grandmother [Fannie Ferguson] very much the matriarch and, you know, very, faith, her faith was like the most important thing to her and, you know, really, my, both sides of my family, they grew up, they went to church every week, and that was a big part of what they did. My grandfather and grandmother were very active in their church, and, you know, so the stories, you know, are really more good family stories, things about his interaction with his brothers and sisters and, a lot of stories about what it was like growing up, you know, with, with their father and what they learned about the business and business in general, and you know, so, you know, so I would say, you know, nothing that would, you know, other than say every once in a while a flash here and there of kind of segregation story. Speaker 1: But you said he was born in what year again? Speaker 2: He was born in 1938. Speaker 1: Thirty-eight [1938], okay, okay, okay. So he saw the, the change in the South. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But he, what year did he move to? Speaker 2: So he moved to New York probably, I don't know exactly, but I would say around '57-ish [1957], '56 [1956], '57 [1957], and he and my mother [Roberta Lewis Pieck] got married when, let's see, my brother [Gregory Ferguson] was born in '61 [1961], they must have got married in like '58 [1958]. Story_ID: 667501 Speaker 1: Now what about your mother. Can you tell me about what her name is-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and you know, and her year of birth and what you know about her growing up. Speaker 2: Okay. So her current name is Roberta Lewis Pieck. She was remarried. So she grew up, and really my father [James Ferguson] and mother grew up in the same town. It was Gladstone, Virginia, a little small tiny town right outside of Appomattox, Virginia. And my mother similarly had eight brothers and sisters, but her family was a farming family so her father [McKinley Lewis] had a farm and, you know, that's basically how they made their living. And my mother was closest, closest, closest to being the youngest 'cause she was the second youngest. My father was the second oldest and she was the second youngest. So she, you know, again, lots of stories about her brothers and sisters and, you know, all of the, you know, lots of stories about individually, like so many, you know, all of their escapades, the things that happened to them, but, you know, my mother was also very good at school always did really well in school so she tells a lot of fun stories about her school memories. She talks about them walking like miles to school and back, and that experience. My father's older brother used to, she tells, always tells stories, and it's funny because later on he lived across the street from us, but he used to always pick on her and she would like hate to go to school because he would bother her, you know, but, and, you know, she said my father was basically like was interested in her from, you know, from early years but she paid him any attention until, I guess at some point he wore her down basically. But the families knew each other, I mean the families were kind of-- Speaker 1: Even though your, your mother's side of the family were farming people and then your, your father's side is there in this business of-- Speaker 2: Trucking. Speaker 1: Trucking, and so that's, so but they all knew each other. Do you know if they went as much to go to the same church? Do you know that? Speaker 2: They actually went to different churches, but the churches, you know, were, you know, they were, there weren't that many so, I mean I'm sure they would do some things together at churches. You know there may have been times when they went to the same church 'cause I, I know it more in later years, so maybe in the earlier years there was only one, but at some point there was two, two in the area. But they had, so there was also a lot of family connections, so, you know, you trace through the family tree, like they have, like one of my father's aunts may have been one of my, like my father's great aunt may have been my mother's cousin. Speaker 1: So there was intermarriage between them. Speaker 2: Inner, yeah, between the families. Quite a few actually. So I have, you know, I have-- Speaker 1: So you have double cousins. Speaker 2: I have, yeah I was gonna say, I have quite a few double cousins, yeah, a term that a lot of people wouldn't know unless you've been in that situation, so yeah. Speaker 1: So we have that in our family. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know I have three strands of, you know, families between us-- Story_ID: 667502 Speaker 1: What are you, what is the, what, what religious--is Baptist, is it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Method- A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] or C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] or what (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they, they grew up in Baptist churches. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so primarily Baptist churches. Speaker 1: So, so, so the preaching and the--southern bapt-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's like I, I mean I remember early years of like going. I just that being the longest services because when I, where I grew up in the Bronx [New York], we went to a Lutheran church that was right across the street, so service was kind of like a hour long, so I remember going down there just like getting prepared, it was gone about three, four hours of church. So that was my early memory of going to church down south was it's gonna be long, you know, so and, you know, the first time like I said I went to Lutheran church, their charismatic nature like people falling out and catching the holy spirit, and, you know, I had never seen anything like that. So going down south was like seeing literally seeing that and, you know, marvel at what, seeing something like that so. Speaker 1: So you didn't grow up that way then, in that you grew up in the Lutheran so you grow up in a more staid environment-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --with hymnals and things like that, now-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Story_ID: 667503 Speaker 1: So your parents met when they were young. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then they, but what brought them north? That's what I'm, you know, asking, and were there relatives up here in New York that-- Speaker 2: Yes, so I think that with my father [James Ferguson] I believe it was really work. So he started out, his first job was as a welder on the ships in Maryland and I think it was the fact that we had such a big family, so somebody from the family is probably there and my father, you know, had skills, so he knew how to weld, then probably was like, "Hey, you can come make X amount of money welding, come on down to Maryland." And then my mother's older sister was in New York, or maybe a couple of them were in New York already, so when she, when her time was there, my mother [Roberta Lewis Pieck] did a year in college and then left and then, you know, I guess is trying to figure out her next move. And she had a sister in New York and I think at that point I'm not sure if came to New York because of my father, but my father was there also and they both ended up there. So they, they got, they got married in New York actually. Speaker 1: So they didn't, they didn't come to New York together-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --they ended up, so even though they knew each other-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --growing up, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't know if it was just kind of like they really came because of each other but it wasn't like they were together and said let's go to New York. They actually got married in, at Abyssinian church in New York. Speaker 1: Well, I mean that's the famous, Abyssinian Baptist Church was a famous Baptist church. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So were they living, and where were they living when they first got here? Do you know where? Speaker 2: Yonkers [New York]. Speaker 1: In Yonkers, okay. Speaker 2: Yonkers. Speaker 1: Yeah I don't think so much of black people living in Yonkers. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting, so there was, there's a couple of areas, that at the time it was, you know, like my aunt owned a house. She had moved, she was maybe ten years older than my mother and she had moved and she had a house and everybody coming from the South would come stay there until they found a place. So that was kind of what was going on. Speaker 1: And that happened a lot. Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know that happened a lot. Story_ID: 667504 Speaker 1: So let's talk about your siblings. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Because you're the youngest. Speaker 2: I'm the youngest, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, um-hm. So can you give their names-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: My oldest brother is Gregory James Ferguson [Gregory Ferguson], you want the birth date? Speaker 1: Yeah, year of birth Speaker 2: --born in (pause) (background noise). Speaker 1: Wait, let's just wait, that's what got me. Wow. Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's like a three alarmer, five alarmer. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERUPTION) Speaker 2: I didn't know it was going to reach a crescendo like that. Speaker 1: That's New York for you. So Gregory James Ferguson, born in 1961. He's four years older than me. So my brother was the one that was really closely following in my father's [James Ferguson] footsteps so, you know, so a southern family that owns a business very quickly, you know, the kids get involved in the business. So my brother literally at the age of, you know, ten, eleven was doing serious work with my father. He was a, he's doing mechanical work on the trucks. By the age of like thirteen, he was probably my father's top mechanic for the trucks. So he knew everything, he knew how to take, you know, take a truck apart and put it back together and that type of thing. You know so all throughout junior high school, high school, he worked with my father every weekend. My father paid him like a regular employee so my brother always had a ton of money. Everybody used to marvel at--because he paid him like a wage, you know X dollars per hour. You know he'd work forty, forty hours a week pretty much, like the weekends would be kind of ten, ten hours a day, Saturday, Sunday repairing the trucks and maybe during the week a couple of hours at night, and so he was, you know, so yeah, my father was very clear about, "You can have whatever money you want, you just got to work for it," you know, so yeah, there was no like, "Hey dad, I wanna go buy this." He said, "Hey show up, show up for work, you get paid." You know, so just to the side for me, so unlike my brother I was never the mechanically inclined one in the family, although I did work on the trucks as well from time to time, but more often I was getting in the way, so I ended up being in the office keeping my father's books. So at the age of eleven and twelve, I was literally doing my father's accounting for his business. So he had us all kind of working and, and going. But so my brother was very, so mechanically, you know, just incredible, like incredibly talented and capable. So, but he, he loved television and film so it was like, oh he's great at anything mechanical and great at science and his mind thought like an engineer really, but he loved television and film growing up. And he was, my brother was kind of given a very significant role in the family in terms of like, he, he was like oftentimes the disciplinarian for myself and my sister [Robbin Ferguson]. He was like the responsible one, right. So we could go anywhere. At any age I could go anywhere as long as I was with my brother. So he would have to take charge and watch me and stuff like that, So, and it was always, it was always a good thing because as long as he was going, I could go, you know, so but also he had a lot responsibility at a, at a young age. So he loved television and film and he ended up majoring, he went to college for television and film, ended up majoring in it and then upon graduation from the School of Visual Arts [New York, New York], which is a specialized television and film program, he started his own company, of course, which is television, film, video, editing, direction, directing, producing company that he's had really all his life. Speaker 2: Now what is his name now? Speaker 1: Say that again. Speaker 2: I mean what is the name of the company? Speaker 1: The name of the company is Princeton Dubs [Princeton Dubs Inc.. Plainsboro, New Jersey]-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --so he lives in New Jersey right outside of Princeton, New Jersey, yep. Speaker 2: So he, and where did he go to school for film? Speaker 1: He went to the School of Visual Arts. Speaker 2: Visual Arts, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 667505 Speaker 1: Is that part of another school, or is it--there's an umbrella, School of Visual Arts [New York, New York], maybe I'm wrong. Speaker 2: You know it may be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: I don't think it's a city school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But no, it's--it's its own, it's right here in Manhattan [New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's well known for, I mean it's very specialized and well known school for film, you know, television and film. And he's, again, because of that kind of mechanical engineering background like, my, you know, my brother [Gregory Ferguson] anything about technology he's ahead of the curve. He's knows it. Like he, just to give you a sense of how his brain works, he taught himself how to build apps, like you know apps on your phone, so, so that's just to give you a little idea of like what type of person he is. So one day, we're gone, we're at my mother's [Roberta Lewis Pieck] for a long weekend, or whatever and he comes with literally like a stack of paper like this big, right, so there's this, there's this app, very popular app, named Angry Birds, some of you heard of it. So he printed out this whole instructional booklet or whatever on how to create the Angry Birds game and he was going to do his own version of it, and he was literally like, and he's the type, like literally like, you know, "I'm on page 145 out of 2,400 pages." You know what I mean? Reading it and doing it so he's in the midst of it. It may take him, you know, he's the type like take him nine months, a year, whatever, programming he's going to do an Angry Birds type of game but with different characters. And like so he's teaching himself, and he'll do that and, you know, that's so that's just kind of, that, that's his, his expertise and skill set. He's really, you know, he's like more, people in my family just know if you need any advice on technology or you need something fixed, you talk to my brother basically (simultaneous). Story_ID: 667506 Speaker 1: And then your sister Robbin, right? Speaker 2: My sister Robbin Beatrice Ferguson [Robbin Ferguson], born in 1963. We were actually eighteen months apart because she was born December 1963, I was April '65 [1965], so I don't know if I did that math right, twelve, like fifteen months apart or whatever. Fourteen months, yeah, fifteen, sixteen months apart. So we were very close in age. And to make it worse for her, I got, I was skipped twice in school, so we were, we graduated high school the same year and college. So I kind of ruined her, ruined her show. She didn't have, you know, her own window to experience those things without me, but she was always very gracious about it. So, so we were, we grew up almost like, you know, we had the same peers and the same friends because we were in the same grade, we knew a lot of the same people. Story_ID: 667507 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when did you catch up in the grades? Speaker 2: So I was in third grade, I did about a couple of months in third grade [at P.S. 69 The New Visions School; P.S. 69 Journey Prep School, Bronx, New York] and the teachers were, so I was doing really well and they decided to give me an IQ test and I took a bunch of these IQ tests and basically kind of a couple of months into third grade they're like, "We're moving you to fourth grade." And what was tougher about it is at the time, so I grew up in the Bronx [New York] so we're in the Bronx so I'm at a school where I can walk to the school, this is third grade, and I walk with my brother [Gregory Ferguson] and sister [Robbin Ferguson] went there, so I, you know, walked with them. And they wanted to move me to the fourth grade, but they also wanted to move me to a special program, which was at a different school [C.S. 232, Bronx, New York]. So now, I'm gonna be younger than all the kids, I'm in a different neighborhood, which is, you know, the Bronx is still the Bronx, right, so you don't know what you're walking into. And I had to take a bus to school, public bus, and I was eight years old or something, you know. So, back then, I look at it now and I'm like wow, my parents [Roberta Lewis Pieck and James Ferguson] were really, really trustworthy because they kind of showed me how to get to the school once and then I was like, I was taking the bus, like public bus myself to go to school in this new kind of foreign area to me with all these kids I didn't know, and it was like really, like there's a lot of times when I'm just like wow, you know, God was just on my side because the kids were so nice, they were so helpful, they were so friendly that they kind of welcomed me in and helped me out and like literally, you know, you had this program, there was a lot of kids that were, that were accelerated but the rest of the school was just the school. And so there was a lot of, you know, fights and, you know, everything you would expect in an inner city and I just had, I just had kids that just decided to protect me, like for no reason, like oh no you can't, don't bother him, you know like big kids that would just literally step in and diffuse any issue that anybody would have towards me. It was just like literally like kind of angels protecting me, but that, that's, but that's on the side so I did third grade, so third to fourth and so then I was a year behind my sister and then I did a program in junior high school [J.H.S. 125 Henry Hudson, Bronx, New York] where I did seventh, eighth and ninth in two years, versus three years. It's called an SP program, pretty popular program in, in the cities at that time, so at that point, so going into high school I, I basically caught up with my sister. Story_ID: 667508 Speaker 1: You know, probably, I don't know if, I don't know if it's the best thing, you know what I mean? Speaker 2: Now why, why do you say that, then? Speaker 1: Well, there are a lot of studies that say that kids that are older in their grades do better, and now I've had two of my kids actually that had late birthdays that actually, you know, didn't stay back so they were, they, so my son [Reginald Ferguson] graduated from high school at seventeen just because he had a December birthday, and my youngest one [Peri Ferguson] will do the same. So I haven't really practiced what I'm saying right now, but, you know, there's a lot of studies that say if you're older, you know, you just do-- Speaker 2: You're more mature. Speaker 1: --more mature you do better. I didn't, from a school standpoint, I couldn't say that it affected me because I think I did fine, but maturity-wise definitely when I went to college [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I, you know I was sixteen, I was like as green and naive as you, as you could be here. Speaker 2: And you know, this is the thing is that that was done before, it's done less around your age. Speaker 1: Yeah, yes. Speaker 2: I mean, you do hear about the exceptional student but it, in our interviews you have a lot of people who went you know, that was more commonplace like a generation or two ago (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Interesting, yeah. Story_ID: 667509 Speaker 1: Back to my-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, so you want me to go back to my sister [Robbin Ferguson]? Speaker 2: Right, um-hm. Speaker 1: So my sister, again, she went to the local public high school as my brother [Gregory Ferguson] did. She grew up always creative, always was in the play or the fashion show, extremely gorgeous like she was, everybody would always rave about how beautiful she was. I'll show you a picture and see if you agree. But, but she was a good student. She did really well in school. She went to Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York], majored in communications, and, you know, so she, she loved it, she enjoyed Syracuse. She had a lot of great friends. And I think she came out and she tried a bunch of things. Like she tried acting for a little bit and she did sales, and she did really good at it. So she's tried a bunch of things and now has been really working, her last few jobs have been in public relations and doing office management, executive assistant, so it was a kind of a broad range of things. I mean my view on her is that the thing that really drives her passion, she hasn't really found, so she's been like a lot of people just kind of functionally finding jobs and things, but, you know, at the end of the day feeding her creative energy she really hasn't found that yet. Story_ID: 667510 Speaker 1: Now when you, when, so when you come along, tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up. Speaker 2: My earliest memory. I remember, I'd say I kind of remember, I remember kindergarten very well. I remember maybe being three or four prior to kindergarten [at P.S. 69 The New Visions School; P.S. 69 Journey Prep School, Bronx, New York]. Speaker 1: What do you remember? Speaker 2: I remember, so when I grew up, so we had a family of five, we had cousins of ours who are right next door to us and they were a family of five, right. So their oldest was the same age as my brother [Gregory Ferguson]. The middle child was right around the same age as my sister [Robbin Ferguson]. Then the youngest one was about two years younger than me, and she was a girl. So they matched up well. It was like boy and boy, oldest, girl and girl middle, and then it was girl, boy for the youngest. But me and her, Tanya [ph.], were tight. So I just remember like, even at a young age we'd be running around playing in the back yard and, and we would kind of always be left to ourselves because they were all playing and, so I remember some early moments like riding bikes, riding the big wheel or whatever those things were, or bikes with her. And just being around her. But I remember that whole environment of kind of having them next door. It felt like we grew up in the Bronx [New York] in the city, but it felt very, very, you know, safe and family, you know you wake up and you have, you know, family members next door. It was like nothing, you know, it was very comforting and it felt, it didn't feel like big city at all. It felt very suburban, it felt very family oriented. Story_ID: 667511 Speaker 1: I, I remember my, you know, I was in my neighborhood yesterday, my old neighborhood, I just remember it, every crack and crevice of my neighborhood, I remember very well (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So which street were you--did, were you raised on? Speaker 1: I was raised on the corner, my, our house was on the corner of Patterson Avenue and Sound View [Avenue], and so my father [James Ferguson] had his trucking company. I don't know if we got to that, but he, so he had, we did talk about it. So he had a trucking company which was located, at first he, all of the trucks were parked like right in our yard or right, you know, right nearby, and then he eventually bought a lot which is, you know, like half a block away where he stored all his trucks and trailers. So that whole neighborhood, you know, our family was very kind of dominant in that neighborhood. So my father had a business there, I mean he, he walked up and down the street like he, you know, like he was the mayor of that little strip or whatever. He, most people in my neighborhood, my father gave 'em their first job, you know, everybody always looked at us like they used to think we were the richest people in the world. You know we really were very middle class, but they would just see, you know they would see my brother [Gregory Ferguson] working and me working, and we would get paid, you know, checks, like paychecks. They were like, "You got a bank account?" You know, like I was twelve years old and I'm depositing checks in a bank account, so you know, so just, so very, we had a real prominent role in that, in that neighborhood. And, you know, it was very kind of, you know, family oriented neighborhood. It was like really, it's funny when people talk about their view on what growing up in the Bronx [New York] would be like. None of what I experienced was like that for the majority of the time. Now, you know obviously, I have experiences where you walk five blocks this way or six blocks that way and you're walking in trouble, but the majority of my experiences was kind of close knit neighborhood where my father owned a business and was well regarded and respected and we knew everybody and, you know, people would, somebody, you know, trying, you know somebody's trying to break into one of the trucks, neighbors are gonna come ring the doorbell and say, "Hey," or they're gonna stop 'em themselves, very, you know everyone was kind of looking out for each other. Story_ID: 667512 Speaker 1: So are you saying that was the blocks that you lived, you know that you lived in, are you saying that the area started to change later? Speaker 2: I think the area changed, definitely changed later and, and when we were there, when we first got there, we lived in private houses and that whole area was private houses and, but not wealthy, you know, like working class. And so it did, it definitely changed over time as other things came into play as more of your drug activity came into play, and more, more different types of buildings went up and apartment style living buildings went up. So it definitely changed over time but I think it was also a uniqueness about the group of people because most of the people that came to buy these houses that were all new when my father [James Ferguson] moved in, you know, this is like their first home ownership opportunity. So you had a lot of people that were either en- just hardworking people basically that were like this was your shot. Speaker 1: Shot at making something happen. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They were, they were very active and really wanting to acquire. Speaker 2: Absolutely. So it was a cycle graphic that I think led to this really interesting and, you know, really interesting kind of neighborhood that was kind of formed based on, based on the type of people that came in. Now we had crazy stuff happen, you know, like, you know, so I don't wanna make it like-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --there were some inner city elements but most of my memories were very like us, my father barbecuing in the back yard, the whole neighborhood coming through. Everybody would come by and get a hot dog or whatever, and, you know, you just really generally, you know, it was very family oriented (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what is, what is the racial makeup of the neighborhood? That's what I'm just wondering. Speaker 2: So what was very interesting in, in terms of how I grew up, there was a, so where we grew up were these private houses, there was a much more impoverished area that was kind of below us, closer to the water, which was, again, lower income and mostly white, and, and actually that was a pretty intimidating area. Like you didn't wander off there. Speaker 1: Now what area was that called? Speaker 2: That was called Clason Point [Bronx, New York]. Little small area but it was like, you know, and then the area I lived in directly was mostly black and Hispanic, largely Hispanic actually. So I would say maybe sixty forty Hispanic to black. But we had that other element. We had really a group of, of people that were, you know, oftentimes my biggest kind of fears was more going into Clason Point than being where I lived, so I had a whole, you know, so I never had this notion of, of race defining criminality, you know what I mean, because I knew like some of the toughest kids that I grew up around were, were like the white kids, so, you know, you were as scared of them as maybe some of the other kids. So I, you know, so that was kind of unique. It was really very unique about specifically where I grew up because there weren't a lot of pockets in the Bronx [New York] that were, that had that make up. Speaker 1: Now the Hispanic kids, were they from Puerto Rico mainly, or from other parts of South or Central America or Mexico, that's where (unclear). Speaker 2: Largely Puerto Rico, largely Puerto Rico, yep (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Puerto Ric- yeah, you find that on the East Coast, more um-hm. Story_ID: 667513 Speaker 1: So tell me what is your, well let--let's talk about just home life. So what is the structure of home life? You know obviously there's, is your mother [Roberta Lewis Pieck] working and, you know, what are, you know what will serve as an average day in the household? Speaker 2: So an average day in the household, so my father [James Ferguson] owned a business, so really my mother really kind of worked for him. But, you know, so she would go to the office, answer phones, do paperwork, that type of stuff, and it was always in this kind of block radius so, you know, so my mother could be home and doing it. She could be at the office. She didn't have to be anywhere and there were times when she didn't work, but you, most of my earlier years, if she was working, she was working for my father. And my, my early years were really like my father was working a lot, you know, so he would, during the week, trucks would be out transporting stuff so he-- Speaker 1: So he would get started early, right? Speaker 2: Get started early, end late, so again, depending, his, his, his primary run was from somewhere in the city, so Bronx [New York], Brooklyn [New York], Manhattan [New York], picking up a load and going to the New Jersey piers so that was maybe about thirty or forty miles back and forth, but he may do like one truck, he had four trucks, like one truck, each truck may do three or four of those loads a day. So the av- so you get paid by the load, right. So you wanna do as many loads as you can, so you time it and say when are they opened, I want that first trailer there by the time they open and I want you to come back with the second trailer, so you're really timing it. So that was all day, anything could happen, somebody could break down, all of a sudden somebody, you know, needs more gas or, so anything could happen throughout the day, so he was pretty occupied with that and then on the weekends was the time when the trucks weren't operating so that was the time you did your repairs. So he was always busy, always gone, so my, my home life was, most likely we would, we would all eat dinner together except for my father. Story_ID: 667514 Speaker 1: He would come in later and, you know, my mom [Roberta Lewis Pieck] would, you know, have his food ready and he would, you know, I generally if I was up, we would, you know, do something or he would, you know, he would come home, we would have some kind of interaction or talk, but it was pretty, during the weeks, and you know my father [James Ferguson] was the type when he was working, he was, you know, he was focused on his work and pretty, you know, serious about it, but then, it was like when he has his fun time, he was like, my father was like the life of, you know, he did, everybody has a fun story about my father. Like I, like I said, I was in my neighborhood yesterday, and guys went, oh man, and my father passed away in 2005, so they like, "Man I miss your father so much. He used to come over here, he would finish work, he would come over here and he would, you know, he'd take me over to this place, we'd go have a drink," and, like, like literally people, I'm just like, I didn't even know my father knew you. You know it's like, but he interacted with everybody, he was a fun loving person when he was out of his work mode. Now he could be a very tough boss and a taskmaster and ran a tough business, but when he was out of that mode, he was having a good time. Always anybody, welcoming people. Like my mother and father both are the type that it didn't matter who you were, they would embrace you like, we would have, I remember when my kids would come visit my father in the Bronx [New York], so this guy comes to the door, he knocks at the door. My father had invited him over. My kids literally came running to us, they're like, "There's some crazy guy at the door, he says he knows grandpapa." So, you know, this is one of my guys, this guy, and my father would give him work. He kind of had some mechanical skills. He wasn't the most well kept guy, let me put it that way. Didn't have on the newest clothing or anything, so I'll it at that without casting any--And they literally were like scared of him, but this is the type, like my father would say, "Hey, you need some money, you know how to change a tire? Go change these tires," blah, blah, blah, the guy would go do the work and you say, "Hey, we're cooking some food at the house later, come on by." That was just how he was. I mean my mother was the same way. Story_ID: 667515 Speaker 1: So that, so you, there's, there's a lot of activity in the house? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you're the youngest. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So are you taking all that in and what are you, what are you, you know your brother [Gregory Ferguson] is definitely the oldest son-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and he is protecting you also, I mean, he's your older brother. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But where are you finding your space in that, in the three-- Speaker 2: So my space, first off, my parents did a great job of making us all feel special in a certain way, so my thing was always, "Oh, Derek's [HistoryMaker Derek Ferguson] a genius, he's gonna be president," like literally from like, I mean, you know, this is pre-Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], like you could not tell me from the age of five to ten that I wasn't a likely presidential candidate, because my parents would just constantly, like, "Oh, you know, he's, he's gonna run the country, he's so smart," blah, blah, blah. My father [James Ferguson] would, my father would always, he would always, it's interesting how my parents' intellect work because my father was the type that he would learn new words, right, and that would be his word of the week. So he would learn a new word and a definition of it. He says, "You know this word, it means," blah, blah, blah. And then he would use it all week. You know, I would just be, he was just doing it like just to learn the word, right, and so we all would start using it that week. So he would come up with these kind of like intellectual challenges that he would teach me and then he would show me off to people. So he's like, "Derek, yeah, come down here." So the whole group family, like neighborhood or whatever, so maybe twenty people, "Okay, what's the longest word in the dictionary? So I would go antidisestablishmentarianism," and I still remember it. "All right spell it. Spell it forwards, spell it backwards, spell it," so yeah he taught me how to spell it forward, spell it backward, so I'd spell it. Everybody would be amazed, but it would be like the thing that he would do and orchestrate and, you know, we would, there would be all kind of things like that that he would do. So it was, so it was interesting was that in my house hold, intelligence, knowledge was always kind of valued, and, you know, you couldn't tell me literally for most of, you know again, not in that, not in a real arrogant way, but you know my parents always made it very clear that I was highly intelligent, so it wasn't until later on in life when I was around a lot of highly intelligent people that I was just kind of like, "Wow," you know, I may be one of many versus like I just thought I was extraordinary person because the way they would make me feel about intelligence, so for me it was about that, you know, that kind of confirmation, oh, you know, you're gonna do really well in school and you're highly intelligent, and sports. So I loved sports. And I play, you know, base- really baseball and basketball were my two primary sports. Played football as well, but I mean my whole, so having your older brother, older cousin next door, neighborhood full of kids. In my yard we had like the biggest yard and we had a basketball court, so my yard is where all, you know, was where a lot of the sports took place. So we would, everything from football, tackle football, to baseball to basketball, would be going on in my yard and we would literally, you know, again, you know, to my mother's [Roberta Lewis Pieck] chagrin sometimes, we would have ten, fifteen kids in the yard from neighborhood to cousins to, you know, doing something at all, at all times pretty much. Story_ID: 667516 Speaker 1: Now what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up when you think back around? Speaker 2: It's interesting I would say, so I, like I said, I was in my neighborhood yesterday. My mother [Roberta Lewis Pieck] still owns a building in the Bronx [New York] and, like, so I used to be around because of my father's [James Ferguson] trucks. The smell of grease a lot. Like truck grease. So it's funny, I was in a, in my mother's building that she owns and it's an auto repair shop and that smell of grease was just like bringing back all kind of memories and even like, like my father would always have grease on his hands. You know like we had all of these special products so he could clean his hands and, you know, like so, so that was just a, just a memory that kind of, that kind of struck me that just even being there yesterday that, that just brought back a lot of, lot of memories. Sights, to me, you know, just the, I guess, the walking back and forth, you know down and walking and running and whatever, like back and forth down and across my sidewalk. Like that's just something that I think about like when, it's hard not to think about it. We had a, we had a big gate that opened up so the, the, just the motion of that gate opening is something that kind of clicks when I look and I think about my, my upbringing. It's interesting because I had, I had to deal with all of these, these things yesterday, cause I was, cause literally I was right there looking at the house I grew up in and thinking about these things. Barbecue smells, like charcoal, water, my father, you know, would have us, you know, out on the boats fishing. He had, he had a boat, so I think about water a lot, and the smell and sound of water. And, you know, I think I, I do think about just my visual is just thinking about all of us together and just a lot of people together and community and family is kind of a thought or visual that comes to mind. Story_ID: 667517 Speaker 1: So when you go to school, well, the other thing I wanna ask you though, with that are you an internal kid? You know are you, or are you an inquisitive kid? What are you, I know you said, you know your father [James Ferguson] they did a good job of raising you and each person felt special but what, what's happening in your head sort of? Speaker 2: Interesting. I was very quiet, generally. Like in school I was very quiet. Not as much around my, my friends and, and peers and family, but I was general kind of quiet. I didn't really consider myself at the time if I'd really known the definitions of extroverted or introverted I would have probably considered myself more introverted, but I've come to know myself to be more extroverted, but I, but I, but I didn't feel like, I felt shy, you know what I mean, I didn't feel like somebody who would be totally comfortable just introducing myself to people at that, in my early ages. But, you know, now, you know, in my teenage years and beyond, I find a lot of my personality to be more like my father than not in terms of just wanting to meet people, talk to people, more extroverted. So, but I didn't feel that way growing up necessarily. My mind was always, you know, I always had a bazillion things in my mind. Like I would, I would like be focused on really things that didn't really mean anything but they would consume me, right. So like sports. So back in those days, nowadays when, like baseball and baseball, you know every time a player comes up to bat they'll show you his statistics, how many home runs he has, how many RBI's [runs batted in], what his batting average is, and statistics are very prevalent now, and, you know, as you watch baseball, but back then it wasn't that way. So I used to keep all of my own stats for baseball players. So I would literally, like the Mets [New York Mets] was my favorite team. I would have every player, I'd go to the box score at the end of the day if I didn't watch the game and I look at how many at bats they had, how many runs scored, how many hits. And I'd tally it and I'd come up with the accumulative stats for the year. So, you know, so my mind would be consumed with that, like I'm just, you asked a question about like what I'd have in my mind, these are the type of things I think about. My mind would be consumed about oh, there's a game tonight, and So and So is batting .298, I wonder if they're gonna go over three hundred today, and, you know what I mean. I was a very-- Speaker 1: Now how old were you? Are you--? Speaker 2: I was nine, eight, nine, you know what I mean like this, this like numbers and thinking about life in terms of numbers, like I would love doing my father's books, just to figure out at the end of the week like how much money he made. Like I had, I would be thinking about that, like wow, it's Thursday, so we got two more days. Maybe he's gonna, you know, he's gonna do this many loads. I wonder how much he's gonna make. Like I was, so my mind was racing about those types of things quite often. You know, I had a, to me my mind was always off on something that really wasn't very relevant to what was going on at the minute, so I was always thinking about the future or just different scenarios and things. Like my mind was always racing about, about just things and they oftentimes had to do with what's gonna happen in the future and thinking about that in a more analytical way, based on, you know, like I said, it would be very, I would be very consumed with is so and so player gonna bat three hundred this year and what's it gonna take for them to, you know like so it just would be whatever the thing is at the moment that was projectable and, and, and analyzable. I would just over analyze it. Story_ID: 667518 Speaker 1: So, so now who are your favorite sports players? I mean who are heroes that you looked up to? Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting. I would, guys like, you know, I was a Mets [New York Mets] fan, so going back to early, early days, guys like Cleon Jones and this is like I was really, really young. My mother [Roberta Lewis Pieck] grew up loving the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers], so I knew everything about the Brooklyn Dodgers. She would talk about 'em and I didn't, you know, the players weren't around anymore but I knew everything about them. So that conditioned me to really follow baseball the way I did, and so, you know, guys like as I got a little bit older, like guys like Darryl Strawberry and Doc Gooden [Dwight Gooden] for the Mets were guys I really followed. You know the Knicks [New York Knicks] from Walt Frazier when I was younger to, but you know I would say I was, Dr. J. [Julius Erving] I would be, I was a big sports fan, but I can't say I was the type of person that looked at people like that and put them on a pedestal like I thought I wanted to be like them. Like my character and everything I wanted to be like was really rooted in what I saw every day, which was really more my father [James Ferguson]. And I had that direction so I never felt like I needed to look at somebody to say I wanted to be like them, you know. And I admired what they did and I could be a fan but I wasn't looking at 'em like they're some kind of role model for what I wanted. I didn't have them on some kind of pedestal like oh they're a great person or this, that and the other because I didn't need to reach out and find great people because I had great examples right in front of me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right in front of you. Story_ID: 667519 Speaker 1: And then, the, the other thing so school, elementary school is what, and then, 'cause you talk about things changing in high school, but your elementary school, you're at PS 69 [P.S. 69 The New Visions School; P.S. 69 Journey Prep School, Bronx, New York] right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and that took you, then you ended up going, you were talking about transferring. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So that is, you transfer to P.S. 152 [P.S. 152 Evergreen, Bronx, New York] or C.S.-- Speaker 2: Well I was actually, it was C.S. 232 [Bronx, New York], and then that school closed and then we all went to P.S. 152. Speaker 1: Oh so the school that you were transferred to when you were in-- Speaker 2: So I went from third to fourth. That school actually, everybody that, so that school closed. I don't, I don't even know what, what went on, but everybody that was going to that school ended up going to P.S. 152. Speaker 1: Okay. And then, then you go to junior high school at 125 [J.H.S. 125 Henry Hudson, Bronx, New York], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So that's seventh through ninth grades. Speaker 2: Right. And that's the program where, it was an SP program where we did three years in two basically. Speaker 1: Oh, you did three years in two. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I see. So that's how they did it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you were being tracked. You know in the old days what people called tracking. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what, what are your favorite subjects in school? Speaker 2: Math, by far. I love math. And everything else was a distant second, but I would say science, you know, liberal arts wasn't really my favorite, but-- Speaker 1: You're one of the, you know that people are dying for it these days. That's true though. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So when you go then, how do you end up going to Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York]? Do you, is, is, that's a school you have to apply to, right? Speaker 2: Yes, you have to take a test to get in. So, you know, a lot of things with me was the stuff I didn't really have a lot of familiarity with, right. So I know that my brother [Gregory Ferguson] took, so you have to take a test to get into three schools in New York; Stuyvesant, Bronx Science [Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York], Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York]. And I knew my brother had taken the test. I believe he took the test. Didn't know much about it. So bottom line, short answer is, everybody in our SP program took this test to see who would get admitted, qualified to get admitted to one of these three schools. So it's just pretty much as standard thing. Everybody, because this was the more elite group, that everybody was going to take this test and see where they ended up. It turned out that not many people qualified for, for the, for these schools, and Stuyvesant, the reason why I chose Stuyvesant is the one you needed the highest score for, so I just assumed it was the best. And people can argue that, but the other two, so I think if you needed a score, I'm just making it up, but if 150 was the cutoff for Stuyvesant, maybe 140 was for Bronx Science and 130 was for Brooklyn Tech and so I got over 150 and there were like four of us in my, in my junior high school class that got over 150. And so and again I just thought about it like although Stuyvesant was actually in Manhattan [New York], Bronx Science was in the Bronx [New York], Stuyvesant was a pretty decent trip for me. I just thought well that was the highest score and so it must be the best school, so I'll go there. Story_ID: 667520 Speaker 1: What is the situation when you go to, you, you get accepted-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --into the, they call it Sty [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York], right, or did they (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. You get accepted in. And so what is the experience there that you have 'cause there are four of you like you said. Speaker 2: Yeah, so in the four was an odd combination. These weren't real people that I had a close relationship with. So, first thing, is kind of interesting like, so the guys that I went to junior high school [J.H.S. 125 Henry Hudson, Bronx, New York] with, for whatever reason they're just like peppering me with like, "Oh, like that school is all white. They're gonna hate you, you know. They're gonna beat you up," you know, so they just like hammered me, hammered me, so I never, at this point, you know, we had a, had maybe 5 to 7 percent of any school I had been to was white. This school was, you know, 95, it was like, actually it's big stories now about how the diversity establishment, especially regarding African Americans, is worse than it was even back in my day. But actually it was very Asian as well. So, so, but, but, so this is going to be a totally different make up, so my first day, so my brother [Gregory Ferguson] took me and we rehearsed how to get to the school, right, so prior to the first day. So we took the train. Everything went smooth. It was on 1st Avenue so you get off on Union Square [New York, New York] and you walk four blocks east then you get to First Avenue. For whatever reason my first day of school I walked west and didn't realize I was going in the wrong direction until I got to 10th Avenue. But, for some reason, no actually 11th Avenue because I thought for some reason that it was going to go to 10and then 1. I don't know. Anyway, so, so I, so I don't know, New York City [New York, New York] blocks, those are long blocks. I had to walk all the way back to First Avenue, so I'm late and I'm coming in and all I see when I walk in are these groups of people. They all look intimidating and in most cases they're all white. I'm like, "Oh, these are the kids that are gonna beat me up," you know like. Speaker 1: 'Cause that's your experience, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was very reasonable that it could be the case, right? So I'm like, now like I'm anxious, I'm late, everything's going wrong and I show up to my class, my homeroom class, and there's a great guy I met. I'll never forget him. His name is Fred, Fred Bernard [ph.], African American kid from the Bronx [New York], and it's like, almost like God again. God just put him there for me to calm me down and to comfort me. He said, "Hey, I'm from the Bronx," blah, blah, blah, and we just hit it off. He became like my best friend in high school and-- Speaker 1: Was he, was he a year ahead of you? Speaker 2: He was, no, we were in the same grade, but he was in my homeroom class. So he was coming from, I'm trying to think, he went to junior high school in the Bronx, so, so, he was, he just say, "Hey, you know, I'm from the Bronx and," you know, we just like we had a lot in common real quickly. That's funny, unfortunately, not funny, but I got bad news that unfortunately about kind of three or four years ago he passed away I found out. But he-- Speaker 1: Young though. Speaker 2: Yeah, very young. He had some really, really strange illnesses that you wouldn't expect a young person to get, but, so anyway, so it just totally, my whole view of the thing totally changed. I had a good friend and, you know, my experience at Stuyvesant was that first experience where you're more comfortable, I was clearly more comfortable being around the African American students so that type of feeling that, you know, I'm going to go to where I'm comfortable, and everything else was kind of weird and strange to me so I just didn't really deal with it, you know, so, you know, so that, that became my comfort zone basically. Speaker 1: So you're saying for the whole three years? Speaker 2: Pretty much. Speaker 1: I see. You know, see people don't understand that, but it still exists. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know they don't understand that, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it very much was, at the end of the day it was just kind of like, well, you know in those days it was very different too 'cause people listened to different types of music, they dressed differently. So it was like foreign to me, like I had never-- Story_ID: 667521 Speaker 1: So talk about that a little bit. So we're talking about, the period that we're talking about is now-- Speaker 2: Seventy- when I started it was '79 [1979], 'cause I graduated high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] in '81 [1981], and I started in tenth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're fourteen when you started? Speaker 2: I'm thirteen actually. Speaker 1: Thirteen when you start. Speaker 2: I was, yes, I was fourteen in the spring. Speaker 1: Spring, okay. So when you, so that's even young to be in high school-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you're like a little baby-- Speaker 2: I am. Speaker 1: --on top of that. So what, what are the, what are the, how are they different? So what are the white kids or the Asian kids liking and what are the black kids liking, so you said culturally different. Speaker 2: Music was the first divide right. So now groups I never even heard of, rock groups, rock tee shirts and this and actually, you know, coming in there's a group playing music and playing kind of loud rock music. There was a, it's interesting because although I grew up in the Bronx [New York] I never really experienced the drug culture, so there were clearly kids that were kind of like, you know, the drug kids. Just never, I never was around it, never experienced it. Didn't know what that was. So the Asian kids probably more stereotypically, you know, viewed as the smart studious kids, you know, but I would say that I end up having quite, my friendships, my non-African American friendships back in high school really were around mostly sports. So people either-- Speaker 1: So basketball. Speaker 2: Basketball, I played basketball in high school. Or maybe clubs I was in. Speaker 1: What clubs? Speaker 2: I was, so, going back to my analytical statistical thing, and my love for baseball, there was a game called Strat-O-Matic baseball, so highly analytical thing, you rolled dice and it's like very, I don't even know how to describe it, it's like, it's almost like what a video game would look like but without any computer technology, right. So, so, so the kids in this club were really like super duper nerdy, kids that are more like if you had to stereotype kind of computer geeky kids you know what I mean? So I would literally like not tell any of my friends that I was part of this club and sneak off to it because they would like say, "What are you doing with these kids?" So I had like so that was a couple of Asian kids, couple of white kids that I did that with and I only did it for a short amount of time, 'cause I couldn't keep hiding it from my friends. But, so there were things like that, but most of my experiences were with the other African American kids. Story_ID: 667522 Speaker 1: So are you, so is music a big part of your life at that point or not? Speaker 2: It is, it was from an early age because my father was the type that he bought new music every week. So new music would come out, so back in those days they had the 45s [45 rpm records], and he would come home with like six or seven new 45s. We would have, again, family over, whatever, and my father would play music 'til like one, two [o'clock] in the morning. They would, you know, they never had to go out because they would dance in the house like it was a club, you know. They would, you know, my, my aunts, you know, like I said tell you about how close my family is and my father and his brothers and sisters. They'd come and just dance with each other and, you know, the family would like dance 'til midnight or whatever, and have a, it was like be a blast. So yeah I grew up listening to a lot of music and it was definitely a big part of what I did. I, my brother [Gregory Ferguson], this is back in the time like really the beginning of hip hop, so my brother bought deejay equipment, you know, 'cause he, again, and he was earning a lot of money so it's funny, a lot of my relatives would say like, you know, they would say, "Wow, you know like we had to save up and buy like one turntable and then another," and then my brother would just like, because he was making so much money at the time, like he bought everything all at once. They were like, "How did you do that?" Right? So, so he had deejay equipment so I learned how to deejay through him and actually was starting to do parties when I was in high school. So yeah it was a big part of, it was a big part of our neighborhood culture, my family culture, and it was a big part of what I enjoyed as well. Speaker 1: Well deejaying became really big then. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And in Chicago [Illinois] we had something called house music-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that was started, you know started there but coming into-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to New York [New York]. Speaker 2: And this was during the time, I guess it was mostly like early hip hop stuff, so this is when you were literally--so this is before hip hop was on the radio or anything so this is literally finding records, break beats we used to call 'em and mixing break beats and, and making tapes and it was the whole kind of early hip hop culture, and we were like totally into it. Like we were one hundred percent, again, my brother would be the type, kind of like my father, he'd come back with like thirty records, you know, new records for us to mix. Speaker 1: So what are your parents [Roberta Lewis Pieck and James Ferguson] saying of the music? Are they saying anything or it's just boys will be boys? Speaker 2: Totally, you know, they didn't like it to be too loud, but you know, it was totally okay. They didn't-- Speaker 1: So did you have a favorite artist back then? Speaker 2: See it was funny because, because of, of just kind of, you know, the fact that it was, I was most into like hip hop and, and these break beats, I was less into like just artists, you know what I mean? So like I could tell you some of my favorite break beats, stuff like that, but yeah, some of the more popular artists would have been, like my brother introduced me to Prince early, early, early on. My brother was more of a, like he would go discover artists. My, my father just, and sort of like my father, see my father had a very early Chaka Khan and Rufus album when I remember liking that, but I was less of a follower of artists, like maybe my brother and sister's [Robbin Ferguson] were, like, you know, Jackson 5 [The Jackson 5], Michael Jackson, and all of that stuff. And more like I would get, I would fall in love with different beats and tracks because I was really into, you know, deejaying and, and, and kind of the hip hop beats back then. Story_ID: 667523 Speaker 1: So now, when you, but what were some of your favorite beats? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear) It's the truth, you, you opened that up. Speaker 2: Opened it up. I mean it would be things like probably like most people wouldn't know, but there were like some stuff like, I'm almost embarrassed to say some of the names, but like we had, so starting with things that everybody knew like Chic [Nile Rodgers and Chic]. "Good Times" was like a track everybody used to mix, but, then there were things like, things we would find. Like there was this one beat, the, the title of the record was called, 'Catch a Groove.' Very obscure record, like nobody would know it for any other purpose other than being a, a break beat, and I used to love that. And what you would do is, you would become an expert on mixing that beat, right, so, you know, so, so, you would literally listen to other deejays and hear how they would mix that beat back and forth and try to emulate that and figure out ways to do it. So, it's probably a laundry list of, yeah, I used to love a song called "Dancers Drummers Beat." But all these were really kind of hard drum tracks that people would, would mix and they would be really kind of like the highlights of the party. Story_ID: 667524 Speaker 1: So what else has influenced you in high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] and when are you thinking about college and where to go, too, because you brother [Gregory Ferguson], in the meantime, he's in this art school [School of Visual Arts, New York, New York], you know. Your sister [Robbin Ferguson] then goes off to Syracuse [Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. So where, how are you making decisions? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think we, none of us were really well schooled on college choices. Neither of my parents graduated from college. My mother [Roberta Lewis Pieck] went one year. So I was kind of lead, I was kind of following people I knew, so a woman I knew that had graduated a year before me, a year or two years before me, went to U Penn and she came back to give her presentation and I really, she was a good friend and she came back and gave a presentation about the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I got interested in it. But I had a weird combination of reasons why I was interested in school. It was either can I play basketball there, you know, from that to I knew I wanted to major in business, so did it have a good business program to did I know somewhere that went there. So when I got really interested in University of Pennsylvania and then I wanted to major in business, I didn't really know what the Wharton School [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was. So, so even when I applied, I was just kind of like, I knew it was a really good business school, but I didn't know it was like the Wharton School so ultimately, you know, I applied to Syracuse University, Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts], University of Pennsylvania, Hartford, University of Hartford [West Hartford, Connecticut] because I thought I could play basketball there. Where else? Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts]. I think that was it, maybe five or six colleges and ultimately my decision was based on a bunch of things, like how much financial aid did I get, what are my chances of playing basketball there, you know, so, so University of Pennsylvania, once I got in and I had a real good financial aid package, I was learning toward there so I wrote the coach and so, you know, I had like a little video of some of my basketball footage, so, you know, he basically said, "Oh you can come out and try for JV [junior varsity] and a lot of people move up from JV to varsity," so that was kind of encouraging. I went to go visit the Boston College coach, who again, was just kind of like, and Boston College had a really good team at the time. He was like, "Yeah you probably have to play JV, but I'm pretty sure you would play on the team and we see what happens from there." So I was kind of really down in considering those two schools, and ended up choosing the University of Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not with a whole lot of knowledge to be honest. Speaker 1: But what position did you play on the team? Speaker 2: I was a, so because of my age, actually in my senior year of high school I was about 6'1", 140 pounds dripping wet. You know what I mean? So I was like relatively small, so I played guard in high school, shooting guard, and so while I was in college I actually grew two more inches and got bigger so I, you know, by the time I was a junior I was probably 6'3", 180. Story_ID: 667525 Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you grow-, you were still, you know, gro- so you, so you go off to college then, what is that experience there, and what is your class, the class that's coming in, you know, how many, what is the percentage of even black students to--? Speaker 2: Yeah, so Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I would say guessing probably maybe 6 percent, 6 to 8, 6 percent African American, maybe 6 to 8 percent. I was very fortunate the year I went in that there were a lot of kids from, from inner cities so I felt really connected with a lot of people pretty quickly. We had similar experiences, a lot of kids from New York [New York]. The age thing, you know, I kind of took it for granted that it was gonna all feel okay because I didn't expect there to be any adjustment because of my age. But it was a little adjustment, more from just a social standpoint in knowing basic things. Like I remember one of my early roommates teaching me how to like scramble an egg and stuff like, just stuff that my mother [Roberta Lewis Pieck] had always done everything for me, so, stuff I just didn't know how to do, like even though she had taught me how to wash clothes, like really teaching me the ins and outs of washing clothes. Like one of my roommates taught me that, and, you know, so it was just stuff like that that I just hadn't done a lot of because basically my mother did everything for me so. Speaker 1: Plus you know, you talk about even going to high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] and your brother [Gregory Ferguson] taking you to the route-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know before the first day-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and getting lost, so you're still very young at that point. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But so not, what about dating and things like that? Did that play a role 'cause you would be younger than a lot of the girls. Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was where the age thing like it, I was, I was, it wasn't that clear to everyone that I was younger although I probably looked younger, but, and although I wasn't 6'3", I was still 6'1", so I wasn't like a tiny kid or whatever. But the biggest impact that people finding out about it was girls. So like they were just kind of like, "Oh, you know you sixteen, he's jailbait," type of thing, which I probably was, so that was, you know, that wasn't the greatest thing, I mean it got people interested in, in like oh, how are you so young or whatever, but it didn't bode well. I had to work extra hard to convince people I was mature enough to be taken seriously type of thing. So it didn't really hurt me too much, but it was definitely a factor. I overcame it eventually. Speaker 1: You had to pull out those beats (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Well you know it's funny I, one of the things I did, when I went to Penn that was one of the ways I earned money was I did deejay and, you know, so I, I used to do a lot of that kind of fraternity sorority parties and-- Story_ID: 667526 Speaker 1: So what were you majoring in? Speaker 2: I majored in accounting. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So from the time when I was doing my father's [James Ferguson] books and, you know, I talked to you a little bit about kind of all the numbers orientation, I knew that I wanted to do something like accounting or, I didn't really know what finance was at the time, but accounting or finance was really, I knew that was likely to be where I was gonna end up. Speaker 1: So how many, I mean so the way that you're in the Wharton School [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, Philadelphia] when you first come in-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so is it a four or five year program, the Wharton program. Speaker 2: Four year program. So that's the, so Wharton undergrad and there's Wharton business program which is a two year program. Speaker 1: So what is, how is that program structured though, you know? Speaker 2: So that program is, it's very, it's, it's a tough program in that for a few reasons. One is there are a lot of courses you have to take which are all like kind of business courses so, you know, accounting one, two, calculus, you know, so a lot of core, tough courses. The other thing is everything is graded on a curve, so the top, the top 50 percent, it's, it's, you know, curve basically the top whatever 10 percent get As, the next 40 percent get Bs, and so if, if you get a 90 and everybody else got 100, you could get a C, you know, so, so you, so you graded on a curve, so which, which generally made it tougher in that you had to do better than your peers. I was a, so academically at Stuyvesant [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York], you know, the kids were so smart and, well this is like, also like the African American kids, they were so smart and they were all a couple of years older than me, so I kind of was very happy being, you know, B plus. I felt like well that was a good accomplishment. I wasn't like, I didn't feel like I had to be at the top of the class because there were so many people that were so smart, and even like my peers, like a lot, you know, like I had peers that were, you know, that were really into, like that was going to be pre-med in college and, I had like 96 averages and 98 averages and would make like 100 on the biology (unclear). So I just saw this as being such a field that I was happy to be at the upper end versus feeling like I had to be at the top, at the top tier, so I just kind of fell in there and, but at college I found for whatever reasons, especially amongst my African American peers, that I was more at the top. I didn't find that even amongst African Americans in high school, I didn't find, I found myself more kind of at the upper end, but not like, you know, I knew a lot of kids that, you know, a lot of my peers did better than me in school. In college for whatever reason I guess as I caught up and was getting older and more mature, you know, I found myself more at the top of the pack amongst my African American peers. Speaker 1: So you did well there then? Speaker 2: I did, yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: All right so when I graduated, they have a couple of awards, but one of the awards was in the Wharton School the highest GPA [grade point average] for African Americans in the Wharton School, it's called the Maggie L. Walker Award and so I won that for my senior class. Story_ID: 667527 Speaker 1: So now what are you doing during summers at school [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and what, you know, are you working, are you going back in working in your father's [James Ferguson] business, or are you working and, you know you have internships at different places. Speaker 2: Yeah. So I was very focused on internships, so, you know, I, first summer, I took a class and I worked at this law firm as an accountant. The first two summers I didn't really, wasn't really successful in getting internships, the ones I wanted. Junior year I did an internship through a program called SEO, Sponsors for Educational Opportunity and it was the first year they had an accounting internship program so I worked for Coopers and Lybrand [PricewaterhouseCoopers] that summer and ended up getting a job offer from them, which I ended up, ended up taking my senior year. So that was a great summer for me. I think at the end of the day going back and working for my father, I had such an opportunity to earn so much more money, you know, that I saw that, and, and also just career pathing, it seemed to make more sense to try to focus on that versus, I always had dad if I needed to, but I really didn't do that during the summers. Speaker 1: So, so Coopers were you working for them in New York [New York]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So you came back to New York-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and that's where you, you work. Now-- Story_ID: 667528 Speaker 1: What, are there any black partners at that point at Coopers when you, when you join, and this is, you join in 1985? Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985], right. So there was one guy who I knew really well that was a partner, and there's another guy who was a pretty senior manager. I was really fortunate and actually the guy that works for us now [at Combs Enterprises], Tony Abrahams [Anthony Abrahams] who I met there, then we went to business school, we went to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] together. He was maybe two years ahead of me and he was really doing well, like he was accomplished, like he was, at that point he probably was like a team leader, so, and he was like a, a guy I could identify with 'cause he was also like to play basketball and he just was more of a regular personality, you know. So I gravitated to him and learned a lot by just watching him. Also we had this partner, Tony Anderson [Anthony Anderson], who was again very accessible, a nice guy, and, and another guy that was a manager at the time, a guy named Gil Harris. So they all did a great job to me as being mentors and people I could look up to immediately when I got to Coopers and Lybrand [PricewaterhouseCoopers]. Speaker 1: I think Tony Anderson ended up being at KPMG [KPMG LLP]-- Speaker 2: He probably, he probably did. Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois]. I think he's retired, but the name sounds (unclear). Speaker 2: Definitely, I mean he was a partner, like I said, he was a partner in '85 [1985], so where he went from there, I didn't, most of the time I was there for like three years. He was still at Coopers but I'm sure he, his path probably took him lots of good places. Speaker 1: Now where were you, were you on the audit team? Is that what you were doing at that point, or what? Speaker 2: I was on the audit team and then I went to a group that's, that really, that specifically focused on small business auditing, which I loved, and then I ended up in a group that really focused on mergers and acquisitions. Speaker 1: So there was a lot, there was a lot of M and A work back then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we would do due diligence work so a company would have a target, would have a target company they wanted to acquire, and we'd go in and do all the due diligence work for that potential acquiree and put together a whole due diligence book that we would give to the acquiring company. So that was great. That was a great experience. And what happened there for me is I just latched on to a manager that I started working for that we had a good relationship so he, he brought me to all of his different engagements and he was in that area, the mergers and acquisitions and small business group. Speaker 1: Now what was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Ben Howe [M. Benjamin Howe]. Speaker 1: Okay. So that, so that, because that's a dream if you find someone who would mentor you along, you have a chance to be on the track so why do you not stay then? Speaker 2: Well, you know I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's and I mean it's that, that's why you, why are you not? Speaker 2: So I think one of the things I was, you know, I, a lot of my themes go back to entrepreneurship, so at the end of the day I was trying to figure out what is my pathway from where I am now to owning and running a business, right? So accounting is very, I think it's a great starting point 'cause you learn a lot about business, you learn it from a transaction level, but the pathway from that to entrepreneurship or owning a company or running a company, I felt like I needed a broader experience and I needed to learn an industry or industries and so I felt like I kind, it had run its course for me in accounting. I knew I didn't wanna necessarily be a partner. I never really had an affinity towards being long term in a service business. I always saw it as a means to gather knowledge and information in relationships but I always saw myself, envision myself actually running or overseeing a company that was making a product or actually, you know, that was more product oriented company or an entertainment oriented company than being a service company. Story_ID: 667529 Speaker 1: So you, so this is what I find now. You then, how do you end up with the Urban Profile-- Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and that, and you, actually that's the same year you get married to your wife, Regina [Regina Ferguson], right? Okay. Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: So that's two-- Speaker 2: So April 1988, let me tell you about this month. I got married April 2nd, all right? I passed my CPA [certified public accountant] exam that month, all right? So I pass my CPA, so I got my CPA that month. I found out I got admitted to the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] that month and at the end of that month I found out my wife was expecting. And so pretty busy month of April, 1988 for me. So, so we, so it's pretty funny in that, so I find out my wife is expecting a baby [Reginald Ferguson] and I was like, well, I got admitted to Harvard but there's no way I can go. I mean I have a small child, you know, that's not gonna work. So I called the head of admissions, who's a woman named Michele Rogers, you may know her husband, Jonathan Rogers, right? Speaker 1: No, no, Steve Rogers [Steven Rogers]. Speaker 2: Steve Rogers, right, right. So Michele Rogers is the head of admissions and she's an HBS grad, and she starts laughing. I said, "Well, you know, I'm gonna have to defer because my wife just had a baby," and blah, blah, blah, and she's like, she started so--literally laughing. I'm like "What's so funny?" She's like, "Well, I'm an HBS graduate and I had a child, while I was in the program, so I think you can manage through your wife having a child while you're there." She said, "I literally was bringing my child to class with me, breastfeeding," blah, blah, blah, "so I think you'll be okay." And I was like, so I was really relieved that I didn't have to defer that opportunity. But going back to Urban Profile, Urban Profile was started while I was working at Coopers [Coopers and Lybrand; PricewaterhouseCoopers]. My friend at the time, a guy named [HistoryMaker] Keith Clinkscales who now works here [Combs Enterprises] also, you know, was just a, he kind of reminded me of my brother [Gregory Ferguson]. Just a desktop, he was just a computer guru and had taught himself how to do desktop publishing. And right around that time in New York City [New York, New York], was a time when we had the Bernhard Goetz incident. I don't know if you remember that where Bernard Goetz was sitting in a subway car, three kids approached him probably looking to rob him and he shot 'em and then he got off, he was not charged with anything. He got off and I think eventually he was convicted of something, maybe gun charge, but got off for shooting these kids. So, there was a lot of dialogue around it, but we just felt like our prospective as young African Americans, was not being heard, so Keith came up with the idea of, you know, look we need to create a magazine where we write from our prospective about issues of the day and it's gonna be, at that time he was like again somebody who he studied something. Before he did it, he would know everything about it, so he knew all about The New Republic magazine which is a very kind of Republican magazine, and he knew about all these magazines and they were very, you know, intelligent and thought provoking. He was like, you know, "We need a black version of this New Republic magazine." It was the first time I had ever seen it and I'm reading it and looking at it. It was just such a compelling idea that he got like ten of us really excited about doing it. We didn't know anything about publishing a magazine, and we just pitched in a bunch of money and, and Keith figured out a way to get free paper for the first issue and he did all the desktop publishing himself, and before you know it, we had our first issue, and, you know, okay, but we needed more money so we did what any young person would do at that time which is like okay, let's throw a party and raise money. So that's basically what we did. We threw a party, we had our first issue there, we had people sign up and subscribe so we had subscribers that were paying and we made some money from the party and we kind of like were off and running with Urban Profile. Story_ID: 667530 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Keith Clinkscales was interning at Chemical Bank, I wanna say or Manufacturers' Hanover bank [Manufacturers Hanover Corporation], and one of my best friends was interning with him, one of the summers-- Speaker 2: 'Cause Keith went (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so we met that way. Speaker 2: He had gone to FAMU. Speaker 1: He went to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: We had this real kind of, it was, it was a real competition between Florida A and M and, really was historically black colleges [HBCUs] and Ivy League colleges, so he was, his whole mission was to prove that, you know, Florida A and M, A and M was a much better school and they were gonna outdo us, blah, blah, blah. So it was kind of this healthy interesting competition, but we all joined together, the group of us ended up doing Urban Profile were a combination of his Florida A and M guy and some of the U Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Ivy Leagues guys, so we all came together to do it. But Keith was like, I mean Keith was one of those personalities, I mean he was just a personality, like, he was, you were going to know he was in the room and you were gonna like, whether you liked him or not, you were gonna like hear him, you know. If you were around him, he was going to be saying something where you're like this guy (unclear) has got some crazy bold aggressive ideas, you know, and that was just the kind of guy he was. Speaker 2: So you met socially, is that it? Speaker 1: We met socially, yeah. Speaker 2: And you met socially, but you're all like starting your careers in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And always talking about, like always, in that the group of people that I was around again, the commonality we had is that none of us were silver spoon kids so we all came from something and had now accomplished some level of education and, and, so we were always talking about what it meant and what we were gonna do, and how we were gonna do it, and you know, we were a very confident bunch. Like we really thought we could take over the world. Story_ID: 667531 Speaker 1: You start Urban Profiles [sic. Urban Profile], now wait a minute, are you out of Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] when you start, no? Speaker 2: Prior to, so that was like in 19- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You marry, what you marry, okay no, that's right, I'm sorry. You get married, all that happens? Are you starting it before you go to Harvard Business School? Speaker 2: I started, we probably started it, it was April '88 [1988]-- Speaker 1: It says '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: I went to Harvard, I went to Harvard in that September, so it was probably early, I would say late '87 [1987], early '88 [1988]. I think our first issue came out in '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: It did. Speaker 2: It may have the time, so-- Speaker 1: It came out in '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: Right. But we probably started, you know, we started forming it, maybe late '87 [1987]. Keith [HistoryMaker Keith Clinkscales] would know exactly. Speaker 1: So, so how much, how much did you each kick in? Speaker 2: It's funny, I think early on, it was a small amount. It may have been a couple hundred dollars, three or four hundred dollars, yeah. But it was like ten of us so it added up to like three thousand. Speaker 1: Do you have any of the original issues? Speaker 2: My wife [Regina Ferguson] has every issue saved. Speaker 1: She does? Speaker 2: Yes, she has every issue. Speaker 1: 'Cause I was thinking, I was thinking I would really like to see, because I read something that, you know, your, the approach, what the, the approach, not the, the viewpoint I'm sorry that you were taking issues from. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And even, can you talk about that a little bit (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, again, very much, you know, when you meet Keith and understand him, very much like a lot of Keith's point of view, but it was very decidedly our prospective, right. So we had a cover and, you know, we, literally we would go just get stock art that cost like fifty dollars for the photo. We had the stock picture of the African American soldier with a big gun, and this is during the first Iraq war [Gulf War], and the cover title of the magazine was The Black in Iraq [ph.]. So it talked about how the front lines were made up of all African American soldiers, and here we were in this war that nobody wanted to be in, but at the end of the day, the lives that were gonna be lost are mostly minority. But so we always took a spin like that. Now the other thing, genius thing that Keith came up with is that he wanted to have multiple perspectives, so he engaged a guy who is pretty well known now, [HistoryMaker] Armstrong Williams, to always give the right perspective, the right leaning perspective on topics. So we would often have an article, so we, I don't know specifically if we had it for this, but we were talking about, you know, if we're talking about the Iraq war and our perspective that it's, you know, unjust that we have all of these African Americans, lower income people fighting it, Armstrong would write the counterpoint and have his perspective on it, and Keith would find people to write those other perspectives because he just wanted it to be thought provoking and intellectual, not necessarily, a uni perspective [universal perspective]. Story_ID: 667532 Speaker 1: So Urban Profiles [sic. Urban Profile] then continued to operate while you went to business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] then. Speaker 2: So we operated, so Keith [HistoryMaker Keith Clinkscales] and I, so, so it's funny, we both applied, we didn't really talk to each other and jinx each other, but we both got in and we were in the same section in business school. And we were in the same study group, so this where we formed really, our, close, close relationship. Keith was actually the first non family member to babysit my son [Reginald Ferguson], which I had when I was in business school, so yeah, he, our relationship goes really deep and far. But, yeah, so we were running it, so were putting in our quarterly at that time, so we were running it while we were in school together. Speaker 1: And he's doing a lot of the editorial, is that, was that his role? And what were, what was your role? Speaker 2: So-- Speaker 1: Who are the critical people of the, you said I think there were ten, but I mean, who are the-- Speaker 2: At that time, it had kind of whittled down to four. We had Doug Austin [Douglass Austin], a Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] graduate who was the editor-in-chief, so he and Keith really worked on content, Keith was the publisher and really oversaw everything. Len Burnett [HistoryMaker Leonard Burnett, Jr.] was the head of ad sales, so Len was running around getting the advertising, and I was the COO, really running all the operations and finance and making sure that we could pay our bills basically (laughter). Story_ID: 667533 Speaker 1: So distribution, how was distribution handled [of Urban Profile] and who was your market and--? Speaker 2: Right. So we went on newsstands, and this is the part I oversaw as well as, we were on newsstands as well as, we had subscribers so you have, so you're sending out, so your newsstand relationship is you're doing it at that time, you're doing it really kind of through brokers that are then getting your, your magazine to the stand. The issue you have is like how many you send to the stands versus how many actually make it on the racks and then how many you sell because if you don't sell 'em you, you, you know, you only get paid for what you sell. But, at the time when we were doing this magazine, we were spending literally nothing on the magazine. We were sitting next highly funded magazines, like at the time, Emerge, which is a Time Warner publication [Time Warner, Inc.], African American publication. We were sitting right next to them and doing well versus them because our content was more directly speaking to a group of young people in the way they wanted to be spoken to. Speaker 1: I, I'm even surprised, I have to say, about the newsstand distribution because that is, can be complicated for a lot of people to understand-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --if they don't know. It's not like you came out of the business, so that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So how did, who pulled, you pulled that off? Speaker 2: We learned, I mean you just, we kind of hustled our way to a lot of things and I'm not sure where we got them. Maybe Keith [HistoryMaker Keith Clinkscales] had the newsstand guy, this guy, actually an African American guy who had helped other magazines like ours, small African American publications, and, so we developed a relationship with him and he kind of showed us the ropes and I spent a lot of time with him to work with him, and, you know, we figured these things out. We did everything wrong, no doubt about it, but we created a new model because we were doing everything wrong. There is no way we should be, should have been able to put out a magazine for the money we, we were doing it for. There is no, it's like no way. We, we did a real competitive magazine with literally no money. Story_ID: 667534 Speaker 1: And it's interesting then to see how your careers have sort of taken off in that way too from that. But, but, what I'm trying to also understand is, I mean, how, so you're funding, self funding it the whole time, or are you really, you're making money and how much money are you making? Speaker 2: Making--costs were really low. We were making, we had advertising money and subscriber money, so, you know, we're probably close to breaking even, you know, not, not-- Speaker 1: So what was break even? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, so, I mean, basically we're netting zero, right? Nobody is getting paid. You know what I mean like we're not paying ourselves. And, you know, we just, we're in it to grow it, and hopefully sell it. And Keith [HistoryMaker Keith Clinkscales] and I when we, so we ran it through our business school, and Len [HistoryMaker Leonard Burnett, Jr.] is out there selling his advertising, people are supporting us. It's great. And then when we get out of business school, we did, we did bring in a few investors and raised a small amount of money. And then Keith and I also had a, we did a, we did the student publication at the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], and we earned a good amount of money from that, so, you know, we used some of that money. That money more sustained us, 'cause we weren't pulling any money out. Speaker 1: So you did a student publication of Urban Profiles [sic. Urban Profile]. Speaker 2: No, no. We did a student publication, so at the Harvard Business School, kind of a different story, but at the Harvard Business School, they had a student concession which you had to compete for, which was to publish the student handbook, which is the net present value book. So that was a student run business. So you had to compete and, and vie for that franchise to, to, to get the business rights to do that book, so Keith and I put it in our plan and we present it, and we won that concession. Now, so here's what we did. So that was like a handbook. So I would say, okay, here are the local shops, here's your class options, blah, blah, blah and you usually had some local ads in there and, and that was your book. So Keith, of course, and I, mostly Keith, was like look, "We're going to sixteen hundred of the most affluent, you know, most sought after people you can imagine. Why are we only putting these local ads in it? We need to get Mercedes-Benz [Mercedes-Benz USA, LLC], we need to go to a high end jewelry companies." So we went and we stacked that book with advertising to the point where after our year, they put a cap on how many advertising pages you can have in the book because we had, because we were like look, "This is sixteen hundred of the most sought after people in the world, why are we limiting it to, like Joe's Pub [ph.] or something as the advertiser. Let's go--," we went to big consumer product companies who ate it up and put ads in there. And we had, you know, car ads and all kind of, you know, incredible adds in there, and it used to be a lot of recruiting ads so were like, "Yeah, let's do the recruiting ads, but also like don't you want to advertise your product? Put your product ad in here." So, we, so we actually made a good amount of money. It, it, probably we made the most money ever for that publication, and unfortunately people had came on the next year, got capped in terms of how many ad, ad pages they could put into the book. Speaker 1: So you could keep the money that you, because (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is totally a you--it's basically like a franchise. You're given a franchise and any profit you make is yours. Story_ID: 667535 Speaker 1: So now what do you learn at Har- HBS [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] and who else is there with you that we might know? Speaker 2: So, who else was there with me? I, you know, you probably have tapped a lot of the people, but I'm not sure exactly, exactly who I would point out. Here's what I learned there. That was, this was my first, I would say although my study group was still African American and I still have an African American set of group, that was really my comfort zone and my kind of support group, it was really a much more integrated educational experience because of how the classrooms are set up. You have to work with people a lot more so, and, and I would say literally every person in my section, we had eighty people in our section, every person in my section is somebody who I can call today, ask a favor of, you know, people I haven't talked to in ten years, fifteen years, twenty years, I can call and have a conversation with because we all knew each other, you know, that well and had that level of respect for each other and liked each other enough that you're gonna take that phone call. I know I'm gonna take it and anybody I call is likely to take my call, so, so from that standpoint, and you had a global group of students and just an incredible group of students, so from a networking standpoint and a relationship standpoint, unprecedented experience for me and something that that alone exceeded all my expectations. Story_ID: 667536 Speaker 1: And what did you find yourself particularly good at, and--your accounting background did help you right? Speaker 2: Yes. So again, the same sort of thing, accounting, finance were my strengths. Speaker 1: So where does Bain and Company come in because I might have, I mean, where, why did you chose consulting 'cause either you're going to be an investment banker or you're gonna go into Corporate America or you're gonna be an entrepreneur-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so where, where, why does Bain makes sense to you? Speaker 2: So Bain for me was, what I was hunting for through my business school experience was really instilled from an entrepreneurial perspective; what makes some companies successful and others not? So you have all of these very highly accomplished people, you know, CEOs, they're building companies, they have these huge companies and one company's doing like number one and one company's number five. What is driving that? And I didn't know much about management consulting, but when I met the Bain people, they were very focused on what makes a company win. What makes you win and what makes you lose. And they were very focused on we go in, we help companies win, we measure how they win and, you know, we pride ourselves on getting results. And I'm like wow, that's really compelling because my whole mission in life was trying to figure out, especially from an entrepreneurial perspective how do you build a company that wins? And I thought that's what they did and that's, and that, that was like really what their job was, so I became very attracted to it. Now then figuring out how I was gonna get a job there because it's one of the most competitive jobs to get, was, you know, then the next thing because this was just kind of all foreign to me, but so the interviewing process was case interviewing and, you know, so I had to really kind of learn how to do that, and so I was very fortunate to make it through the process and get an offer, because it was really what I wanted to do at that time was to learn more about, you know, strategically, you know, how you figure out which companies were gonna win in various industries. And, you know, Bain delivered on that for me. Like that was, that was really what I ended up doing. I learned a lot being there for the summer and then working there for five years. Speaker 1: So you worked in New York [New York]. Were you working in the New York office of Bain? Speaker 2: Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: In Boston. So you stayed, oh so you-- Speaker 2: So here's what happened. So when I graduated business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], like I said, we raised some capital and we went and moved. So my first year I had an offer from Bain but I declined it and I went off to Baltimore [Maryland], me and Keith [HistoryMaker Keith Clinkscales] and Doug [Douglass Austin] and Len [HistoryMaker Leonard Burnett, Jr.] to start Urban Profile full time, so we had a little bit of capital, we moved to Baltimore. We ran that company and I was there full time for a year before we decided to then sell it to another African American publication owner, a company named Career Communications [Career Communications Group Inc., Baltimore, Maryland]. They published black and Hispanic engineer book, engineering books. And, so they acquired us, merged us, and at that time-- Speaker 1: And the man there who runs that, I know his name too. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Tyrone Taborn. Speaker 1: Tyrone Taborn. Speaker 2: You know everybody, of course. So Tyrone was great. We got to know him. He, he, so Keith again, Keith's thing was always he loved publishing. I was more intrigued by the idea. I wanted to work with Keith. It was less about my love for publishing. So he stayed on and, and continued to work with them, and I called Bain and Company and said, "Hey, if you'll have me back, I'd love to come in, and, and start, a year later." And that's what I did. Speaker 1: Okay. And then you moved-- Speaker 2: Moved back to Boston (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) back to Boston, okay. Story_ID: 667537 Speaker 1: And so what industry sectors, cause isn't Bain [Bain and Company] divided by industry sectors, so what industry sectors are you assigned (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so I started really focusing on retail and consumer products, and so some of my large music retail chain was one of my clients. I guess I can say my clients now. Anheuser-Busch [Anheuser-Busch Companies]. What's the other one out of Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? McNeil pharmaceutical [McNeil Consumer Products Company; McNeil Consumer Healthcare], Tylenol, all some of my clients. Great, tremendous experience. Marshalls, the retail chain was one of my clients. So, I mean, phenomenal experiences. Speaker 1: So the work is looking at industry sectors and predicting, I mean, what is the work you do? Speaker 2: It's very strategic, right. So, for example, so let's say Camelot Music was a music retail chain. Primarily mall based. And they came to us saying, "Look, we're losing our sales are declining. We're just trying to figure out what's going on, how do we stop the tide, what do we do to, you know, basically grow our market share again?" So we went in, diagnosed the whole situation and you try to figure out what's going on and strategically what should you do? What we found out is that at that time the growth of the big box stores that were carrying music, so now this is the first time when like Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] was carrying music, Best Buy [Best Buy Co., Inc.]. All these companies were carrying music as lost leaders and they were taking business away from the mall based stores because the mall based stores were slightly higher priced and people were going less to malls and going directly to the Best Buys and Walmart's of the world. So there was a real good reason structurally why they were losing market share. And at that time, they were very mall based. So they had some real tough decisions to make in terms of how they were gonna survive because this trend was not going to stop. So we ended up recommending to them to actually merge with another chain of music stores because there was no way they were going to keep their size where they were without some kind of merging or some kind of combination. So that was our kind of--so we went in did a whole strategic analysis of the industry and the specifics of the company, what are their strengths, what are their weaknesses, and then at the end you come, come up with a recommendation. Speaker 1: So did that, so were your, did your recommendation hold true did that work (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So they did, they went and they actually got acquired by Musicland [Trans World Entertainment Corporation] at the time, and that was based on our, our conclusion. Story_ID: 667538 Speaker 1: So you're moving up in Bain and Company. How--were you promoted up during those five years? Speaker 2: Yeah. So I eventually got promoted to manager and when I got promoted to manager, myself and another woman, Adrienne King, were the first two African American managers at Bain and Company. So that was a milestone and now Adrienne, whom I'm still in touch with, she's a partner. We've had partners since then, but prior to us, there haven't been anyone there that had reached the manager level. Speaker 1: 'Cause I was gonna say the numbers are still, you know, we, I know them in the Chicago [Illinois] office. Speaker 2: Yeah, they're weak but you definitely, like you have probably three or four partners. At the time I was like, when I was in the Boston [Massachusetts] office, you know, very few African Americans, and so, in fact, one of my initiatives when I was there, was to help them grow their African American recruiting and, you know, one of the stores, one of my Mitt Romney stories is 'cause he was running Bain at the time, was that, you know, we came to him with a proposal about minority recruiting and saying, "Look, we really need to go, yeah we're gonna find--," because he was always saying, "Ah, we can't find candidates." We're like, "We need to go to historically black colleges [HBCUs], and we're gonna find people there and we need to, we need to expand the schools we go recruit at to these schools." And you know, I have to say, the company and all the way up to Mitt's level, signed off on it right away. "Great, we love it." We added Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], to our recruiting list, and it, we, we found more and more candidates so it really worked. Speaker 1: See it shows that sometimes those efforts really can work. And then FAMU was always had been viewed as having a very good business school. Speaker 2: They did. They did and you know, what we, part of the consulting thing is really educating people about it, and preparing them for the recruiting process because, you know, so focused on case interviewing and so on. So we found great candidates, I mean, we found great, like immediately like the next year we hired, I think, maybe three or four people from historical black colleges. So I had, I mean again, I, my experience with Bain and Company was like it was unbelievable because, you know, you could do things like that, take your own initiative and it could get done, and you know, you think about, a lot of times you think about these machines behind these companies, and how they wanna kind of stunt growth and they don't want to support initiatives, especially African American initiatives. I didn't, you know, that was something I didn't really run into at Bain and Company at all. I was very complimentary about how they handled women's workplace issues and minority workplace issues. Now the bottom line is by its nature, it was an up or out environment. So, it was not an easy environment to succeed in, but at least in terms of their embracing, "Hey, let's just go find as many great people as possible," never found resistance to that. Story_ID: 667539 Speaker 1: You had a good career there [Bain and Company] then, so the question is, you then end up going to Sony [Sony Corporation] in '96 [1996], so how, why, do you get the itch that you wanna be in it, do you get the itch to be in the entertainment space? Is, I mean is Keith's [HistoryMaker Keith Clinkscales] career, I'm just trying to understand. Speaker 2: So here's what happens again. So I'm promoted to manager, but I also have a business plan in my, in my bag which I usually do and actually this one's interesting because this one related to Keith. Keith and I were working on, he worked at Vibe at the time. We were working on-- Speaker 1: 'Cause that, he and Len [HistoryMaker Leonard Burnett, Jr.] were at Vibe. Speaker 2: Right. At Vibe, and he went there and helped launch that with [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones and we, we had been talking seriously about opening up a chain of Vibe retail stores, and so even back then the digital wave was happening, so we were thinking about how do you make the store really very digitally savvy to come in and people would be able to listen to music and download it, and so we, so we had all--so we literally had a whole business plan about how we were gonna go about, you know, basically licensing from Vibe to open these retail stores. So, as I'm looking and thinking about that opportunity, I said, "Wow, you know, I could really use more industry knowledge." At that time I was working for the music retailer so I had good knowledge about the music retail side, but I, I felt like I needed more industry knowledge about the music industry, and when I happened to get a call from a head hunter that's at BMG [Bertelsmann Music Group], at that time it was BMG music, was looking for someone in their finance group, it was interesting to me. And again, I, I never saw myself as being a partner at a service company, so although I had made manager, to be a partner in a consulting firm or a partner in an accounting firm, just wasn't something that had a high level of, of appeal for me. Speaker 1: Are you also looking at Keith's success and sort of like, you know, liking, I mean 'cause now he's in a celebrity space, you know, and it's exciting. Vibe becomes quickly the very, you know, a very hot magazine, quickly, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: After they, 'cause they start as part of Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And then, then whatever. Speaker 2: Then they, yeah, they bought themselves out, and then Time-Warner bought it back. There was a whole lot of gyrations here. Speaker 1: Um-hm. So is that influencing you or not? Speaker 2: I can't, I don't wanna say, I don't think directly necessarily. I mean it was always there. I knew I had that relationship and that contact, but I wouldn't say it was directly. I mean I always, Keith and I always thought about the opportunities to come back and work together, I mean we had a, that was such a formative part of our lives when we worked together, and it was challenging, but fun and drew us closer, and, you know, like I said, we knew each other so well, and, you know, so those types of, to me business, ultimately what I've come to learn about all of life is that it's all about relationships. And, you know, and if you could work with people you love and care about and, you know, that's the best scenario. Story_ID: 667540 Speaker 1: So you join BMG [Bertelsmann Music Group]. Are you vice president of worldwide finance or do you get promoted up? Speaker 2: I was vice president. That's, I joined at, at that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So what is this experience like and who is, who's heading up BMG at that time? Speaker 2: So BMG is head up by, Bertelsmann [Bertelsmann SE and Co. KGaA], which is the parent company. BMG is the music company. So my boss is the CFO, chief financial officer of BMG, the music group, Tom McIntyre. He reports into the head of BMG, was from Germany and part of our role in that department was reporting in to Bertelsmann so I had to spend some time in Germany. They were based out of a country, a little country, little part of Germany called Gutersloh, Germany, where literally the family that owns Bertelsmann owned the whole town. Like they owned the hotel, they owned the restaurant and they owned Bertelsmann. So that was a good, interesting experience going back and forth there. So what was it like? So after leaving Bain and Company, I mean that environment is so challenging, so fast paced, so, you know, competitive. Yet almost anything I could do would be a fall off of intensity, let's put it that way. So-- Speaker 1: You mean from Bain to BMG? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was a fall off of intensity? Speaker 2: Absolutely. So I remember stuff like I would have been asked to do at Bain in a week, I was given a month to do, you know. So I just remember like, "Wow, I got a month to do this?" You know, like I'm used to doing this in like two days or something. So, so it was, so, but it was also now my reintroduction into the kind of real work force, right? So now I'm managing people that are like, you know, they are not highly motivated M.B.A.s. I remember one of my first week on the job there was a guy that was about two years from retirement, he was in his late sixties, and so my group oversaw various parts of the company and they rolled up all of the financial information for various parts of the BMG company and it was broken down by region so this guy oversaw the European region, and he kind of came into me like kind of the first week and was like, you know, "My name is so and so and I've been working here thirty years, I'm retiring in two years and I come in at nine, I leave at five, I get my work done." Basically like, "Don't bother me and I'm gonna get it all done, I know what I'm doing--," and like he pretty much pronounced to me how, how it was gonna be. I was okay, great, you know, and, I mean honestly, he did a job, he came in nine to five, he got everything done. He was great, low maintenance and it worked out. But it was a totally different mindset than people that were like, you know, basically ready to work around the clock seven days a week and had to work that way to get it all done. Story_ID: 667541 Speaker 1: So the music industry, though (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --is changing a lot at the time that you joined BMG [Bertelsmann Music Group] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely yes. Speaker 1: And has continued, you know, to change a lot-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah. Speaker 1: --'cause I think there, what, it's Universal [Universal Music Group], and I'm not sure, there's been a lot of consolidation. Speaker 2: Lot of consolidation absolutely, yeah. Speaker 1: So this is 1996 and how long do you stay there, and (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I--oh, sorry, so I stayed, I'm at BMG, I do two years in this worldwide finance group, which is kind of a corporate group. It's a nice place to land 'cause you get to see everything and my approach was do the job I was given but find opportunities to expand your opportunity base and to jump into some projects across the company in different areas. And that worked out really well. I definitely had my sights on the entrepreneurial areas of the business, which at the time were Bad Boy [Bad Boy Records], because that was a 50/50 joint venture with Arista, the record part of that, and LaFace [LaFace Records], which was, which was another 50/50 joint venture with L.A. Reid and Babyface [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds]. So I was looking at those businesses, you know, very intrigued and like hoping I can figure out a way to-- Speaker 1: So BMG you're saying BMG owned part of both LaFace and Bad Boy. Speaker 2: Bad Boy Records, 50 percent. Speaker 1: At that point-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: On both sides? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so they had been very involved in urban, you know the urban scene, you know music scene. Speaker 2: And this is specifically through Arista Records which was Clive Davis. Speaker 1: Okay. That's-- Speaker 2: Clive Davis, you know he saw hip hop and understood it, he understood everything from Notorious B.I.G. to like, amazing music mind. And obviously got L.A. Reid and what LaFace was doing. So he, it was really because of him. Speaker 1: So who else is out there, I mean who are the other, what is, let's see, what are the other music companies at that time? So in the-- Speaker 2: Big ones? Speaker 1: Yeah, big ones. Speaker 2: So Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.], Universal, you know, we're BMG which is the, the big labels under BMG are Arista and RCA [RCA Records], but you had, you know, Time Warner. Warner was, you know, Elektra [Elektra Records], Atlantic [Atlantic Records] and Warner Music [Warner Music Group]. You had Universal, as I mentioned. What else did you have? At the time you had MCA [MCA Records], PolyGram [PolyGram Entertainment]. You had Jive Records. Story_ID: 667542 Speaker 1: But a lot of times with these in the, in the world of the creatives, you know the business and accounting types, or business types, they're not as, you know, as significant, or viewed as significant. Or more, or is as significant as the, the art, you know, what do they call it, the art, artists' reps. Speaker 2: A and R [artists and repertoire]. Speaker 1: A and R. Speaker 2: A and R right. Speaker 1: And, and the sales and marketing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so where are you, you know, where are you wanting to be in that position and what are you learning and-- Speaker 2: So you got, at the time I was really using this whole experience as a knowledge gathering experience 'cause still so I got this plan, these retail stores, I got ideas about things I wanna do, so it was a little bit more knowledge gathering than career plotting, buy yeah, you're right, finance, like even to have an M.B.A. in an entertainment company, it's almost like people aren't gonna, like they think you're an accountant pretty much. "Aw, so you do accounting?" You know, like people understand law degrees more than M.B.A. so you don't really get any, I didn't get many passes because I had a Harvard M.B.A. [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] in the entertainment industry. But what you learned to do, what I learned to do is to learn the business through relationships with people and entering those relationships in a very non-intimidating way. I saw a lot of my peers, my M.B.A.s, coming in and kind of like, "Oh, I know I can tell you how to do your function better than you and I know more than you." It's just not the way to work in that business, you really, people have been doing something for twenty, twenty-five years. They've been successful at it. You got to really learn it on their terms and with the right level of humility towards them, so, so I was able to learn a lot about the business and, you know, but at the time I didn't necessarily have an aspiration, oh I wanna run a record company, it was more like I'm gathering information, I'm trying to figure out my next move. I moved from the worldwide finance group to become CFO of one of the BMG divisions [Bertelsmann Music Group], one of the more profitable divisions, BMG Special Products. And that was a company that was, you know, had a real P and L [profit and loss statement] that needed to be managed in had we literally created products that were sold to various customers and so on, but we would create a product for like Readers' Digest or for a company, and then we'd take that product and then sell it to third parties or sell it to consumers, so pretty interesting group. Learned more about the music business and learned a lot about really managing a P and L [profit and loss] from top to bottom. So while I was there is when I got approached by Sean [Sean Combs] about Bad Boy [Bad Boy Records]. Story_ID: 667543 Speaker 1: And how did that happen because remember you also said that the thing you were doing was making contacts and relationships, so how did that, I mean how did the, how did you even meet, but what other relationships are you making too-- Speaker 2: So this is again, so my meeting, the way I got to him was one of my, so Andre Harrell who's a close friend, mentor of Sean [Sean Combs], was helping Sean do this search for chief financial officer. Andre Harrell, one of his best friends is a guy named Tracy Maitland who was married to Kim Hatchett Maitland [Kimberley Hatchett], I guess, I don't know if she changed her last name, who was a year behind me in business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]. So, so they're saying, "Okay, so who's the candidate," blah, blah, blah, and Kim's like, "Well the only person I know who is a CFO in the music business is [HistoryMaker] Derek Ferguson." So she throws my name out. I meet with Andre and Tracy first before I meet Sean, and they screen me and we talk and we hit it off and, and then I end up meeting Sean. So again, understand that my, I'm predisposed to, you know, be attracted to entrepreneurship, you know, already based on the history I've given you, so this is to me like meeting one of the great entrepreneurs of this next generation. So it was, you know, pretty intriguing to me to think about the opportunity to work in that environment just to think about all of the entrepreneurial opportunities I'll be, I'll be a part of. You know and I started formulating in my head, you know, the idea of starting and running your own business was appealing to me but I realize that for me I felt like I was more, instead of the dream creator, I was one of those people that would really help somebody accomplish their dreams, you know what I mean. So I may not be the one in that division for the business, but I'm better positioned to be the one that's gonna help make your vision a reality. And so I start becoming more and more comfortable that that's kind of where I fit in, still wanting to be in an entre- in an entrepreneurial environment and seeing things start from scratch and build, but really not being the one that had to come up with the idea or even be part of the idea, but being the one that was going to help actually actualize the idea. Speaker 1: So do you remember your first meeting with Sean? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Can you talk about it? Speaker 2: Very vividly. So we met in the hotel room and I remember him doing like five things at once right. So he's interviewing me, has my resume, he's on the phone. I think his son Justin [Justin Combs] was in the room, so he's talking to Justin. So it's like five things going on and I was just like, okay, this guy's really busy, let me get to what I have to say, and we'll figure out if there's a match here or not. So I just started talking. And I learn then that he could actually, like they say, it's impossible to really multitask, but I learn at that point that he could actually successfully multitask 'cause he was hearing every word I was saying while he was doing four other things, and so, but I was assuming he was gonna hear me because I just kept talking. So I didn't stop, like if he paused or said something on the phone, I did, I just kept talking, and 'cause hey, I'm gonna get out what I gotta say and we'll figure out if something makes sense or not. Speaker 1: Did you have a plan, and what did they tell you? Why was this important? What did Tracy and, you met with Tracy and-- Speaker 2: Andre. Speaker 1: --Andre Harrell. And what were they saying? What was important, and what were the plans and what was intriguing about this? Speaker 2: Well at the time, first off, his music business was one of the most successful music businesses in the country. Also he was starting new businesses, so the idea of why he had a restaurant [Justin's], he had a magazine at the time, and the idea of Sean John had been kind of started and formulated. So it was a kind of classic, you know, we now need an internal CFO that manages all the stuff. So the actual task they were describing was something I could understand very well. What, how it would play out and who the people were and how it actually worked inside this company [Combs Enterprises] was a little bit more of a mystery, but the actual role they were describing I felt very comfortable with what they needed. Story_ID: 667544 Speaker 1: But this was also a time, I mean I think, hadn't Biggie Smalls [Notorious B.I.G.], hadn't he, he had died the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --year before. Speaker 2: So, yeah, I see (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So there had been, you know, a little, he could go either way, let me put it that way, you know while there was growth, we, we had not seen the emergence of Sean John the, you know, the big premier on 5th Avenue and stuff like that. Speaker 2: So I think, so I would say he was so big in music at the time, he clearly was already a cut above the average kind of entrepreneur and even music personality. So, 'cause I mean, you know, I think in 1997, the year, so Biggie was killed the beginning of '98 [1998] [sic. 1997], I started having these conversations, kind of summer, late summer of '98 [1998], but in '97 [1997], Bad Boy [Bad Boy Records] held like the number one position on the singles charts, like, something like forty-seven out of fifty two weeks, so he was as big as you could be in music and, I think had just done a real big deal with Arista Records, so it was a big undertaking even if none of these other things happened. But I did believe all of the logic around the things he wanted to do made a lot of sense, so I felt like there was a lot I could bring to the table and I felt like it was all very accomplishable and doable and, but I thought it needed analysis and he needed to figure out, like for example, having had a lot of experience in the magazine business, I didn't think the magazine business was gonna be good for him you know, but I thought clothing was gonna be great. So those were kind of my initial impressions and thoughts about coming in, but I never had a, to me, I never had a doubt about him and his possibilities and his upside. I really just, for whatever reason, I never, never did really. Story_ID: 667545 Speaker 1: So when you, so you start in 1998 and a couple of things. I mean he [Sean Combs] at that year, he had approached I think or I heard, that he had approached Arista [Arista Records] for more money and had a $55 million advance, advance toward future earnings, so was it that money that he was gonna invest in other things, and who was the one who did that deal? Was that him doing that deal? Speaker 2: That deal was before I got there, and you know him, with his advisors, did a big deal with Arista and it was, you know, it wasn't, at that time it was for the level of success he had, you know, it was an unprecedented deal, but it made sense because he was so successful, you know what I mean? So when you look at the economics of it, you know, they effectively recouped all of their money. You know they advance him a bunch of money, but they recouped all of it because they made, they made the money back, so, so it made sense at the time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what are the things that your tasked with working on and what is the organizational structure when you join [Combs Enterprises]? Speaker 2: So the organizational structure was developing. He had a manager, a guy named Benny Medina who he had just put into the president role, so I technically reported in to Benny when I started. So it was actually the beginnings of some structure. And then he had, you know he had the magazine business, he had the restaurant business [Justin's]. He had different people running them. He had Sean John which was just starting. So all these people they had business heads so it was like for me, it was about getting your arms around all of it, and, you know, there was a, there wasn't a well defined structure, but it wasn't hard to figure out how it should be structured. Story_ID: 667546 Speaker 1: Well you know what is interesting to me, because I think of Benny Medina as a creative himself so, I, you know, sometimes creatives don't wanna be structured. They may want to think they want structure-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but they may not, like, you know, you go sit over here you know, we know what we're doing, or we don't like that. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that Benny was interesting because, you know, it was, it was a different type of role for him. He was a manager and really, by all accounts, a rainmaker, right? So he goes out, cuts incredible deals, this, that and the other, so this was a lot of like management, like make sure this person is where they're supposed to be, manage this, you know, a lot of business management. And I was very impressed with his work ethic and how disciplined he was, and you know, everybody I met was such a get it done person, like this, this environment [at Combs Enterprises] rivaled the Bain and Company environment in terms of its intensity. People worked hard, they were smart, they were driven, they were getting stuff done. It was a real compelling, intense, you know, challenging environment. Story_ID: 667547 Speaker 1: What are the things that y- 'cause you've been here [Combs Enterprises] for-- Speaker 2: Six- sixteen years (laughter). Speaker 1: Sixteen years. So I just, I would like you to take us through the critical marketing points of that, so you're really coming into non structure. I mean I understand what you're saying, people are working hard and everything-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but you're really coming into somewhat of a non structured environment though. Did, does it have all the structure in it that you saw at BMG [Bertelsmann Music Group]? Does it have that structure? Speaker 2: It's like, it's, it's almost like comparing an apple to an orange, you know what I mean? It's like so different. It's hard to compare it. It, the foundations of the structure were there in that you had separate companies and then people running them, so, but even now, I mean our environment is still entrepreneurial. So you can't, and I will say that BMG actually did try to structure their companies very entrepreneurially. So if you were the head of BMG Germany, you ran your company and then you reported in to corporate, and so they were really more entrepreneurially structured than a lot of companies, but this is an entrepreneurial company, you know what I mean, and, and basically it was you run your company. You go out grow it, build it. You have some support. Like now we have this CFO who's going to support you, you know, and, and help you put your business together and so on, but it was about individuals who could run companies coming in and running their company. Story_ID: 667548 Speaker 1: So what are the things that you play an instrumental role in, let's say your first two years [at Combs Enterprises]? Speaker 2: So I think it was, you know there was always major initiatives that were going on, right, so I may not have the timeline right, but you know, so negotiations with Arista [Arista Records] always ongoing. After every deal there's a new deal you're working on, and then eventually negotiations with other record companies. When I first came on board, we really finalized the initial deal with Sean John, where we brought on a partner to partner with us and actually fund the launch of Sean John, so I was heavily involved with that. Speaker 1: Now who was the partner? Speaker 2: The partner was a company, an Indian family that was based out of Queens [New York] and their fashion, the name of their company was Fashion Ventures. The family was the Soni [ph.] family, great family. They were like kind of garmentos, but not your traditional Garmentos in that they learned that business but they were highly educated, highly sophisticated, you know not the kind of people that grew up in the garment world. They were also in real estate. I learned a lot from working with them. The key guy there, a guy named Ashok Soni [ph.]. I talked to him every day. He was a meticulous kind of business person, organized, analytical. Unfortunately died suddenly at the age of fifty, very young. About, that was maybe about eight, eight years ago or so, but, but he, so that was a great experience I had. So early on I would say, you know, probably Sean--and then know also figuring out the magazine which I knew was gonna be an issue, and eventually we ended up closing it down. But, you know, I knew how much money a magazine required, and just didn't think, you know, at the time I didn't know if that was the best use of funds. So we, so I sat down immediately with the magazine, Sean John. We opened a new restaurant [Justin's] in Atlanta [Georgia], and the ongoing negotiations or renegotiations with the record company [Bad Boy Records]. Speaker 1: Okay, so when did he, from the beginning would he [Sean Combs] bring you in at the beginning, or did, did it take time? Were you really a deal was sort of cut and then you were trying to figure out how to make the deal the best deal or, or how, and, and who was running, then who also was brought in to run these various enterprises? Speaker 2: So several questions there, I think the-- Speaker 1: So, so let's start with the first question, so at what point is he, you know, do you get, are deals already in place and then it's your job to sort of figure that out. Speaker 2: Right, so, so when I came on board there may have been some things in place, but I jumped right into the center of whatever was going on. And once I was there, as things initiated, either I would be initiating things, or as they were initiating I was always kind of front and center, you know, me, his attorneys, the business head, or him, depending on whose driving the deal, and at some point he would always get involved once we got it to a certain point. But yeah, so I mean at the end of the day we were a small company so anything significant going on, I was pretty much involved in. Speaker 1: And what are you learning about yourself and the business, because Sean John became very, it probably put a different face on him, you know in a very, almost a classic, you know, kind of, it took him from hip hop-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, urban music to respectable member-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, or whatever. Speaker 2: What's amazing is being around this environment and being around Sean at the time, you always had this feeling like we could do anything. You always had this, you know and like having had my own company, African American owned company, I knew the barriers we ran into and things relationship wise and how when we sat in a room, I know it felt. When we sat in a room it felt like we were really asking for a favor, you know what I mean? Whereas when I as in the room with him it was kind of like, we had the power, you know. So like you, you're either gonna wanna do this with us, or we're gonna go to somebody else. But we're getting this done. So it was a great feeling of empowerment and being in a position of power in these rooms, largely because of the mentality he created and really believed, and really because he was able to do a lot of these things and he proved he could do them, but you're right, Sean Jean was the first major one where he showed he could take something from other than the record company, take something from really zero to being a significant success. Story_ID: 667549 Speaker 1: So what were the critical parts of that success? You said you had the partnership with the Indian company [Fashion Ventures]. Were they the ones who were actually going manufacture the line [Sean John]? Is that, that was the, their role and-- Speaker 2: So yeah, so they used, they were to think about all of the infrastructure they were managing from warehousing to finding the right manufacturers, who manufactured mostly in Asia, and we were like the front of house, which is more the marketing and design of the clothing. But we ran a whole company. Everything from production to design to sales. We operated that whole company and was run by a guy who's still with us now, Jeff Tweedy and, you know, so, it was a real, real operation. I would say the success, and this is what Sean [Sean Combs] has done a lot, was really about us really identifying a white space which basically, you know in business terms, is filling a void of something that, that is, is desired by the consumer but doesn't exist. So we, we created a design, and a, and a type of clothing, and an appeal to the type of clothing that people weren't getting satisfied by any other brand. It was like, almost like, and I know how I felt about it. It was almost like clothes designed to fit the way you wanted it to fit, designed to make you feel the way you wanted it to make you feel. It felt good, it felt rich, you know, but it wasn't, it was still asp- it was aspirational, you know, but you still could afford it, but it felt like meticulous detail. The buttons were in the right place and if I needed a little pocket here for my cell phone, or I needed, it was like they, the designers knew who I was and what was important to me. And that's, that's really to me, and that was really all from Sean's vision and obviously Jeff, Jeff's vision as well because he was a very astute apparel executive. And they hit it on the head, truthfully. They hit on the head. They hit, they satisfied a need that was not being satisfied. Speaker 1: And then they, the other thing is that it was, and I think someone is gonna write about this, you know, with the beginning of the, the, the celebrity fashion thing. But there were others that had been in that space, you know, [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons, you know you had, not in, not a, but they had been in the fashions basically, let me put it that way. Speaker 2: Well Russell was the only one you could say celebrity that came before a Sean [Sean Combs]. There were a lot that came after him. But Russell was different too, and Russell was never like an artist like Sean was. But what we learned, what I learned very quickly with Sean is that celebrity can get people to the table, but if you don't have a great product, it's not gone work. So, you know, you can, yeah you can, and like we like to say, we can play unfair with celebrity and gain a bunch of impressions and, and get really brand, increase brand notoriety, and all of that quicker than other people, but whence they get there, if they try the product and they don't love it, if it doesn't satisfy some need they can't satisfy another way, if it's not economically priced, you're not gonna win. Story_ID: 667550 Speaker 1: Now what, so how long does Andre Harrell, I mean not, I'm sorry, how long does Benny Medina stay, during, in the, 'cause doesn't he go off soon? Speaker 2: Yeah, he does. I don't, I don't know if I'm gonna say exactly-- Speaker 1: You joined [Combs Enterprises] in '98 [1998]. Speaker 2: He may have left a year later. Speaker 1: Okay, a year later. So who takes over after him? Do you-- Speaker 2: So what happened after that, so Benny was like president of everything. He didn't replace that role exactly. He, he did bring in shortly after Benny left, he brought on Andre Harrell to be president of the record company [Bad Boy Records]. So more elevated executive to run the record company and it just brought another kind of seasoned executive around, but he, but he didn't really touch all the other businesses. So we never, we never really got back to someone who was kind of a centralized president until really now. We have like Brian Offutt who is our centralized chief operating officer, so we never really got to, each, so everybody kind of reported in to Sean [Sean Combs], all of the business heads reported in to Sean from that point. Speaker 1: So now why does he end his relation, his joint venture? I mean in 2001 he ends his joint venture with Arista [Arista Records], so, he, you know, and that way gives him control of the catalog and, you know his artists. So what is the motivation there and is Harrell, is Harrell helping drive that and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, you know so what happens in music is depending on your window of opportunity at the time when your deals are up or whatever. You try to get your best deal and at that time we had a real opportunity for him to basically buy Arista back out, own 100 of his catalog and, and do a distribution deal, which is what, which is what we did, a distribution deal with Universal Music [Universal Music Group]. So really like it's, it's a very savvy business move. It was a unique opportunity we had at the time and it's one of those like, again for that window, you could say why not renew with Arista, but they owned 50 percent, you know, there was an opportunity to buy it back from them and to, and to go then do a distribution deal with Universal, so we just took advantage of that opportunity. Story_ID: 667551 Speaker 1: So at that point in time that you do that, the revenues at Bad Boy Entertainment [Bad Boy Records] are--I think they're in the $300 million level or that's what I read--or is that later (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that, that may be, that may have been all of the, all of the businesses [at Combs Enterprises], so the actual record company was, you know, at that point what was interesting is that around that time Sean John was now the biggest business. So the record company wasn't the biggest business at that time. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause-- Speaker 2: And, and you're starting to see at that time, just so you understand why some of the choices were made. You are starting to see, you're starting to see the pressures on the music industry. So you're starting to see declines in music industry growth and so you're right at that point in the, in the music industry development, so, you know, you're really being very measured about, you know, your choices and decision making on what you're trying to do in this space. Speaker 1: Okay. And why are those, what are the pressures happening? Can you talk about that, on the growth of the music industry? Speaker 2: So I think what happened with music is a couple of things. One is that as digital music became more and more a factor, people were shifting from traditional CDs [compact discs] to digital music. You saw an immediate tick up because everyone would take their physical catalog and transition it into their digital catalog, so that maybe gave you a false hike up, and then after everyone kind of transitioned everything to digital, you know, and it got to that big wave of activity, you know then you started seeing a decline. And you could point to a lot of things, but one is the, you know, changing format from CDs to digital and, and a lot of ways, a lot of new ways to get music for free, piracy across, you know, in the world. What's interesting is during this time never is there a decline in consumption of music and people listening to music and being interested in music, but the sales of music are declining because there's all these ways now to share music, to get music for free. There's this thing that comes out called Napster where you can share files you know. There's blogs, there's this, there's that, we can get free music. So that's really the pressure that the music industry was facing. Story_ID: 667552 Speaker 1: And did you ever, here at Bad Boy [Bad Boy Records], think we need to exit or you know, we're--we need to sort of figure out our, our strategy here because there also, the, the, the--what I'd like you all to talk about is urban music, hip hop, you know. It's also, I mean there was a lot of, right, so you tell the story. Speaker 2: (Laughter) So I think, here's the thing, when you're, we were still like a boutique label, so no matter what's going on with the music business what you had to be able to do is to put out six to eight really good albums and sell music, and that's, even in the worst environments, that's very accomplishable if you have great artists and great music, and at the time we did, so there was never a feeling that, you know, hey we can't, this business is not sustainable for us because we weren't, we weren't Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.] or somebody that was trying, you know, earn billions of dollars, you know. We were trying to put out eight to ten albums and have them all go gold or platinum. So that's a much more contained goal and much more accomplishable goal and I think we always felt like we had a good enough selection of artists and talent and capability to make music to still work even in a declining, overall declining environment, but. Speaker 1: So talk, talk about who some of those artists were. Speaker 2: So, so just to one of your points, you know the idea of urban music, you know, really partly because of what Sean [Sean Combs] did, was really miss-categorized. Like urban music became popular music pretty quickly in the life cycle of music, especially with Bad Boy. So everything we were putting out, most of the things were hitting the pop charts. So these are groups like, you know, Faith Evans, 112, Mase, you know, in the latter years we went and, you know, we had a, a young teenager all, all, all white pop group Dream. We had Danity Kane which we made off of a television show ['Making the Band'] which is multiethnic. We had Carl Thomas. We had, I mean we just a plethora of great artists that came through Bad Boy we signed. At one point we signed New Edition. We signed some legends of, of southern rap, 8Ball and MJG at a certain point, so we had talent, you know, just an overwhelming amount of talent coming through the Bad Boy record label over the course of the years and we were able to capitalize on that. Story_ID: 667553 Speaker 1: So what is your role in these--on the music side, can you explain to me who, so Andre Harrell is here how long and, you know, and then when does he leave, and how involved are you with music deals? Speaker 2: So, let me just, so as CFO during this period, really I'm involved in, in every, every financial aspect of every company basically, pretty much, and the record company [Bad Boy Records] is one that didn't have its own separate CFO so some of our companies like Sean John, at a certain point we hired our own CFO, and, you know, therefore, I would have more oversight role over that versus being in, in the, in the details of it, but the record company generally never had its own CFO and I was always the record company CFO while I was CFO. So every decision that relates to, you know, a financial decision, which is really everything from how much money we spend on marketing to how much money we spend to record it, to, everything, pretty much. But yeah, I'm not, I'm not picking records or, you know, nothing creative. I'm not, I mean they may, they may come to me to do an analysis on the economics of signing an artist but nothing about who the artist is and-- Story_ID: 667554 Speaker 1: So why does Bad Boy [Bad Boy Records] buy a stake in Warner Music [Warner Music Group] then, how does that decision come about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It actually was the reverse. Speaker 1: Oh, it is. Oh Warner bought-- Speaker 2: So yeah we bought, we bought our stake, we bought Arista [Arista Records] out. Speaker 1: Oh, I see, Warner will acquire a 50 percent stake of them, I'm sorry then. Speaker 2: So then Warner bought, so now we're owned 100 percent, we're doing a distribution to Universal [University Music Group], and Warner comes along and says, "We want to be a joint venture partner again." And we're like, "Okay, well you gotta buy in." And they bought 50 percent. Speaker 1: Okay. And how much was that deal worth when they bought the 50 percent? Speaker 2: That was, I think it was in the press, but I think it was, they bought 50 percent for $30 million. Speaker 1: So when these deals, how much comes down to the bottom line with these deals, you know. You always hear these numbers, you know, how much are going to the artist, how much is going to the company, I mean, that, I wonder about that. Can you talk about that? Speaker 2: So it really depends, it's like anything, these are company, these are company deals, a lot of, you know--what are the things about Bad Boy and its businesses is that for a significant amount of time they were all self-funded, so at the end of the day any monies that were going to be invested into new businesses was coming from the existing businesses. So in a lot of cases, it just so happened as a choice a lot of the funds that would come in from deals like that, and I don't, I'd have to go back and think specifically about that one, but deals like that would be repurposed into new investments or new things or growth opportunities, and, you know, that's how they would be utilized. Speaker 1: So you're talking about really in some respects, zero based budgeting, you know that you generate, you're generating what you earn and then you're reinvesting it back. Speaker 2: Well you have a choice right, you could pull it off the table and, you know, just, you know, have the shareholders pocket it, or you can, you know, you can basically reinvest in some other things, or maybe even reinvest in that company. And over time, we, you know, the result has been a combination of, of, of all of those things. Story_ID: 667555 Speaker 1: And so I, I would say, I wanna stay really in that two thousand- but you know not above 2005, not that there's anything--but what is your most challenging period of being here [Combs Enterprises] at that point, up to that point? Speaker 2: Here's what's been interesting about being here, there's always a set of things that are challenges, but then there's always, the one thing, this is one of the great things about being with Sean Combs is that there's always a set of challenges and then there's always a set of things that are going phenomenally well, you know. So, and things just shift, right, so while we may have, okay we gotta figure out the record company [Bad Boy Records], record world is declining, we can't put out as many records. Sean John is doing incredible. So okay now there's more competition in apparel. Sean John is not doing as well. Television and film is doing incredible. Television and film is slowing down and, so now we get in the spirits business and that's doing incredible, you know, so, you know, we've always been fortunate to, while we're facing challenges, to also be, you know, reaping the benefit of some phenomenal successes. And that's what's been great about it. Ultimately, the decision that Sean made to be in multiple businesses, has really been what's sustained his companies over the years. And, when I say be in multiple businesses, it's like really being in them, not just like you were saying earlier, like just not being a celebrity face for something, but these are real businesses that get built, grow, they have growth trajectories and, you know, it so happened that when one is, when one is challenged, one of the other ones is flying. Story_ID: 667556 Speaker 1: So let me ask you this Derek [HistoryMaker Derek Ferguson], is there any situation where you advised against something and he went forward or you gave advice and it was the wrong advice? Can you talk about any of those? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say, you know, very, that in this environment, quite often advice routed in analytics in logic may not be the right advice, so, and one of the great things I've learned from Sean [Sean Combs] is that his intuition and his knowledge of where he can push based on who he is, and the looks in people's eyes, is pretty unique, so there's definitely been times you know I'm like, "Look, if we get this number, let's close the deal, let's run to the bank." He's like, "Nope, I think I can get more." I'm like, "Well you gonna blow this deal," you know what I mean, he's like, "No I think, I'm looking in their eyes and they wanna do business with me so they'll do more." I'm like, "Okay," so I'm literally like at times I'm just like I wanna kick him under the table like, "Take it, take it," and, you know, analytically it's the right point to take it, but, you know, there is the contextual and the kind of reading people the right way and knowing where you can push and he's great at that and a lot of times, you know, he's pushed it further and got what he ultimately wanted, beyond what I would have recommended that we, you know, we stick with. Speaker 1: So you really, you, you have, you saw the vision, because a lot of times there can be conflict between the entrepreneur, the made entrepreneur and you, know, people with M.B.A. training. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There can be, like it doesn't fit the metric so then it doesn't work, but you really believe a great deal in him and his vision from the beginning. Speaker 2: Well, I just, my kind of, I got ruined early on in that every vision he had was coming true, right, so I understand nobody is a hundred percent, but you get, so at a certain point I'm just kind of like, well you know what, this stuff is really happening so let me figure out more about how do I take this vision and actualize it and maybe even, and make it any bigger versus trying to cut it down. Analytically, you can find a way to say no to anything, you know what I mean, you know, there's, there's, we used to do this at Bain, it's like if you do enough analysis you'll come up with enough, enough of a story that would almost allow you to say no to anything, you know, because analysis generally brings doubt, and doubt brings about risk and risk brings about no's, but entrepreneurship and business building is about knowing the risk and be willing to take it and, and going forward anyway. Speaker 1: So what, what would you say is the essence of him though? I mean having worked with him now, you know, is it sixteen years, yeah? Speaker 2: Sixteen years, yeah. Speaker 1: So what would you say is the essence of him because this is a person who did not even finish college and so how did he, you know, where is his street smart? Your father [James Ferguson] didn't finish-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know college, so I'm just trying to understand why you think he's good at what he does and then multiple businesses. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think one is that, and this is what people don't get enough credit for, he's highly intelligent. You know so I worked with, along with a lot of CEOs and, you know, one of the tough parts when you're a consultant at Bain and Company working with the CEOs is that they're always out in front of you. They know their business really well, they're seasoned, and there's nothing you can tell them that they don't already know, and their usually a couple of steps ahead of you, so to be a great consultant, you got to find a way to get ahead of them. Say yeah, "I know how you feel about these things, but you didn't think about this," so he's very hard to get ahead of because his mind is, so he is, and again I don't, you know, I don't, you know, I don't know if it's just all natural or just so, he is highly in the world I operate in and I been around, you know, presumably some of the smartest people in the world, he's in that group. And then the second part is something that is not, that's more conditional I think, which is that he has an incredible thirst to continuously be successful, you know what I mean, so whatever it is that's driving him and truthfully it almost is a little scary, it's like, you know, his drive to be successful, even for somebody who's already wildly successful, it never stops. You say what's the next challenge, what's next impossible thing I can try to do and he throws himself into these things so fully, like I said it's almost scary to watch because it's such a complete commitment to doing something groundbreaking or impossible that, that's something that you just don't, just most people don't have because, because at the end of the day it's hard to succeed at those things you throw yourself in 1,000 percent, and most people can't recover from not succeeding when they throw themselves into something that way. And again, he's been fortunate to succeed at a very high percentage of those things he throws himself into that way, but he's willing to take that risk and has enough confidence and faith in himself to throw himself into some impossible initiatives, you know, 100 percent. Story_ID: 667557 Speaker 1: Well let's talk about the, the, the I mean, I'm just trying to think, so who start, who's decision was it to start the marketing firm, Blue Flame (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was, yeah, that was, you know, one of his things at a certain point was to codify what we do in marketing so let's institutionalize it, and that was the idea behind having a marketing firm that would then be able to take what we do in the various companies, put it all together and then help each company grow. We very quickly found that outside companies wanted some of that and we went through phases of actually offering services to outside companies, but Sean [Sean Combs] always came back to wanting to just keep that special sauce for his own companies 'cause he was just kind of like, "I don't wanna go build up XYZ's company and they, they all of a sudden learn all of my marketing secrets, you know, I'd rather keep it for my company [Combs Enterprises], so." Speaker 1: So that was called Blue Flame, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Blue Flame, yes. Speaker 1: Blue Flame, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 667558 Speaker 1: And then, then what is the next significant thing because when I met you, yeah because I'm wondering, when I met you it was really about Revolt-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, and that's the most recent initiative, so can we talk about that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then move on, yeah. Speaker 2: So Revolt are the two that are really kind of the most recent, I say Revolt and AQUAHydrate. Speaker 1: Right, oh yes, the water. Speaker 2: And actually we just bought a tequila, DeLeon Tequila. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --was Ciroc in that because Ciroc also became a big deal but it became a big revenue deal, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so, but DeLeon is the brand that we bought with Diageo [Diageo plc]. Speaker 1: Right, oh-- Speaker 2: So those three, those are the three most recent kind of big initiatives that are new would be Revolt, Aqua Hydrate and DeLeon. Speaker 1: So let's talk about each of those. Speaker 2: [06:12:36:01]Okay. So Revolt, here's one thing I would say about Sean [Sean Combs], everything he does is purposeful and doesn't happen overnight. So Revolt, really the seeds for Revolt really started in 2007 when we developed the cable concept, that was similar to Revolt but it included music, fashion, life style, you know, it was more, it was a broader lifestyle channel. We thought there was a real void for it. We felt we could provide it. We also wanted to include movies and we developed that in 2007. We went to Comcast [Comcast Corporation], we pitched it. They received it really well. Actually it was going, it was looking like it was gonna happen and then we hit the financial crisis, so that slowed everything down and everybody's stock price dropped, money dried up, everything changed. So it just slowed everything down, but it didn't change the vision and over the years the concept kind of evolved and evolved and Sean eventually said, you know, "I want this to be all music." And at the time when we were revamping it into all music was also a time when Comcast was looking to add channels as a result of the Comcast NBC merger where they were required to add independent minority-owned and women-owned channels to their line up as a condition of this merger that consolidated two really big content companies. So we entered into this bake off, over a hundred channel options were presented by various people, a lot of the names that we all know, Bill Cosby, Suzanne de Passe, like great incredible names of people that have incredible ideas, so we were very, very proud and fortunate to be selected as one of the four channels that they added.[06:14:33:23] Speaker 1: So was, it was really you and then Magic Johnson had-- Speaker 2: On the African American side. Speaker 1: On the African American side. Speaker 2: There were two Hispanic ones. Speaker 1: That's fine, that's fine. So talk about the concept for it and what role you, you know I always wanna go back to your role, but what was the concept for Revolt and what was, this was a new initiative completely a new business. Speaker 2: Yeah. So Revolt, the idea was that, you know, music had been off of television for some time at the point where we were formulating this, so Sean's basic point was that there's room for music on television if it's done right. And pretty much everyone had abandoned it, except for a channel named Fuse, which wasn't having a lot of success and largely the competition was that you have all this video online and that people could easily access and control on their own and it would lead you to believe, "Well hey, why do people need music on television or videos on television when they can go control it themselves and get it online." But what people were missing and what Sean didn't miss is curation, that people, as much as people wanted to discover stuff on their own, they wanna be told by people they have confidence in and trust, you know what, what the new music is that they should be listening to, and that was a fundamental premise of Revolt was that people would come and be interested in watching curated music. And that's early on and really what we offered was curated music. And, you know, it's interesting because if you're fourteen years old, a lot of fourteen year olds would say, "Wow, what a cool idea to have music videos on TV." 'Cause they didn't grow up in the MTV [Music Television; MTV] era. So what we've been able to develop is really a real, you know, the goal for Revolt is to be the new number one name in music, and we feel like a lot of people abandoned that position and it's wide open for us and the first place you, the first place you start establishing that new number one name is with the artist community. So now artists are all vying to be on Revolt, to be picked by Revolt to perform on Revolt and that's the first place where you get the credibility and the authenticity and that's that, these last nine months, we've really accomplished the artist community, you know, and their fans embracing Revolt as a real source of curated music and of music information and news. Story_ID: 667559 Speaker 1: So for a while you were looking for, you brought someone in from MTV [Music Television; MTV], you know, who had at first, right, I forget his name, but there was-- Speaker 2: Andy Schuon, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Andy Schuon, that's right. And he had been successful in the creation of MTV. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So you, but then now [HistoryMaker] Keith Clinkscales has been brought in [to Revolt] so -- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --talk about how that happened and, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that, you know, there's always a, as with a lot of these businesses, creative businesses, there's kind of the creative side then there's the business side. It's very hard to find someone that does really both, you know, extremely well. So we knew Andy is a guy who just had produced hours upon hundreds of hours upon hours of music content. And we knew he knew how to do it in the quality way we wanted, in the efficient way we wanted so that we're not, weren't spending, you know, too much money. So we felt very confident about that. And Andy has also run businesses so we had that side, so but we really were like, you know what, the content part of this is so important we really want somebody who can just come in and that's all they really focus on. And that's what led us to say, you know, let's also bring on somebody who can oversee all of the business side and particularly have a real sensibility around advertising and affiliate sales so growing out distribution and still have enough creative sensibilities that they could, they could have input over there and that, that was the idea about bringing Keith in, and really at the end of the day we thought having somebody that, although you could have someone who can do both, content and business, that we thought it was so important to get the content right that we didn't want to distract that focus buy having somebody who also would be having to worry everyday about ad sales and all the other business functions. Speaker 1: So the business functions are gonna be Keith? Speaker 2: Yeah, they are Keith. Everything, everything reports to Keith, but again, you know, Andy still is significant leader on the content side and he brings a lot of experience and capability there, and then Keith is really, the large part of his energy is focused on the, the business functions. Story_ID: 667560 Speaker 1: So then let's talk about Aqua. Speaker 2: AQUAhydrate. Speaker 1: Right, AQUAhydrate. Let's talk about that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. So AQUAhydrate is somewhat unique for us 'cause we don't, we have, we have several kind of partners in it. One is Mark Wahlberg, who I think I mentioned. Did I mention him? Speaker 1: You did, you mentioned him off camera. Speaker 2: Okay, sorry. Yeah, Mark Wahlberg really is the one who first discovered this water and we also have Yucaipa Companies [The Yucaipa Companies, LLC] whose one of our investors and one of the investors in this. So it's really at the end of the day it's really the three that really control the company, but Sean [Sean Combs] again, years ago, years before we even discovered this, thought there was a real opportunity, a white space, for this new generation in the water category. So he said if I can find a water that taste good and has good stuff in it, this new generation is drinking more water, they care about what they put in their body, and water satisfies something that other drinks just don't. It's that, it's that recovery drink when I work out, it's that drink when, you know, if I had a hard night of play or a hard night at work, I feel good about myself when I put water in my body because I feel like I'm cleansing and restoring my body. And that was his hypothesis, and then we discovered this water that had great properties, tastes great and, you know, we had Mark Wahlberg involved, and we thought, you know, we thought it was a home run. Speaker 1: So talk about the type of water it is and the origin of the company that is now AQUAhydrate. Speaker 2: So really it was originally the process for making the water was originally founded by, you know, some of inventor, scientist guys that came up with a way to create this high pH water through and electrolysis process. We had some proprietary machines that kind of made the water, but they were kind of, kind of inventors and scientists and not really marketers, so they were able to make the water but really couldn't do much else with it. They got really fortunate in that they sent a bunch of water to Mark Wahlberg, actually they didn't, so somebody, so these guys were out there, they made this water, they didn't really know what to do with it. Another group of entrepreneurs came and bought that technology from them. And they were fortunate enough to send out cases of the water to Mark Wahlberg while he was training for a movie. Mark drank the water and felt like, you know, it had incredible effect on him, that his recovery time was faster. He loved the way the water tasted, and what happened? Speaker 1: No, I'm just thinking that out of this, I'm just listening to the story so I was looking over at the bottles-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --but I was just thinking that he got the water, he start drinking and he felt what? Speaker 2: He felt like it really, he was working, he was in the movie 'The Fighter,' he was training for that movie, so he was actually working out every day. So his recovery time, he was drinking the water, and his recovery time from his workouts was, was being cut down, so he was able to like, his body was getting restored faster, which is one of the property of a high pH electrolyte-enhanced water. So similar to a Gatorade or other liquids that restore your body fast, this has a lot of those properties, but he felt the impact of it right away, and felt like this was something unique and he started literally walking around. Everywhere he walked around he had this bottle in his hand. Now this is a guy who hadn't endorsed anything since Calvin Klein underwear from back when he was Marky Mark, so he wasn't someone who was endorsing a bunch of products, but he loved this water. Sean kept seeing him with the water, we were looking for water and eventually, he was like, "Mark, what is this water you always have in your hand?" Mark introduced it to him and, you know, we got to know a lot more about it, and eventually Marks like, "Look, you know, I love the water, I know what you can do from a marketing standpoint, let's team up and this thing happen." Speaker 1: So that, that, so where are you in the process of the business (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So we really, we really did a soft launch of the brand last, last year. We're growing our distribution, you know, we tripled our sales from last year to from thirteen from twelve to thirteen, we're still growing at an incredible clip, we're looking to double our sales from last year to this year and we're just growing our distribution, so the water business is about really getting a distribution footprint first, and then driving sales. So it's a much more difficult process to get a fully distributed beverage product because, you know, it's complicated, but it's a region by region process, and you have to team up with distributors to get them in stores. So much of it is not really a clear national network for a startup, you know, early stage water to tap into to get national distribution in, in one snap of a finger, so you gotta go out and build it region by region. Story_ID: 667561 Speaker 1: And then what about the deal with Ciroc then. Can you talk about that because-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that, that's a little earlier (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: That, that occurs in what year, in two thousand-- Speaker 2: Two thousand- let's see if I get it right, 2008. Speaker 1: Eight [2008] I was gonna say. But '8 [2008] was a (unclear) economy. So maybe it's before-- Speaker 2: Maybe it was in, the end of 2007, 2008, right. So yeah again it was-- Speaker 1: So who, who, how does this deal come? Does the company come to Sean [Sean Combs]? Speaker 2: So we were doing things off and on with Diageo [Diageo plc]. They were sponsoring things, and you know, they really had their eye on Sean and say look we wanna do more, more things with you. We wanna do something bigger with you. So a lot of vision from their side. I have to give them a lot of credit for it. And, you know, Sean was always like, you know, stopping short of nothing, then something really big. So he said, "Look, I want a brand." And they talked about various options and they had this existing brand that was pretty cool product but not a lot of people knew about it, which was Ciroc. It's made from grapes. Its vodka made from grapes instead of potatoes. It's made from fine French grapes, so, you know, smoother tasting, so it had a lot of great attributes, but nobody really knew about it and Sean saw the bottle, tried the product and was like, "I could make something out of this." Struck a deal, really a kind of landmark deal where he's like, "I think I can do great with this, but I'll bet on myself and my economics will really be based on the upside and what I can do to grow it." And they agreed on it, and the rest is history. Speaker 1: So he struck a deal not to be, it wasn't so much payment up front, it was based on a larger percentage I take it? Speaker 2: For his success, so he was saying I'll, I'll bet on the future and my future success versus taking any large, like you said, large upfront payment, but if I'm successful, I'm gonna get a large piece of the pie. Speaker 1: So, okay, well. So then it really became marketing. He put it, so was that done through the agency, Blue Flame? Speaker 2: It was done through Blue Flame. Again it was a little bit, it was similar type of thing where there was a, here's the thing, Sean has created a categories of consumers which are aspirational consumers, right? So this is an aspirationally priced, spirits brand. It's really about celebration and it's like what is the thing, where do you go to if you're celebrating, if you're having a special event. Where do you go to and why? And he created this as that product for our, of course twenty-one and over, but our kind of younger, cutting edge, you know, aspirational consumer, where is your go to place to celebrate? And he made Ciroc that and it was something that didn't exist in a product that people felt was kind of their own that spoke to them that spoke to their aspirations, their desires. So he came in and positioned something that, to a group that really never had anything positioned to them that way and it worked. Story_ID: 667562 Speaker 1: So basically Sean John, that was his [Sean Combs] market there too, the aspirational-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --this is the aspirational. The water [AQUAhydrate] doesn't quite fit in that. It's a broader market. Speaker 2: It is, but again, it's very, it is aspirational in that it's, it's the I work hard, I play hard and I wanna be able to do all the things that Sean Combs does or Mark Wahlberg does and still stay healthy and fit and recover and whether I'm a workout enthusiast, so I just work a lot of hours. What do I put in my body to keep me going as I'm aspiring to be better and better? We call our primary target for this water the everyday warrior. So that person is working hard, that's playing hard, that's working out hard, but they're the everyday warrior. It could be somebody from, somebody who wakes up early in the morning and does a sanitation job and works hard and is exhausted at the end of the day, or a mother whose got three kids, she's dropping off at daycare and goes to work and comes home, or that, you know, person that's in the gym four hours a day and needs to recover, or just that business executive that is running around, traveling, you know, squeezing in a work out here and there but very conscious of their body and what they put in their body, all of those would be the group and all of those have tapped into an aspect of aspiration. Story_ID: 667563 Speaker 1: So when you, so talk about your, the, the change in position, what you became, you know, and who filled in your position and what-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So, you know, I been the CFO here at the time probably about fourteen years. And Sean [Sean Combs] and I started talking about a new role and he was just kind of like, "Tell me what you wanna do," right. So yeah, I'm going to get my, my, what I always loved was entrepreneurship, new businesses, creating new businesses. So we came up with this title called chief growth officer, which would allow me to work with existing companies as we were growing whether we were growing internationally or growing into new lines of business, and work with the new businesses that we were starting, you know, so things like as we're becoming involved in AQUAhydrate or the acquisition of DeLeon [DeLeon Tequila] and new things that are other things I'm looking at, and to really focus on those things and to put all of my energy toward them versus it being a part of, of, a part of my responsibilities or, you know, a small piece. And so what we back filled in on is we now, so we have a chief financial officer who takes all of those duties and we also added a chief operating officer which takes some of the operating duties, so, so, you know, we went from a period of time where we had kind of my role as chief financial officer really do in aspects not all of the three positions, but aspects of all three positions, and now we have three positions that really are required giving the complexity and the number of businesses we're overseeing and, and running, and because I've been here so long, I still get involved in quite a lot of different things that may not fall right into my description, but, you know that's part of being in an entrepreneurial company. Speaker 1: So how many total businesses are there presently? Speaker 2: So I guess I could count 'em, you know, probably ten businesses, yeah. Speaker 1: Ten businesses, okay. Story_ID: 667564 Speaker 1: So tell me where you are in your life and career right now? What, what are you, you know, as you sit here, what are you wanting to do that maybe you haven't done? What is, you're still, I mean you're less than fifty, even though, you know, fifty is staring you in the face, (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thanks a lot. Speaker 1: I know, but it's a baby and all grown. Speaker 2: It's a baby. Well, you know, I would say my life focus, and 'cause we didn't get into this because we were just talking more-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Speaker 2: --functionally about-- Speaker 1: I wanted to, but, go on. Speaker 2: --jobs and stuff, yeah. So my life focus really, it's actually interesting timing wise, 'cause when I first joined here [Combs Enterprises], here's what happened to me, right. So you do your career plotting and you, you pathing and you say okay, how, what is the best thing for me, how do I put myself on a track to make the most money and this, that and the other, and, you know, I kind of landed in this world where I was like wow, this is great, it's entrepreneurial, there's a lot of self made people that made a lot of money, and I got into this environment, I pretty quickly realize that, you know what, the aspiration is just a successful title or certain, making a certain amount of money, just wasn't it for me, you know what I mean, and it was just one of those things where I don't, I don't judge anybody that it is, 'cause it was what I thought it was gonna be for me, but it was just not the thing that was driving me, and, of course, you know, so I felt a lot of confusion about, okay if it's not that, what is, what is it gonna to be, so, of course, I did what a lot of us do when we looking for answers is I started going back to church again, more regularly. I always went to church, but I start going back more regularly and actually a colleague of mine, a friend of mine that I went to college with, had recently started a church in New Rochelle [New York] and the co-founder and co-pastor was living in Stamford, Connecticut, so I bumped into him. He said, "Hey, me and David [ph.] started a church in New Rochelle, you should come down and visit." I live in Stamford, Connecticut, so I'm thirty minutes away, so I never really thought, I thought it was a little far for that to be my church home, but, so this was all around this same time, sixteen years ago actually. The company, the church is celebrating its sixteenth anniversary this year. So I went and attended the church and I got really upset at my friend and pastor because I felt like his whole sermon he was talking about me. I thought that was kind of rude, you know I come visit your church and you put my whole life on blast, you know, and then after like three times of feeling the same thing that he's like why are all your sermons talking about me, I realized that probably was a lot of what he was talking about that I needed to hear. And truthfully, he and I are from such similar backgrounds, you know, he was very educated but came from Queens, inner city Queens, New York and so we had such similar experiences that I realized that his whole faith walk was very relevant to me and so it really became the most relevant thing in my life at that point in time and I realized that. I'm seeking a center point or a centerpiece of what I'm supposed to, to model and chase after, and all of the things the world had been teaching me were the things that I should model and put front and center in my life, were really not it. It really was very simply what, you know, grandma used to tell me, which is, you know, put God first, you know, put Jesus first and that's really what drives your life and should drive your life, and so that's kind of been, you know, it's interesting how the things coincided, so as I started finding my a through that right, so I'm still in, you know, a company and kind of drive success and economics are always a part of it and still trying to build a life for my family, but I'm seeing that I really wanna to start pushing my life toward having my, you know, my relationship with Christ and my faith driving what I do and how I do it, I'm trying to marry these two. Story_ID: 667565 Speaker 1: So not easy but as I'm going along the way, you know God is putting certain things, you know, to me and saying, you know, "Look, well, okay. I understand you're grappling with this," so one of the first things he put to me is starting a bible study here on the job [at Combs Enterprises]. Very unconventional. So for me coming out of a Bain and Company and coming out of more traditional companies, it's almost like unheard of to even talk about your religion or your faith in any job setting. But here I am being kind of seriously feeling pushed toward, start a bible study, so I put it off and put it off and kind of just ignored it and eventually said, you know what I went to Sean [Sean Combs], I said "Look, I have this idea. A lot of people can't make bible study because we're working so hard and so busy, I have this idea of starting a bible study on the job, before and after work of course, so it wouldn't interfere with people's jobs." And, he was like, "Great," you know, supportive of it, do it, you know. So I finally got up enough courage to send out the original email and I commute on a Metro North train [Metro North Railroad], so at a certain point you lose service, so I send out the email to all of the staff of the company. At that time it was about two hundred people I send out the email to. It said, "Hey, want to start a bible study, let me know if you're interested," blah, blah, blah, described what it was. So I lost service. I couldn't tell if I'm getting responses and I, I knew a couple of people would probably do it, so I was expecting, if I had four or five people, I'd done pretty well. When I got into Grand Central station [Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York], I had like twenty-five responses, all people that were like, "Wow, this is great, you know I've been wanting to find a bible study," range of people and it was just like, wow, you knew something was going on way beyond me that had already been going on to get that type of like, to get an over ten percent response of people that wanted to participate. So, in fact, that first group was so big I had to split it up into two sessions and we had a night, morning session and a night session of a bible study that we had started running and since 2002 I've been doing that. We've also now, we were doing that on Tuesday nights cause that is now morphed into, we still are doing the bible studies, but we then created a couple of years ago, we created Tuesday night church. So its church for people here, but any other people that may not, you know, Sunday may not be working for them, or they wanna, you know, attend more than once, but it's really geared toward the New York City [New York, New York], kind of professional type. It's very rooted in worshiping through the arts, so it has a creative spin to it and so we do every, every Tuesday we do a Tuesday night service here in the city as well, which was kind of born out of that whole bible study and so on that we did here. So long story, to get to the point of kind of what's driving me now, my mission is to, I know what needs to drive me, and my mission is to figure out how to marry real life and real life responsibilities and, and aspirations with the path that God is putting me on and marry those two in a way that ultimately glorifies God and really satisfies its purpose, the purpose he has for my, for my life. So what that means is that a lot of times business opportunities and work opportunities, you know, are not always like, I'm not always striving for what's that next position, what's that next CEO job at another company. It's kind of like how I'm able to do what I need to do in the environment I'm in and if I'm able to do that, that's really important. So the fact that I can have an owner of the company, an executive that I can go to with a crazy idea like hey I wanna do a bible study on the premises and they would say yes. I'm like well, you know what, this is an environment that's allowing me to do the things that God is calling me to do and that's probably more important than me going to chase some other corporate dreams or opportunities. Story_ID: 667566 Speaker 1: So you're talking about your faith walk and, I mean people would not think that this would be happening here. I mean that--you know, I know I had read about it, but people would find that odd like a juxtaposition of two unlikely worlds under one roof. Speaker 2: Yeah. And this is like the, the kind of, I would say humor that I found out God has, right, to some extent, because I would, so to back up, I wouldn't expect for this to be married with the company [Combs Enterprises], with any company truthfully, you know what I mean. So from where I'm, from my background, like you know, I barely would want to let somebody know whether I was Republican or Democrat, you know, nonetheless let them know that, "Hey, you know I believe in Jesus Christ," you know what I mean? Like, that would not be something I would say aloud in a work setting at any point in my career prior to this experience, so it's all unconventional to me and I look at it like, wow, who could do something like this. If you don't believe in, in a God as someone who controls the universe and kind of makes all things, creates all things for his purposes, you know, this story should help you believe that because it's not conventional. It's not something I even fathom to put together. It's the circumstance I find myself in because I'm trying to do my best to follow his direction, and as bizarre as it is like to say, oh, okay, send out an email about a bible study, you know, when you do it you find out the results are there because he's already planned it out to happen, basically, even in the most unconventional settings. Story_ID: 667567 Speaker 1: So what, what do you wanna do here [Combs Enterprises] that you haven't done? Do you, do you have thoughts about that? Speaker 2: You know one of the things, I, again, I love the idea of building new opportunities and new businesses and I have become satisfied with not over planning where everything is going, and kind of letting it go where it's going and figuring it out. You know there are some very specific goals I can talk about within my current job which are kind of international growth and kind of couple new industries I have my eyes on and so on and so forth, but you know, I've learned a couple of things from a business prospective that we can be, we can be kind of steered in a lot of different directions so you gotta be prepared, prepared for that and not be too locked or wedded to something, and then from again, when you're trying to follow where God is leading you, you gotta be ready to go once you're being led, you gotta be ready to go there, so I've learned that, you know, the model of having everything planned out week by week, month by month, year by year, you know, may not, may not work in all situations in that being ready and able to, to be flexible and go where the opportunities, business opportunities may lead me or go where God is leading me is really important. Story_ID: 667568 Speaker 1: You know we, we've spent really time talking about your generation, you know, that came up that is really maybe two generations removed from the--what is your generation called anyway? Speaker 2: I think I'm still Generation X. Speaker 1: Is it, so you're Generation X? Speaker 2: I'm like right at the tail end of Generation X, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So can you tell me what you believe the, the legacy of your generation will be when all is said and done? Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say, if I had, if I'm truthful about it, it'll be a little disappointing. I think we had an opportunity to pick up a mantle and we're gonna be able to point to a lot of individual success but maybe not a lot of collective advancement. It pains me to hear that eighty young, probably mostly black men, were shot and killed over the 4th of July weekend. That's like painful and that says that us as a generation, we're doing something wrong. That can't be, I mean that's from, you know, that's where you are, you know. So I don't, so that is, is, is, is painful. And I think that where do we go wrong, where do we get lost, I think, and then I look at the generation coming after us, they're in a very, I mean my kids legitimately grew up in a world where, you know, I only can judge individuals, but individually they have a lot of friends that really didn't judge them by their race, and they have a lot of relationships and so on. Society still has, of course, a bunch of issues, but they are a more eclectic group of people that see the world a different way. My daughter [Peri Ferguson] now, the only president she knows, my nine year old daughter, my youngest, the only president she knows is Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], so like, that's a whole different perspective and way to grow up and I think it can lead you into complacency about some of the major issues we're still facing. And, you know, eighty young black men getting killed on, on, over a weekend, is as big as an issue as us being at war in the Middle East, you know, but it's like, you know, I don't know if we're treating it that way. So I feel like we have a lot to, we have a lot, we have a lot to do as this generation, and one of the things that I realize is that we can do a lot and the other generations accomplish a lot really by having a strong church that was focused on the right thing. So I see that our generation can, can rekindle that, and that's a lot of what we're trying to do in our churches, to really make justice a big part of what we do as it was in the sixties and so on, 'cause it's the core of where we can, we can really corral human capital but also corral the strength that goes beyond human strength because that's what's really required. To go attack that issue in Chicago [Illinois], if you're not going with a faith, faith lead initiative, we're not gonna be able to deal with it. So I see that happening. I see us as a, you know, as a church trying to do it, but truthfully I think, I think we, when I look at how this generation is gonna be written about, I don't, I think it's gonna be a lot of individual accomplishment and a lot of, you know, Barack Obama, President Obama being president. We have a lot of great things to point to individually, but collectively, I can't be, I can't be satisfied with where we are. Story_ID: 667569 Speaker 1: So what are your hopes and concerns for our community leading into that? What--so what, what hopes do you see and what are your concerns? Speaker 2: Yeah I, you know, hate--it sounds cliche-ish, but it's just like, you know it starts with just a fundamental kind of like love your neighbor perspective. Like can we get to, at some point, figure out how we go back to community and really supporting and loving each other, you know what I mean? I feel like we're, we're, we, as an African American community are very separated. We don't we're not really in touch with what life is like, you know, us at certain income levels are not in touch with what life is like at lower income levels. We, we fleet in and out of real major issues like violence in Chicago [Illinois]. We can jump into it for a couple of weeks, but then we jump back out of it. I mean these are life long dedicated issues that none of us should really stand for. Like we should wake up every day trying to figure out how do we solve these issues? So what do I hope for, I hope for, you know, getting back to the fundamentals, how do we get back to love your neighbor, community, education, aspiration, building a better collective, being responsible for the collective. How do we get back to some of those tenants that were so important for our growth period, especially during the civil rights era, that kind of, I feel like we've gone backwards with. Story_ID: 667570 Speaker 1: Well some would (cough) say that Sean Combs is part of that generation that came or even helped cultivate that, so how do you juxtapose those two things? Speaker 2: I, I would say, it's hard for me to say, to agree with that being a, I mean Sean, there's no way, everything I know about Sean Combs, there's no way I can paint him as anything but a positive, right? And, you know, it's like, almost like looking at Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and saying, is that a positive guy. He's going to go down as one of the greatest entrepreneurs, African American or not, in the history of the United States of America, you know what I mean? So that's a great thing. And I think, you know, he's not void of a bunch of the contextual issues in our communities and I think he's done a lot and will continue to do a lot, but it's bigger than him when I talk about a community being focused and gathered to do a bunch of things. We often times rely on those that we see as most prominent to do something, and don't do anything ourselves, you know what I mean, so I think we're the real, we're the real movements came from is everybody waking up and feeling obligated to do something. So kids, in schools saying, "I'm gonna protest today. I'm not going to school and I'm going to march and I wanna be thrown in jail." That was high schoolers. When you look back at the civil rights footage, like that's who was doing it. They were waking up like saying this is important and this is what we have to do today. So I think, I think it's almost a little bit of a misdirection to say, "Well what is LeBron James doing, or what is Sean Combs doing?" Because we're missing the fact that we're not asking the question, we're not looking in the mirror and saying what I am I doing. Speaker 1: So really you're talking about the collective actions starting, but someone has to galvanize it at some point. Speaker 2: Yeah, but have to galvanize it, but I's also a little bit of, you know, of it being important to each and every one of us. It would be important in our households. You know it's not, the bully, you know at the end of the day, let's think about the civil rights era. We didn't have the internet, we didn't even have mobile phones, so people were corralled that wanted to be corralled, you know what I mean. There wasn't some big propaganda campaign that made them want to be corralled. They wanted to be corralled, they wanted to do something and then you just had a charismatic leader that came about to corral them, but it wasn't kind of like because they had, you know that they were into some big campaign. Like right now we could probably do a slick online campaign and try to do it but at the end of the day at its core, did people wake up, you know, feeling like something was wrong and I gotta do something about it. And that starts at the dinner tables, in the households it starts at the dinner tables and that starts in the churches. That starts in your everyday life, not on watching TV or even right now looking online at what people are talking about. Story_ID: 667571 Speaker 1: So this is my last question. So you have two children, right? Speaker 2: Three. Speaker 1: Three, three children. That's right, I'm sorry. And their ages, they're actually getting up there in age. Speaker 2: Twenty-five [Reginald Ferguson], twenty [Maya Ferguson] and nine [Peri Ferguson]. So I didn't do a great job of family planning, but all from the same wife [Regina Ferguson], so we had a child each decade, '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s], 2000s, so I told 'em all we gotta do, we probably gonna set a record if we had one in this decade, but she, she's not having that, so. Speaker 1: So what are you, when you think about, because you are, appear to be a very strong family man and you've been, you know, consistent? You've been married now how many years? Speaker 2: Twenty-six years. Speaker 1: Twenty-six years. So what, what do you want people to know about you and what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think what I've come to learn is that my legacy is nothing if I haven't pursued God's purposes for me, right? So I could have gone off and had this on paper or something that people like, "Ooh, wow, oh great, he did that," but if it didn't really, if it didn't really match what my ultimate purpose was, created as I quoted Ephesians 2:10 early on, before I was born there was a set of things God wanted me to, had prescribed for me to do that were in my plan, you know, so am I really, am I really satisfying that plan or not? So my, my biggest legacy will ultimately be probably one between myself and, and, and, and, and God, mostly which is, like at the end of the day, how close did I get to what you wanted me do. That's my ultimate kind of test for me. And so along those lines, you know, I would wanna, I again learn to not boast about myself because ultimately, you know, if we try to be the best humans we can be, we're not gone be that great ultimately, so being the best, God directed people we can be and accessing and utilizing God's power is always going to result in something between than trying to do things on my strength. So I'd be looking at most of those things I could point to that would clearly, at God's direction, and things that would give him glory versus things that would give myself glory. Speaker 1: Okay. That's it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's it. Thank you. Story_ID: 667572 Speaker 1: This is me, [HistoryMaker] Derek Ferguson, when I was four years old. My actual pictures as a baby are rare because my, we had a house that we lived in, burned down when I was about one years old so we lost a lot of my baby pictures prior to be one years old. Speaker 2: So this is my high school [Stuyvesant High School, New York, New York] graduation picture. Am I right about that? Yeah, I think that's my high school graduation picture. Yeah I think that's my high school graduation picture. And I, you know what, I'm sorry, let me just check, it had to be junior high school. Speaker 1: Looks like junior high to me. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I'm looking at the shirt, I'm like I did not wear that. I wore a suit for my high school. So right, that's my junior high school graduation picture. Speaker 1: From where? Speaker 2: Graduated from Junior High School 125 [J.H.S. 125 Henry Hudson, Bronx, New York]. I would have been, let's see, I would have been thirteen, thirteen years old, yep. Speaker 1: So this, I don' know what grade this is. I would guess this is fifth, fifth or sixth grade school picture. P.S. 152 [P.S. 152 Evergreen, Bronx, New York] would have been sixth grade? Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is my picture I took upon graduating from business school, 1990 Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]...