 Story_ID: 187627 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe and I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing are Amina [ph.] Pilgrim [ph.] and Roz Mason, right. And ma'am, could you please give us your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Eugenia Fortes, E-U-G-E-N-I-A, F-O-R-T-E-S. Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: I did, but when I got my citizen papers I omitted it. So it's just--it used to be Antonio and I decided that Eugenia Fortes was enough. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187628 Speaker 1: We've just been joined by John Reed, John L. Reed. Ma'am, could you give us your full name and spell it--well you did that, that's right. So what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: November 14, 1911. Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born? Speaker 2: Brava, B-R-A-V-A, Cape Verde Islands. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The smallest island of the nine. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well right now retired. But before it was housework, cook. In fact I did quite a lot of catering. Story_ID: 187629 Speaker 1: Before we get--go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask and they only require a short answer, they are lightweight questions. And the first question is, ma'am what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Kale soup (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The whole world (laughter). Speaker 1: And the last question is, ma'am do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Well, not really. I mean whenever the occasion arises I answer and sometimes it's not always the same thing. Story_ID: 187630 Speaker 1: Now I'd like to ask you about your family history, I wanna start with your mother's side of the family, then I'll ask you about your father's side of the family. But can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Maria Anicleto Fortes, A-N-I-C-L-E-T-O. Speaker 1: Okay, what's the middle name again, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Anicleto, A-N-I-C-L-E-T-O. Speaker 1: Okay, Fortes, okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 25th, I think it was 1890, I think, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well my mother was from Brava-no, her mother's family were Fogo [Cape Verde] and they moved to Brava [Cape Verde] and the first-we were all born in Brava, and it's--what else did you want--(simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Well, how much do you know about her side of the family, how far back can you trace 'em? Speaker 2: Well I know that one of her parents was-couldn't speak, she was dumb. But she was a very, very fine seamstress. Then my father--I mean her father, he came from Lisbon [Portugal]. He was white--so-called white Portuguese. And I don't know much about his background. But he had a brother, Manuel [ph.], who came to Brava also and they all married Cape Verdean women. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Just for the record, can you tell us where Cape Verde is and the significance of Cape Verde? I think a lot of people don't know where it is. Speaker 2: Well as far as I know it's 400 and some odd miles west of Africa below the Canary's [Canary Islands], below the gulf--the oh what do you call it? Speaker 1: The equator? Speaker 2: The line-- Speaker 1: Equator? Speaker 2: Equator. Speaker 1: Right, okay. And, and Cape Verde was colonized by the Portuguese right? Speaker 2: By the Portuguese and they weren't the greatest masters either. Like all the rest I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they did not--until Amilcar Cabral came and did independence for the islands, they were very, very bad off. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, and that was in the 1960s, right? Speaker 2: Change. (Unclear). Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 187631 Speaker 1: So what else do you know about her [Fortes' mother, Maria Anicleto Fortes] side of the family, can you--are there any stories that they tell? Speaker 2: She had one--the father was married before and she had a brother and a sister, Anna [ph.] Anicleto and Andre [ph.] Anicelto. I don't know too much on that--that side of the family, except that they were--well, so-called white, although I can't see why at Cape Verde should be so-called white with all the Moor--Portugal rather, with all the Moorish things that happened there 500-600 years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Now before the Portuguese got there, was it occupied by the Moors, is that what? Speaker 2: Everything was occupied by the Moors. Speaker 1: Okay, so we're talkin'--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Italy, Portugal, Islands, whatever. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right from 711 to 1491 and maybe thereafter too, you know, yeah. Speaker 2: Could be. I'm old but I can't go that far back (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. So, yeah the Moors ruled the whole of North Africa and part of Iberia. Speaker 2: Angola, they owned Angola and all, then of course the Cape Verdeans go to Angola often. In fact, there's a lot of Cape Verdeans in Angola. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mozambique. Story_ID: 187632 Speaker 1: Can you tell us anything about how your mother [Maria Anicleto Fortes] grew up, did she talk about going to school or--and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: How my mother grew up, when she was a very little girl, my mother wanted to come to America, but couldn't afford to bring her. So she got two aunts of my father's [Antonio Fortes] family to bring her up and that's how she came along. She lived with these two aunts, Aunt Ana Gomes [ph.] and Amelia Gomes. Yeah. As far as I know that's kind of a way back and we should've asked more questions, but we didn't. Speaker 1: Did, did she have a chance to go to school in Cape Verdes? Speaker 2: My mother? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. How far did she go--did she? Speaker 2: Well whatever, they--I think two quarters. I think that's how they do it--they did it. I don't know now how they call it. My aunt, my Aunt Marian [ph.], my father's first cousin, we all call her aunt, was the village school teacher. And I went to school when I was three and a half, 'cause I absolutely I would not stay home. So she dragged me to school and I can read and write Portuguese. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187633 Speaker 1: Now can you tell us about your father's side of the family and first can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name was Antonio Fortes. Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth. Speaker 2: He--I can't tell you, but I know he was born in May. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he died in 1955 and he was in his early seventies, but I don't know the date. Speaker 1: Okay, so he probably was born in the 1880s? Speaker 2: In the late '80s [1880s]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What can you tell us about his side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, it's funny, if you go to Brava [Cape Verde] and you want to get ahold of our family, you don't say Fortes, you say Benqueto. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: B-E-N-Q-U-E-T-O. I think that's the way. Because my grandfather was a fisherman, but he could set a bone better than any doctor. See the islands didn't have a doctor. About every six, eight months somebody would appear and then they couldn't take care of everybody. So my grandfather, the boys that partied at night and fell off their horses and did all the things they had no business doing, grandpa was the one that did all the patchin' up, bandaging and the whole thing. And he never went a day to school for it. It was just a gift. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as you know, God always sends somebody. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any other stories from that side of the family they tell about the island? Speaker 2: No, except that my family was well known through my grandfather and all his help. Because they called him from--the island--Brava is twelve miles square and you can get from one end to the other in a short time. And he was always on call when he was not fishing. And weekends when he was home and that's when the parties were, he was a busy person settin' bones and also the sick with herbs. Speaker 1: Okay. What about your grandmother on that side? Do you remember her? Speaker 2: My grandmother on my father's side, I remember her, but I didn't know her quite that well. And her name was Maria--let's see what was grandma's name. Kia something. And she--well she had eight children so she was so busy takin' care of all of us in a sense that you never questioned. You only did what you were told. Speaker 1: Okay, so people didn't ask--children didn't ask a lot of questions in those days. Speaker 2: Not a lot of questions because we didn't know much about the history and you know, so forth. We only learned what they told us. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187634 Speaker 1: Now did your father [Antonio Fortes] talk about growing up and going to school, and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, (laughter), my father was I think you've heard of Daddy Grace [Marcelino Manuel da Graca]. Well, Daddy Grace and my father took care of goats in the mountains all day--days and then they came home now and then. But they were great buddies and when Daddy Grace became so prominent, every time he came to the Cape [Verde] he'd always go and see father, and father was always happy to see him. But they grew up together. Speaker 1: Okay, now Daddy Grace had a-- Speaker 2: --Church. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was an evangelist with a church and they're called the--what--what's the organization, I, I can't think. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): United House of Prayer. Speaker 1: Yeah, United House of Prayer. Speaker 2: United House of Prayer, okay right, and we were just, we were in [Washington] D.C. a month ago interviewing a gentleman who lived right across the street from the current bishop of the United House of Prayer. Right, right. And he had a huge place (laughter). (simultaneous) (unclear) Tennis courts and everything. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: New Bedford is huge too. They have a house of prayer there, a beautiful building. They've really--I mean gone out and done it. Speaker 2: Daddy Grace was popular in the 1920s and '30s [1930s], and had a-- Speaker 1: And he never came to the Cape without checking with father. Speaker 2: He was responsible for feeding a lot of people too. Father Divine [Reverend M. J. Divine] and Daddy Grace-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --we're--had that reputation during the Depression of feedin' people. Speaker 1: Yes, oh that depression, that was something. Speaker 2: Okay, so what was Daddy Grace's real name, do you remember? Speaker 1: Charles Marcelino, Charles de Grace [sic, Marcelino Manuel de Graca]. Speaker 2: Now, any other stories about your father? Speaker 1: Not too many because I didn't know him til we came to America. And then I was always so busy, you know, tryin' to learn English, I couldn't speak a word of English when I was nine and a half. And then also, (laughter) I decided to go into business. I was very, very young. And that was the mills, and New Bedford [Massachusetts] had a lot of cotton mills. And a lot of the Cape Verdeans worked, and some of 'em liked hot lunches. And so I decided I'd take two hot lunches and I think it was fifty cents a week, so I made a dollar a week takin' them the lunches. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 187635 Speaker 1: Well I wanna go back to when you were a child on--in Cape Verde. Did you--did they ever talk about how your parents [Maria Anicleto Fortes and Antonio Fortes] met, did you ever hear a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Well they were next door neighbors. My--the two women that brought my mother up were his aunts. So I think and a lot of marriages were made up, you know, the families did them. Speaker 1: They were arranged ahead of time? Speaker 2: Arranged, yeah. So that could have been. But I knew they were our next door neighbors. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187636 Speaker 1: I want you to think back to childhood and give us some idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growin' up. Speaker 2: Well one of the things about our house, it was at the top--there was sort of like a river down in front and a long slope. And we had orange trees, lime trees, bananas, and then what is the name of the tree. I don't know, but they used--it used--they could make candles from the droppings. There's a tree and I know that was very good. And I used to help my aunts pick up the pieces, their droppings, and then they'd boil it and make it into candles for light. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, I always went with my mother [Maria Anicleto Fortes] wherever she went. And she worked hard. And one of the things was to bring stones in for the houses from the mines, the stone mine. And I remember that vividly. Speaker 1: What were the stones used for? Speaker 2: Houses. Speaker 1: To build the houses? Speaker 2: To build the houses, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So most of the houses were made of stone when you were--(simultaneous) (unclear) Speaker 2: --most of them, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my father [Antonio Fortes] sent us money and our house was small, but it was a stone house. And it was right back of my aunt's house. Speaker 1: So you grew up in the neighborhood--this neighborhood until you were nine years old, right? Speaker 2: Well when we got to New Bedford I was nine and a half, June, June 4th, 1920. And I'm very happy it was just before the McCarran Act [McCarran Internal Security Act, 1950] because another year maybe I wouldn't be here. Mr. [Pat] McCarran was from the South I guess, and he didn't want too many black people around. Speaker 1: Oh that McCarran Internal Security Act? Speaker 2: Well whatever. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Story_ID: 187637 Speaker 1: Tell me about the first school you attended in Cape Verde. Speaker 2: Well the first--you see I could do numbers and--but I--oh the language barrier was my big problem. I couldn't speak English. Speaker 1: No, I'm talkin' about in Cape Verde? Speaker 2: Oh in Cape Verde. Speaker 1: Yeah, we wanna talk about Cape Verde for--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: As I told you I went--I went with my aunt to school every day. And I was a tomboy and I fought all the boys and survived (laughter), and here I am. Speaker 1: What, what was the name of your school in Cape Verde? Speaker 2: Well they called it Scarlet [ph.] Emadeande [ph.] Lala. The School of Marians, you know, the family name, Lala, they used to call Amelia [ph.] Lala. Speaker 1: You're gonna have to write it down for me afterwards (laughter), I can't, I can't--I'll probably (simultaneous) Speaker 2: L-a-l-a. Speaker 1: L-a-l-a, okay. Speaker 2: It was the (unclear) school. It was the only one. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187638 Speaker 1: Now what were race relations like on the island of Cape Verde, was there-- Speaker 2: Well I never knew anything about race 'cause we're all the same. It's when I came to America that I found that there was a problem, a big problem. Speaker 1: So there's no difference made between the white--so--called white Portuguese and the other people? Speaker 2: No, there weren't. There weren't too many whites either. They were sort of in government, you know, like--I would say governor of the island and he could have been white. But then there were non-whites too. Speaker 1: Okay, so the population then was, was I guess sort of mixed between the Portuguese and the Moors that were there before? Speaker 2: Well the Moors were there, that's why we were the color we are. And the Moors plied the Mediterranean for years, hundreds of years. So I think we're part of them. Story_ID: 187639 Speaker 1: What did you like to--you said you were a tomboy in school, right, and you spoke Portuguese until you only, only--(simultaneous) until you came here? Speaker 2: Until we came to America. And then--in fact, I went first to the [Thomas] Donaghy School, South End [New Bedford, Massachusetts], then they moved me to the Thomas A. Greene School [New Bedford, Massachusetts], and then. Speaker 1: I don't wanna get a head of us know, I don't want to get a head, too far ahead, but I-- Speaker 2: They moved me again to the Allen F. Wood [School, New Bedford, Massachusetts]. Where the Allen F. Wood is where I met the person who I'll never forget in my life, a teacher. And we--they used to have charts that you pointed to and she'd point to the word and I couldn't say it, and I fainted dead away. And when I found myself, I was on--almost near a settee and she was hovering over me. And her name was Ellen McCann [ph.]. And she said to me, she said, Eugenia Fortes, you can learn anything you want if you want to learn it. And she said you can learn to speak English. Well I think I did and the New Bedford Public Library was my second home. I'd go and I'd read and all, and I think that's why now they say I have no accent. Speaker 1: Okay, and I, I don't detect any, except a New England accent (laughter). A Boston [Massachusetts] accent or whatever. Story_ID: 187640 Speaker 1: Okay, so can you tell us why your family moved from Cape Verde to Massachusetts? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I had two girls who came here and sat on the couch from the Cape Cod Community College [West Barnstable, Massachusetts] and they wanted to interview me. And one of the girls, I knew her grandfather and all, they're Irish. And so she asked me the same question you've asked me now. And I said to her, why did your grandfather come from Ireland, a better way of life. Speaker 1: Okay, so they heard the things we-- Speaker 2: --All with immigrants, it's for a better way of life. Speaker 1: Okay. So did your father [Antonio Fortes] come first before you? Speaker 2: My father came first and then we came to find him after he sent us the money to come. And it took us thirty-one days from Brava [Cape Verde], Furna that's the port in Brava to New Bedford [Massachusetts]. And we had food, but we just had enough food for thirty-odd days, and we ran out of--we almost ran out of food. So when they--we got into the Quashnet River [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] where the boats all stayed, they brought us fresh food from, you know, New Bedford. But we were in New Bedford, but they wouldn't let us off the boat for a couple of days for immigration. And I never forget, they brought cabbage and I love cabbage to this day, and that's why I told you kale soup. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's my favorite food. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now the boat you came over on was a sailboat you were telling me before we started? Speaker 2: Her name was the Melissa Trask and I wrote to Mystic, Connecticut to find out about her. They said she was the homeliest boat that every plied the Atlantic. And that's where I came from. Speaker 1: The homeliest boat that ever plied the Atlantic (laughter)? Speaker 2: That's what they--she was a lumber boat and then the Cape Verdeans bought it and made it into berths and that's how we came. Speaker 1: Okay. So you lived in New Bedford at first, right? Speaker 2: Yeah from 1920 to '23 [1923]. And then we moved to the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] and we've been here ever since. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187641 Speaker 1: So you started in New Bedford [Massachusetts] to seriously study English, to learn how to speak? Speaker 2: Oh English, yeah, and Ellen McCann [ph.] was terrific. She helped me all the way and one day at my church here in Hyannis [Massachusetts], they asked me to speak to the Women's Group, which I did. And I mentioned the name Ellen McCann and this woman, Kate, what was her--the English teacher at the high school-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Sue Trafton. Speaker 2: Trafton. Kate Trafton jumped up. She said she's my cousin. (Laughter.) So that was almost near home. Speaker 1: That's something. Story_ID: 187642 Speaker 1: Now, when you grew up, was church a big part of growin' up? Speaker 2: Well I was born a Catholic. And then when I became older and one day we had--our church burnt down on Pleasant Lake Avenue in Harwich [Massachusetts] and they met at the houses. You know, the priests would come for catechism and so forth. And we had two boys that were mischievous and they went to confession and the priest the next week told us all about it. So I decided that was not my cup of tea. You know, if I've confessed to somebody that was it. So I--when I became of age, twenty, I decided I'd go my own way and I went to First Baptist on Main Street, and I'm seventy--well in '33 [1933], I became a member and I'm still there. Speaker 1: Okay. Is the rest of your family still Catholic? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 187643 Speaker 1: Who else is in your family? How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: Well I had two brothers and two sisters. And one sister, the oldest, is Julia Owens [ph.] and she now lives at Prairie View, Texas. And my brother, Julio [ph.], who lived in New Bedford [Massachusetts]--Julio Fortes--in New Bedford. And I had a blind brother, Andrew, he was--when he was born there was something they should have done to his eyes and they didn't, the midwife. So he went to the Jamaica Plain Nursery in Boston [Massachusetts] and then when he be--was six, they sent him to Perkins Institute [Perkins School for the Blind, Watertown, Massachusetts], which is one of the finest in the country, I guess the world. And he graduated from Perkins. And then he got a job and was on it for thirty-two years. And blind people, at that time, didn't have the opportunities, but Andrew was very lucky. And he was one of the greatest guys. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what about your other sister now? Speaker 2: My other sister is Marian Cutts [ph.] and she lives in New Bedford. And she worked in the mills, Goodyear and whatever. Speaker 1: Okay, now are you the--you're not the oldest are you? Speaker 2: I am. Speaker 1: You are the oldest? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Because they were born here after my mother [Maria Anicleto Fortes] came and I was born in the islands [Cape Verde]. Speaker 1: Did you go to high school here? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: So, okay, so you-- Speaker 2: But I took all the courses that I could, as you can see my house with books. So I think I've--in fact I've had a lot of Ph.D.s that have stayed here with me, 'cause when we couldn't go in the hotels, and they told me I was luckier than they were. So, I'm not a fool. Speaker 1: Oh no you're not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Even at ninety-three I don't think I still have Alzheimer. Speaker 1: Yes ma'am. Story_ID: 187644 Speaker 1: So, now when you got here, you had to go to work, right? Sort of, oh, okay? Speaker 2: Of course, of course. And you couldn't--you couldn't get good work, it was household, you know, cleaning, cooking. So I decided cooking was a good idea. So, well I'm still cooking if you know what I mean (laughter). And I did catering at night. And this is the thing, I always worked for very wealthy families. It's so it was--and I learned a lot too, 'cause I listen. And I know the rules and regulations. Speaker 1: Now, a lot of black people in this country whether they're from overseas or from here, from down south, have worked, you know, for white families doing one thing or another. Speaker 2: Well that's all you could do, what else could you do. Speaker 1: My grandmother and (simultaneous) my aunts did. Speaker 2: In fact, in fact when they talk about gays and things, they weren't allowed--the southern people, the slaves weren't allowed to get married. So you just, you know, lived with each other. It's, it's--as I say, it hasn't been easy, if you know what I mean. Because it's--I have a picture there, the cotton fields and the cranberry bog right under that'n there. Speaker 1: Is there much difference? Speaker 2: The south is the cotton fields and the upper north is the cranberry bogs. Speaker 1: Yeah, is there much difference between the two? Speaker 2: No six and a half a dozen. You know it and I know it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you say it made a difference. Now you worked for people that were wealthy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Very wealthy. Speaker 1: --had something (simultaneous) (unclear) on the ball too? Speaker 2: Millions, millions. Hyannis Port [Massachusetts] and now I understand there's a beach bein' named for me that I was segregated on years ago in Hyannis Port. And where the Kennedys all learned to sail. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: (laughter) and that's ironical. Speaker 1: Now who did you work for first--I mean who did you work for that was-- Speaker 2: Mada and Alice Feldy [ph.], two sisters. They weren't married and I was with 'em for twenty-seven years. And I was one of the family in a sense. In fact, Mada had a Packard car that she wouldn't let anybody drive but me. And she took sick, went to Boston [Massachusetts] and low and behold, she used to call me, "Ginny, come up and see me." So I drove her Packard all my early years. And then I had a Roadster, '31 [1931] Chevrolet Roadster, which was my own with a rumble seat and I thought I was the cat's pajamas (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So now did you--did you live with them or did you have your own place? Speaker 2: Oh yes. I stayed with 'em, uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And well what kind of things did you learn from them? Speaker 2: Oh many things. In fact, their dinner guests, Laughlin Steel of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and if you listen you learn a lot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They think we weren't listening, but we were. Speaker 1: Right, there's a--do you think that most of the people that worked in those positions actually were learning, you know, from the people they worked for? Speaker 2: They did, they learned a lot, we all did. Although we weren't supposed to talk about it. You kept it inside and then you did what you felt you had to do, like I did. Story_ID: 187645 Speaker 1: When did you first get interested in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or in--tryin', tryin' to correct some of the-- Speaker 2: Well the injustice. We had stores on Main Street and you couldn't sit at the counters. You couldn't go into hotels or motels. And if you went someplace, you had to--you wanted to try on a dress. If you tried it on, you had to buy it and all. And I hated injustice, so I knew Boston [Massachusetts] had a branch. Speaker 1: Okay now, wait a minute now, let me go--I'm gonna ask the question that most people would probably ask about this-- Speaker 2: Well that's what you asked me--(simultaneous) Speaker 1: All right, yeah, yeah, but I'm-- Speaker 2: I'm answering your questions. Speaker 1: I know, I know you are, but I'm gonna ask you this question because most people would probably--would probably think well this is Hyannis, Massachusetts. This is where the Kennedys are, they are liberal politicians, everybody knows how liberal they are and everything. And they, they couldn't come from a place that was discriminating could they, I mean? Speaker 2: Oh yes they can. This is up south, up south. There's down south and up south. New England is up south farther north. Speaker 1: So this, this discrimination up here, the kinda thing that you're talkin' about is what my father experienced in South Carolina in the-- Speaker 2: That's the same thing. Yeah. (simultaneous) Speaker 1: If you tried on a hat you had to buy it-- Speaker 2: Well I think so, but I went to the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association] in Boston, they wouldn't take me to work because after cranberry, and the winter was long and my family were very poor and we needed the money. And low and behold, I had to--I went to the Y and the lady was on the phone, they had the crank phones then. And I stood at the desk waiting for her. And she wanted to know what did I want when she got through. And I said I want a room for a week 'cause I'm looking for a job, housework and all. "Oh," she said, "I'm sorry, but we do not take colored girls." Well here I was in Boston all alone, very little money and all, and it was--I think she must have seen the look on my face, I was scared, petrified. So she said, "Well there's a house that some black women have, they call it the Harriet Tubman House on Holyoke Street. She said I will call them and see if they may take you. They take the colored students." So she did and the lady, I'll never forget her, said send her right over. There's your answer. And so, I joined the NAACP, the Boston branch 'cause we didn't have a Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] branch in 1936. And I used to do their memberships here, what few I could get because a lot of the Cape Verdeans still have the idea that they're white. And that's colonialism, I mean living in Cape Verde. But they're gettin' blacker and blacker all the time. Story_ID: 187646 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was the only black Cape Verdean on the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] for years. Speaker 1: You were the only one? Speaker 2: I spoke out. And I'd go among my friends and you could feel them all clamp up. Speaker 1: So they--you think they were just afraid to lose their jobs and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Yeah, well they all did housework, so it wasn't no jobs. I mean it was menial, very menial. Because you couldn't go in the stores, you couldn't sit at a counter, you couldn't go in a hotel, in fact you couldn't do anything other than live among your own people and do whatever you did, your own culture. Speaker 1: So after people would work and do whatever they had to do they would--I guess their, their employers thought they should just disappear or? Speaker 2: Yeah, in a sense, yeah. And they worked you to death like the southerners and paid you so little. So that in the end you didn't have any, or if you did, it was a struggle. Story_ID: 187647 Speaker 1: Now before we started the interview, you were talkin' about your friend [HM] George Leighton, who was--became-- Speaker 2: Well, George found himself on the cranberry bog in West Wareham [Massachusetts], Plymouth [Massachusetts] due to the fact that he said, "George, what are you doing here." And he applied at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and first they didn't want him. And then he kept persisting, and they took him. And when he graduated from Howard, I think he was the third or fourth in his class. So if you, you can do it if you want to-- Speaker 1: Yeah he became a-- Speaker 2: --but it's not easy, it's not easy. Don't let anybody tell you. Speaker 1: Right, he became a powerful lawyer in Chicago [Illinois], a civil rights lawyer. Speaker 2: Oh that decision that he had that they almost killed him, but he went out on it. I know. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And he sits in this chair many a day (laughter). Story_ID: 187648 Speaker 1: You contacted the Boston [Massachusetts] branch of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and joined in-- Speaker 2: And joined. Yeah, uh-hm. Speaker 1: --1936. Speaker 2: Thirty-six (1936). Speaker 1: Who was in charge of the Boston branch then? Speaker 2: Lionel, oh John. Lionel Lindsay was the president then. I can't remember the others, it's too far back and I've met so many people that I can't remember all their names. Speaker 1: Okay. So were you intent on settin' up a chapter here? Speaker 2: Well things were so bad that in 1960 this Jewish fellow appeared, Kivie Kaplan who had a house on the vineyard, called Walter-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Stevenson. Speaker 2: What. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Stevenson. Speaker 2: Stevenson and told them that he thought the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] should have a group, NAACP group. And then they called several of us. We all got together (unclear) and started the branch. And I'm the only living founder left. They're all gone. Speaker 1: Okay, so from 1936 to 1960 you, you were a member, but you hadn't started a branch here then until '60 [1960]? Okay. Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961] is when we got the branch and Walter was president for almost two years and then he died and I became president for four years. And one thing, we have a good record. Then after me, it was Jim Curry [ph.], he was from Mississippi and then Joseph Daluz and now John [ph.] in '61 [1961] up to now and I think that's wonderful. And we've done a lot. Speaker 1: Now tell me--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: Many, many changes and John is responsible for the big changes. Story_ID: 187649 Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me--now so that means in 1961--now this is when, you know there was-John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was president. Speaker 2: You know that was turbulent days. Listen, Roy Wilkins sat in this chair, Lionel--not Lionel, but Henry [Lee] Moon, all of 'em used to come down to speak at our meetings and they couldn't go into hotels or all. So they would sit here--I mean come--we'd put 'em up for the night and so forth, and I had quite a few. So I've--Roy was terrific. And all of 'em were. Speaker 1: Okay, so who-- Speaker 2: And Gloster [B.] Current he was head of membership there for a while and they all stayed here. In fact, I was very proud several years ago that the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] now has a Gloster Current Award a year, and they--I got it. What is it, eight or ten years ago, I can't keep track of time. And it's eleven states, and they picked me out of Cape Cod [Massachusetts] and I still wonder why (laughter). Speaker 1: Well you must've gotten somethin' done here I guess, somethin' changed. People keep recognizing the fact that things have changed now. Speaker 2: In my own way, in my own way. Speaker 1: So in 1961, what were the issues that you all were facin'? Speaker 2: All the issues. You had 'em, we had 'em. I can't go into one, it's all. Speaker 1: Was there a plan that the NAACP had to change all these things? Speaker 2: Well that's why it started, was to change, to make changes and of course the NAACP is the law. And that's it. You notice all the other groups have dissolved, but the NAACP still holds. Speaker 1: Now was there, was there a particular law suit that was filed here that made a big difference in those-- Speaker 2: No, no we just started our own branch because the situation was not good. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Just like your southern people did. And I know every black person in America comes from slavery or most. I mean not all the Islands, but the Islands were segregated too. So what's the difference. six, half a dozen. Speaker 1: That's right. So--but what did you focus on here first? Did you attack a certain discrimination policy? Speaker 2: I focused ever since I could learn it, that the situation was bad. And I was going to see what I could do to help it. Speaker 1: Okay. So what I was gettin' at is did you start with the stores or did you start with the theaters or did you start with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well we picketed main street one day and boy that--when you talk about paths going up and down the street, and we were on the sidewalk. And then they knew that we meant business. Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1961 right? Speaker 2: Well I would say '62 [1962] and thereafter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we're still struggling with problems. Story_ID: 187650 Speaker 1: Okay, so what's your--now at that time John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was the president and Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert Francis Kennedy] (simultaneous) was-- Speaker 2: Well that didn't mean a thing. He was still an Irishman. Speaker 1: Well explain that to us? Speaker 2: Well I mean, he--they didn't do anything unless he had to. In fact, everything was sort of against everything and it was either come up or shut up. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: So don't think the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] was any different or the Islands, because they weren't. Speaker 1: Okay. Some have written that, if I remember Taylor Branch's book correctly, I think we were discussing this when I came in. He seems to indicate that Bobby Kennedy was sort of innocent to the fact that there was discrimination. Speaker 2: But I think most white people, the new generation, just like our black children, it's not just the white, it's the black. They don't know the history. They--see for years, books wouldn't publish problems. It's now that all these black writers and I'm delighted every time one comes out, if I can afford it, I buy it. Telling the story. And then the young people, black and white, sees it on television and they can't believe it, because it, it isn't America. Well it was America until the changes. And the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] I think has been one of the biggest factors in change. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us some examples of some stories from those days from when you--you all were (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: There's loads of stories. I mean, you know, you just go along with it. It happens, you work it out or think it out, and you keep on going. But it wasn't easy, that I can assure you. Speaker 1: What, what kind of opposition did you have? I mean, what did they do to try to stop you? Speaker 2: All kinds of opposition. Subtle, subtle. Up here they're subtle. Down south they'll call you a nigger and you're a nigger. But up here they try to go around it. Meaning the same thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And try to buy a house in a certain neighborhood, you try it. Speaker 1: Did they have restrictive covenants on the houses? Speaker 2: Of course, it's still are, they still have 'em. And I'm the gal that tells it to 'em. Story_ID: 187651 Speaker 1: Now you had a story--you had an interesting story about [HM The Honorable] Edward Brooke and John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] I think, about (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Oh at the--Jane Gomillion's [ph.] boyfriend there. He's maitre d' in the [U.S.] Senate. And he came down and he sat here. He asked me if I knew the Kennedys and I said oh yes I lived in Hyannis Port twenty-seven years. Asked me if I knew Ed Brooke. I said well I used to help work for him with, you know, when he was running for the Senate. So when he went back, they came in for lunch and I think Ed was the first one. And he asked him if he knew--he had been to the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] and did he know Eugenia Fortes. He said oh yes, he said, Eugenia helped me on the Cape, you know, with votes and so forth. Well Ted [Senator Edward Moore "Ted" Kennedy] came in and they asked him--he asked him the same question. He said no, I don't know Eugenia Fortes, but I know Ginny, and that's my nickname. Speaker 1: So he knew you in one capacity and Brooke knew you in another basically so, made a difference. Speaker 2: And all 'em, I know all of am. Eunie [Eunice Kennedy Shriver], Lady Hartington [Kathleen Agnes Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington] who is dead now, all of 'em. Story_ID: 187652 Speaker 1: Now what was the relationship of the different rich families on the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] in those days? Speaker 2: Well the rich is rich and they are scared to death of losing that money. So they are on guard every minute. And if they can pay you the least they will do it until they get caught up with it. And that's it, the rich are still the rich. Speaker 1: Do you have any interesting stories about how the rich got rich? Speaker 2: No, hard work I guess. Somebody, not all of them now, there inherited, you know, the money. But somebody way back either cheated or stole or worked hard. Let's see work hard, cheated or stole. Speaker 1: The three ways to--about like today I guess it seems. Story_ID: 187653 Speaker 1: Now you worked for the two sisters for twenty-seven years and then you worked for another family too? Speaker 2: Well I went and worked for the town [Hyannis, Massachusetts]. I was baker in one of the schools. I baked for the kids. And the kids still have the wives call me on how to make cornbread, how to make Apple Betty (laughter). Story_ID: 187654 Speaker 1: And we have some, you know, we had articles about you being responsible for--or you and others bein' responsible for desegregation of--the desegregation of the beaches here in Cape Cod [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Well that's why they're naming this beach for me next Saturday, a week today. I had this--the same girl that I went to the Tubman house with that I roomed, Marie Anderson [ph.] from Xenia, Ohio, came down to visit me after she had gone home and she was a pianist. And she was all excited about the beach and the Cape, and so forth. So I said well we'll go to the beach tomorrow. Well we did. We got there at 1:30 and there was a policeman there and this woman. And so we were there and I took Feldy's [the family Fortes worked for] had pit bulls and I still love pit bulls to this day--Peter--and I took Peter. Marie, Peter and I went and we sat on the--up against, you know, the pier. They have a long pier on that side. And then about a half hour later, this policeman came over. He said, "I'm sorry, colored sits on the other side." And I said, "They do?" He said, "Yes," he said, "You'll have to move." I said, "Since when?" I said, "This is a public beach." And he looked at me said, "I didn't know you lived here." I said, "I do." And do you know I stayed on that damn beach til 5:30 that afternoon. I would not move. So I was long before Rosa Parks. Speaker 1: Okay, now when was that, when was it, do you remember? Speaker 2: Forties [1940s], I can't keep track of days. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): 1946. Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946], 1946. Speaker 1: Oh that's right, cause it's all in the town records. Speaker 2: Okay. So did that-- Speaker 1: And I'm still here and you know I've been quite sick this year, this summer. And I almost--I went to the pearly gates, but they wouldn't accept me, so I'm still here. And I think I'll try to go to our next meeting of the council on the second of September. Speaker 2: Now, Dr. Gilbert Mason is the one who integrated the beaches in Mississippi and Biloxi [Mississippi], that's who it was I was tryin' to think of. He was an N-- Speaker 1: How long ago was that? Speaker 2: That was 19--he was in the '60s [1960s] and sixty--I think '61 [1961] or '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Well this was long before. Speaker 2: Right, right. Dr. Gilbert-- Speaker 1: And they had--their girl came back with the policeman. And I looked at her and I would not move. And now the beach is being named for me, which is quite something. Speaker 2: Now did what you, what you did on that day in 1946, did that stick, I mean could, could other-- Speaker 1: It's all in the town records. The next year, they came to buy the beach, the civic association. And I got up at the town meeting, 200 people or more there, and I told them what had happened. They didn't get it. They did not get it. And I understand now that one man down there was givin' everybody a fit. Blacks comin' in. Speaker 2: When you say they didn't get it, you talkin' about the-- Speaker 1: Well the civic association. They had, they'd have them--well it's like the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] group. They're going to keep everybody out, like that. Speaker 2: Okay, so they intended to buy it to privatize it? Speaker 1: The next year after this happened they came to buy it. And it happened I was at the meeting and I told the whole meeting what the story was. And I think they've believed me ever since, I don't lie. Story_ID: 187655 Speaker 1: So you, you have a reputation too of being a truth teller you were tellin' me before. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, so Judge Curley [John P. Curley] says, "Stop tellin' the truth," every time my hand goes up. Speaker 1: You seem to get a lot of joy out of causin' trouble to for-- Speaker 2: Oh (laughter) I don't know if it's causing trouble. Here I am, if you ask anybody in town. As one man said, they may not love you, but they respect you. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: What you should do is go in my room and look at all those awards and I got three more here that I don't know where to put. No, four more here. Speaker 1: So somebody appreciates this work, you know? Speaker 2: Well with all these awards and the beach and all, I must've done something right along the way. Speaker 1: Well I think so. So you just, you just don't think that rich people should just do whatever they want and be left alone to have as much fun as they want without being bothered with-- Speaker 2: They're not happy. Speaker 1: They're not? Speaker 2: I've lived with too many and I've worked for too many. I mean the dinners at night I cook and serve, and you'd listen to them. Scared to death of losing that money. And they'll do anything to keep it, I don't care what. Look at the new government. Speaker 1: So what do you think of this, this, our current government? Speaker 2: Well the sooner we get rid of the Bushes [President George Herbert Walker Bush and President George Walker Bush] the better off we'll be. It's the same thing that happened with [President] Herbert [Clark] Hoover years ago. But that depression was different than this. There were families. There was food, gardens and the families took each other in. But not anymore, because everything is--two, mother and father have to work. And that's not easy. Story_ID: 187656 Speaker 1: Are there any other good stories about desegregating the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Freedom Riders. Speaker 1: You can say it out loud. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, okay, it's Freedom Riders. Sambo (unclear). Speaker 1: Freedom Riders with Jack Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. You know, I never say President Kennedy, I always said Jack, 'cause I knew him so well and--while he was president. The Republicans, you know, 'cause they didn't want a Catholic or whatever, and they tried to make it as difficult as could be. And they started sending these people from Arkansas up here to embarrass him, very poor black people. In fact one woman, Victoria Bell, had nine children. And I never forget takin' her off the bus as she was comin' down the steps she trembled like a leaf with a baby in her arms, scared. So there was a group of us that got together, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], right in this very room, and worked to help her and help the others. It wasn't only the--it wasn't only the--what you call it, but it was everybody. Story_ID: 187657 Speaker 1: Now, we were talkin' about different things here, so we'll just start with--we were talkin' about the Freedom Riders, but what's been explained is (simultaneous) that they-- Speaker 2: Well they came and some of them worked here. They--we got jobs. And Ken Warren too, I wish you'd mention Kenneth Warren, Reverend Kenneth Warren. He is from Oklahoma and white, but there's no human being better than Ken Warren. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: [Edgar] Ted Lockwood sat--I used to have the couch over there. We got a house for Victoria up the street where the Laundromat is now on Straight Way and Main. But the house wasn't that good. So we had a meeting here, and I was very upset about the whole thing. Ted's family apparently had money and he was not a poor person, but he was a minister for Church of the Messiah at Woods Hole [Massachusetts]. So there was about ten of us in here. And finally Ted spoke out, he said Eugenia calm down. I'll buy the house for Victoria to stay in. So we found a four-bedroom house on Greenwood Avenue here and she stayed there for quite a while. And then I had problems with the school department because one of the principals of the school, John Barry [ph.], lived on the next street and he called everybody to tell them that the blacks, the niggers have arrived and our property value will go down. Speaker 1: Now let me just stop (simultaneous) okay-- Speaker 2: And I was workin' at his school at that time. And so he made it so unpleasant for me with segregation. And then this woman that I had gotten a job there, a black woman, she turned against me to him. And we had a hearing in New Bedford [Massachusetts] at the library on the whole thing with the school department. And I came out on top. The woman couldn't read her own letter. So you know somebody wrote it for her. So the attorney, Bob what you call it, said that to stop the meeting, they'll agree to anything I--if I didn't go to the newspapers. Well I wanted health insurance, so I didn't want to go to the newspapers. But after I got through there I met--I spoke to the newspapers about it. But it was--it hasn't been easy. Speaker 1: These Freedom Riders, just explain were people sent, black people sent to Massachusetts from Arkansas (simultaneous) to embarrass the administration? Speaker 2: White people sent, not black. Speaker 1: Yeah, white people sent these black people (simultaneous) to-- Speaker 2: Embarrass Jack Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. Speaker 1: Right. Okay. So they weren't Freedom Riders in the sense of the real Freedom Riders (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But they called them Freedom Riders-- Speaker 1: --but they called 'em that. Speaker 2: --because they paid their fare one way. Story_ID: 187658 Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us about Thurgood Marshall's visit here? Speaker 2: Well Thurgood--Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] and Hazel [Scott] called me one day. See I'd, I'd decided I'd do houses. So I have, well right now I have four houses, five houses with my name (unclear). But at that time, the blacks couldn't go in the hotels or anything. So I used to rent the cottages. And Ida Belyiza [ph.] who was very--oh a friend of mine and she used to come down a lot. She got a lot of these people to come. And she wrote two, three books which I have in there, and quite the gal. Studied at the Sorbonne [University of Paris, Paris, France], the University of Temple [sic, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and the whole bit. So she was able to get Nabrit [James Madison Nabrit, Jr.] of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: James Nabrit, right. Speaker 2: And Murphy [HM John Murphy] too. Speaker 1: Of the Afro-American newspaper? Speaker 2: Afro-American, and it was funny and Sadie, his wife, every morning, they stayed here. He had a beautiful car and he'd go out and clip all the little branches off the car and Sadie would say, Junior come I want to see you and he's doing. (Laughter.) So we had--it's, it's been, well, a lot of things. Speaker 1: What about the incident at the police station with Thurgood Marshall? Speaker 2: Well it wasn't Dennis [Massachusetts], it was here. I was president of the branch and this night, this friend, well I knew Edgar Toby [ph.] from Ashby [Massachusetts]. He called me and said they had his son at the station. And the boy had been playin' a mandolin, some kind of instrument on Main Street and they told him to move and he wasn't movin' fast enough and they really gave him a mauling. So he called me. So I went down to the police station. And Thurgood was in bed of course. I didn't wake him up. I went down and they said what, are you here for Eugenia. I said to get Edgar, young Edgar out. Well he said, we've called Bill Murphy the bailiff. He said that he's coming. So finally, oh it was early morning, this was around one o'clock, twelve, they let him out. So he had to go to court the next day. So I woke up Thurgood and Harry and so he said wait a minute, said I'll get him. So Thurgood told me what to do when I went to the court. And I went with him and we did what I was told. And they continued it. Well they did it three times, continued, and then they let Edgar go. Nothing, no charges. Story_ID: 187659 Speaker 1: Is there any other memories of Thurgood Marshall's visit? Speaker 2: Oh there was two kids, John [W. Marshall] and Goodie [Thurgood Marshall, Jr.], Goodie was Thurgood, the older boy, who's an attorney. Well John, I think, now is an attorney or something too. But they were, oh I think Goodie was about three and John was about one. Yeah. And then Sunday, I always checked on Sunday's. So when I--he always had to have milk for the kids. So I went down with him because he wasn't too sure of Charlie's on Barnstable Road. And I said to him, that's when they offered him the presidency of Lincoln [University, Chester County, Pennsylvania]. And I said, why did you refuse it. He said I cannot leave you all now. And I've loved that expression all my life. Cannot leave us now. And then when you think of these kids that don't wanna vote, oh it's kind of a shame. Speaker 1: Okay. Anything else about Thurgood Marshall? Speaker 2: Well he was one of the best outdoor cook that you ever had. We used to have cookouts out here, down in front and all. And he was jolly, fun, a lot of things. As I say, you go with it. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell us-- Speaker 2: He stayed, he came for two summers until he began to get the judgeship jobs. Then he didn't. But this friend at Stone Mountain, what's his name now, he has that (unclear) magazine, yeah. He was at the King thing in Atlanta [Georgia] about a year ago--a year ago, maybe a little more, and Cissy was there. They invited her, his--Thurgood's wife. And he said, oh he said you know, I'm going to Cape Cod [Massachusetts]. Oh Eugenia Fortes. So I think I haven't been forgotten. And then I have her address, I have her phonebook--her phone number. Story_ID: 187660 Speaker 1: Okay, well tell us about Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and Coretta Scott King's visit? Speaker 2: Well, I had one of my very good friends, Marian Lopes, but she was from Salisbury, North Carolina. She married a Cape Verdean. And she was the hairdresser. And when the holidays came, she hated to cook. So she would always have me as her last customer on the night before the holiday. And I'd go because we were very good friends. And this weekend she--week, she, she said to me, I want you to stuff a turkey for me. I said okay. Well she had the stuffing made and I started after she got through with washin' my hair and so forth. So we started on the turkey. And then all of a sudden I heard all this commotion outside, this rattily car, just a lot of noise. And she said well, Tine, that's Ernestine her daughter, is bringing some friends from Boston [Massachusetts]. She said they can't go home for Thanksgiving--this was Thanksgiving and also Christmas. So it was Coretta and Martin. And low and behold they came in and Martin was skinny as a pickle, he was not big like, you know, you see him, yet very young. And so they--she introduced us and he went in with the bags and all and then I finished the turkey. I said goodbye to everybody and came home. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was, he was at Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] then working on his doctorate, right? Speaker 2: I know. Story_ID: 187661 Speaker 1: Tell me about Sambo's restaurant? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: And when did Sambo's restaurant take place, when, when did that incident take place? Speaker 2: I can't remember. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Sixty-five [1965]. Speaker 2: 1965 I hear (laughter). All right. Speaker 1: About 1965. There's a new restaurant on the west end of town [Hyannis, Massachusetts]- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): At the end of the '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] that I recall. Speaker 1: Okay, maybe, okay. Speaker 2: Because it was quite a while. Well anyway, this new restaurant came to town named Sambo. And we were all a little indignant because the name is derogatory. So, a group of us decided we would picket. Well there's a rotary there near the airport, close to the airport. And we blocked the rotary and we picketed Sambo. Okay, well they were very, very unhappy. Well then, the convention, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--a national convention, I forget what city we were in. Well anyway, it doesn't really matter. There was something about, I don't know, food or somethin'. I said oh gosh I gotta tell 'em about Sambo. Well a lot of the southern states had had Sambo but they did nothing about it. So I get up on the floor and I told 'em the story of what we had done here, and they went out of business here because people wouldn't patronize. And so, that was the national thing, they all went back home and got rid of Sambo. So I felt very good (laughter). Story_ID: 187662 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about some of the housing issues here along the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Oh housing is still bad, but it's, it's been very bad. And I was, Margaret Moseley, Ken [Kenneth] Warren, quite a few of us started to work on the housing, Judy [Judith] Barnet, to see if we could get public housing. And it took us almost three years to get Adams Court [Hyannis, Massachusetts], the first one. I think it houses twenty-odd families. And we started that. Then Barnstable [Massachusetts] got a housing thing too also, not us. And of course we were all on that committee too. And it's been very, very bad, and still is. And now the price is so and so, that young people and non-whites cannot afford anything. And it's a shame. In fact at the September 2 meeting, I'm gonna tell 'em about Jacques Morin. This developer at the end of Pitcher's Way where Pitcher and Castlewood comes together from the highway, they wanna put, I don't know, seventy-odd houses and it's been under the hammer, it's been, you know, up and down. So I don't know. But I've always voiced opposition to all this price gouging and the whole thing and they centered. The reason I say when I get up at the meetings, I'm Eugenia Fortes from the slum village of Hyannis, is everything lands in Hyannis. Osterville [Massachusetts] which is very wealthy with all the melons and I don't know what else. Cotuit [Massachusetts] and the other rest, as John [L. Reed] said, the towns. Nothing, very little goes there, but everything is Hyannis. And one man, almost--he's new on the board now and he objected to my sayin' it. And I said, I'm telling the truth, why should you object. Well come to find out, he decided to--let's see--well he was so mad he was furious with me and I just stood my ground. And finally, I told him he had to apologize to me. Well he did, because I was right. But it's, it's still iffy and as I say poor people, white or black, cannot own a house because it's too expensive. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And of course I don't just speak for black people, I speak for everybody in the town. Speaker 1: To try and alert people to what is wrong? Speaker 2: To what's going on. Speaker 1: To what's going on. Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, I met this man at the grocery store yesterday and he said, Gennie it's about time you got back in that chair. And the rockin' chair. They had a regular, you know, folding chairs and the businessmen in town, Main Street, was--of course they all watch the meetings and they said I looked very uncomfortable in it. So Ted, what's Ted's name. Well anyway, Ted--this fellow named Ted called me, he's one of the businessmen and wanted to know would I object if they got me a rockin' chair because I looked so uncomfortable and sometimes I'd sit there for four hours until they were through. And whenever I'd get up at town meeting, nobody knows what I'm going to say. And it's gonna stay that way. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're comments are now the highlight of the town meeting I guess or one of the highlights (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: And that's--we have a mic now, we have--it's televised so everybody's listening, so you let 'em know what's going on. And we have, like the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and John and all, we've said a lot of things. Story_ID: 187663 Speaker 1: Tell me about the community action organization [sic, Community Action Committee of Cape Cod and Islands, Inc. (CACCI)]? Speaker 2: Well Community Action is one of the oldest groups we have in town and they--we wanted it. And they were, I don't know, which president or what brought it on, you know, that we could have it to help. And we decided we needed one for the Cape. And it's centered here in Hyannis [Massachusetts]. And this fellow, Dick Bigos, used to run it and now he's dead and it's still going on and they're still doin' a lot of good work. Speaker 1: And you serve as a, as a board member for that? Speaker 2: I was on their board for a long time, but not anymore. In fact, the only two things that I'm on, I was president of the Barnstable Council on Aging [Hyannis, Massachusetts] for four years. And John Grinnell [ph.] and I worked sixteen years to get the town to build a new building so that everybody could enjoy it. And now that we have, and the only two meetings that I tried to go to now if I can, I haven't been most of the summer because I have been laid up, is the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Council on--I'm still on the board. And I still try to do those two, because that's important too with the age. Story_ID: 187664 Speaker 1: Okay. Now can you tell us about the Mississippi Box Project and your involvement? Speaker 2: Well I was sittin' in this same chair many moons ago and I was reading the paper. And the--what ya call it, the editorial page I love and letters to the editor, and some women in Fairhaven, Mass [Massachusetts] wrote a letter asking women on the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts] if they would join this Box Project. Well this woman had gone to, let's see, she had gone to Mississippi and Alabama, and things were so awful and the people. So she started this with her church then. Now it's one of the biggest things we have. It's nonprofit. And so I wrote her a letter and one to the family in Mississippi and one in Alabama. And so that's how I started mailing clothing and whatever I could, food, dishes, you name it, whatever they could use. And I'm still doin' it. Speaker 1: Okay. I heard--I read in one story your car was so loaded down that somebody-- Speaker 2: That's was with Margaret Moseley. We-Ken [Kenneth] Warren got us all this canned meat, you know, canned food and a lot of like corned beef and all that in the cans. And he--and then I had a lot of food too, a lot of clothes, and the only place we had--I told Margaret I said we have to travel light because we can't have big bags. So we did. And Margaret was eighty-five and I was eighty, and the two of us took our way southward. And the--I--first stop was Maryland at my nephews and he came into Day's Inn where I was. And he said you know Aunt Jenny, I think your springs are gone in the car. I said they are. I said well you know Bob that trunk is full. I said that could have been the whole thing. Well come to find out, we did make Mississippi. When we got to Memphis [Tennessee], instead of takin' 55 [Interstate 55], we--talking and all--we found ourselves across the bridge in Arkansas, and we had to turn (laughter) back, go down 55 to the families. Speaker 1: Okay. So you've been doin' that for quite a while. Speaker 2: Oh, thirty, forty years. Quite a while. Story_ID: 187665 Speaker 1: Do you ever attend the political conventions? Speaker 2: What do you mean? Speaker 1: Well like the Democratic convention? Speaker 2: No, no I don't. I let the others do it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I used to be a Republican and then when Watergate, I decided I couldn't be that stupid. So now I'm an Independent. Speaker 1: Okay, that makes sense. Story_ID: 187666 Speaker 1: Talk about some of your trips across the South, I mean other trips across the South? Speaker 2: The South is beautiful. It's the people, and they're learning. Because when I--the last trip to Mississippi there were so many young people in the stores, clerks and all, so the picture is changing. It's still slow and look at all the mayors and all the things we have over the country. It's gettin' better, but it still needs to be better-er (laughter). Story_ID: 187667 Speaker 1: Now, well you mentioned Margaret Moseley, but she's the author of a book called 'Moving Mountains' [sic, 'Moving Mountains One Stone at a Time: Memoirs of Margaret Moseley'], right, and she worked closely with you? Speaker 2: Well Margaret was president of the Massachusetts Peace Group for several years. And Margaret was black, but if Margaret would've walked in this room you may think she was white, but she wasn't. In fact, I have a picture of her, that trip to Mississippi in my bedroom and I'd like for you to go in my bedroom and check some of those awards which are great, Daughters of the American Revolution, you name it, (laughter) it's there. Speaker 1: So, so yes, one can say that you've done a lot to change the minds of some people down here or your activities with (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I've tried, I've tried. And I think I have because back there there's a stack of cards that they sent me this summer that's quite revealing. Speaker 1: Is there a story you can tell about somebody that was--that you really turned around, somebody that thought one way and you've turned them around? Speaker 2: Well her picture's over there and that's Diane Jackson [ph.] in Mississippi. Lizzie Jackson [ph.] had six children and was very, very poor, very, very bad. But Diane was the youngest. And I said to Lizzie, and she was smart. I said Lizzie, don't let Diane go outta school. I said, keep her in school. I said and if you need help, I will help. Well Lizzie kept Diane in school. She went to Alcorn [Alcorn State University, Alcorn, Mississippi] and graduated and then got a job in the penal system, and in June she was married. So I feel very good about--and now Diane is helping the nieces and everybody to keep going. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 187668 Speaker 1: We always ask this question-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm not surprised. Speaker 1: Well, okay. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well first of all they've got to learn to vote, as Jesse Jackson [HM Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] says, and be somebody. It's not easy because the parents are all working, the children are sort of at odds, but I'm hoping that they can work it out, the parents to make these children responsible. Because we need it, it's very much needed. Speaker 1: Okay. Anything else? Speaker 2: What. Speaker 1: Any other hopes--more hopes or concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: Well to make a better world for themselves and everybody else in it too. Be a responsible person. Somebody you can go to and feel that is helpful. Like John [L. Reed]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 187669 Speaker 1: When you look back at all the things that you've done, is there anything that you would, any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: I think I would've like to have gotten married and had a family of my own. But seein' I had a bad love affair, I decided I would leave it alone, I wouldn't touch it, so I haven't. But I have a lot of young people that I've helped and I feel are part of my family. Story_ID: 187670 Speaker 1: And did your parents [Maria Anicleto Fortes and Antonio Fortes] live to see you become a successful real estate person and troublemaker here in Hyannis [Massachusetts] (laughter)? Speaker 2: Well my mother always said I was a troublemaker being black and you know, her family was so fair. And so that was one thing. But--and then the first award I ever had was from the B'nai B'rith Group, the Jewish people, and she was able to go to that. And I think there were 200 people, their synagogue was full. And they had the best food you could ever eat. So she and my Aunt Rose [ph.] and Uncle Frank [ph.], both--they all--the three of 'em came. And that was the only thing since then, well I got a little award, I can't remember just which one but a few. And then she died about twenty-odd years ago. Story_ID: 187671 Speaker 1: When you look back over all the, the struggles that you've been involved in and here on the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts], what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Well I think I have no legacy, I've only done, as I've told everybody, what I felt I had to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Twas me and my conscience and my heart. Story_ID: 187672 Speaker 1: And the last question is ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well as I said, I've said before, when I go if there is a heaven and an earth, I'd just wanna say to whoever is at the gate, I did the best I could. Story_ID: 187673 Speaker 1: --That's your mother [Maria Anicleto Fortes]? Speaker 2: Yeah, when she was young. Speaker 1: Okay that's Julia and where was this? Speaker 2: Harwich [Massachusetts], taken in Harwich. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know when or have an idea? Speaker 2: Oh she was very young, I, I can't say. Speaker 1: And to the right of that? Speaker 2: The gentleman? The fellow that I was supposed to get married to. Speaker 1: Do you want to mention his name? Speaker 2: Lawrence Toby [ph.]. Speaker 1: And directly below that? Speaker 2: My cousin, favorite cousin, John Soas [ph.], my uncle's son. (unclear) Speaker 1: And my brother Andrew, the blind boy. He was home for the holidays. Speaker 2: Was that in Massachusetts? Speaker 1: Yeah, Harwich. Speaker 2: How do you spell it? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE FEMALE): H-A-R-W-I-C-H. Speaker 2: It's an old English town they named after in England. Speaker 1: And directly below him? Speaker 2: That's Piney Wood School, it was Frances Stantio [ph.], myself and Barbara Delonba [ph.]. And we stayed in the guest house the second week it was built. Speaker 1: About what year was this? Speaker 2: Oh quite a while ago. I can't go way back. Speaker 1: Late '30s [1930s]. Speaker 2: I would say '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Okay we'll go just to the right of there. Speaker 2: Which one? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (unclear) (simultaneous) Speaker 2: My brother Julio [ph.]. INTERVIEWER: Julio, Julio Fortes. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA CONVERSATION) Speaker 2: Directly below there. Speaker 1: You mean next to me? Speaker 2: No right here. Speaker 1: Oh that's me (laughter). Speaker 2: When was that? Speaker 1: Oh I can't tell ya. There's all these pictures, they snap 'em like popcorn. Speaker 2: Oh that one I want. In his Army uniform. That's Norman Monroe [ph.], my oldest friend now. His wife is my sister's Julia's best friend Ethyl. And he is ninety-seven today. And I made him a box of fudge and sent it to him. And he told me he could--every time he looked at the box he had a fit 'cause he didn't wanna open it till today. So I guess he's full of fudge. (laughter) But ninety-seven. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 2: Oh that's my brother's two oldest children, Alan [ph.] and Julia [ph.]. Speaker 1: And that's Worry, we call her Worry, her name is Marie [ph.] above the bottom one. That's his daughter too. Speaker 2: And then my very, very good friend, Lena Gonsales [ph.] with the--the boy with the red sweater. She died a couple years ago and I still miss her. She lived down in Sarasota [Florida]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA CONVERSATION) Speaker 2: Okay, this is you? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And when was it taken? Speaker 1: Oh in my lifetime (laughter). Speaker 2: John said that's one of the more recent ones. Speaker 1: Yeah, this was one was taken last summer (unclear). No, this--yeah that's one of the more recent. Speaker 2: That's Roz's [ph.] mother and I. Speaker 1: Okay who is this? Speaker 2: Julia, my sister Julia and me in the red coat. Can't you tell that white hair. Speaker 1: We want you to say it (unclear) Speaker 2: The top, well the front, well the top gentleman my uncle Jorguin [ph.] (unclear) Jet, we call him Uncle Jet. Then the middle lady is my Aunt Rose, and then the bottom one is my Aunt Julia and then my mother in front of her, and then my grandfather, John Fortes, that I told you was the doctor for the island for many years, with me when I was two months old, 1912. Speaker 1: And that's Roz. The bottom one, right standin' behind you. With the pigtails. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: I don't know, I can't tell. Speaker 2: You say that's from the '40s [1940s] or '50s [1950s]? Speaker 1: Could be. Speaker 2: Oh that's when I was young (laughter). Speaker 1: You just let one guy broke your heart? Speaker 2: Not gonna trust anybody again. Speaker 1: I know they were disappointed. Speaker 2: Oh that's Margaret Moseley and I--in Mississippi, in Sunflower, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Was that the trip? Speaker 2: Yeah the trip (unclear). Speaker 1: Were you down there with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] when they were there or Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses]? Speaker 2: No, no. (unclear) but I didn't. Speaker 1: And that's my mother and she loved flowers. And she--whenever she had a picture out there she always wanted it in front of flowers. Speaker 2: And is that in (unclear)? Speaker 1: Harwich. Speaker 2: Harwich? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And that's my mother and I in Harwich. And that's my mother and I. I must've been around seven or eight in Brava [Cape Verde] before we came to America. Speaker 1: It looks like a print (unclear). INTERVIEWER: Yeah it looks like a touched up photo (unclear). Speaker 1: Oh that's my brother Andrew, the blind, the blind one. Speaker 2: You said he had a long career, was it-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, he worked for a plumbing place and he inspected all the work before it was okay. Speaker 2: Oh, and that's Elvis and me. My favorite cat. He was so smart and the coyote got him outside. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: But, he liked to go out and I used to try, don't watch the dust (laughter). Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, we have a lot of coyotes around. Speaker 1: I didn't know that. Speaker 2: That's me again. Speaker 1: (Unclear) I saw one of the south side for the first time. Speaker 2: Coyote? Well, you see man is displacing 'em, and I'm one of the few people in Hyannis with almost two of em. Speaker 1: The last one was of you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's not the same photo. Alright. Speaker 2: That's my mother. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Maria. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: And that's my sister Julia, Roz's mother. Speaker 1: Did we get your father? Speaker 2: No, not yet. Speaker 1: Okay that's your father? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that--and was that after he came to America? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: What's has name? Speaker 2: Antonio. Speaker 1: About what year is that 1920s? Speaker 2: Way back, way back. And that's the pier that they're supposed to be namin' for me. I mean the beach. He just got the pier, but the beach is yonder. Speaker 1: Now is this painted by Sam Renner [ph.]? Speaker 2: Sam Barbia [ph.]. Speaker 1: Sam Barber? Speaker 2: And this--I understand they're selling it $30,000. He's got studios in Florida, New York, Boston [Massachusetts], everywhere. You used the houses bounded by Sam. Speaker 1: Okay we're ready, if you could tell us-- Speaker 2: Oh that's my sister Marian on the left. Let's see--no that's my brother Julio on the left, sister Julia--no--can you put a little more light on it. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I can't--that's Julio I think. That's Julio. Speaker 1: Julio, this is Marian. Speaker 2: Marian, there's Andrew, myself and your mother. Speaker 1: Should she do it again or? Speaker 2: No we got the names as I said-- Speaker 1: That's Marian son Robert, Robert Cutts [ph.]. And that's the Tuesday group, the women in town, black women that I got to, to work together. We did very good job. We did really help. Speaker 2: You raised money for books right? Speaker 1: Not only books, but you know, 200 or 300 per kid. We had suppers, we had, you know, different things. Speaker 2: Who is this? Speaker 1: This is my niece, Marian's daughter, Jaqueline [ph.]. (Laughter) I must tell you a funny story about Jack. Speaker 2: Do you wanna tell us the story? Speaker 1: Well she--her job that she had for twenty years moved from Houston [Texas] to Dallas and she didn't know what to do. I said, well you better not go. Well in the meantime, she got severance pay and then (laughter)--oh boy I've gotta do some dusting. (laughter) And so she applied. Speaker 2: And that's Jackie when she was a little-- Speaker 1: That's Carolyn [ph.]. Speaker 2: That's Carolyn, Roz's sister, Julia's daughter. So she was looking for a job and she got a job with the attorney general of Texas. And guess what the job was. Dead beat dads. And there was somebody in the--what you call it-- Speaker 1: That's Carolyn and Julia too. Speaker 2: And one of the Harlem Trotters [Harlem Globetrotters] is one of the dead beats (laughter). That was really somethin'. Speaker 1: Well as I say, they wanted a picture for 9/11, all the (unclear) on the Cape [Cape Cod, Massachusetts]. And this one artist, Anne Boucher, went to dinner with my attorney and wanted to know what she--she said she didn't know what to paint. Combined with the flag or what. And my attorney told her to do Eugenia. Well she did. And then the picture was hung at the Cahoon Museum [of African American Art] in Cotuit [Massachusetts]. And everybody came and of course everybody knew me. And then, she had another, she had to take down--they took down the pictures and she had an exhibit of her own, and somebody came in and bought it for $1800 to be given back to me. Well just like another anonymous donor at the high school, $30,000 for a nonwhite child, maybe Cape Verdean descent. But not just Cape Verdean, anything nonwhite. Speaker 2: Is that the rockin' chair that (unclear)? Speaker 1: No, no that's a separate. John can tell you about you see. Speaker 2: --other sister and her husband. Speaker 1: I'm sorry I wasn't taping, could you tell me again? Speaker 2: My Aunt Rose [ph.] and her husband Frank [ph.]. Rose and Frank Pena. Speaker 1: Alright. Speaker 2: And Uncle Frank always had-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --he'd say you can do it, you can do it. Speaker 1: He was wonderful-- Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: --Very good friends and she used to be--she was the money keeper. She worked for the post office. But she was one of my best friends-- Speaker 2: Beulah Gardner. Speaker 1: Beulah Gardner. And she was the first woman that ever went on the National Episcopal Board. She was St.--one of the New York churches, Episcopalian...