 Story_ID: 128476 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing is Mary Kate Thompson. Ma'am can you please state your name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Maureen Forte, M-A-U-R-E-E-N. F-O-R-T-E. Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, and what kind of name is Forte? Speaker 2: Forte is the name, the origin, can be one of two: it's either from the French background or from the Italian background, but in music term French means loud, and sometimes I find myself being very forte, very loud. Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is October 1, 1950 and I was born in Chicago, Illinois, at Cook County Hospital. Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation, I'm, I'm an educator, I'm an ESL teacher, English as a second language teacher, at Sawyer Elementary School on [W.] 52nd [Street] and [S.] Sawyer [Avenue in Chicago, Illinois.]. Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 27, 2004, Friday. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Today we are at The HistoryMakers, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue], in Chicago. Story_ID: 128477 Speaker 1: All right now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions, that I'm compelled to ask you. And the first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Now that's a good one. My favorite foods mustard and turnip greens and sweet potatoes; that's my favorite. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color's purple. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is autumn, the fall of the year. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Las Vegas [Nevada], I just returned from Las Vegas. I enjoy the weather, I enjoy the atmosphere, I enjoy the diversity of the people. Speaker 1: Okay, now the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase is a quote from [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.]: "Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere." Story_ID: 128478 Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: If you can give us--I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and father's side of the family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's full name is Georgia Ann Jones. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Knowles. Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: Georgia, G-E-O-R-G-I-A, Ann, A-N-E,--I'm sorry--A-N-N, Jones, J-O-N-E-S, maiden name Knowles, K-N-O-W-L-E-S. Speaker 1: All right, now what is her date, date of birth, and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her place--her date of birth is December 28, 1919 and she was born in Welsh, West Virginia. Speaker 1: W-L-C-H? Speaker 2: W-E-L-S-H. Speaker 1: E-L-S-H, okay, okay. Speaker 2: My mom recently passed, July 10th, of this year. Speaker 1: Okay, All right. What can you tell us about her side of the family? How far back can you trace your ancestors on that side? Speaker 2: Well my mom is a, is a, is a child of a mixed marriage. Her father's Irish, her mother was a, I want to say Afro-Indian. It's a mixed marriage, you probably could say. But, her father was the captain of a, of a steam boat. And there were like about nine children in the family and they all were birthed by Mr. Knowles. That's the only name I've known him of. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so your grand, your grandfather was a Mr. Knowles. Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Knowles. Speaker 1: All right. Can you trace him back any further than your grandfather? Speaker 2: No, that's, that's far--you know that's something that we are now getting into, now that my mom and father both have passed. My family, my brothers, and sisters [Mary and Millie] and I, now are in the process of doing a genealogy trace. Speaker 1: Okay, there aren't any stories or anything passed down, in the family. Speaker 2: No, not really, not from my mother side, you know. She's just--as she was born, and the mother worked, and the father was always at the, on the steam boat, and you know, that was just the history. And my mom, my mom did a lot of quilting; her mother did a lot of quilting. In fact, I just put it in the cleaners, a quilt that her mom had made. And it's a patchwork quilt, with the feather stitching, which was stitching that was used back in the day. So the fam was very big in quilting. So, that's the only stories we have of a, you know, of her family. Of how they sat around and did quilting. We never have had family reunions with either side of the family. But, we would, you know, gather together on the different holidays. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother talk about growin' up in West Virginia? What it was like? Speaker 2: Yeah, growing up in West Virginia, she, she grew up and went to college, I think she did one, one to two years in junior college. Her ambition was to be a nurse. But, as time went on, she met the love of her life, my father. And they lived on the coal camps. My father [Willis Jones, Sr.] was a coal miner and in Elbert, West Virginia. In fact, that's where my three oldest siblings were where born. My, in fact, my mother called us seeds, I'm seed number four, my Mary, my oldest sister, is seed number one, and seed number two are Millie and seed three's Willis. They were all born on the coal camp. And in fact, my father--as we got older, he developed black lung, an illness from the coal dust. And so, in fact, the other, three older children too, have some symptoms of coal dust too. That's from, like from asthma, one of my sisters has only one lung. I have a brother who, my brother has polyps. These were all later on affects that are affecting them now. These are products from growing up in the coal camp. Speaker 1: Okay, now what part of West Virginia was this again? Speaker 2: Elbert, (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 1: A-L, (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Elbert, E-L-B-E-R-T. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 128479 Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's full name is Willis Jones, Sr. W-I-L-L-I-S, Jones, J-O-N-E-S, Senior. Speaker 1: All right and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is October 16, 1909 and he was born in West Virginia also. Speaker 1: Okay. All right now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Can you trace them back any further? Speaker 2: The only thing I know about my father's side is that, the first cousin, he's related to, the Shuttlesworths--the Shuttlesworth family with the civil rights organ--organized--organ-- [sic, SCLC, Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. Speaker 1: [HM] Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth? Speaker 2: Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, in fact, Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth was raised with my father, when his [Willis Jones Sr.'s] parents died. I believe his [Willis Jones Sr.'s] mom died, and his [Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth's] mother, Mary [sic, Alberta] Shuttlesworth raised him [Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] along with my father. And they were raised in Cincinnati, Ohio. So, we have a large, on my father's side, a large family in Cincinnati, which we visit regular. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and Fred Shuttlesworth, of course, was famous for the Birmingham situation [the 16th Street Baptist Church bombing in Birmingham, Alabama on September 15, 1963]. He's pastor of 16th Street Baptist Church (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Sixteenth Street Baptist Church? Speaker 1: In Birmingham? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The famous one, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They were bombed and so forth. Speaker 2: Right, (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Okay, one of the, yeah he's one of the heroes of the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Shuttlesworth, Fred Shuttlesworth. Speaker 2: So, I just--I went (unclear) I returned from Cincinnati, about three weeks ago. I went to meet with him--my father's sister had celebrated her 54 year anniversary and the sister-in-law, Fred's sister-in-law was there. So, he was under the weather, so he didn't make that event. Yeah. Speaker 1: He's somebody we haven't interviewed yet. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, he's someone you should interview. Speaker 1: Right. (simultaneous). Speaker 2: You have to give us his phone number when (simultaneous), (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When this is over, I'm serious (laughter). Speaker 1: It's well over due. Speaker 2: Yes, so your father was raised in West Virginia? And did you ever meet your grand--his parents? Speaker 1: I only met his mother, Mary, 'cause every summer I was sent to Cincinnati, Ohio. And I spent my summers in Cincinnati, on, in Madisonville [Ohio] which is a small suburb of Cincinnati. So, I met Mary, she made breakfast every morning, hot biscuits, and so I met her. And so, I had interactions with her and his sisters. 'Cause they had what you call the big house, where all the family gathered together. In fact, the big house still exists. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's just no one's living in it (unclear). Speaker 2: Now, when did the family move from West Virginia to Cincinnati? Speaker 1: I believe they, I'm not that sure of when they moved from there because I wasn't in the picture at the time. But my father, from his history, from his oral history, had sent the family which was my mother and my older sibling to Cincinnati, to live until he found someplace for them here in Chicago [Illinois]. So, they were sent ahead to stay with his family in Cincinnati while he found some place for them to live in Chicago. And they stayed there, I guess maybe two or three years, maybe a couple of years, 'cause in 1950 I was born. And we lived in Altgeld Gardens [a public housing project on the far south side of Chicago] at the time, so they--we have made that transition from--they had made the transition from Cincinnati to Chicago. They moved into Altgeld Gardens, at that time it was the place to be. It's, today it's, you know, the project area of Chicago, but at time it was a very prominent place to live. And then from there, from Altgeld Gardens we moved to 67th Street, and then we finally got our own place on [E.] 66th [Street] and [S.] Rhodes [Avenue]. Story_ID: 128480 Speaker 1: By the time that you were born, by, by 1950, the family was living in-- Speaker 2: Right, 1950 the family was in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, do you remember any other stories that your family, tells about life in the, in the (unclear), in the coal camp, or, or do they talk about, you know, what things were like in West Virginia or Cincinnati [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Just about the Blue Hill Mountains [sic, Blue Ridge Mountains], how hard it was for him [Forte's father, Willis Jones, Sr.] at that time to acknowledge it wasn't like it is now going into the coal camp, risking his life. You know. Going down there trying to breathe and how he had to save several people's, people in turn they saved his life also, then coming home. My mom [Georgia Ann Jones] never worked, you know, she stayed home with the children and that was the life back then; it was hard. I'm looking at today; it's even harder to be a stay-at-home mom [Georgia Ann Jones]. But, basically, you know, those were just some stories. We just didn't really get into, but we knew, of the life of the coal camp and his life with the black lung disease because, as he got sick, I took him and signed him up with the Black Lung Organization here in Chicago. And when he passed and it trickled down to the wife, of course, but I'm now waiting to see if my siblings are going to follow up with the black lung, because their entitled to that, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, now did, did you talk about growing up in West Virginia at all? Speaker 2: Growing up in West Virginia, he did some running, from the coal camps. His brothers were in Cincinnati and Kentucky, so he was ah, what you call a whiskey runner (laughter), would run whiskey in Kentucky. And going to the games, that's, that's where he met my mom at a game. He met my mom at. Speaker 1: A baseball game? Speaker 2: At, it was a baseball game. Yeah, she loves baseball, and that's where he met her. Speaker 1: Was it a Negro League game? Speaker 2: It probably was, more than likely, it was. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so your parents met in West Virginia? Okay. Now, and is there anything else about you? Did your mother ever work or did she remain a housewife? Speaker 2: She remained a housewife, she never worked. They were married in April 10, 1939; so she never worked. Speaker 1: Okay, and what did your father do in Chicago? Speaker 2: In Chicago he was a construction worker, he worked for Cachey [ph.] Construction Company. And then after that he, worked at J. J. Brodsky's [J. J. Brodsky & Sons Inc.] as a candy wholesale person. He had a cleaners; he cleaned clothes. He was just a laborer; he did a lot of jobs. Sometimes he worked two and three jobs to take care of the family. You know. We never suffered for anything; we were the rich poor kids, you know. Everyone in the family had a birthday and everyone had a birthday cake, their own birthday cake, you know, every year. Story_ID: 128481 Speaker 1: Tell me what's you earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory (laughing) is being drowned, almost drowning in the bathroom, when we lived on [East] 66th [Street] and [South] Rhodes [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. My parents [Willis Jones, Sr. and Georgia Ann Jones] had gone out and had left me with my oldest sister [Mary] and my brother [Willis] and they were supposed to be washing clothes in the bathtub, soaking them. And some type of way, I ended up in the bathtub under the clothes. So, that was, I must have been about maybe four or five, and I guess I remember this because it's constantly being told to me of how you always was in trouble. And after that sticking my finger in the, in the socket, you know, I had a really rough time growing up with my siblings. You know, but it was all good. That was my earliest drowning in the bathtub, up under some clothes. But you know, the washer type, we had that at that time, it was the wringer, so they had to soak the clothes. And I think they were trying to get rid of me (laughter). Story_ID: 128482 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Some of the sights, just seeing the neighborhood, seeing the community, we didn't venture out, like the families today do. We did go to the zoo, it was a, a evening, a Sunday, that we would go to the zoo, go the park, Washington Park [in Chicago, Illinois], was the highlight for us. The sounds was the jump rope, the kids outside sitting on the porch, the ice stream, ice cream truck coming through, kids running across, the hand games, a lot of hand games. The smells were from the cooking the barbeque, whether they had a grill or not, manmade grill, you know, that was the sounds, the sights. And one other sight that we had--my older sister, Mary, she had set up an account with the corner store and my father [Willis Jones Sr.] would buy certain types of meat, and as we started getting older my sister start working, it was time for us to get a certain quality of meat and so she had set up an account at Willie store, Willie William's the corner store. So we had Willie Williams store which was the African American store on one corner and we had Jack's which was the white store all on the other. And my sister had gone now and we had an account at Willie's and we had an account at Jack's. So, we had the best of both worlds. And my sister sewed, so made clothing for myself and my younger sister [Mille] and also for herself. So she was almost like the mother of the house, you know. When I was coming up six years later, my mother was pregnant again, and my sisters were coming out of high school and here's my mom [Georgia Ann Jones] expecting again. And so, I went to high school with my sister one day, with both my sisters, I went to Englewood High School [in Chicago, Illinois] because my mother didn't have time to watch me, so I went to school with them. I did a lot of traveling in my younger days with my sisters. Speaker 1: Okay, you had responsible sisters it seems like? Speaker 2: Yeah, even today. Yeah. Story_ID: 128483 Speaker 1: Any other sights, and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: That's just about it. I mean the neighborhood, you know. Speaker 1: And you're at 66th and Rhodes? Speaker 2: 6621 South Rhodes [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very organized, block it was very, it's was very, we had a block captain that time. You weren't out all night. It was a time when your next door neighbor could chastise you. If you did wrong, the neighbor got you, when you father got home he got you again. My mother [Georgia Ann Jones], she would beat you down (laughter), I'm trying think of how I could take her to court now for child abuse, but I'm still here. But the, in the time I grew up, the next door neighbors, the neighbors looked out for each other. But now you can't do that, you know, the kids know the rules, they know the laws. Know what you can't say, and you know; you're almost afraid to speak to some of these children. But back when I grew up the families worked together, the block worked together. If you didn't have food or if you didn't have Christmas presents, they made all that possible for the families. It's was very united block. Speaker 1: Were they, were they part of Park Manor neighbors? Speaker 2: It's Park Manor, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And I know they've always had a strong organizational (unclear). Speaker 2: Very strong. Speaker 1: Even now the block clubs over there are very strong (simultaneous),(unclear). Speaker 2: Even today, that's a area that's kinda hard to move into. You know, you didn't just go and say I'm going to move here. You had to know somebody to get into that block. Just like getting a job, you got to know the right hook up, yeah. Speaker 1: Right, right. Well tell me about growing up, what kind of a little girl were you? What, what did you like to do? Speaker 2: I was very aggressive, in fact I was probably the most aggressive person in the, my family. I went to James McCosh Elementary School [in Chicago, Illinois]. My brother [Willis] and I went to the same elementary school on [East] 65th [Street] and [South] Champlain [Avenue]. And I always had to wait for my brother, I could not come home without my brother. And my mother never attended anything at the school. And so this one particular day we were late coming home, and we had both gotten suspended, I got suspended because my brother got into a fight and he put a boy in the garbage can, the city garbage can. So because I stood and watched I got suspended also. No, but I've always been very aggressive. Always would go out and challenge see what was goin' on. I would always bend the rules; you know, like mom [Georgia Ann Jones] would say, "Stay on the porch" and I would venture off the porch. "Don't cross the alley." I would cross the alley, you know. My next door neighbor, his mom had bought him a motor bike, my mom says, "Don't get on that motorcycle," so I didn't, but I went around the corner and got on and sure I fell off and got injured. And I worked at the little, we had a little Pick 'n Save, like a thrift store. My mom allowed me to go in there and work, I worked there, I must have been like eleven or twelve years old. And it was a second-hand store, helping the lady doing with whatever she was doing, binding up the ribbons, so it was a little outlet. But I was always aggressive. I've always wanted to find out "why"? And then I went to Englewood High School and during my lunch break I would always walk down to the funeral home, that was on 64th and Stewart I believe, 'cause my whole vision was to be a mortician. I wanted to go Worsham's Mortuary School [Worsham College of Mortuary Science in Wheeling, Illinois], but that didn't pan out 'cause my mom wasn't hearing that. So, I volunteered, did a lot of volunteer with a lot of politicians while I was in high school. So, I've been very active ever since high school. Story_ID: 128484 Speaker 1: Now, let me go back to grade school. Were there any teachers in grade school that stand out as important? Speaker 2: Yeah, there's one teacher who I still talk to, Mrs. Knight. Mrs. Knight, she was like my third grade teacher, and she became a friend to my mom [Georgia Ann Jones]. And in fact now Mrs. Knight--my girlfriend, it's her cousin, it's her aunt--it turns out that I have a police officer friend that I use for security--and Mrs. Knight(unclear), I was talking about high school and grammar school and where I went to school. So, she said, "My aunt taught at James McCosh [elementary school, Chicago, Illinois]," and I said, "What and what was her name?" and I told, "Mrs. Knight," she said, "That's my aunt." So she called and I talked to Mrs. Knight, and whether she remembers me or not, she's kinda, sorta, 'cause she's kinda up in age now too. But Ms. Knight, she was a very she the kind of teacher that came to your house back in the day. She was a very nice teacher, Ms. Knight, she made friends with my mom, because I had a, my second older sister [Mary] that was very sickly with asthma and so she found comfort with my mom. And then there was a Mr. Stiegel my eight grade teacher. And I would like to find out if he's still alive. He was very, he was a strong disciplinarian, and he made sure you got everything right, and that you understood everything. Those were about the two strongest forces in my life in high school, in grammar school at James McCosh [Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Did you like school? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I enjoyed school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I enjoyed school because it gave me a chance to communicate and I had so much to talk about, you know--because I bring activities from my house to school-so, it was a chance to network, the word network wasn't even in my mind at time. But, now I look forward to going to school, to the assemblies, you know, participating in that. Yeah I look forward to school. I love school. Speaker 1: Okay did you have speaking roles during the assemblies? Speaker 2: Yes, I had speaking (laughing), I had speaking roles in the assemblies, if it was just to introduce the assembly or "Please stand as we do the Pledge of Allegiance," yeah, always talking. Speaker 1: Okay, so you like the kind of formal (unclear), some people talk but don't want to talk in front of a group (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Oh no, I enjoyed it. Story_ID: 128485 Speaker 1: Now, did you like to read when you were comin' up? Speaker 2: Reading I enjoyed; I've always enjoyed reading, we always would read I think you know, we were probably the first house on the block to get a television on [S.] Rhodes [Avenue], but my mom [Georgia Ann Jones] made sure we read and my mom read to us too. That's one thing you know, we read to everyday and we did, we did reading too. So a family that reads, if the parents shows you that reading is important, the children will pick up. So, my mom did read to us we knew all the nursery rhythms and we were readers, (unclear) readers and writers. Speaker 1: Okay now was television important we you were growing up and radio? Speaker 2: No, I think radio was probably more important than the television. The only time television was important was when The Ed Sullivan Show and The Lawrence Welk Show and then it got to a point where okay we're tired of looking at Lawrence Welk, 'cause now you're grow up and Lawrence Welk wasn't hitting it. But television was not important part of our life, you know, it came on, but we were not couch potatoes sittin' down watching, 'cause there was so much to do: newspapers to be read, my mom would pick up little books, and we always had library cards, so television was not the number one priority in our house. Speaker 1: So, back to radio was a lot of music played. Speaker 2: A lot of music. My mom and dad they both enjoyed, so we had a lot of music. My mom would sing, my father [Willis Jones Sr.] would sing, you know, so it's a lot of singing, a lot of whistling, you know, 'cause I can out-whistle the best man today. And so. Speaker 1: Can we hear a little whistling? Speaker 2: You want to hear a little whistling? (whistling) Speaker 1: Wow! Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Wow! Speaker 2: So, I'm pretty good at that. I got that skill from my dad (laughter), (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (unclear) Okay, wow! That's something, so you know, so did, did you, could you, could your friends like hear each other down the block with that kind of whistle or something? Did you ever use to for-(simultaneous) Speaker 2: So, it turns out that we didn't have to, "Come home, it's time for you to eat" 'cause we knew the whistle, you know. So time went on you know how to use, first learning how to whistle with the two fingers, well I was taught to whistle with just these two fingers, so that was the key, the whistle or the jingling of the keys. We had our little symbols. And when I jingle my keys it's time for you to come, or if I whistle, you know, so you're told before you go outside what time to come in. When the, when the street light comes on it's time for you to be in, if you hear me the whistle, don't have me out there yelling for you, so we knew the rules. Speaker 1: But that's interesting, so, so they wouldn't necessarily, 'cause some you know, mother's would yell (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: "Come on home," but no that didn't happen, we had the whistle, we knew that you, we knew that, that mom or dad [Willis Jones, Sr.], well my mom, my father--by the time my father came home from work, it was time for us to come in anyway--come in and do dinner; and we ate together. Story_ID: 128486 Speaker 1: Well tell me about high school and you went to Englewood High School [in Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Englewood High School, yeah, Englewood High School on [West] 62nd [Street] and [South] Stewart [Avenue]. As soon as I walked in the door I became involved with the drama department under Mrs. Davis, who was the drama teacher. I stayed in a little trouble 'cause I couldn't stop talking, but Englewood High S-high school, was high school. I, I think before I even went to high school I attended a prom, Calumet High School's prom, when I was thirteen, as I was entering high school. But-- Speaker 1: (unclear) Now that's something now, your parents allowed you to a prom when you were thirteen? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause it was set up prom, I belonged to Carter Temple [Christian Methodist Episcopal] Church on [East] 79th [Street] and [South] Wabash [Avenue in Chicago, Illinois] at the time and this young man didn't have a prom date, so my mom [Georgia Ann Jones] knew the young man and it was not to my liking to go but, because he needed a prom date, and I think one of my sister's had just gotten married and I was in the wedding so I had the green empire dress, so I went to the prom I was in my 12:00. It was, it was not exciting for me at that time, you know, but yeah, that was a set up, you know, fixed-up prom date. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 127025 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay so what was Englewood [High School in Chicago, Illinois] like? Speaker 2: Englewood High School was very challenging. I had attended Englewood, I'd come from James McCosh [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], which was the elementary school, which was family-orientated because of the neighborhood you knew everyone at James McCosh. So now here I'm going to Englewood have to travel by bus from my house to get to Englewood and now I'm encountering some intra-racism, black-on-black racism. I had very long hair, very light in complexion, and here the population was predominately black. And the attitude when I walked in--when I first started I was very excited about high school. But I was faced with the color. "You light. We don't like you. You think you're this." And so that was the sad part for me my freshman year trying to adjust. It was like probably from, up to January of that first year, that was the hard part you know, so it turns out that the cheerleaders at Englewood, they were all very light complexioned women, they were the cheerleaders. Well that was not my interest. I joined the, the chorus and I got involved with the drama department and that was what I enjoyed. But I, I caught hell, if I can say that, the first year you know. My father would give me money to take the bus to school, I would take the money and walk home instead of taking the bus, then one day I got jumped underneath the viaduct on 63rd right off of Wentworth. As I was going home some girls jump me and beat me down. And when I got home, I got another beat down from my father, because I was supposed to be taking the bus and walking. Be the next day he fixed a little two-by-four with some nails on it and told me walk back home and wait for the girls and I did, you know I walked back home I waited underneath that viaduct and I know today one of those girls got some pock marks in her face, you know. Speaker 1: So, you hit them with a--(unclear) Speaker 2: With a two-by-four, my father had me a two-by-four, a little piece of wood, with a strap on it had some nails in it. So I was beat something terrible, you know then when I, but after that everything, we all came together and I met a young lady there, who truly became friends. We stayed friends up until last year, so from '64 [1964], from '68 [1968], up to '64 [1964] up to now, we stayed in contact with each other, you know. But, it's such amazing when you look at zero tolerance and an eye for an eye, leaves somebody blind and so you think of what my father instructed me to do, versus me coming home with another beating from my father, you know. It just wasn't right, but at that time it was right. Speaker 1: At that time, what was happening? (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah. Story_ID: 127026 Speaker 1: Oh I forgot now were you following the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: I was following the Civil Rights Movement--in fact, when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, my aunt my mother's sister had come over to the school and we were both kicked off the bus when the word had got out that Dr. King had gotten assassinated we were both kicked off and punched on 63rd Street. Speaker 1: Now you were on the 63rd Street bus? Speaker 2: On the 63rd Street bus, underneath that "L" [the elevated train system in Chicago]. Speaker 1: Who punched you and who kicked you off the bus? Speaker 2: Some young people on the bus, boys, girls pushed us off the bus, called us white, pushed us off the bus. Speaker 1: These are black people? Speaker 2: These are black. Speaker 1: And they, calling you white? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They pushed you off the bus? Speaker 2: Called my aunt white, and, and as you know when Dr. King was assassinated here in Chicago it was just an ugly mess anyway, you know. But and then you, you know now that as I got older I started reading the Willie Lynch letters [sic, "The Willie Lynch Letter: The Making of a Slave!"], I says that's was that was, plotting the dark against the light, the old against the young you know you want to know what is this about. I came up in a household where my mom told us whether you are light or dark you no better or worse that the next sister. I come from a family that's got rainbow-colored children in the family. And my mom talked to us all the same, you're light or dark, you're all equal; there's no such thing as good hair, bad hair 'cause we had the rampant of texture of hair in the family also. And so here you've been taught this at home, you're coming from coming from a grammar school where you didn't have those problems, but then you get into a bigger institute of higher learning, and here you have kids from all over, from all walks of life going to one public school, you know. There were a couple of kids who lived on my block whose parents sent them to Catholic school, well we couldn't afford to go to Catholic school that wasn't even in our order, our mind set going there. Catholic school because we were, you know, just a regular family going to public education plus we weren't Catholic and that time, in order to get into Catholic school you had to be Catholic and we weren't, yeah. Story_ID: 127027 Speaker 1: And you remember the March on Washington [1963], and that, and that must have taken place when you were in eighth grade, right? Speaker 2: Right, in fact we're coming up to the celebration on the March of Washington, August 28th, tomorrow. And normally, my sister and I, we participate in that we go to Washington, being active with the Chicago Teachers Union, we would take a busload down to that to celebrate that. Speaker 1: Okay, no problem. Do you, do you remember seeing that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s speech on television in those days? I mean back in those days. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, in fact I wanted to go over there be involved, and my family was like you're not going over there, nobody's taking you over there, what do you want do with that, you know so. We would look at part of the news, you know, but it's like my father didn't expose us too much to news, because it was always something bad, the news wasn't good, you know. But we would see glimpses of it, but then again going to school, going to high school, you get a chance to see everything and read everything. Because now you're not in the house, nobody's hiding anything from you. And so you get a chance to pick up newspapers, and you read them, so I do a lot of reading, even today I do a lot reading. Speaker 1: Okay and so you said you got involved in politics in high school? What, what? Speaker 2: I volunteered to, there was a politician, I can't think of the guy's name, but he was running for office, and he had an office right there on [E.] 71st [Street] and [S.] Jeffery [Avenue], and I would go over there and volunteer my time, one or two days, you know make a phone call and stuffing envelopes. Speaker 1: Was he running for alderman? Speaker 2: He was running for alderman, yeah. Speaker 1: That's like city councilman? Speaker 2: Yeah, city council. Speaker 1: Okay, did he win? Speaker 2: Yeah, he won, he won. Back in the day, I can't remember the guy's name, but then there was a lady that you've had on HistoryMakers, I did some work for her, volunteering. And then as I got on into to college I started going to different political affairs, and I worked at Harold Washington's campaign, like everybody, and just tried to be involved with the community, see what's going on in the community, see what happens is we just move into a community, we just move into these houses and we don't get involved with the community. So I started going to different community meetings, the T-W-O, over there, The Woodlawn Organization, find out what's going on and how I can be involved, I ventured down to the Operation Breadbasket, and I would read about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League, all the different organizations and what was going on with the people you know, and so I try to be involved. Story_ID: 127028 Speaker 1: Now did you have any teachers or any, were there any adults when you were in high school [at Englewood High School in Chicago, Illinois] that were guiding you toward activity in politics? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah today, even today Lorenzo Martin, Lo, Lorenzo Martin was my high school teacher. He was a political science teacher, or social science teacher, and when I was in high school we had a principal Mr. Van Damme [ph.]. Mr Van Damme was so racist and this all-black school that the teachers had gotten together and escorted him out of Englewood High School--and when they did that, all the tea--, all students followed him, even today I'm touch with Lorenzo Martin. Speaker 1: Is this the teacher, that, I fa, I fairly, remember this story correctly, that I've heard, I think Lorenzo tell, tell this story. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Of Lorenzo Martin is the editor of South Suburban Newspapers now. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But, they, they picked the guy's chair up with him in it and took him, just took him outside and set it on the lawn. Speaker 2: Took him out. Speaker 1: That was while you were in school? Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was Mr. Van Damme? Speaker 2: Mr. Van Damme he was the principal, yeah, yeah. And so today I work with Lorenzo Martin on my talk show I had him on, once a month. He comes on and he hosts the show, where international and national news. And we interviewed the Ambassador from Zimbabwe, we bring people of interest, we've had Ambassador from Sudan on, and he's able to network, we are trying to elevate the minds of the people. Speaker 1: Okay, alright so Lorenzo Martin was teachin' there and you mentioned somebody else? Speaker 2: Mr. Martin, Mr. Black who's now Professor Black, he hosts a meeting over here, inter, intercity studies. Speaker 1: Samuel Black? Speaker 2: Yeah, so I he was there. And we had some, Mr. Squash [ph.], Mr. Squash, Mr. Wash [ph.], one of those names, he was very instrumental too, he was a very outspoken biology teacher. See we had some great leaders there in the school, you know, that were directing the children in the right way. Story_ID: 127029 Speaker 1: Okay now were you, were you a good student at Englewood? Speaker 2: I was an average student. I'd would say a C-plus student, just an average student. Speaker 1: Well what do you, what do you major in, did you take a business course or college prep? Speaker 2: I took speech, speech courses, business I was not interested in, speech and theater and drama that was my interest. I do go through a work-study program that Englewood had at the time, and I ended up working at Sears on 63rd and Halsted And then at Wieboldt's, I worked at Wieboldt's and at that time the big issue at Wieboldt's was those S&H green stamps. Remember those stamps? (laughter) So I worked for a whole week or month in that department, it was just amazing how people would come in, even back then and try to duplicate the stamps, to fill up a book. So yeah, that was the big thing those S&H green stamps. Speaker 1: So, you had to check the stamps to make sure they were authentic? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had the stamps to make sure they were authentic. Speaker 1: Yeah those were the days before Xerox machines. Speaker 2: (Laughter), yeah people were busy, yeah they had crayons, they had a way. Anything man-made we can undo. Story_ID: 127030 Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about high school, well you did, did you have a chance to be in any plays? Speaker 2: Yeah I was in a couple of plays, about three plays at, while I was in high school. Played always old women and, in fact, I'm on the inside of a several yearbooks, in the inside cover of the drama department. Speaker 1: Do you remember, do you remember any plays that you were in? Speaker 2: 'Saved by the Bell' is just one play that I remember the name of. In fact, as it turns out, I participated in Parkway Community Center and we did the same play there also, but that was a part of the community center, part of Hull House, 'Saved by the Bell' was, which was the same play that we did in high school. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were out of high school, when you did it at Parkway Community Center (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Right, I was out of high school. Speaker 1: So were you part X-Bag Theater then, I was just wonder--what group was there? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Clarence Taylor used to be over there, but I don't know who else. Speaker 2: There was a lady named Ms. Jones was over there, yeah but I would go to all the plays, we lived right around the corner from Hull House, [E.] 66th [Street] and [S.] Rhodes [Avenue] and Hull House was on [E.] 67th [Street] and [E.] Marquette Road. Speaker 1: Yeah, 500 E. 67th Street? Speaker 2: So yeah right, so they had activities you know my mom would let us go up there for skating and little other activities they had for the community. Story_ID: 127031 Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about graduation from high school, did you, had you decided what you were gonna do for the rest of your life or what kind of career you wanted to pursue? Speaker 2: Well, at that time I wanted to go to mortuary school. I had applied for Worsham's [Worsham College of Mortuary Science], which was located downtown here in Chicago [Illinois] at that time, and that had kicked out, so I couldn't go, so I ended up going to Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] majoring in special ed. [education], I wanted to be a special ed. teacher. And then after I did some observation and some work with the special ed. Misericordia Home that changed my mind, so I didn't want to do that. 'Cause I didn't, I couldn't stomach it, you know, I just felt like I need to bring all the kids home. So I ended up just being a regular education teacher, receiving a type three certificate, state certified. And so now that I'm in the teaching field, I enjoy it. I started doing some teaching the Catholic schools first. Speaker 1: So, when did you finish Chicago State? Speaker 2: I finished Chicago State in '74 [1974], January of '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 127032 Speaker 1: Yeah, I went to Chicago State when it was on [E.] 68th Street, and then in, in between my classes I would take drama classes at Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois]. And then this time, which was like in '69 [1969], Kennedy-King was auditioning to go to the USO [United Service Organization] Show. And I said, well, I had to see if I could go, because I wasn't a full-time student at Kennedy-King, I was a full-time student at Chicago State, but I had auditioned for their plays. And so, 1500 students auditioned, I was told, my mom told me I couldn't go, 'cause I was too young to go, but I went on and auditioned, and out of 1500, fifteen of us was selected and I was one of them. And the USO paid for our full ride, our housing, gave us a check for spending, and, and the cost of everything was taken care of USO. So I went on that USO tour with Kennedy-King College, we were there with Lou Rawls and Sebastian Cabot. We went to, it was the South Pacific, Japan, Okinawa, Taiwan, the Philippines, and someplace else we had ventured to. And we stayed over there for three months, doing Cole Porter's play, "Paint Your Wagon," and then we had some other entertainment that we did. Speaker 2: So you did, "Paint Your Wagon" as the play? Speaker 1: Um-hum, Um-hum, overseas. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: In fact, I met my ex-husband in Korea, in Seoul, Korea. And, so it was a good trip. So, I went, stayed three months. The weather there was much colder as we got there, we had to exchange our coats for the army coats. We stayed on the barracks, that's where we stayed. And then from there, when I came back, I finished my, my schooling for, for education, graduated from Chicago State, did my student teaching at that time in Posen-Robbins, I was a ESL [English as a Second Language] teacher--I didn't bring that article--where I taught English as a second language to a group of Philippines [sic, Filipinos], a Philippine [sic, Filipino] family had just moved here from the Philippine Islands and I taught them, was given them as a special project for student teaching. And that was out in Posen-Robbins on a hundred and--in Robbins, Illinois--so I would venture from Chicago to Robbins, Illinois, to do my student teaching. And in Robbins at that time, the mayor was Mayor Smith, who dipped snuff and I had the pretties white blouse and Mayor Smith in the process of talking spit snuff all over my clothes, (unclear) just something ugly. Speaker 2: That's a, that a strange memory. Speaker 1: Yeah but, so then from there I went to teaching at the Catholic school and I stayed there like for ten years, 'cause I had children at that time. Speaker 2: So you taught in the Catholic school system first? Speaker 1: Um-um right, taught in the Catholic school, first, at Saint Thaddeus [Saint Jude Thaddeus Catholic School in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Saint Thad, Saint Thaddeus? Speaker 1: On 95th and Harvard. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I stayed there until my kids, my oldest daughter graduated. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were there for ten years? Speaker 1: Right for ten years. Story_ID: 127033 Speaker 1: Now what years, what, what years were you in the USO [United Service Organization]? I didn't, I forgot (unclear). Speaker 2: I was in the U, USO from 1971. Speaker 1: Seventy one-- Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-one [1971]. I got in trouble over there too 'cause I should have stayed in the barracks. Coming in one night, our escort officer wasn't with us, and they come on the bus to check and make sure none of the people from the village are comin' on. And they pulled me off the bus and they said I didn't have any ID on me or anything so they pulled me off. They had to call my mom all the way to the States for her to identify a birthmark that was on me because I didn't have any identification, and I looked like some of the people over there in Seoul, Korea. Speaker 1: Okay, so they thought you might have been a Korean? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was a lot of Seoul, Seoul, Seoul Korean sisters over there. Speaker 1: Yeah I just (unclear), these are observations that, you know, I mean there important, I think an interview like this, you had a chance to go there at that age, and to look, and, and did that surprise you, did you know anything about you know, black people in Korea? Speaker 2: I knew nothing, I knew nothing, I knew nothing of the culture or anything, everything was a surprise to me; everything was new. I was not knowledgeable enough to take advantage, to do some research beforehand; I was just at that time, excited about going. The flight was so long, it was an 18 hour flight; that was a flight that just wore me out, that was my first airplane ride too. But it was just a very surprise. I'm not aware of the foods they were eating, didn't know that dogs was a meat there. So one night we had ventured out I had gone out that had a burger patty and fries, and I, after I had eaten the burger patty, my escort officer informed me that the burger patty was ground dog. So over there at that time, they were eating dogs, ground dogs and ground horses. And then they took us by to see the dogs just hanging up in the shops, in the deli, and so that was an experience, so I've had ground dog. And when I was in Taiwan you could see them roasting rats on a grill out there, you know, some had octopus, you know I've had an experience of a lot of different foods that I would not have had if I had known better. Speaker 1: Okay. But did, did,--who--were there black people every place you went--I mean, that there, were they part of the population of the--? Speaker 2: There were black soldiers there. There were children of black soldiers there. The entertainers in Seoul, Korea they was like, the entertainers like, for instances there was a Michael Jackson there. If Michael Jackson had been a popular person back then there was singers that could sing all the same soul songs. So, the music was there, the serviceman you could tell had come and had made families; there were children there. They had a difference between, and so, when I was there the Seoul, in Seoul Korea, they had taken families of brothers and they were fighting against each other. 'Cause they had sent one to one side, South Korea to and some to the North side to fight, so you had families of families fighting against each other (unclear). Vietnam War was going on to at that time too. Story_ID: 127034 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so let's take you back up to, so you taught school at Saint-- (simultaneous) Speaker 2: Saint Thaddeus [Saint Jude Thaddeus Catholic School in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: --for ten years. Now when did you get involved with Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity], now, I believe it started around '69 [1969] or '70 [1970]. Speaker 2: Right I had been goin' down to Operation PUSH and I just getting involved, just sittin' back. I couldn't really get involved like I'm involved now because I was just a student, still livin' under your parent's roof. Speaker 1: How did you hear about Operation PUSH? Speaker 2: From school, from school. It was, [HM] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson was a hot issue, you know, [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was a hot issue, Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois] you know, was a hot issue at that time. You know, it was "niggas go home" painted on the wall over there in Marquette Park. You weren't allowed to go across at a certain place, so you want to find out, why can't you if the constitute says we are equal then why can't I? You know, so, I was always one to challenge the system, and tell my why, make it plain, make it to where I can understand. And so I started going down to Operation PUSH, and as time went on I eventually joined Operation PUSH. My parents had been members of Operation PUSH, or Breadbasket that's what it was called at that time. But then as I got older, I joined the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] 'cause I thought Operation PUSH was a little bit too radical for me, you know, and so I joined the NAACP. I became the vice president of the south suburban chapter of NAACP. And as time went on NAACP, it didn't fill my need it was lacking some organization. They have a constitution whereas, you could not acknowledge elected officials; they had a lot of different rules. In 1995, the first Million Man March, the NAACP didn't endorse the Million Man March. Well I invited Minister Ishmael Muhammad, to an NAACP meeting, and he came with his entourage and the national headquarters had a stroke because you didn't, at that time the NAACP and the Nation of Islam was not together, and so then they came and I endorse--as Maureen, the person, the individual--the Million Man March. And, but they didn't see Maureen the individual, they saw Maureen the Vice President of NAACP. And so I was doing a whole lot in the south suburbs at that time. The mayor, who's the mayor now of Harvey [Illinois], Eric Kellogg was an alderman and I marched with him, with a hundred black men of Harvey. I was the only woman marching with them and just brought the whole south suburban together. Then it turned, as I the more I worked with the NAACP I wasn't getting enough done to wake up the people, so then I went down and met with Mr. Conan [ph.] from Rainbow PUSH and told him I would like to start a chapter of Rainbow PUSH because there's a need because more people from the city are moving to the south suburbs. And he said, "It'll take you about six months, you have to do X-Y-Z." So, I had this chapter together in two weeks. Turned in 150 memberships, I had a fifteen member board and so, we had about 5500 members in the south suburbs under my leadership. And I just recently resigned as of March 1st of 2004. Speaker 1: Fifty-five hundred, that's pretty good for the suburbs (unclear) especially. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 127035 Speaker 1: What was your technique for organizing people and getting them to join? Would you-- Speaker 2: Holding forums, I Holding forums, I would hold forums, I would go to school expulsions, still worked with the national headquarters. I'm a deputy registrar for the state, city, around the world; I can register you wherever I am. So, that was the biggest thing, going out to make myself available. In fact, I became the voice of the voiceless people who were afraid to speak--I became that person for them. When school expulsions would hit and I would read about it, then I would contact that parent to find out what's going on. And the biggest part came when we had the Decatur Seven situation. Now, after we helped the Decatur Seven young men-- Speaker 1: Now that's--let's explain what that it is, 'cause someone watching this in the future won't know what that is. Speaker 2: Okay, the Decatur Seven is where these seven young men from Decatur, Illinois were at a football game and words were passed back and forth, and it's like a so many second fight broke out. And when the fight broke out--now this is after school time, but it was still a school game, they immediately decided to use these young men as a tool to let them know we are not going to deal with zero tolerance 'cause now zero tolerance is coming into play; and they wanted to expel these young men for two years, just expel them out the system period. And so this is when we had heard of it. Keith Anderson who had just formed the Decatur chapter of Rainbow PUSH, we had been in contact with each other. He called me, he told me, "This is what has happened. What should I do?" I said, "The first thing you have to do," because there are rules, "you have to contact the attorney from Rainbow PUSH, from the national office, let them know what is happening; and then you follow from there." And so, and so from there, this escalated to the Decatur Seven. We had to go in and fight for them. Speaker 1: So, you were the first person, that they, they called you first, I mean from? Speaker 2: Right, 'cause I'd been in contact with Keith Anderson 'cause he had just started up a chapter, and my chapter had already been started. In fact, my chapter was probably one of the most outgoing chapters. I've had like dinner dances, guest speakers; and you know, we took money out of our own pocket to get stuff started. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So Keith Anderson and I talked first about the Decatur Seven. Story_ID: 127036 Speaker 1: We were talking about Decatur, and what happened in Decatur, [Illinois] so let's pick that story up. Speaker 2: Right. The "Decatur Seven," the situation: Keith Anderson was the president of the Decatur chapter of Rainbow/PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], he was in the forming process of forming his chapter, and this situation with the "Decatur Seven" boys, came out with the incident, so they were used as a target and an example of what happens if you disobey the rules. So, they were targeted to be expelled, and so it was advised, I advised Keith Anderson to contact the national headquarters [of Rainbow/PUSH] 'cause they do have an attorney there, you can't, as a chapter, just do things on your own, you had to get permission, and work, we're working as a whole unit. And so when he contacted, it was like, put on the side for a moment then we finally were allowed and [HM] Reverend [Jesse Jackson] really went to work on the "Decatur Seven." Speaker 1: Reverend Jackson? Speaker 2: Reverend Jackson. And in fact, he went to jail, Reverend Jackson, Mark Allen, and we would take busloads of people to rally there. Now mind you, these, these guys were not perfect students, they were perfect people, but who's perfect, you know, and so they, we went out there and a couple of them are now graduating from college. Speaker 1: Well the issue was that? Speaker 2: The issue was right and wrong, black and white, if they had been white students with this behavior, which had happened before they would have just been hit on the wrist and let go. But here you have a group of black students with this incident: seven minutes, no one was hurt; there were no guns; there were no bats; there were no weapons used. But yet still thee were targeted and being expelled for the rest of the school year, from school, so now their lives were on hold. So this is the issue when we had to go in and fight, then the issue of zero-tolerance, even got stronger because the "Decatur Seven." What is zero-tolerance? What are you going to take for zero-tolerance? Name calling zero-tolerance? Giving someone a cough drop zero-tolerance? I mean so if you look at it different school districts now they have a whole list of things that are zero-tolerance. So then the phone calls start comin' in to Rainbow/PUSH, that my child was expelled for two years because he wore a fireman suit to school and it had a plastic axe on it. So now the school systems are getting ridiculous; they are not taking into consideration what zero-tolerance really is. So I started doing, going to some of the zero-tolerance in the south suburban area. We had seventh grade sisters that brought a machete to school in their book bag. It was a collector's item from their parent, and which still wrong, but they were expelled for two years. And so when my board members and I attended the expulsion hearing my question was to bring in their pastor for counseling. And so, that's how I started working with zero-tolerance and the churches, involving the pastors of the different churches to be the counselors of the children who were getting zero to--. We won a lot of cases in the south suburban area because once a kid in the south suburban area is expelled, the parents have to find other alternatives for them to go school, you know. It's up to the superintendent to say, "Okay, the board will pay for them to go an alternative school." If the superintendent doesn't okay it, then the parents are out of pocket for trying to place their kids in school. What do you do with a seventh grader that's been expelled for two years? I mean, how do we help them? They either become trouble makers; they become pregnant; they become a nuisance to society. So why would you want to expel them for two years. So, this is somethin' we really have to look at, and as the fall, as we approach a new school system, we have to look at what is zero-tolerance. More training on zero-tolerance needs to be done with the teacher. Need more staff development, you know. If I call you out of your name and you expel me for what reason? I could understand drugs. I could understand a weapon, you know. But the first year, the first day of school explain zero-tolerance, take that whole day and just go through the rules of the school to the students. So that that's the biggest thing, but "Decatur Seven" was the kick off of zero-tolerance. And then when kids started getting in trouble the first thing they would do their parents would call "Can you help my son? Can you help my daughter?" You know, because you did this in, this is not something we do, we don't go out looking for trouble, you know, but it's a civil rights organization, for injustice to justify the people who have been done wrong. Story_ID: 127037 Speaker 1: Okay so, you think that the zero-tolerance is often used to, to, like, it's targeted towards black students? Speaker 2: Black and black and black and brown race, the black and Hispanic that's who it's targeted by, you know. It's targeted for, we don't want too many black brothers to excel, we don't want too many to Hispanics to excel. And now what's happened is the Spanish population is just thriving, you know. It's at the point now that we can find a way to, the racial profiling, we got 'em, black while driving, we'll get them, if they got a big afro, we'll get the Mexican Americans if they got a big old hat on. So we're still dealing with racism in the year 2004. Racism and sexism--so this something that we have to educate our people on, all people have to be educated on racism and to show the strength of unity and the diversity. We're like the toss salad, you know, each one of our cultures bring something different to the bowl. And once we embrace them, the world will be better, you know, but it takes a whole lot of training. We get the kids here and we use kids as consumers, we tell 'em them this is what works, hoping that the kids will take it home and teach it to their parents. You know, because the racism is all embedded in some old ideas, from old parents and grandparents, so we gotta, we gotta to stop this stuff, this stuff has to stop somewhere. Speaker 1: Now, are, is the nature of a, of a Rainbow, Rainbow/PUSH and just reactionary or is it I mean, do you just re, re, react to issues that people bring, or do you have proactive things that you--? Speaker 2: It's proactive. It's not reactionary 'cause you can't react on stuff, 'cause you have to have everything. It's a very good organization, I mean, it elevates and educates the whole community. It's an organization that reaches out, not just to the black community, but to all communities, it's a rainbow, it's a--. And that's what the rainbow means: it's for all races to come together under one umbrella to build stronger bridges. And, but, we're more proactive, not reactive, but yet in still you have some people who try to label you know, (unclear) this, "You all just do this you don't even know the story." Well, we do we know the story because you have become now a mindset of readers, you have to read everything. I'm up all night reading, at one point I was reading eight newspapers a day, until I woke up and found out I could look them up online. So, you know, 'cause I read and each newspaper has different information, same information, but worded differently. So you have to be aware. I don't wait to be invited to stuff if I read it in the newspaper that a congressman or an elected official is gonna be somewhere, I make a point to be there, 'cause I'm media, I can go and participate. So, I've always tried to be there to get an understanding of what's goin' on. Speaker 1: Okay--(unclear) Speaker 2: But we sit back, we sit back, and wait, "well he's gonna find out for me, he's gonna tell me," you know and you can't do that, if you're interested in what's goin' on you got to be part of the, of the solution. Story_ID: 127038 Speaker 1: So, you all [Operation PUSH (People United to Serve Humanity)] hold forums you said and do voter registration. What other kinds of things do you do? Speaker 2: Um-hum, we hold forums, hold voter registration, one thing that I would do is try to contact different churches for judges, judges is one part of the elective process that people tend to overlook. We go in and we vote for the president, we vote for the senator and then that's it, we need to still educate the people to turn to the back of the ballot and vote for the judges. Don't just vote yes, to retain all the judges, you have to educate the people on who the judges are 'cause we go and stand in front of these judges, judges hold our lives in their hands. It's not the jury, it's the judges, they make, the judge makes the last decision. So, we have to go into the churches and, and ask 'em about can we have a law day, and then invite the judges in. You know, they too have to be elected by the people, so the people need to be aware of who the judges are. They are very important, one thing about the elected officials, they are important, but the most important person is me the voter 'cause I have something that the elected official wants, and needs and that's my vote. So I'm the one that's the most important person, and now I've givin' you my vote for you to go and make some changes. But, have your door open so we can freely talk, and, and I think forums and meetings of this site, type that we have for our, for our chapter, was very instrumental for the people. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now do you have a, is there a regular interaction with [HM] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson, the, the CEO, I guess, of Rainbow/PUSH? Speaker 2: He's, he's very, very approachable, you know, I can go in and talk with him and he's not a stranger, he's a very personable person. And I guess because with being a chapter president I have to have a conversation and communication with him. For three and a half years I produced his talk show that was on 1570 [AM]. And so, my responsibly with that was to get into the studio, make sure the commercials were right, contact him, wherever he was you know, sometimes times he wouldn't be in the studio, he may be out the country, so he would call in, make sure the lines were clear, so that was three and half years of producing his show. Sometimes he wasn't be able to do the show at all, so then I would do the show, and I would just highlight on what he had talked about, what he's doin', and what's goin' on in the area. Story_ID: 127039 Speaker 1: Okay, we were discussing off camera, your involvement in the, or the Rainbow/PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] Coalition's involvement, with the Justice Coalition in Greater Chicago [Illinois], and the issue of police brutality, can you, can you, want to talk, talk about that? Speaker 2: Well the Justice Coalition--I worked with the [National] Coalition to End [sic, Abolish] the Death Penalty. There was a young man that I had met that helped me with an election in 1993 that I became very close friends with. And after convincing him to tell his story of how he was brutalized by a former police chief, he came, he had been working at the University of Illinois as a parking lot attendant, that's what he used to do, and so he finally came down. He has family and children, but the parking lot attendant was not enough money, so this is what he wanted to do. He finally told his story, got involved with the [National] Coalition to End [sic, Abolish] the Death Penalty and [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson Rainbow/PUSH was very instrumental in helping him to secure a job with the Justice Coalition. And with the [National] Coalition to End [sic, Abolish] the Death Penalty, with my radio show, I'm able to with, the assistance of Alice Kim, the chair-person of the Coalition, to go into the prison and talk to the inmates. I've talk with Madison Hobley, he's one of the "Death Row Ten;" Marvin Reeves, who's one of the "Death Row Ten;" his co-defended is Ronald Kitchen and I was able to do for Fathers Day's. Speaker 1: Who are the "Death Row Ten"? Speaker 2: The "Death Row Ten" are the ten men who were released from the death row. You have Aaron Patterson, Marvin Reeves, Ronnie Kitchen, Madison Hobley (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (unclear) was they the ones that were, that were released under a couple of years ago (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Under Ryan (simultaneous). Speaker 1: When George Ryan, was the Governor Ryan was the governor of Illinois, and just before he, his term was up, he, well he took them off the death row, he didn't release them from prison (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous), (unclear), just took em off the death row. Right, he didn't release them no, they just took 'em off death row. And so, they still have a story to tell, they're still trying to prove that they are innocent of the crimes, and just trying to get the word out to the people to hear their story. And so I've talk with, I've spoken with by remote from Stateville [Correctional Center in Illinois], with Marvin Reeves on Father's Day and the call was not interrupted. He spoke for half an hour and my, one of the questions that I asked him was are you more afraid of the inmates or are you more afraid of the prison guards? He said that he was more afraid of the prison guards, and he talked about how he had been, how his testicles had been burned, how he had been beating with a telephone book, and so these are some of the (simultaneous) torture. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) now is this prior to going to prison or after? Speaker 2: This is prior to going to prison, this is prior to-- Speaker 1: This is during the interrogation? Speaker 2: Ex, exactly, exactly and so there and, and the other young man that I met, who was working for the justice coalition now, he was also tortured you know. So, these are stories that have to be heard and have to be told, you know, and so they're still doing this here. So, that's why I was very, it was very instrumental for me to have this interview because we say okay these men are locked up in prison, but they're still fathers, they're still brothers, they're still spouses, so Father's Day my title for my show was "The Cries of Men in Prison." And Mother's Day, I went into a women's correctional center, because a woman went in for a drug charge, she was not pregnant, but she finally became pregnant while in prison. And when she had the baby they had handcuffed her and strapped her to the bed, so she had no movement, so her mom had contacted me and we did the interview from this woman's correctional center. Speaker 1: How did she get pregnant in prison, I mean (unclear)? Speaker 2: Oh, well some, some guard probably had to impregnate her, and that was the story, you know. So it has not been proven as of yet, but she did have the baby and that's still Mother's Day. Yeah. (Simultaneous) there's a lot. Speaker 1: (unclear) Yeah, some, somebody did something there. Speaker 2: Yeah, of course, of course. Story_ID: 127040 Speaker 1: Well what, what other activities that, that you, you have a radio show now right? Speaker 2: I have a radio show, it's "'N the Know with Moe", on WCFJ 1470 AM, and it targets the south suburban area from 51st Street South, to south suburbs to Indiana and some very small parts of Michigan. And it's a talk show and basically I've had on there, Art Chat Daddy Sims from "Brothers on the Down Low", was a hot issue. We talked about J. L. King, 'cause he was a guest scheduled and what does that means brothers down, brothers on the down low, so I've had him on. I've had Jerry Butler on, to do the illuminati [ph.], which is an event, dealing with reading and how he volunteers his time at one of the public school on being a mentor. Also, I've had Reverend Al Sampson on, Reverend Al Sampson's is one the men that was ordained by [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.], so he has been on. And so I've had this type of guest, so when people call in what can we talk about. I've had VITAS on, VITAS is a program dealing with hospices care, you know as your loved ones are preparing to leave, I've had them on. In fact, my mom, who just recently passed, she was in VITAS, and, and just amazing that we are not familiar with VITAS and hospices care because they make the whole transition very smooth for the whole family. So, I've had them on, we've talked about Lupus, which is a, a disease that really affects the large African American women and how it takes on the form of other systematic symptoms, but it tears down your immune system, you know. So this is what I have on, then I have co-hosts like Lorenzo Martin from the South Suburban Standard Newspaper and David Johnson, the former Mayor of Harvey. Yeah, and we talk about issues that affect the community and what can we do to change the community and just bring them information. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sometimes the topics are hot though, you know, sometimes I have to drop a lot of callers. Story_ID: 127041 Speaker 1: What do you think is the most important issue for Operation PUSH [People United to Save Humanity] out in the south suburbs? Speaker 2: I think the most important issue right now is getting people to register to vote. What I have found in my research from the south suburban area you have a lot of people coming in from the city, moving to the south suburbs, but they work for the City of Chicago [Illinois]. So they're registered to vote in Chicago, where if they're moving into the south suburbs, we need them to register to vote and vote in the south suburbs, and so that's the biggest issue. But again people are living in the south suburbs because of the quietness, because of the availability of the, of the land, the housing, but they're still afraid to inform their jobs that they live in the south suburbs. If you work for the Chicago Police Department you have to live in Chicago. If you're a fireman you have to live in Chicago. And now if you are a Chicago teacher for Chicago Public Schools, you have to live in Chicago. So the biggest thing is that we have a lot of people in the south suburbs, our voting records do not reflect the people that live there because we have so many people whose jobs are still tied to Chicago. What do you do with that? Speaker 1: So they just don't vote? Speaker 2: They vote but they vote in Chicago. You know, I may need, say for instance if I'm running for mayor, and you're my next door neighbor, I need you to vote for me, but you can't vote for me because you're a Chicago fireman, livin' in the south suburbs illegally. Speaker 1: Okay, (simultaneous). Speaker 2: See what I'm saying. Speaker 1: So the things that really affect where they live they can't vote on? Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: They don't have any say in it. Speaker 2: They don't have no say, and so we need to wake them up, I mean you just don't move into the south suburbs and say, "Oh, I've arrived!" All you've done is changed your residency; that's all you've done. Because you still have issues, if things are not going right in your community you have no say so 'cause you are not registered to vote. You can go and raise all kind of saying at the council meeting, but when you look at that voting record, you haven't voted, you're not registered to vote, why? You know, I've come across a lot of that in south suburban area. I teach school in Chicago, but I just, one of the people that was lucky enough to be able to live where I can live 'cause I'm grandfathered in, you know but. I make a point to be involved in Chicago politics and I make a point to be involved in the suburban politics. Speaker 1: Okay, there's another issue that was raised, [HistoryMaker] Dempsey Travis back in 1980, predicted that a lot of the, the what we call the low end Chicago, in the low numbers streets, you know, down in the old, what we call now the Bronzeville neighborhood, the old Black Belt neighborhood, that that, which includes the very land that we're sitting on right now doing this interview, all this area is being gentrified. And it's, it's, as it's gentrified, he predicted, that when asked, where people would go. He said, "They'll go to wherever they can." He said, "But the suburbs, south suburbs, Harvey, Dismore, Robbins, you know, all those, those south suburban communities, Homewood, they would all absorb a lot of the poorest people in Chicago." And when asked what they would do out there, he said, "It will be like Sawaydo [ph.]: you catch a bus to the city to work and then you catch that bus and get outta here before sundown or after work is over." Is that, do you see that happening? Speaker 2: I see that happening and, in fact, that is happening. Since I was driving in today, I noticed down on the low end as you say, where there used to be the projects, that they have torn down, now there building these $120,000 reasonable homes, reasonable for whom? Who is that a reasonable cost for? Right there in the same area where the projects were torn down. The people in this city, they are leaving from Chicago, they're comin', they're migrating to Harvey, and to Robbins, and to Markham and they're comin' all through the south suburban area, because they have to have a place to live. And so with them coming through the south suburbs area, not only are we looking for affordable housing, now we're looking at people who own homes that want to rent their homes 'cause now they want to move further south, but they're running from their own people. So, they're moving further south renting their homes, and we're comin' up now with the Section 8 housing. And Section 8 houses say, "If I want to rent my house and go into Section 8, I have a right to do this as long as it passed the codes." So, we did a forum on coming to, "Coming to a Neighborhood Near You." We have found that there were so many Section 8 houses in Country Club Hills, and in Homewood. We had young lady who came in and said that she lives in Homewood, Illinois, she's on Section 8, she has five bedrooms, and she lives in a very nice neighborhood in Homewood, but it's up to the homeowner if he wants to go Section 8. Just because you're Section 8, doesn't mean that you're a bad person, you know. And so, that's a feeding of the mind, that we have to correct in people, Section 8 doesn't mean that you are the dirt of earth, you know. Section 8 means that it's just affordable housing, and it's up to the homeowner to make sure the person whose renting these homes, understand what needs to be done and the upkeep. And so, they're coming and we moving further, further south, pretty soon we'll be down south, back on the plantations, 'cause we're running, running from each other. And what's happening as blacks movin' in the south, the whites are moving back to the City of Chicago, that's what's happening, it's a figure eight. We're going south and the whites are coming back to the City of Chicago. Story_ID: 127042 Speaker 1: Does [Operation] PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] having plan for how to deal with that, or any ideas about how to deal with that? Speaker 2: I don't know what plans PUSH has for that. Speaker 1: Okay. But, but, you say the main, the main problem is registering people to vote, cause they won't-- Speaker 2: Registering, we register people to vote, but getting out to vote, is the issue, and that's not just for the south suburbs, it's nationwide. Getting people to vote, you can register a thousand people a day, but if they don't get out and exercise that right to vote, then what? What do you do to enhance (unclear). We have tried limousine rides to the poll place; if you need a ride, we'll pick you up in a limousine. We have, have car polled to pick you up, but we can register and stand up and say Oh we've registered a million people but yet in still our records show that a million have not voted. This election year of 2004 is very instrumental and very important that all people get out and vote, you know. Other than that we are losing families, every day a family member is lost, several family members are lost. It's very instrumental that people get up and get out and vote. Exercise that right, that's a right we have fought for and died for, for the right to vote. And we're not exercising it. Story_ID: 127043 Speaker 1: Now in terms of politics the south suburbs, the city has some wild things goin' on from time-to-time, but it seems like the suburbs has some real wild political activity, with the Shaw brothers running another man by the name of [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson against the second district congressman Jesse Jackson Jr., the same name, and they go to court and fight about the name, and who can use it and who can't. The old congressman, Mel Reynold's and all the charges against him for all kinds of (unclear). Speaker 2: Well, right to vote and running for office, I ran for office in 1993. I, in fact I ran for two office, I ran against Harold Murphy for state rep. [representative], when I lived in Bremen township, ran against Harold Murphy twice, the first time I got kick off the ballot, the second time I stepped down because I had received the nomination for Golden Apple, for teaching. Well, it turns out the second time when I stepped down, "Maureen Forte to step down from running for state rep." the next day, or the next Sunday, it came in the paper "M. Forte to run for independent." Someone had from a person with my first initial and last name to run as an independent for the seat. All the headlines said "M. Forte runs as an independent." Now this caused a whole lot of confusion, because now this person, I don't know, which politician had this person up the run, but it had all my background but it was a male. And so I finally met the person, and I told him you can't do this, and I mean we were actually going to blows about this, my credentials as in his article, but it was not my name, it was a M. Forte run. So people do a lot of dirt, it's a lot of dirt always done. In 1993, I ran against Frank Zuccarelli for the college seat, of South Suburban College, I spend $45 of worth of Sam's Xerox paper, made my literature, and walked door to door talking to people. Frank Zuccarelli I believe spent $15,000 on my campaign, I wasn't able to speak to anybody, you know, when we go to the dinners, I had made friends with the Thornton, with the Bremen township supervisor. We were at a big Democratic dinner, he said you get up there and speak, and I spoke. Frank Zuccarelli beat me by nine votes. I got 8800 votes. He beat me by nine and I spent $45. So, it's not so much the money being spent, it's the communication and the relationship you have with people. We're very good friends now you know. People had to realize in any race, somebody has to win and somebody has to lose, so you still have to respect each other. Story_ID: 127044 Speaker 1: Okay, is there, is there anything else you're working on in the south suburbs [of Chicago, Illinois] you want to tell us about? Speaker 2: Right now, I'm just working on bringing, getting more involved in the community. I recently resigned from Rainbow/PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] after seven years, as the president, and I'm still an active member. I'm still, you know, refer people and attend the regular meetings so I'm still involved in that. But as far, having the president's seat, you know, having that big responsibly, I'm not involved in that capacity. The conference, this past conference in June, I worked as the media for the conference, you know, contacting all the press, getting the press involved with the different guests that we had there, covering the conference, but basically what I'm doing now is just working with my community in East Hazel Crest. I'm trying to decide whether or not to run for trustee of East Hazel Crest. East Hazel Crest has about 1600 people. It's a village; we have our own mayor, fire department, police department and as I attend the council meeting, we have maybe about 350 black families in East Hazel Crest. So, my purpose for running for trustee would be to bring out the diversity, to have the diversity represented, for the community. And they're trustees at large, they're not assigned to a certain block, they're just trustees at large. And so that every year that seems to be, every election year, there seems to be a big to do in this small village--everyone's fighting for the seat, but I don't want to run for office if I have to fight for it. I want people to understand there's need for it. I used to be the Library Board president of East Hazel Crest. East Hazel Crest doesn't have a library, so we were paying like $45,000 a year, to Homewood Library in Homewood, Illinois, for the use of their library. So, I resigned from that seat because I could get more involved in Rainbow/PUSH. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so the other thing is, that you know, I still very active like in Chicago. I'm looking forward to the school year. We have a new president for the Chicago Teachers Union 'cause I sit on that legislative board for Chicago Teacher's Union, as a past president of AFT, American Federation of Teachers, IFT [Illinois Federation of Teachers] delegate rather, and Chicago Teachers Union delegate, so welcoming in now a new president, Marilyn Stewart. So, we're just hoping to see how the new year is going to pan out under new leadership. Speaker 1: Okay. Do, do you think are you, do you think that you might run for office again at some point? Speaker 2: Right now the only office I'm con--thinking about running for is just the trustee. The large offices as senator, congressman, no that's, that's really not an issue of mine; it's not an interest of right now. At one time it was, but now as I see how everything is goin' on and some of the dealings and stuff (unclear) no, I just want to stay within the community. Story_ID: 127045 Speaker 1: Okay, now we always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community? It may sound redundant in this case because of what you've done but, but a what are some of your hopes and concerns? Speaker 2: Some of my hopes for the African American community is to become more unified to come together more. We are, we have a lot of jealousies for each other, you know, so we need more unification because in unity there's strength. That's a old union saying, but we need to unify, we need to come closer together. We need to work closer with our churches. I belong to Trinity United Church of Christ, Dr. Jeremiah Wright Jr., and it's a church where, it's family-orientated, I mean the church it's open seven days a week, so hopefully if I can get our people, our race of people to work closely together, to unite, to be mentors, to reach out to each other. The question, "Am I my brother's keeper?" Yes, you are, I am my brother's keeper. You know we need more unification. Story_ID: 127046 Speaker 1: Okay. When you look back at the things that you've done up to this time, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: No, I'm really happy with the things that I've done, you know. I tried to think, think back what would I have done differently. Everything I've done, from birth to getting married, to getting divorced, raising children, only thing I, I just, I probably wish maybe the marriage had lasted so my kids could have experienced a family unit like I experienced. I was lucky enough to grow up in a family with mother and father, way up to, as they celebrated their 54th anniversary. That's probably the only thing I wish I had had for my children, so they could have experienced a whole family unit. But I was just blessed enough to have the support of my siblings: my brother and my sisters to help me with the raising of my children 'cause as of today I've been divorced twenty-five years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Wow! Speaker 1: You want to tell us about your children? Speaker 2: My children: I have a two girls, Monee Sherri Forte-Williams [ph.], she's married for five years, and she's a new mother, so I have a grandson, Courtland Jr. We call him C. J. She's in school; she had taken a year out of school because to have the baby, so she's in school for business. She has her own home, nice little family. My youngest daughter, Melissa Marie Forte, she's a graduate of University of Georgia, in Athens, Georgia, and that's where she resides now. And she's majored in health education and she did an internship with the HIV organization. So, I'm very proud of them. They're smart girls, smart girls, smart young women, and, sure, life has not been easy raising children, especially girls, especially being single parent. So, but I'm not gonna say we've had no problems. We've had problems, we've had our ups and downs, and our fist fights and arguments like everybody else would have, but yet and still, I still love them. We love each other; they're a piece of work (laughter). Story_ID: 127047 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back at your life, what would you consider to be your legacy at this point? And I know you're still young, but? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think if I was to leave today, my legacy that she had a dream, she didn't sit back and wait for, she had a dream that she worked for. Okay, because I put the "s" in struggle, I put the "s" in success, if there's a struggle out there, I'm there. Success only comes if you work for it. So, her legacy, my legacy, it would be her story, not history, but her story about how she made a difference in a lot of people's lives from the young to the old. And from black, white and wrong or right, so the legacy would be from success to struggle, or struggle to success. Story_ID: 127048 Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is similar to legacy but a little different, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think I would like to be remembered by the song "God Bless the Child who's got his Own" [sic, "God Bless the Child" by Billie Holiday]. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 127049 Speaker 1: Okay, that's me, Maureen, when I was three years old, 1953. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: That's me when I was six months old in 1950. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: This is a picture, this is a picture of my sister Mary, and my brother-in-law, brother Lenard Thompson and we were at my fourth annual dinner dance. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture of [HM] Mr. [Danny] Glover, we were at the N, I was the Vice President of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] of south suburban chapter. I invited him to be the guest speaker. Speaker 2: Danny Glover? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: Danny Glover. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my nieces and nephews from Chicago. These are my, my sister's children and my brother's children, nieces and nephews. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: It's a picture of the former CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of the Board of Education, Paul Vallas and I, we were at a [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s breakfast, having a conversation someone snapped a picture. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Year? Speaker 1: Year 2000. Speaker 2: This is a picture of a AFT convention [American Federation of Teachers] convention, the year 2001, and pictured with me is an unknown lady, but in the middle is president, past president, Debra Lynch, of the Chicago Teachers Union. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in Decatur, Illinois as we were marching on the Decatur school system with the "Decatur Seven" about couple of years ago 2000, 2001. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Mrs.--what's the lady's name?--Emmett Till's mother, Mamie Till, I had picked her up for a meeting at Rainbow/PUSH and we went to lunch afterwards, we had just returned from Alabama where a young man was hung. So, that's Mamie Till. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Year? Speaker 2: That was 2000. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my students from Sawyer Elementary School, it was during Christmas time, it was a Christmas party, and that was 2001. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of me and my hip hop artist, Brian Stinson [ph.] of the Flying Bee [ph.] Show, we were at my radio studio "'N the know with Moe" at WCFJ and that's 2004. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: This another Christmas picture of another class of students this is 2002, and at Sawyer Elementary School, fifth graders. Feliz Navidad. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is a picture of Delores Jordan, Michael Jordan's mother. We were at Women for Gore, (unclear) the Gore's campaign. I can't recall the year. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is my grandson, Mr. C. J., and it was 2003, his first Christmas. Speaker 2: And Nemo (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is me at WBEE, 1570 at the time, doing a show for [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Jesse] Jackson. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Year? Speaker 2: Two thousand and three [2003]. Speaker 1: That's a 2002 picture of me in the House of Lynwood [ph.], I had a dinner reception. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my two daughters, Monee is the one in the bridal gown, and Melissa on Monee's wedding day and it was 1999, August. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my family: my sister Mary, and myself, my mother Georgia, Amelia, my brother Willis and my sister Anita and it was in 1997. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, go ahead. Speaker 2: This is [HM] Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr. and myself at my South Suburban Chapter Rainbow/PUSH, fifth dinner dance, which was March of 2003. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Description. Speaker 2: June of 1968. Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois], graduation picture. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: This is a picture of when I was in college, in a play, from Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois] '[A] Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansbury], were I played the daughter, Baneatha, which was in 1970. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: This is 2001 I'm pictured with [HistoryMaker] Reverend Al Sharpton we were at, we were in Selma, Alabama, we were going across the Edmund Pettus Bridge. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is 1971 in Seoul, Korea. I'm pictured with a colleague, Althea [ph.] as we traveled the South Pacific for the USO [United Service Organization] show. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is Art Chat Daddy Sims as of Chat Daddy's and it was 2004, he was my guest on my talk show "'N the know with Moe". Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is 1996, 1995, we were in [HistoryMaker] Senator Emil Jones's office in Springfield [Illinois]. At that time I was the vice president of the NAACP, and pictured with me is some ladies who were also in the office along with Reverend Jackson. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is 2001. I'm pictured at PUSH Push, with the president of Decatur chapter Keith Anderson, Lerone Bennett and myself. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is 2002. I'm pictured here with some of my board members we were at a meeting with Judge Mathis [HistoryMaker Gregory Mathis], is Bertha Chester, Judge Mathis, myself, Leon Norwood and James Thomas Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Year? Speaker 2: Two thousand two [2002]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: This is 2004, starting the year off with a cup of hot coffee (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is 19, 1996 I believe with the Astronaut Mae Jamison and we were at a reception, which was held here for her. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And the other person is? Speaker 2: Unknown person. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Description. Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy one [1971], out of 1,500 people who audition for the USO [United Service Organizations], this is a picture of the fifteen who were selected to tour the South Pacific, the Drama Guild of Kennedy-King College. Speaker 1: Where are you? Speaker 2: I'm at the top all the way over, over right there, that's me right there. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: This is 1993. I'm vice president of the NAACP of the south suburban chapter, at that time the president of the national headquarters was Ben Chavis [HistoryMaker Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr.]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next. Go ahead. Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety four [1994], at Rainbow/PUSH, with Rosemary Akins [ph.] Johnnie Cochran, and we're at the Rainbow/PUSH organization. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: This is Christmas of 1997, I'm pictured with Keith Anderson president of the Decatur chapter, Don King. Don King had just given us 5,500 turkeys for Christmas. (simultaneous) (unclear) laughter. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Two thousand one [2001]. I'm in Selma Alabama for the march on the Edmund Pettus Bridge, and pictured is [HM] Al Sharpton, Jacqueline Jackson and myself, and Reverend--not Reverend--Martin Luther King, III...