 Story_ID: 521491 Speaker 1: I want to have you start out by stating and spelling your name. Speaker 2: Okay, [HistoryMaker] Thelma Golden, T-H-E-L-M-A, G-O-L-D-E-N. Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth? Speaker 2: September 22nd, 1965. Speaker 1: And place of birth? Speaker 2: Queens, New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. And your loca- I mean your, the location we're at today. Speaker 2: Harlem, New York City. Speaker 1: At the Studio Museum. Speaker 2: Oh, right, the Studio Museum in Harlem, in Harlem, New York City. Speaker 1: And your occupation. Speaker 2: Museum director. Story_ID: 521492 Speaker 1: We ask five People magazine-ish questions (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, good, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: Just short answers--I may add to yours, but I wanna know what your favorite color is. Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Favorite food. Speaker 2: Mangoes. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation. Speaker 2: Anywhere on the continent of Africa. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year. Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite place to, favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: Fantastic. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite artist? Speaker 2: I don't (laughter). Speaker 1: Safe. That's a safe answer. Story_ID: 521493 Speaker 1: I want to start out by asking you about your father. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And if you could give his name, and what you know about his growing up, and his background. Speaker 2: Um-hm, right. My father's name was Arthur Ivanhoe Golden [Arthur Golden, Sr.]. He was born on January 14th, 1926 here in New York City [New York, New York] in Harlem. He grew up on 135th Street, and his mother's name was Anna Golden [Anna Campbell Golden]. She came to New York City from Jamaica at the beginning of the 20th century in about 1910, and met my paternal grandfather, Zachariah Golden, here. When she came, her port of landing certificate listed her occupation as seamstress but, quickly upon coming here, she was able to have her mother come, my paternal great-grandmother, whose name was Miriam [Miriam Garvey], known as Mimi to all, and she, my Grandmother Anna, and Mimi worked primarily doing domestic labor in homes on the Upper West Side of Manhattan [New York] and up in the North Bronx, Riverdale [Bronx, New York] area. My father was my grandmother's first child; he was the oldest, 1926, and in 1930, my grandmother and grandfather had a daughter whose name, who they named Thelma [Thelma Golden], and she was born with what my grandmother, all through my childhood, told me was a weak heart. What I know now, as an adult in talking to cardiologists, is she probably was born with an enlarged heart and she passed away when she was six. Shortly after that, my grandfather passed away. So, my father grew up in a home here in Harlem with his mother, Anna, and his grandmother, Mimi, and they formed a triumvirate, and all through my growing up, what I understand about my father, is these two women who raised him. My father went to elementary school, middle school, and high school here in Harlem; he went to the same middle school as James Baldwin, which happened to also be the middle school here in Harlem where Countee Cullen had been a teacher and wrote the school song. He went to high school at Benjamin Franklin High School [Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics, New York, New York], which is still here in Harlem under another name. And then after high school, went to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], also here in Harlem. He then was drafted, and served in the reserves in World War II [WWII], and then shortly enlisted fully, and served in the Korean War, went to officers training school [Officer Candidate School] in Georgia, and then was deployed to Korea where he served in an infantry unit as an officer in the then, now newly integrated [U.S.] Army. When he came back to New York through the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], he was able to finish his college degree at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] where he studied business administration with a particular emphasis on insurance. He had aspirations to be a lawyer but saw the potential at that moment of what owning a small business might do, and he finished NYU and opened an insurance brokerage firm at the corner of 125th Street and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard], so literally about four doors from where we are right now. And this building that the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] is in was a bank, and was built as a bank in 1914, and at the time my father started his business, in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], was his bank, so he banked in this building. And he started his business here in Harlem and opened up a successful business insuring small businesses, restaurants, hair salons, daycare centers, churches, often non-profit groups, and the business was successful in a way that also made it so he got involved in this neighborhood in a very, in a civic manner. My father loved Harlem; he loved growing up here. I grew up with these incredible stories of this neighborhood. At a moment when this neighborhood felt like a whole universe to him in its incredible diversity, in the way in which it lived as the center of a kind of black life, an ideal. And, but in 1963 when my parents met, my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] was born and raised in Stuyvesant Heights in Brooklyn [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], and for anyone who's a New Yorker knows that that, sort of the relationship between Bed-Stuy, Brooklyn and Harlem is such that the compromise was that my parents move to southeast Queens [New York]. So, there was no, neither of them was willing to sort of concede and, and then my father moved his business to Queens. During that time, he also went to Brooklyn Law School [Brooklyn, New York] at night, and fini- received his law degree, and then with the law degree was able, in a fuller way, to expand his business, to be able to do sort of more full service work in terms of his ability to work with homeowners on not simply their home insurance, but in cases where they were refinancing. It also opened his business up to be able to work with city government, and begin to do some work around, particularly in southeast Queens where I grew up, the redevelopment efforts that were happening there where he could provide the insurance but also do other parts of the project. And so that was a great goal of his, and he went to law school at night, you know, finished that degree while he was sort of running his business working. My brother [Arthur Golden, Jr.] and I were young children at the time, but something, you know, that always deeply impressed me. Story_ID: 521494 Speaker 1: How would you describe your father [Arthur Golden, Sr.]? Speaker 2: Oh. You know, my father was, you know, a man that, once I got to college [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] and began to study the sort of great history of African Americans, I realized there's so much of my father's story that is an African American story, but also an immigrant story. So, you know, my father was raised poor, but as I hear so many people say, my father told me he did not know he was poor until he was an adult, right? That he grew up without want for things because he had an incredible amount of love in his home, right? These two amazing women [Golden's paternal great-grandmother and grandmother, Miriam Garvey and Anna Campbell Golden], a community that was supportive on every level. He had ideals within the community, so his ability, you know, to imagine himself as a businessman came from the fact that he walked up and down, as he said, Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard], and all through Harlem [New York, New York], seeing African Americans who owned businesses, you know, understanding the law and what the law meant came from being in this community that had a rich political life, but the accessibility to those politicians, right? The ability, again, to see them and to know who they were was important to him. So my father was someone who believed deeply in the ideal of hard work, he believed deeply in the ideal that education meant everything. He often says that everything about his outcome had to do with education, and he was very proud to be educated in the public schools of New York City [New York, New York], you know? Very proud to have gone to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] and would have graduated but again, interrupted, you know, by the war. But, you know, very proud that these systems, right? That were created to create equity and equality benefitted him, you know, the child of a woman, you know, who got on a boat and came here as a young woman without, you know, any sense of what this country would provide for her, but the sense that this is where she would make her life. And I was very lucky because when my parents married and moved to Queens [New York], my Grandmother Anna moved with us, and so she lived with me my whole childhood; she actually passed away the week I found out my college acceptance, so just a few months before I left home she was, you know, with me the whole, the whole time. And, you know, and even--again, I got this incredible sense of how she marveled, right? At the possibility, you know, of what this country provided for her through what she could see in me, right? As her grandchild. Even at that point as a seventeen year old going to college, to her, you know, that meant so much. So, my father believed in hard work. I worked for my father from the time I was about ten years old. His insurance office, as they were in that time before the Internet, to purchase your home insurance required sending in a check. You got a hard copy policy; it was created in triplicate, those copies had to be, one went to the company, one went to the client, one was filed with my father, so it was a very administrative business. And my own skills, even from a young age, were sort of completely and totally targeted towards that. So, at first, what felt like simply spending time in my father's office with him, at the point at which it became clear that my ability to alphabetize, for example, beyond just the first letter but, you know, not just A but AA, AB, AC--that my father put me to work. And so I spent many hours, weekend hours sometimes in the summer before I would go to camp, working in my father's office, and by the time I was thirteen or fourteen, after being there and listening to him as he would narrate to me sort of what things meant or, you know, sort of tell me what a problem was, or understand like how to do a deposit and, you know, all, all these things, I began to know how to do them and he began letting me answer the phone. And, but because he agreed that perhaps it was not the best thing for some of his clients, particularly sometimes 'cause they're calling in a moment of crisis. "Just had a car accident," you know, "what do I do?" That they shouldn't maybe know that this was his fourteen year old daughter; he allowed me to make up names, right? And say who I was. And quite often they were looking for his normal secretary, and I'd say, "Oh, she's away from the desk; this is So and So," right? And I'd just make up some name. But, I knew, even though I didn't know what it meant, I'd heard him say certain things so many times that, you know, if someone called and said they had an accident, I knew to say, "Did you get the information from the other car? Do you have their license and registration? Was there a policeman onsite? Do you have a police report?" I just knew what to say. And I would take down all the information, and I knew then that he would then do what you had to do next to get that person, you know, there to begin to file their claim. And so I loved that; I loved working for him, I loved that he gave me so much responsibility. We would laugh at, you know, certain clients that were very persnickety if they knew that that was me, you know, how much, they would probably be hysterical over that. But for him, he was also very proud of the fact that, you know, I kind of grew into this really good assistant very quickly. Story_ID: 521495 Speaker 1: Did he [Golden's father, Arthur Golden, Sr.] grow up in a Jamaican household or a Jamaican wanting to be American household? Speaker 2: Jamaican wanting to be American. And, you know, what's so interesting about that, and again, you know, what's so amazing, and that's why I love art, you know, and the reason I'm a curator is because I think art tells us so much about who we are, and the world around us, but more importantly about worlds that we have never experienced or encountered. And what's so amazing is that as I began to study more about the Caribbean, the immigrant experience, it told me so much that my father and my grandmother [Anna Campbell Golden] never told me. So, when my grandmother came, she never went back to Jamaica and never wanted to go back to Jamaica. Through my entire childhood, you know, I would say because, of course, the Jamaica I was thinking about was the Jamaica of images of Bob Marley, you know, and the beach. So I'd say to her, "How come you don't wanna go to Jamaica? It looks," you know, "so fantastic." But she said, "I came here and I am here," and that would be the end of that conversation. And my father never pushed it at all; like he never said to her, "Oh, we must go back." There wasn't the sort of great sense of that. My father thought of himself very much as an African American, and the history I grew up with was infused, of course, with the great figures from the Caribbean within that tradition, like Garvey [Marcus Garvey], you know, and others. But the history that my father gave me, the legacy he thought he was giving me was one of Harlem [New York, New York], right? And of the African American community here, but also at large. So I grew up in a house where my engagement with sort of Caribbean culture came more from my mother's [Thelma Eastmond Golden] side of the family, not my father's. Also, because my grand- great-grandmother [Miriam Garvey] passed away when I was probably, she passed away before I was born, right? So early '60s [1960s]; my mother's, my father's father [Zachariah Golden] had passed away when he was a young man, and his sister [Thelma Golden] passed away; really, my father and my grandmother did not have a huge extended family, none at all. People who we called cousins on my father's side actually were often friends from Jamaica who my grandmother would sponsor when she was here, and they'd come and stay and live with my father and my grandmother and my great-grandmother for a few months while they got on their feet, and then stay in touch. So I'd meet people in childhood and they would be referred to as a cousin, you know, or an uncle. But later I would find out like, oh, that was a family who through, you know, my grandmother's network, came and stayed with her. I also found she kept in touch with people from Jamaica. I found lots of postcards and letters, and I imagine they were going the other way. I found that my grandmother would go to the photo studios here in Harlem and, as was the case in that day. We have some of these photos in our collection here at the museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], and to get pictures taken, but then they could be printed as a postcard that you could then send to people, and my grandmother had those taken, you know, all the time, and I would see sometimes some of them, I found in her things, that she would have been sending back to Jamaica to people who she still knew and corresponded with and, you know, I found letters and cards that she'd exchange, you know, with people in Jamaica. Story_ID: 521496 Speaker 1: Now, your father [Arthur Golden, Sr.], you sa- he was born in 1923 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Six [1926], '26 [1926]. Speaker 1: Twenty-six [1926], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. '26 [1926]. Speaker 1: So he was an older parent. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: He was forty when I was born; my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] was thirty-six. And my father often said that he didn't imagine, perhaps maybe he wouldn't be a father, and being an older, and for that moment, like very old father, right? In the '60s [1960s], when I was born in '65 [1965]. It's what made my father unable, in some ways, to parent me as a child, and I think that was to my great benefit. So that while spending all that time in the office with him, so while on the one hand, you know, we were doing work, my father sort of kept, you know, the sort of talk radio station; at that time, the African American one was WLIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York] that would be playing in the background. Often, they would be talking about things that now we would say, "Not appropriate for children." My father never made a distinction about things like that; he would just, you know, explain to me what it was, and talk about it. My father also was an avid reader, avid newspaper reader; I mean he read, at that time in New York City [New York, New York] we had, of course, The New York Times and the Daily News [New York Daily News], but also in Long Island [New York] there was a, the Long Island Press and Newsday, and my father got all of them home delivered, read them all, and would often talk about things in the newspaper with me. And part of that, I think, had to do with the fact that he was forty years old; by the time I was ten, he was fifty years old, and he just did not have, you know, a good sense. Now, it drove my mother crazy because once in a while she'd walk in on something, you know. I can remember when the trials were going on about the Attica uprising, and my father was watching it and I was watching it, too, and they were showing, again, those horrific images, you know, and I'm--she was right. I mean they were horrific images. But, I was deeply engrossed, and my father was explaining to me, you know, what that was, and I think now when we start talking about things like prison reform and mass incarceration, my father was explaining that to me, you know, as a child, in the moment that that was happening, in the moment that that was on the news. And so he was an older parent, but it also made it so that he had a certain ease, you know, about him, and he had an ease when it came to me, as a child, that he encouraged certain things that, in the rest of my family, were seen as my being a bit too precocious, and he was completely willing to sort of say, "You know what? This is all gonna even out in the end, so let's not worry about it," right? At ten, eleven, twelve, right? And my mother would say, "Okay, the mouth," you know, "we have to stop," you know. She--you know, she'd say to him, I'd hear them talking about me, you know, and I'd hear my mother saying, "You cannot let her talk like that, she cannot do that," you know. And my father would say, "It'll all work out, it's fine," but that was sort of, I think, also what came from him being an older parent. Story_ID: 521497 Speaker 1: So, your mother, give her name and her date of birth, and what you know about her background (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. My mother's name was Thelma Eastmond Golden; she was born in 1930 in Brooklyn [New York], grew up in Stuyvesant Heights [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] in a house that my grandfather, whose name was Evans Eastmond, bought. My mother was one of six children, four girls, two boys, and she grew up in this home. Her mother's name was Larta Eastmond, and my maternal grandparents came to this country together from Barbados, settled in Brooklyn. My grandfather worked a realm of sort of construction and labor jobs. In that time in Brooklyn the--particularly the waterfront was a huge industry, and so he worked his whole life. And my grandmother, Larta, was a homemaker, six children. And my mother grew up in this house on Jefferson Avenue that her next oldest sister still lives in and still owns, and she grew up in this environment where she, like my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.], lived in a neighborhood 100 percent, almost, African American, a mix of Southern African Americans as well as from the Caribbean, but a neighborhood of homeowners, people who had a stake in the community, people who were deeply invested in the civic life and the church life. My mother grew up in Siloam Presbyterian Church in Brooklyn, and sort of through her childhood and her young adulthood, that defined a sense of her and my aunts, right? Their, their life. My mother and my aunts took singing lessons and piano lessons, they were in clubs and social groups, they had dances and teas and recitals and plays. My uncles played sports and were involved in athletics, and all of my aunts and uncles, up until my, the youngest two, went through high school but, again, in those years, the war years, my mother and my Aunt Gloria [Gloria Eastmond] and my Aunt Evelyn [Evelyn Eastmond] all graduated from high school, began Brooklyn College [Brooklyn, New York], but got jobs. And there was, again and I listened to my mother talk about what it was like at that time to be a nineteen year old young African American woman but, but the labor industry, there were jobs, that she had a job, and that that job allowed her and my Aunt Gloria to go to work at the, what was then called New York Telephone Company every day, and to get their paychecks. They lived at home, and then they would, you know, make dresses and go out on Friday night and go out on Saturday night, and go to church on Sunday, and go to a dance on Sunday afternoon. They had these like rich lives as single women, and then my Aunt Evelyn got married, my Aunt Gloria got married, and my mother became a very active aunt because, again, in this extended family they all lived together in some way. Even when one of my mother's sisters moved out, there was still a way that my grandmother was taking care of grandchildren, and my mother was there. So, that side of my family, I grew up with this complete and total sense of this extended family that sort of lived as a unit, that house being a real center, you know, of my life. I grew up going to that home every Sunday, I grew up, you know, with a sense of that as a real base. Speaker 1: So, now, so, did they consider themselves Bajan, and were they--and was there more of a connection with Barbados? Speaker 2: Yes, completely, much more of a connection with Barbados. My maternal grandparents traveled, you know, once they could, later in life. I don't think they did it so much when my mother and my--were younger, and that was just, I think resources and, and kids, and even, you know, fly- what it meant at that moment, but as they got older, they did. And then that's where we often had family vacations, all of us, right? We would, you know, go to Barbados and, you know, in those days, the Barbados Hilton [Hilton Barbados Resort, Bridgetown, Barbados] was an upside down hotel, you know, that had the lobby at the top and, you know, the rooms at the bottom, and all of us, my aunts, all of my cousins, and we would be there, you know, particularly sometimes at this time of year, but also at the holidays, for a week or two as an extended family, and with ties to relatives who were there, right? So, my mother and my aunts knew their same age cousins because those cousins also would often come to New York [New York] and visit and stay for extended times as teenagers. My aunts and my mother would often go there, and so there was much more of a connection. I will say, however, in my particular family history, what did happen by the time I feel like I was a teen is that many relatives who were there by then had moved to New York, and that was more, I think, economics, you know, but it just felt like, even my mother would say that as she got older, many more, from the time younger relatives were eighteen, nineteen, they were coming to the U.S. as opposed to my mother grew up with relatives her age who were there, you know, raised their families there. And so we knew those cousins, and that was always very interesting and very exciting. And my father and my paternal grandmother were included in that as well. So, my paternal grandmother Anna [Anna Campbell Golden] went with us to Barbados and had a complete relationship with my maternal grandparents as well. Story_ID: 521498 Speaker 1: So, how did your parents [Thelma Eastmond Golden and Arthur Golden, Sr.] meet? Speaker 2: They met at a dinner dance that, and they were introduced by friends who were then their, became their best couple friends. So my father had a business partner in his insurance business, one of my father's closest friends that he knew since he was in college at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], and his name was Robert Scott [ph.], Bob, Uncle Bob, we called him. And Uncle Bob was also at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] studying insurance, but really had aspirations to be a child psychologist, which he did do. But at, immediately, he finished the degree with my father and they were in business together. And Bob was married to a woman named Jean Scott [ph.] then. By then they were married, they were already married, and they even had, I think their first child was born at that time. And Jean knew my mother, and it was one of those dances where they had to put the table together, resell tickets so, you know, they had tickets, and Jean asked my mother if she wanted to come; she told her about my father. My father, at the time, had a sports car, an MG convertible, and Jean told my mother this, and my father drove to Brooklyn [New York] and picked my mother up. My aunts all remember this, you know, as if it were yesterday. And they went (laughter) to this dance here in Harlem [New York, New York]. Again, my father also was someone in social clubs, so this was one of his social clubs, you know, dinner dances. And they began dating, and relatively quickly decided to marry. They eloped, they went to Baltimore [Maryland]. And simply because at the time they got, they were going to get married, my grandmother [Larta Eastmond] was sick; that illness is what was the end of her life. But my mother, having lived through the very big grand weddings that my aunts had had, felt that her mother was not up to that, so she eloped. They drove in the MG to Baltimore, got married, and came back and told everyone they were married, and that's, you know, how it, it really, to me, it seemed they knew very immediately that they were meant for each other. Speaker 1: So, so neither of them had been married before. Speaker 2: My father had been married before, briefly, in his, the day, if they were about thirty (unclear), in his twenties. It would have been, I almost wanna say it was when he was in the [U.S.] Army, very briefly, less than a year. And--but did not have children and it did not, you know, even result in what was a kind of extended relationship. It was a very brief marriage to someone who had been a high school sort of sweetheart. And then, again, I think, the tumult of that moment--his going off to war, et cetera, you know, ended their marriage. My mother had not been married. She had dated, but kind of felt herself actually as--then she had progressed in various jobs. She also, my mother was very involved in civil rights work through her church [Siloam Presbyterian Church, Brooklyn, New York], was deeply involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Brooklyn, in the youth chapter, you know, organized all sorts of activities and trips, did lots of sort of civic fundraising in that regard, and I think she imagined she would have a life. And my mother actually had a group of women friends that she'd gone to high school with. She went to Girls High School in Brooklyn; it's now called Boys and Girls High School [Brooklyn, New York]. But she went to Girls High, which was an integrated high school at that time, but very amazing because it really was about women's education. And my mother had a group of friends who went on to become high school principals, nursing supervisors; several of them did not marry, and I remember growing up and being very impressed by them because of their sense of purpose, their commitment to the community, their commitment to their work, you know; they weren't simply a high school principal, they were high school principal that also was on the weekends tutoring kids and making sure they were applying to college. They were, you know, these amazing women, and I think my mother thought that's who she might be as well. But she met my father (laughter) and got married and, you know, quickly they moved to Queens [New York] and began a life there. Story_ID: 521499 Speaker 1: Do you, you have an earliest memory at all in Queens [New York] in-- Speaker 2: I do, I do. I have very early memories in Queens of, with my grandmother, and it's because she, my grandmother who lived with us, took care of us. Now, it wasn't something that was so formalized in the way in which people talk about it now, it was just this sort of natural way that she lived with us; we all lived together, and there was a way in which she took a very primary role, right? In our care. And so I do remember being three and four years old and being with my grandmother, you know, in very specific and profound ways. Speaker 1: So, can you talk about some of those specific and profound ways? Speaker 2: Well, as I said, my mother, who was born in 1930s name was Thelma Eastmond [Thelma Eastmond Golden]. My grandmother had a daughter in 1930 named Thelma Golden. When my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] introduced my mother to my grandmother, it was not lost on her that my father was marrying a woman named Thelma who was born in 1930. So my grandmother had a very particular relationship to my mother. Now, some people might find that, you know, strange and a little bit too, you know, on the edge, but my grandmother deeply believed that this was all meant to be. And often people think I'm named after my mother, I am not; I am named after my late aunt because both my mother and my grandmother understood just how the world could work, that it would be that my father would meet, you know, a woman who was born in the same year with the same name. So I do remember, as a little girl, even four and five years old, my Grandmother Anna [Anna Campbell Golden] talking to me about her Thelma, and that was something in our house where, when my grandmother said, "My Thelma," we were talking about my aunt. When my mother said, "My Thelma," they were talking about me. Anybody not in our house would never understand this 'cause a conversation could have three Thelmas in one sentence. But when my grandmother said, "My Thelma," and when I was little, she would talk to me about, "Oh, my Thelma loved ice cream, my Thelma," right? And so I, my memories are of growing up understanding that, as a little girl, that my grandmother, in many ways, especially when I was that age, right? Because my aunt died, you know, when she was six, that her relationship to me was very interesting because of the way in which it resonated for her in the child that she lost. And as I grew up, I know that she continued to have that relationship to me, right? Because she didn't get to see her daughter grow up. Story_ID: 521500 Speaker 1: I know we were talking about your growing up, but (simultaneous), Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I wanted to go back to your mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden], you know, and her being late to motherhood. Speaker 2: She, you know, I don't think (simultaneous), Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At that time. We're talking the '60s [1960s], the mid-'60s [1960s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right. At that time, yes, my mother was definitely late to motherhood. She did not think she was late; she actually felt she was lucky because in some ways, she got to live a life, right? And that life included her engagement in civic affairs, her engagement in the many clubs and associations she was a part of and had leadership roles in, her ability in those years, as a young woman, to earn money, you know. My mother bought a small building in Brooklyn [New York] that, you know, was one of the things growing up, one of the greatest lessons to me about financial independence because not only did she own this building, she would go every month and collect the rents herself, go and deposit them, and I don't believe it was until I was in my twenties that I feel my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] knew how much money my mother had from, from that building. And that always impressed me, right? That my mother had this sense of this independence in her life before; it's very common now, of course, but, the fact that she had that. But also what was important to me as an example is my mother had a deeply rich life, you know? I mean my mother, you know, out of nowhere, could tell me a story about going to California to sing in a Gilbert and Sullivan [W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan] competition and I would say, "What are you talking about?" "Oh, I never told you about that? Oh, well, I was in the choir at church, and then we, as a choir at church, were in a choral where all the church choirs sang, you know, non-religious songs, and we sang a song from a Gilbert and Sullivan, and were able to then go and present our song at this conference in California." And she would just tell me things like that and I would be so amazed and impressed by it because I knew I had friends who, more traditionally at that point, their mothers became their mothers sort of right after, you know, college or high school, or maybe a brief time working. But, you know, I felt my mother had this whole life. She also had this very rich circle of friends, and very important to my mother. Primary were her sisters and, without it being a slight to my father, it was always clear to me that that was primary. I knew I did not come before her sisters; I tried very hard, you know, because I saw the bond my mother had with her sisters and how singular that was, and it played out in small ways, right? The way they just talked every day. But it also played out in big ways, right? The way that they existed as a unit, as a family unit, and everything that happened in our family they, together, right? Made happen. And that, to me, was very important. And it also was important to me to understand that, that late motherhood allowed my mother to decide how she wanted to be as a mother. And again, I credit so much of her sense of who she made me as being about the fact that she had some experiences in the world, right? And even though she would often say to me these were not like incredibly worldly experiences, they gave her a glimpse of what the possibilities were and I knew that those possibilities were what she was giving to me. Story_ID: 521501 Speaker 1: So your father really married into a family of a lot of women, and he was an only child, to speak of, so that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was an only child, five siblings, so a, my, my mother's [Thelma Eastmond Golden] two brothers Ernest [Ernest Eastmond] and Clarence [Clarence Eastmond], and then my mother's three sisters Evelyn [Evelyn Eastmond], Gloria [Gloria Eastmond], and Joan [Joan Eastmond]. And my father married into this, but I have to say growing up, what became clear is that he not just married into it, he folded right in like literally it was sort of, you know, Ernest and Clarence and Arthur [Arthur Golden, Sr.], right? My father was sort of right in there, as were my aunts' husbands. Like that was the kind of family my mother's family was, right? To just encapsulate them all in. Also, as cousins, you know, there were no distinctions as a whole group between our parents in terms of authority or love, or care, or nurture, right? It would be just as common for me to come home from school and my cousin Karen [ph.], who by then was in high school, who might have had a project that she had to do for high school, so she had to go into Manhattan [New York], and instead of going home, she came to our house; for her to be in my room sleeping in my room that night as, you know, my cousin, my brother [Arthur Golden, Jr.] being at my Aunt Joan's house with my cousin Brian [ph.], right?, because they were going to hockey the next day. Like that's how my, my mother and my aunts and uncles sort of treated, right? Each other's children, right? We, we all were one group. Story_ID: 521502 Speaker 1: So you talk about, you talked about your earliest memory and time with your grand- [paternal] grandmother [Anna Campbell Golden], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And so I wanna ask you what, what was the address you were living at? And can you talk about the block you lived on? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I lived in a, grew up and lived in St. Albans, Queens [New York], and the address was 18936 Lewiston Avenue. Southeast Queens was a kind of amazing African American community. I grew up understanding its history as being a real haven for middle-class African Americans. There were many known celebrities who'd lived in the neighborhood, and that was sort of well-known among (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you talk about-- Speaker 2: You know, I mean there were people like, of course, you know, there was the musical stars as well as, you know, people in the civic life who found St. Albans as a important enclave. I grew up on a block that was all African American, all homeowners. Generally speaking, what I realize now is perhaps when I was growing up on the block, again, my brother [Arthur Golden, Jr.] and I existed with about half of the block having young children, but the other half of the block even being older than my parents [Thelma Eastmond Golden and Arthur Golden, Sr.], right? So real pioneers in terms of coming out to Queens, integrating that neighborhood, who then had older children, so they were on the block as well. Our next door neighbor had been a mail carrier who lived here in Harlem [New York, New York] and, Mr. Turner [ph.], and Mr. Turner lived with his wife Mrs. Turner and Mrs. Turner's sister. And I'm going to say, if my father at that time was say, fifty, Mr. Turner was probably sixty-five so, you know, fifteen years older than my father, had come to Harlem from the South, been a mail carrier his whole life, lived in Harlem and saved his money and bought that house, and was very proud of it, and was our next door neighbor; but again, a window onto a whole other experience, right? What it meant to come to New York [New York] as a young man from the Deep South. And so the, and the block was full of that, right? At the very end of our block was a man who owned a taxicab, and that's what made me understand that in New York City, owning a taxi medallion was an incredibly, incredibly important entrepreneurial effort, right? And how, you know, for our neighbor to have done that, and what that meant for him as someone then who could own a home, raise a family, educate kids that were our age, send them to college as we did, you know, was amazing. Also on our block were many city workers, schoolteachers; but behind us, the house that our fence faced on the backyard, was a home of a woman, a long retired schoolteacher, who took in foster children, and that was interesting; my mother had an incredible relationship with her, one that taught me so much about my mother's values and about, you know, sort of notions of charity, because my mother was deeply, deeply moved, right? By the way in which this woman did what she felt many people would not, and that is care for these children who, if not for her, right? Where would they be? And she had to do it with a great amount of practicality. And my mother was deeply generous to her but in a way that created no hierarchy between them, absolutely no weirdness, but just two women who understood what it meant to raise kids, right? And so it might be that my mother, we would go to the supermarket and we'd be buying, you know, off in the big box store, and my mother would be buying, you know, the sort of big, you know, multipack pop or popsicles, you know, which would excite us, and she would put two in the cart and my brother and I would get excited and think, oh, wow, you know, we're gonna have double popsicles this week. And, you know, very quietly we'd get home and my mother would go to the fence and she'd call her from the fence and say, "You know what? I was at the store, these were on sale," you know? And it was just, and this would go on, and the back and forth between them and, you know, again, these kids had terrible hard stories, and I'd hear her telling my mother about them; I'd hear her saying, "You know, you're never gonna believe, you know? I just got one last night." And that's what always happens; like a lot of times, the kids would come at night, right? They would, and so this was a neighborhood that again had a kind of cross class relationship that was interesting because it also, again, formed my sense, right? Of, of the world, and formed, you know, my way of understanding the world. And I really, I did feel like I grew up somewhat in an enclave, right because when I look back at the years of my childhood, and if you lay that against the timeline of New York City, there were awful things happening in the city at that moment, but I was not fully aware of them, right? Because I lived, you know, somewhat away from them. Story_ID: 521503 Speaker 1: What sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Ah, what sights and smells- Speaker 1: Sounds and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sounds. Well, I have to say the sound of quiet, you know. Growing up in southeast Queens [New York] is a distinctly non-urban experience, and what I craved was the urban experience as a child, so I certainly felt like the idea that, you know, we lived in a place that did not have, you know, the energy and the sounds, right? Of the city was something I was very conscious of. I think the smells of my childhood, you know I think in the summer, the smell of, you know, barbeque grills in people's backyards. I think, you know, the sort of smell of grass, you know? I, I grew up, you know, with grass. I also think some of, you know, the smells of my household. I think the smell of typewriter ribbon, I, for me, which is a smell you do not smell anymore, but reminds me again of my father's [Arthur Golden, Sr.] office, right because that's where all those policies had to be typed by hand and the ribbon, you know, had to be put in the typewriter, and that smell of typewriter ribbon reminds me of my childhood, you know. I really think about the way in which, the sounds, I would say, are the sounds of voices, you know? I lived in a house that was very full of people all the time. My parents entertained a lot, formally, informally; there were always people in our house. I think of the sounds of laughter and conversation. Story_ID: 521504 Speaker 1: Now, your brother, what is his name, and what's the age difference? Speaker 2: So my brother's name is Arthur Golden [Arthur Golden, Jr.], and he was named after my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.], so that's, you know, I was not named after my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] but he was named after his father, after our father. And he was born November 11th, 1966, so we are really just a year and a few weeks (laughter) apart in age. Again, my mother's late motherhood made that, she was adamant; like she told me that she, you know, knew she wanted to have more than one child. She already had been told this will not happen, and so therefore, you know, she was very motivated to make that happen. He is a year younger, and so we were always one year apart in school, right? So I, one, one year after each other. My brother, we grew up in a house that was somewhat gendered but somewhat not, right? So, not gendered 'cause my father let me do lots of things that maybe a little girl would not do, but gendered to the degree, for example, that growing up in Queens [New York] at that time we did have freedom to, you know, ride bikes. I, as a girl, however, was encouraged not to push the boundaries, right, with the bike riding, so my friends and I would just ride around the block, ride around the block. My brother and his friends would ride all the way off to the Long Island Rail Road tracks, ride off to where there was like, near our home it was a VA [Veterans Administration; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs] hospital that had, you know, lots and lots of land that you could, you know, ride around it legally. My brother had a much more, I think, free childhood because, as a boy, he was not encouraged to be free, but he wasn't discouraged, whereas I was discouraged towards that kind of, you know, sort of freedom in many ways. My brother was also, as a young boy, interested in sports, and my father really, you know, went all out in making sure that my brother was on teams, and my brother played, you know, all the various different sports, and that was something, you know, he was deeply interested in, and so that's where, in some ways, our childhood split, right? We had sort of different ways in which our parents kind of socialized us around those kinds of things. Story_ID: 521505 Speaker 1: So, you know, what is interesting to me then, would you say, 'cause at first when I was hearing you talk about your father [Arthur Golden, Sr.], I said, "She's a daddy's girl." Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But, you know, fathers who have sons, you know, and he had, you know, he had, he hadn't had a father figure (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right, yeah. Speaker 1: So this is his son, so-- Speaker 2: Totally, yeah. You know what? I am not so much a daddy's girl; I was a daddy and a mommy's girl. I mean I feel that very distinctly. My parents parented me in totally different ways, and as an adult, I see how both of their parenting styles, as different as they were, together have made me into what I am. My mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] was deeply traditional, right? In some of her attitudes about women. My mother would not let me sit on the steps outside of our house in the front; my mother would not let me chew gum out on the street; my mother wouldn't let me eat on the street; I was not allowed to eat walking down the street. If we went to an outdoor affair and we brought something to eat, my mother would make me stand and eat it. I couldn't walk and eat at the same time. My mother, you know, believed deeply that I could not go out without a handbag, you know; I had to have a purse. My mother, you know, deeply believed that one's, you know, hair and nails always had to be done. My mother would always say, "You never know who you're going to see." And I can't tell you how many times in my life that's been the truth. But as a child, you know, when she would say that, I would just say, "Are you kidding?" And she would say, "No, go change," you know? And my mother was at, my mother, also, as I said, she was a great hostess, but she also was a great organizer. You know, my mother worked deeply within the church I grew up in, and by that time, by the time of my teen years, my parents had moved churches from Siloam Presbyterian Church in Brooklyn [New York], to the First Presbyterian Church of Jamaica in Queens [New York] because my mother wanted my brother [Arthur Golden, Jr.] and I to be active in that, and being in Brooklyn, that wasn't as practical. And so my parents moved churches, and my mother was involved in the youth group, and the women's guild, and the elders' board and the deacon's board. So it wasn't uncommon to come home from school and my mother would have me stuffing envelopes because it would be, you know, the church's outdoor fair, or they'd be getting ready to have a thrift sale, you know. My mother also could organize things, you know? In our kitchen we had a wall telephone, and my mother, because my aunt continued to work at New York Telephone [New York Telephone Company] for years, my mother was able to procure like a, the longest cord you could get, so my mother could be on the phone and walk all around our kitchen; she could go to the stove, the refrigerator, the sink. And my mother could make a whole meal while being on the phone having a whole conversation with one of her club members where they would be talking about, "Okay, so who will be first on the program, and who's going to present the--," and they'd organize like the whole event, and my mother would have the phone and she would, you know, twist around, you know, with the cord and, and do that, so my mother taught me a lot. I can remember holidays, Thanksgiving, where my mother would plan this out for several days and, you know, now like event planners call it staging. My mother would take down all of her serving pieces, and in the era before postage, she would cut up scrap paper and then she'd write in each one and put, you know, stuffing, cranberry, have them all laid out, and then they'd be in order of how they needed to come out of the kitchen and what order they needed to go in, you know. My mother would, we'd set tables weeks before, weeks before, we'd be in table setting, right, and, you know, and my mother, I knew, you know, which knife, and when we were going to put the fish knife, and when we didn't put the fish knife. I mean she, all of that she gave me, and thought of these things as important and, you know, she had a beautiful home, she set a beautiful table, she decorated for every holiday, even ones that didn't apply to her, you know? She, you know, St. Patrick's Day, any holiday my mother had decorations for, she would decorate for it. She really, you know, believed deeply, you know, that those things were also important, you know? So as much as she felt like my father clipping articles out of The New York Times and making sure I understood, you know, sort of congressional procedure, you know, she'd often say to me, "Let's set the table for tea." And I knew, okay (laughter), okay. I know what means, you know? And I know how to set the table for tea. And we would do it. Story_ID: 521506 Speaker 1: You grew up in a household that has a lot of activity, but there's a great emphasis on how to do things, and yet you're also seeing a lot of structure. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Your fa- your brother's [Arthur Golden, Jr.] exposed, now did you have chores? Speaker 2: No. I, I would say I, I didn't have chores, you know? I mean, and this was really where I think the relationship between my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] and my [paternal] grandmother [Anna Campbell Golden] was tested. I think my mother would have loved for us to have chores, right? My mother talked about how she and my aunts were responsible from the time they were, you know, teens, of cooking and cleaning; she would talk about how they would clean that house, my mother grew up in that four story brownstone, from top to bottom, how they had to do the woodwork and how they had to do the floors, and how this was a real Saturday activity. They could not do anything until they had cleaned that house, whereas my grandmother, who spent her working life cleaning other people's houses and taking care of other people's children, felt that the thing she could offer was that I should not do chores. She would say to my mother, "I don't want her to know how to clean anything; she should have someone else do that for her." And that wasn't a classist statement on her part, but it was because again, she'd worked and she'd see, right, a world where people had that, and she felt like she wanted me to aspire to that, right, so she saw nothing that was great. My mother thought, "No, this is important; I want you to know how to do this." And my grandmother said, "No." And this was something, you know, they had an interesting relationship, and I can remember hearing my mother talk to some of her female friends who would say, "I cannot believe you live with your mother-in-law; I cannot believe it." But yet they had this incredible relationship, they had a way, a kind of communication without words with each other, my grandmother did all of the cooking and my mother did not want this but she said to my grandmother, "You don't need to cook like this." And my grandmother said, "You know, I've been cooking for other people's kids and families; that's work." She goes, "This is pleasure." And so she cooked, she loved to cook. She'd start in the morning and cook every day for us; she took care of us. I never heard my mother say to her, "Oh, on Friday night we're going out, can you stay with the kids?" There was never a conversation like that. My mother would say, "Oh, on Friday night we're going out," and my grandmother would say, "Oh, what dress are you gonna wear?" And my mother would say, "Oh, maybe the pink one." And my grandmother say, "Oh, maybe we should hem it, put it on, I'll pen it for you so you can hem it," and that would be the conversation. And so my mother and my grandmother had this incredible relationship with each other, living together, you know, two women in this house, being responsible for us. My grandmother was the one who was full of all the kind of nurture and the, you know, physical love, and the physical presence, you know, and, and my mother was the one who sort of created this sense of, you know, the structure, educationally, you know, socially, all the things that we would do. And somehow, my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.], you know, was kind of on the edges of that but he knew that, you know, he was not the one making all those rules; it was really those two women who were doing that. Story_ID: 521507 Speaker 1: What is the young Thelma [HistoryMaker Thelma Golden] like? What is your personality like at that point? Do you know? Were you quiet (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, no, no, no. I, look, the young Thelma-- Speaker 1: I know I heard precocious. Speaker 2: I, incredibly precocious. First of all, I was tiny; always, always, really small. So, at seven I looked five in physical size, so that made all the ways I was even more complicated because I always seemed younger to people, and that made it even perhaps seem as I was very precocious. I, as a, from the time I was a young child, again, had a father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] who talked to me and treated me like an adult, had a mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] who believed deeply in, you know, raising full, whole individuals, you know. My mother believed in manners, she believed in, you know, you spoke to adults in a certain way, you know? She, she believed in all those things, and I was able to conform to that very well, right, which was pleasing to my mother, right? That I was the child who, you know, could say the, "Good afternoon, how are you?" And, you know, my mother loved that. But also, I was an inquisitive child; I was more interested in adults than children. Because I was small, I could get away with it a little bit sometimes, like make myself very not present. I loved listening to my mother and her sisters talk and, you know, my mother, her sisters had an active social life; they had friends that had all kinds of things going on. I would listen and, you know, my mother, when she would catch me, would be like, "You have to stop doing that," because then what would happen is that I would repeat things, right? So my mother would be talking and she'd say to my aunt a few weeks later, "Did I tell you about da-da-da?" And then my aunt would say, "I don't know," and I'd say, "Yeah, you told her because," and the two of them would be mortified because I would have remembered the entire thing. You know, it was something that my mother got great pleasure at the end of her life, as her memory failed and she was diagnosed with dementia because she would say to me sometimes, "I don't need to remember anything 'cause you remember it all," you know? And she'd call me up and say, "I don't remember why I was calling you. Why was I calling you?" And I would say, "You probably were calling me because," you know, and I would just fill in something because, you know, my mother, I loved like adult conversation, I loved adult activity, you know? I didn't like playing, you know? That was the thing. My brother [Arthur Golden, Jr.] always wanted to go outside and play; that was a constant, you know, argument, "Mommy, can I go out? Can I go out?" You know, and more often than not, she'd say, "Yes," but sometimes she would say, "No," you know? "Right now you're going to," you know, do whatever she wanted him to do. I never wanted to go out; I'd stay inside with my mother and my [paternal] grandmother [Anna Campbell Golden] all day, right? I loved to listen to them; they cooked together and they would have a mode where, they didn't talk, but they would, you know each, the roles, right, so if my grandmother took certain things out of the refrigerator, then my mother would know what she was going to make, and know that maybe she was making potato salad, so my mother would then just start peeling them, right? Then my grandmother would know that the peeled ones were in the sink, and she'd take them out and put them in the pot, then when the pot had to be poured, my grandmother was older, my mother would go over, you know, and pour the water for her and like put it back on, then my grandmother would do the mashing. By then, my mother would have started chopping up the cel- but they didn't talk about it; they didn't say, "You do this, you," and I would love being there with them, you know 'cause they'd talk about other things, right? They, you know, talking about, "Oh, did you see this TV show?" Or, "Oh," you know, "maybe we'll do this this weekend." But I loved it. So, as a child, I was super inquisitive; I loved adult conversation, I loved books, I was deeply, deeply, a, a, a deep reader, which was encouraged by my father, encouraged by our local librarians, so read kind of above my grade level very early, and therefore, a wide variety of things. I was also a child who was very social; I was always ready to, if my mother said, "We're going to the post office," I had my coat on, I had my bag, I was always ready to go. I sort of loved, again, working for my father because I loved what it felt like to be in the world, that was my sense. As a child, I just wanted to be in the world, and I felt like, here I was in this house in Queens [New York]; like when are they gonna let me out, you know? When, when can I be in the world? That's what I wanted. And again, both parents encouraged it to the degree that I proved that this was real, right? As opposed to just a passing interest, you know? So, at the point that at the library they told my mother, "Well, she should be in the young adult room but, you know, she really is already," you know, I wanted to read James Baldwin, you know, all of that, and they said to my mother, "It's actually okay." And my mother would say, "Okay, okay," you know? I was reading 'Giovanni's Room' [James Baldwin], you know. What, how old was I, thirteen, fourteen? You know, on some level, but yet she encouraged it because then my father, you know, would further that, right, with adding into that. "Well, you know James Baldwin is from Harlem [New York, New York], and now you're gonna read 'If Beale Street Could Talk' [James Baldwin]," and he would go get me 'The Fire Next Time' [James Baldwin], you know; he, he would encourage, with all the context around it. I often say in some ways my father raised, you know, me in my intellect, and my mother raised me in my spirit. Story_ID: 521508 Speaker 1: What elementary school do you, so, what, before I get to elementary, the black Presbyterian, so did you, you grew up very strongly in the Presbyterian, didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: You know, we haven't done a lot of black Presbyterian, so-- Speaker 2: Oh god, do you know Paul, Reverend Paul Smith? He's now in the Virginia area. He, look him up. Paul, Reverend Paul Smith, black Presbyterian, some of the, the legendary ones are no longer with us, that's why I'm saying that, but Dr. Smith is and, you know, as a young adult, when I, you know, left home, left college and moved away, and again, my parents [Thelma Eastmond Golden and Arthur Golden, Sr.] were never pushing me towards like, "Oh, you know, you need to continue--." I, on my own thought, like I grew up in the black Presbyterian church, loved it; grew up in the Presbyterian church, and found Paul Smith's church who then, of course when I walked in, he just looked at me and he said, "You're Artie Golden's daughter," like he could just see it in my face, and that became, you know, my church home as an adult, until he retired. He now lives in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area, retired. But he also is someone, his own history with the movement, et cetera, I think, for you. He, he, you know, and, and Howard Thurman, just a lot of things about a black theological formation, amazing. So, yes, grew up in the black Presbyterian church, so grew up with a-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Grew up in the black Presbyterian church, understanding church life as a spiritual pursuit and an intellectual pursuit, as well as being about activism and social justice. What I remember deeply about it is it was a space of deep questioning and inquiry, and also a space of deep community, right? So, I grew up sort of understanding it in that way. I never felt over burdened by a kind of overwhelming, narrowing theology, but one that was open and expansive and, and a great opportunity in that space to question, and through question, become deeper in one's understanding of what all that meant. So I grew up in a church [Siloam Presbyterian Church, Brooklyn, New York] with a minister named Milton Galamison [Milton A. Galamison], Reverend Galamison; again, well known in the black Presbyterian church, and then when we moved to Queens [New York], moved to an integrated church and, and my parents were very interested in the context of what that meant, a church that was now in a changing community; so, as a changing community, a church that was wrestling very deeply with this idea of interconnection. Speaker 1: And it was also Presbyterian? Speaker 2: Presbyterian, yeah, First Presbyterian Church of Jamaica [Queens, New York]. Now, which has a senior pastor name Reverend Patrick O'Connor, a minister who came to that church as a young associate minister who is my age, so we sort of grew up together there. Speaker 1: So, what would you say was the teachings in the church? You know, do you, 'cause you know, a lot of people are from the Baptist tradition or the A.M.E [African Methodist Episcopal] tradition, Speaker 2: Yeah. It was a teaching, you know, that was about, you know, an idea of Christianity being, you know, a faith of love, a faith of justice, you know, a faith of, you know, sort of understanding humanity, you know? It was a theology that, you know, sort of promoted the idea that our ability to operate within those values is what made us able to more ably influence the world. It was a faith that did look at other faiths and say, "Let's be one with other faiths," so I feel like, as someone growing up in that church, I heard and understood things about other faiths in a way that equalized, right, that experience. It also, however, was a faith that rooted itself, of course, in the great traditions of civil rights and now social justice, so I also understood its place, you know, in those worlds. Story_ID: 521509 Speaker 1: --To a strand of social conservatism. I read that someplace. What does that mean now (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] was somewhat socially conservative, right? He believed that you do the right thing, he believed that you were an upstanding citizen, you know? He was a veteran; he hung an American flag outside of our house on Flag Day and on Veterans Day. At the same time, he existed in a sense of moral outrage about racism, and about the violence against black people. He had a deep sense of real, you know, just a deep sense of anger about inequality and about the way in which some of those inequalities were perpetuated. My mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden], you know, felt the same way. So while on the one hand, to see the two of them, you know, my mother saying to me, you know, "Get your purse," right, and, you know, "Please do something with your hair before we go to the post office to mail a letter," this is the same woman who believed that the system was not doing right for black children who were not cared, and that's why she personally needed to support our neighbor, who was doing what needed to be done to give these children an equal outcome. My father believed that he grew up poor in public schools, and was able to come to an outcome of a man who owned a business, you know, had a graduate degree, could raise children, send them to private school, send us to college, but yet many men like him, you know, by the time of him, fifties, sixties, could not at all make any inroads, right, into the system, and that made him very angry. And so, on the one hand, you know, my parents, I often say, you know, people would think, oh, well they're, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr.] people, and they certainly were, but they also were deeply Malcolm X people, right? Because they knew that things were not exactly right. And, you know, but they also had a way, and I can remember, you know, in my extended family, because, you know, we span generations. My father would often take the conservative line around things, right? I can remember when the great big blackout in the '70s [1970s] happened and there was mass looting. And my father is a business owner, was completely against that, completely, right? But I can remember my, you know, cousins, who were older than me, so they were probably in their twenties at that time, saying, "No, that's our right. We, we should, our people should be able to attack the system." And I remember this being, you know, this kind of very political argument, and it could go in any number of ways, where generationally, my father would stand on something more that said, "I believe," you know, "in America, I believe in what this country can mean," and I had younger cousins who were saying, "No, we see the evidence that what you think it means, it does not mean the same thing to us." And that was interesting to me, so I saw that. I also understood issues of charity and social justice to be personal, you know? I never really understood those infrastructures as big and wide until I was, you know, a young adult, or even an adult, because what my, the way my mother raised me was that you have to do what you can do, you know? I mean she felt like that's the way in which the world changes, and that yes, it's great that you can have, you know, sort of big ideals around that, but you have to do, and I saw her as a woman, right, in her home, how she made that happen, right? How she just, in, in many different ways, how that was the way in which she would make that happen. Story_ID: 521510 Speaker 1: So, I wanna go to school. So, where did you go to elementary? Speaker 2: I went, my prim- my elementary school years were almost completely at a school on Long Island [New York] called Buckley Country Day School [Roslyn, New York], and my brother [Arthur Golden, Jr.] and I went to the school. I started in first, second grade, my brother started in first grade. So I had done first grade in a public school in north Queens [New York]; my brother, kindergarten. It was at a time in New York City [New York, New York] when New York City was beginning to engage in what now they call school of choice; that is that you can pick a school for your child not in the school district. At that time it was a little more complicated process, but you could get out of your district school. At the time, my district school, P.S. 118 [Lorraine Hansberry School, Queens, New York], was beginning to show the evidences of a kind of educational failure. My parents chose a school in Briarwood [Queens, New York]. What was interesting about that choice is very quickly in the school year, I can remember again eavesdropping on their conversations and hearing my parents' fear about this school, which was a very good school academically, in a great neighborhood, great resources, you know, public school; but it was in a working class white neighborhood, and I remember my parents having very distinct fears about that, fears about what that meant. And nothing had happened; this wasn't based on, you know, anything that had happened so far, but just their sense of what it would mean for us to go to a school in a working class white neighborhood, and what that racial dynamic would be, and they quickly made the decision to send us to private school where my brother and I ended up being the first black children to go to this school, you know, on the North Shore of Long Island. But my parents felt that environment, those families, those parents could and would be more open, and that was where that choice, you know, was made. And it wasn't 'til later that my father explained that to me because I said, "Well, why?" I mean, you know, the public school was a great school. And he says, "No, you don't understand that some of those parents could not deal with me," right, "as your parent, a lawyer, an insurance broker, a business owner," right, in a way that when we went to Buckley and these parents were all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Comfortable. Speaker 2: Right? Or, or even more, but he said there was a, a better understanding of what, what that might mean. So I went to Buckley Country Day School-- Speaker 1: So how did they find Buckley, and how far a distance was it? How did you-- Speaker 2: You know, they found it because, I'll tell you, Thelma Golden [Thelma Eastmond Golden] she did her research; she researched every private school on the North Shore, she set up appointments. My mother did not drive, so she set these appointments up and my father drove my mother; she put an outfit on for each one of those visits, she went and visited those schools, this was without any intervention on the schools. You know how these schools have outreach and, no, she just called them up and said, now, the thing that my father, we always laughed through childhood because my father's name is Arthur Golden [Arthur Golden, Sr.], and almost every other Arthur Golden in the world is white and Jewish. So, of course, you know, my mother calls up, "I'm Mrs. Golden," you know, who knows? Who knows? But, they got to these schools, and I have to say, across all of them, there was a welcome because there was, this was a novelty; this would have been 1971. So, we went and saw four of them. It required taking a standardized test, a different one that we'd taken for public school. My mother sat out, we, I remember coming to Manhattan [New York], that early memory, taking that test in Manhattan; it was in the office of an educational psychologist but it was in a big apartment building on the East Side [New York, New York], and I just thought it was the most glamorous thing ever. I'm sure I wasn't concentrating on the test because I just was so impressed, you know, that we were like in Manhattan, in this apartment building, you know, taking the test, and we applied to four schools. And my parents loved Buckley, they loved Buckley Country Day School and we enrolled. And from the first day, I think the combination of the novelty, but truly, also the values of that school, we were received with nothing but an incredible welcome, a warm welcome, a genuine welcome. It was an amazing school. I, my brother and I, as very different kinds of learners, very different kinds of students, very different interests, both of us thrived in the environment; it was a good school for both of us. It's where my interests in art were first encouraged; it was where, for the first time, I understood the difference between being taught as a student and being intellectually curious, and both were encouraged there. So that this is a school where teachers might be teaching us one thing, and if you asked a question about something else, they would feed that curiosity. So as a young person, I felt like very deeply, deeply loved in this environment. It was about thirty-five minutes by bus from our house, and there were many families in Queens from as close to the city as Forest Hills [Queens, New York] and as, you know, far into southeast Queens as we lived, who then were on a bus route that took us to school and brought us home. If we stayed after school, then a parent had to pick us up, but generally speaking, we took a bus. And I went to school there from the second grade until ninth grade. It was a school that went from kindergarten through ninth grade and, and then ended, and then you went to high school in the, in the tenth grade year. And my brother and I went all the way through, and I loved it and-- Speaker 1: So that school was very suited to your personality in many ways, right? Or you were the, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it's that, but I also think, in many ways, the school molded my personality. I think that school made me a lot of who I am. I think that school took, you know, this child that I was that was curious and engaged, and super verbal and, you know, incredibly social, and made all of those qualities into qualities that then could serve me to kind of figure out who I was. Story_ID: 521511 Speaker 1: So how large was the school? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm guessing that Buckley [Buckley Country Day School, Roslyn, New York] had a total student population of less than three hundred at that time. I think it's a bigger school now; they've, over the years, sort of expanded both the physical plan of the school, but it might be a little bigger. But my memory of it is maybe, I'm thinking each grade at Buckley had about three classrooms but each was not bigger than fifteen students, so I, I just feel like, so even if you were in fifth grade, there were three fifth grade, but it was a small, very small, very small school. And, you know, a school, a private school with incredible resources, incredible resources. Speaker 1: So did you, you said you were the first black kids there? Speaker 2: To our knowledge, I mean and to the school's knowledge, and they certainly, you know, engaged with that as a real fact at that time. Speaker 1: So, did those numbers change as you went through the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, because my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] became their, you know, complete and total diversity volunteer. She got incredibly, incredibly involved with the school; she not only became their diversity volunteer, she created for them a way for them to understand the potential of financial aid and how that might also create diversity, so I know any number of young people, and even at the time of my mother's passing, got several notes of young people who went to Buckley Country Day School long after I was gone. But because of my mother's, you know, continuing engagement with the idea that, again, she thought, for her children, this was such an incredible opportunity, let's, you know, see how this could be an incredible opportunity for others. So now, and I love it; I'm still involved with the school and I get their newsletter and I open it up, and it is an incredibly diverse, you know, across the racial and ethnic spectrum. I love opening up the little magazine and seeing the fifth graders and they are, you know, you know, such a amazing diverse group. Story_ID: 521512 Speaker 1: At this time, how are you, what is your interest at this time? Like how, are you more English and history? Speaker 2: Um-hm, totally. I was absolutely terrible at math, and the sciences, you know, were challenging for me but what, again, I loved about Buckley [Buckley Country Day School, Roslyn, New York] and what I now take with me when I understand some of how we talk about education now, is that I never excelled in math, but that was never seen as a problem; it was seen as something that had to be addressed. I mean I couldn't fail, I had to pass, but there was this idea that we are all good at something; we are not all good at all things, and that to be equally good in everything, perhaps isn't the ideal. So the fact that I excelled at certain things and I didn't do so well in others, I was made to feel like I was a good student nonetheless, right, because I had qualities that allowed me to do really, really well. So I was very good at English, history, you know, social studies, the social sciences, art, I wasn't good at art; I've never been a good artist. I wasn't the child who made, you know, beautiful things, but I loved it. I loved music, and I was not good at music, I didn't have proficiency, but I loved it. I loved the theater. Again, never got a big part in anything but, you know, I loved, and even at Buckley, also what I loved is that even in the arena of athletics and sports, there was a culture that sort of promoted the idea of not necessarily creating only star athletes but creating a love, right, of just the engagement in the games themselves. So I found at Buckley that I actually loved playing sports though I was never a student who anyone would have said was a great athlete. So it really was a place that encouraged one's love and engagement with, with activities and ideas. Story_ID: 521513 Speaker 1: So, Thelma [HistoryMaker Thelma Golden], then at this time, and I think, you know, like, I think I had read like 1975 that you loved when 'Mahogany' came out; you loved that; that you were also reading Essence magazine, you were going (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Every month. Speaker 1: --to Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]-- Speaker 2: I was going, Dance Theatre of Harlem and to the Na- and to the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], you know, plays, and my parents [Thelma Eastmond Golden and Arthur Golden, Sr.] were into black culture, so that's what I mean. So at one level, you know, there was this way in them that, you know, I would not say they weren't art collectors, but they were, you know, proud African Americans; they were real race people, so if there were any black player musical that was on Broadway in that era, I saw. And it didn't matter if The Times [The New York Times] thought it was good or bad, my parents' attitude is: "If there are black people on a stage, we are going, we are buying tickets and we're going." And we did. So I saw all of that, you know, golden era of '70s [1970s], you know, era black musicals. I absolutely, we also, my parents were very interested in, you know, supporting, again, they were civically involved, so like in Queens [New York], community theater, right? There were a lot of community theater in Queens; we would go see those performances. I really, again in my father's office on the weekends. Often, my father, on Sundays, well, my mother, often we would go to Brooklyn [New York] and be, you know, at my [maternal] grandparents' [Larta Eastmond and Evans Eastmond] house. Sometimes my father wouldn't go to Brooklyn because he would on, especially like once a month, catch up on paperwork, right? It would usually be the point in the month when the billing had to happen, right, which was the reconciling of what the companies were paid out, and what people needed to get. And sometimes my mother would let me stay with him because sometimes those stacks, you know, would be very, very big. And we would watch movies on TV, right? And I loved, you know, all the realm of those sort of old black films that would come on, you know, in those days, you know. You didn't have a VCR [videocassette recorder] or even a DVR [digital video recorder] so, you know, my father would say, "Okay, three o'clock it's coming on," you know; we had to get ourselves ready to watch it. You know, 'Mahogany' and 'The Wiz' were the two films that I saw as children that, more than anything, had a profound effect on my sense of aesthetics and the world. I already was interested in things I knew, you know. Again, my mother, my parents had an active social life, so my mother got dressed on the average Friday or Saturday night to go out, and I was already, you know, engaged in the idea of beautiful fabrics and things, and jewelry but, but then at Buckley [Buckley Country Day School, Roslyn, New York], I was studying art, the making of art. Also, at Buckley, we took many field trips; that's when I first started really going to museums and seeing things in museums. But those films really, together, created for me really a whole platform, a whole mandate, right, that I really worked from. 'The Wiz,' I know everyone saw it as this sort of black version of 'The Wizard of Oz.' What I understood it as, I couldn't articulate it at the time, but of, the idea of a black aesthetic, right? So that everything in that film was created then with all these codes that were so deeply, right, in and about the culture. And I understood that to be profoundly interesting and important, right? And it planted the seed in me that that's how I want to begin to understand the world, right, through this idea of an aesthetic, and formed by blackness. 'Mahogany,' for me, was this sense of how to have a dream and an aspiration, right, because the nature of the story, not just the love story but the story itself, right?, was of her, Tracy Chambers, right, working in that store, but having this desire to be a designer, right? All this creativity in her, and having it be unlocked, and the journey to get there, right, which is full, within some cases, you know, setbacks, but really in the end, right, sort of opens her to her whole life, right, which then becomes Billy Dee Williams. But, all that said. But more specifically, what 'Mahogany' also brought me into was an obsessive interest in style. I mean an obsessive interest. Seeing that just defined for me the idea of the difference between sort of fashion, what's dictated as being in fashion, and style, right? And I grew up with women who had style but, again, I couldn't articulate it, this idea of, you know, my Aunt Gloria [Gloria Eastmond], who could put together a head to toe outfit; I mean the hat, the bag, and it wouldn't look like anyone else, you know, and be, she would be the most stylish, you know, woman in the room. I knew what that was, but seeing 'Mahogany' really sort of put me into a desire to wanna understand that, so that's what opened up my interest in reading fashion magazines and beginning, you know, when my mother and I would come into Manhattan [New York] and we'd go to stores and I'd, we'd walk through the designer floor because I just loved looking at all the different clothes and, you know, my mother and I would, you know, look at them and she'd say, "Okay, if you could pick one thing, what would you want?" You know. Not that we were getting it but, you know, we'd walk through as if that was what we were going to do, and I would sort of think about where I would wear these outfits and really, but 'Mahogany' was that and, you know, Diana Ross in that film, to me, I mean it, I, I felt like that film was made for me. I, I really watched it thinking that. And, again, the combination of those two, critical to who I am. Story_ID: 521514 Speaker 1: And then you also talk, this is on the other side in terms of art (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Lucille, Lucille Buck. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That was, she was a, a-- Speaker 2: A teacher, Speaker 1: A teacher. Speaker 2: At Buckley Country Day School [Roslyn, New York]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: My teacher at Buckley Country Day School. And she taught us, you know, at Buckley, we had lots of electives, so we had our core subjects, but in each year we were taught, along with the core, other subjects that allowed us, in our core topics, to understand things in a wider way. So, around fifth grade when we were sort of doing world history, Lucille Buck taught us art history because, as she taught us, and as I now know and I teach young people, you can learn the history of the world through art, right? And so that was why she was teaching us art history, and she herself was a great lover of art history and an art historian and, while I think most of my classmates were engaged deeply with the study of the art history, for me it unlocked everything because then we would go to visits to museums, field trips, museums here in Manhattan [New York], and for the first time it occurred to me that someone actually made the decisions about the works of art that were on the wall. Up to that point, I just imagined, I don't know, that those works of art just grew there, right? I did not know there was a job where someone made those decisions and there was a body of knowledge that you had to know to make those decisions, and that body of knowledge was vast. And going to museums then began, for me, to open up this space that made me know I wasn't good at making art, right. And, and I didn't feel that that was where my passion was, but I was so passionate about looking at art, and deeply passionate about being in museums and having the experience that I now hope everyone might have, but what it means to be engaged and educated and inspired in the face of great works of art. Story_ID: 521515 Speaker 1: How did you end up going to New Lincoln School [New York, New York]? And what was, where was New Lincoln School located? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, after Buckley [Buckley Country Day School, Roslyn, New York] I graduated in ninth grade and I spent a year at a boarding school in Dutchess County [New York] called the Millbrook School [Millbrook, New York], and it's a fantastic school, wonderful school, still around, great curriculum. I, by then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it was a boarding school. Speaker 2: A boarding school. At that point, it was also clear to me, you know, I am the rare New Yorker; I am the child of native New Yorkers, right? And I went to boarding school which was a mere, you know, 150 miles away from the city, and deeply, deeply missed this city, deeply missed what it meant to have a life in my family and school, and have those things come together, and boarding school was just not for me. So, midway in the year, my parents agreed that it wasn't for me. I had two older cousins who went to boarding school very successfully; I was next in line, it felt like, "Okay, you know, that makes sense," but it was not for me at all. And, and so when, mid-year when I came home, again, my mother, Thelma Golden [Thelma Eastmond Golden], began a research process and began looking at several schools and, through a family friend, was suggested that we look at New Lincoln, and New Lincoln was an independent school that was on 77th Street between 2nd [Avenue] and 3rd Avenue, and at the time was run by a woman named Verne Oliver, a legendary educator, then New Lincoln's head of school, but had began at New Lincoln some thirty years before that as a teacher. It turned out that Verne Oliver, my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] spent a brief moment, again, complicated by his officers training, but at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], with the idea that maybe he would have been able to stay there, but his officers training took him from Washington [D.C.] to Georgia. But, it turns out that Verne Oliver was a Howard grad, so when I went to the interview, Verne Oliver and my father immediately bonded, right, around that and that experience. And this school that was known to be an alternative, independent school with an incredibly radical sense of how education could be delivered, which would not have been my parents' preference, they immediately felt a great sense of respect for Verne Oliver, who said to them, this is the place for me. So I ended up at New Lincoln for my eleventh and twelfth grade years. It was a school where we did not get letter grades, written reports by teachers. It was a lot of freedom about what one could study, there was incredible sense there of being able to see education as not just the school day but outside of the day, so we were encouraged to do internships or volunteer, or even work, but to do things that put us directly in the world. It was a school where our teachers almost all tended to have other lives that they were able to bring into our classrooms. For example, my English teacher, who was an amazing teacher teaching us literature, was a writer and was allowed to talk about that, right? So we understood him as not simply the person teaching us English, but as someone who himself was going home every day and writing, and submitting his short stories to magazines and the New Yorker, and other places. And it was an amazing school also because it really deeply encouraged, as I said, not just internships, but this idea that we engage with the world. So, it was felt that if you were interested in dance, that you didn't simply say, "I'm interested in dance," that you went and you saw dance performances. And our teachers also provided us with lots of resources that allowed us to access the sort of culture of the city inexpensively, or more often than not, for free. And that was incredible, so that I was educated at New Lincoln, but I was also educated in the cultural institutions in this city during those years because for me, being from Queens [New York], I spent my whole childhood trying desperately to get to Manhattan [New York]. There was nothing more exciting to me than getting on the subway every day and coming to school in Manhattan, being in Manhattan after school, being able to walk from the New Lincoln School on 77th and 3rd, to the Whitney Museum of American Art [New York, New York] which was at 75th [Street] and Madison [Avenue], to the Frick museum [Frick Collection, New York, New York], right, a little further down the street, or the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] a little further up 5th [Avenue], or even to the Guggenheim [Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, New York]. Like I could just do that; it wasn't a field trip, it was just that I'm out of class at two o'clock and this is what I'd like to do. I loved it. In those years also, that's when my parents were eagerly willing to pursue both my brother's [Arthur Golden, Jr.] interests and my interests, so that my interest in seeing Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] meant that they were willing, every year, to buy tickets for the season, and I could go see, and by the time I was fifteen or sixteen, they let me do those things by myself and I, I did. I also was someone who, you know, the reason I talk so much about access to the arts is I saw such great, amazing art of all sorts, performing arts, visual art, as a high school student, for free. My understanding of the arts came from the fact that the cultural institutions in this city then, as now, provided so much amazing access for high school students, students in general, but that made it so that you could go the Metropolitan Opera for a rehearsal. Now, of course, I was also a little bit spoiled because I've been in New York [New York] my whole life, I've grown up here, and it really wasn't 'til I left New York that I realized that, you know, when I got to art history classes at Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] and they put a slide on the screen of a great work of art, these are works that I walk past at the Metropolitan Museum every day, I saw them in person. I've been in front of the 'Water Lilies' [Claude Monet] at MoMA [Museum of Modern Art, New York, New York], I can't even say how many times, you know, because I had that opportunity. And so that, I feel, is what really made my high school years amazing, the opportunity to be in this city and to be able to access so much in the city just on the subway. Story_ID: 521516 Speaker 1: So, there was a lot happening, and that's what I was wondering. How wide was your universe, you know, 'cause there were things happening, a lot of things in the arts community happening in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So did your, were you exposed to any of that, and the-- Speaker 2: I was. You know, again, because my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] shared the newspaper with me when I was ten, eleven, twelve; by the time I was in high school, we had a system. I got the arts section in the morning. Like he'd separate it and give that to me fully, and he kept the other sections. But then, he would cut articles out of the other sections and bring them home and give them to me at the end of the day. And so, often, I read in the arts section about exhibitions happening. At the time I was in high school was when the contemporary art world was moving from the Lower East Side [New York, New York] to SoHo [New York, New York], right, and, and what we know of SoHo as an art world. So all along West Broadway and, you know, in the side streets, there were galleries opening up, and in those buildings were artists, and that really was the art community at that moment. And I would get on the subway and go to those galleries. And galleries were free, and I'd walk through those galleries. Most of them are galleries and gallerists that I still know to this day, but I can't imagine what I looked like, you know, this little 4'11", sixteen year old walking in. Most of them ignored me, not in a bad way but, you know, just didn't think anything of it. But there were a few galleries where the owners of those galleries would see me and actually speak to me, come out and offer me the opportunity to ask questions. There was one gallery in particular called, OK Harris Gallery [New York, New York], run by a man named Ivan Karp [Ivan C. Karp], the late Ivan Karp. And Ivan Karp would speak to me as if I were a potential client. And it wasn't 'til later in my life when I was a curator at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] and I had occasion to see him, you know, later, and I said that to him. He didn't remember it, of course, but I said, you know, "Mr. Karp, you probably don't remember this, but I used to come in your gallery as a high school student and you'd come from behind the desk, just as you do now that I'm a curator and you would, you know, tell me what was on view," and he was just so kind, right, in a way that, you know, he had to know. I was a teenager, but yet he treated me in the same way that he would, you know, the sort of most important museum director or a curator coming in. So I was going to SoHo definitely. I wasn't, I was aware of sort of the scene of sort of graffiti and street art that was happening in the South Bronx [Bronx, New York]; I did not experience any of that firsthand in that era, but I was aware it was happening and I saw some of the exhibitions of it. Also at the time this was happening was the birth of hip hop, which was happening in Queens [New York] and the Bronx [New York], as well as other places. And, again, I did not experience any of that firsthand, meaning I was not in Baisley Park [Baisley Pond Park] in Queens when all that was happening, but I was deeply aware of it, aware of the music, aware of the people making the music, and some of them I knew as people we knew growing up, right? Speaker 1: So, were you a consumer of it, or aware? Speaker 2: Completely. I was a consumer. But again, in the, in the gendered household I lived in, you know, while my brother [Arthur Golden, Jr.] certainly, you know, was probably sneaking out and going off to the big block parties that were happening, you know, in all these places, I did not. I was listening to it on the radio on WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York], and I certainly was, at the time, buying the records at the record stories on Jamaica Avenue, and I was intrigued by what it meant, right, as contemporary culture. I mean already I distinctly saw myself as a sort of cultural being at that point, so I was deeply interested in culture in all, and of all forms. Speaker 1: So what artists were speaking to you at that time? Speaker 2: You know, at that time, I was not so much interested in individual artists per se. At that moment, I had the very naive idea that if I just went to these museums every day, I was just gonna learn the entire history of art at large, like in my head that's what I was going for; I wasn't looking for specificity, I was, at that moment, thinking, okay, if I walk through every gallery at the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] and memorize, you know, every single work, I will know the history of art. I hadn't yet formed a specific interest. I will say, in those years, I was going to the Whitney Museum which, every other year, organizes a show called the Whitney Biennial, which is always the newest work being made, and I saw the '81 [1981] and '83 [1983] biennials when I was in high school [New Lincoln School, New York, New York], and they had a profound effect on me. I wouldn't have been able to name the artists in that moment; I just remember walking to that exhibition and seeing works of art, kinds of art I'd never seen before. Of course, later in my life, when I was working at the Whitney, I, I could recognize those works and realize how profoundly they shifted my definition of art and art making. Story_ID: 521517 Speaker 1: Now, how many, just one more question about New Lincoln [New Lincoln School, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How many black students were there? Speaker 2: Oh, I would say New Lincoln was a diverse school for an independent school on the Upper East Side [New York, New York] and, you know, and I'm just thinking of my own friends, you know, from New Lincoln; we're a very diverse group. So it was, you know, a really, you know, wonderful environment, you know. My best friend from New Lincoln is African American; her name is Alexandra Llewellyn Clancy and, you know, Alex and I met at New Lincoln, became friends, we found out our fathers knew each other, but that was, we didn't probably find that out until weeks into, you know, becoming friends there. You know, I, I had a really diverse group of friends, and New Lincoln prided itself, you know, again, as a school that privileged diversity. And more important at New Lincoln I will say, for me, in terms of my understanding of these issues, was being at a school with a head of school who was an African American woman and of my parents' generation which, you know, again, as I, I, I knew Verne [Verne Oliver] for the whole rest of her life. Again, someone else, it was like pieces of the puzzle. So, all the very same values that my parents [Thelma Eastmond Golden and Arthur Golden, Sr.] were instilling in me, Verne came of the same, she came out of the same piece of cloth, and that was happening for me at school. You know, people often say to me, "So, what opened things up for you?" And there are moments, you know, certainly 'Mahogany' and 'The Wiz' are, but also when Verne accepted me in New Lincoln, I came home from Millbrook [Millbrook School, Millbrook, New York] in June, Verne asked my parents to bring me in for an appointment in June because she wanted to talk to me before I was coming in September 'cause I was entering in eleventh grade, and so, you know, hard year to transfer. And I remember we just and a talk about it, and she wanted to see how I was feeling. And then she said to me, right, because I already was saying things that I think made her know who I wanted to be. And she handed me her paperback copy of Ellison's [Ralph Ellison] 'Invisible Man,' and she said, "Read this over the summer, and we're gonna talk about it when you come back to school." And when I came in eleventh grade, Verne made an appointment for thirty minutes with me every week for that first year of my being at New Lincoln, and we talked about 'Invisible Man,' sort of, you know, couple pages at a time. And not only was that a profound experience, right, because like in a way, I still have that copy of her 'Invisible Man,' but it was like a passport; like she basically handed me all of this in that. But that, also sitting with her and talking about 'Invisible Man,' and we'd veer into other things, that's how Verne got to know me. And it's how Verne influenced in me a sense of trust in her, and just her deep belief that, you know, she was going to help me become who I wanted to be. And I love that my parents deeply respected her, and allowed her that sort of wide latitude with me. Speaker 1: Well, that's exceptional 'cause she's head of school. Speaker 2: Yes. And I think about that just on a management leadership principal; that literally she said to her secretary, "Thirty minutes once a week," and somehow that happened, and I would go in there, and she would, you know, we'd go to a chapter, and she'd say, "Okay, let, let's talk about it." Story_ID: 521518 Speaker 1: --How did you end up choosing Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: I ended up at Smith because of Verne Oliver. When it came time to think about colleges, as head of school, we had a guidance counsellor, but as head of school, she also worked with the senior class, right, to ensure that every student was looking at the best range of possibilities for them. And I remember I did not necessarily have a distinct interest in women's colleges per se; I knew I wanted to go to a small school and it felt like the counsellor gave me the whole realm of some of the best small liberal arts schools on the East Coast, and so my sense of myself was, well, great; I'll apply to all of these schools. But I imagined that I would end up in a coed school, small coed liberal arts school. I knew I already wanted to major in art history, I knew I wanted to work in a museum, but I also saw college as something else besides just getting on my career track. I was excited about the possibility of leaving home and of meeting new friends, and so I just thought that college experience would be like the experience that I'd seen on TV. And Verne, in a way, Verne was very direct and stern about things. She said to me, "You are going to apply to several women's colleges." And I said, "Why?" And she says, "Because that's how the world is, and I want you to go to a women's," (background noise) sorry. I'll start that over. I, Verne was very adamant that I look at women's colleges and, you know, Verne Oliver was an educator who believed also in education; like she believed that education is what made us who we are, and believed deeply in college as not just a conveyor belt to career, but to, again, this ability to deeply dive into an academic study that one could have with them, right, their whole life, no matter what they did. And so Verne was the one who said, "You are gonna apply to women's colleges." And I remember Verne giving me the most sophisticated analysis of gender and race politics in America as she saw it, and end of that lecture ended up that she felt a woman's college would give me things that I would not get anywhere else, that she felt would be critical to my ability to actualize a life full of possibility and opportunity. And I believed her in a way, and so applied; in the end decided not to go to Smith, and sent a deposit to a coed liberal arts school that I won't name, that I went to visit, and when I was visiting this coed liberal arts, very good school that had a, a student body all proud to go there, I met a young man at that school who, so proud of his school and so, did, believed deeply, right, in its pull, said to me, "Oh, my girlfriend goes to Smith; you should meet her." And so in the weekend, it was that discovery weekend that, where after you decide where you're going you go up there, I met this young woman, and she was amazing. I mean I had never met a woman my age who had as much determination, as much focus, as much poise, I mean the first thing when I saw her, I thought, my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] would love her. While everyone else was at this college party, kind of, you know, in whatever they were in, she commanded space in the room, and she very calmly kind of said to me, "You know, it's great you're here; this is a great school, but did you apply to Smith?" And I said, "Yes, and I got in." I said, "But you know, I just don't know, a single sex school; I, you know, maybe I should go to a coed school." And she says, "I think you're wrong." And she gave me her phone number; she said, "Call me, let's talk," you know, "when you get home." Well, by the time I get home, and this is how the world is, it turned out her father was a very well known elected official in New York State who, when she said, "You know, I met this young woman, this is her name." He said, "Oh, that must be," again, "Artie Golden's [Arthur Golden, Sr.] daughter." And he called my dad, and she and I had spoken, and at that point my parents called Smith and said, "Listen," you know, "she made this decision, she'd like to perhaps change her decision." It was still within the timing, so I wasn't out of time, but it was more that it felt like we were done. And Smith, of course, said, "Of course you can come." And the only thing that happened is we lost the deposit for the first school. And years later, that school invited me to do a lecture and they paid me a very generous honorarium, and I was so proud of that and I told my father, and about a week later he said, "Okay, you know whose money that is." He goes, "That's my deposit with interest," you know, twenty years later (laughter). But, I then knew, I knew Smith was right. I knew it was right; I knew when I visited, but I just had a little bit of anxiety about what I imagined I wanted. It's the thing I tell now young women who are looking at Smith, that that anxiety, in the course of one's life, is so small compared to all you gain in these four years in an environment that is truly invested in you. And what it means to be in an environment with all these young women, your peers, who have an equal sense of themself was inspiring every single day. That's how it felt to be at Smith, it was inspiring every day. So that's how I got to Smith. Verne was thrilled. I mean this was sort of her choice, and I'd applied to several other women's colleges. My parents were thrilled because it was a decision they thought I was happy with, and I went off to Smith and spent four amazing years there. Story_ID: 521519 Speaker 1: And so you had said, so, what was amazing about it? Can you talk about that? And I also know that in your sophomore year you interned here at the, at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], and [HistoryMaker] Mary Schmidt Campbell was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was my director, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] was amazing because it was academically rigorous, it was socially engaging, it created for me a sense of purpose, it allowed me to develop myself not just academically, but sort of understand the role we can have in the world. Smith was amazing because at Smith you got to see many examples, this long history of women who'd gone to the college and gone from the college to do many things, but you also, with your peers, had the opportunity to work together, right, to form for yourselves a sense of yourself, your politics, your ideals, your aspirations, and I found that to be incredible at that point in my life. I had many important professors at Smith, but none more important for me than a professor named Walter Morris-Hale. Dr. Morris-Hale taught government, not my major, but I took every class that he gave and he taught in my four years. He was the first tenured African American faculty member at Smith, and had lived a life at the college, deeply invested in what it meant to be a man, an African American man teaching women. And I thought it was very interesting because for the reason that Verne [Verne Oliver] felt I should go to Smith, right, understanding how the world might treat me, but what I needed to get beyond, right, the world's sense of limitations. Dr. Morris-Hale also gave us in his teaching, right, he gave us this sense, "This is what the world might have for you, this is what you can offer." And showed us the ways in which we could define our own paths. At Smith I was an art history major, and at Smith, art history is one of its, the most important departments, one of the strongest departments, an amazing department to learn the history of art. In some ways I was spoiled because I came to Smith after having interned at the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] through my two years, last two years in high school [New Lincoln School, New York, New York], worked at the Metropolitan Museum in the summer before I went to college, and spent my childhood going to museums in New York [New York]. But at Smith, whereas in New York, I had gotten the sense of being able to feel these works; at Smith I learned, right, I learned art history, I learned what it meant to be an art historian. But in my classes generally at Smith, I understood that to be effective in anything we might do, one had to learn how to communicate verbally, and in writing. And so I took a range of classes at Smith that allowed me to learn deeply about different disciplines, but also hone the skills that have become really a core of what I do now in my work. Dr. Morris-Hale was also important to me because, in a way that was similar to my parents [Thelma Eastmond Golden and Arthur Golden, Sr.]. He had a whole life before he became a professor at Smith. He'd studied in Europe, and on the continent; one of his fields of study was the independence movements on the continent, it's what gave me my first love and desire of wanting to know as much as I could about the continent of Africa and the, and the different countries and their culture. But Dr. Morris-Hale also had a very rich social life here in New York where he was someone who knew people in the academic world, in the world of literature, in the world of music. And because of my particular interest, he shared a lot of that with me, which also made me someone deeply eager to be a part of what that meant. Story_ID: 521520 Speaker 1: Now the art history, the study of art history at Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] was still very white, right? Speaker 2: Extremely, extremely. It was, you know, I was in college in the late '80s [1980s], you know, in that moment of canon revision. So, it was a time when all disciplines were beginning to understand themselves in a more diverse way, art history being among them. So I was taught art history before the moment where both contemporary art was taught, or a diverse sense of sort of parallel histories in the history of art. So I did not learn in, say, the history of American art, the contributions of African American artists, which would have been a tragedy if it had not been for the fact that in my sophomore year, halfway in my Smith career, I interned here at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York]. At the time, Dr. Mary Schmidt Campbell [HistoryMaker Mary Schmidt Campbell] was director; she sat in the office I sit in today. I was an intern here in the public relations department, what we now call communications, which was run in those years by the actress Cheryl Lynn Bruce, who I know you know. Cheryl Lynn Bruce was the head of communications at the Studio Museum; she did all of the public relations work, all of the publications work, all of the interpretive writing, right? So Cheryl had a key role here, and I was her intern. And it was at a time when this museum was deeply engaged in canon revision, and Mary Schmidt Campbell, an art historian and an arts administrative museum director, had created in her leadership of this museum, an exhibition program which took on certain received ideas about art history and blew them open, like creating exhibitions which showed the breadth and the depth of the contributions of African American artists. And so in working with Cheryl in the PR [public relations] department, I was getting a whole education, not just about African American art as it was being shown in this museum, but about the sort of critical work that had to be done to change the narrative, right? So Cheryl was writing press releases not simply to inform the press, but actually giving them the language to talk about this art and artists that hadn't been spoken about before. And I understood how critical it was that every choice of a word, every way in which things were described became important in the history itself. So my internship here within this museum, working with Cheryl, with Dr. Campbell as this example, right, now, you know, my idea of museum director was Mary Schmidt Campbell, right, so anyone who might have said to me, "Well, you know, this is not necessarily going to happen," I had this example, and not just as a museum director. What was so amazing to me in that time, being in this museum, that was primarily at that time the leadership, women, and watching in that era, right, the middle '80s [1980s], how this institution at a small budget, with a small staff, was doing work a hundred times greater than the resources might have indicated was possible. And that for me was a great, gave me a great sense of mission, right, about possibility. So that my internship made me go back to Smith deeply radicalized, and I then became an African American studies double major, right, so I was, African American studies and art history. At that time in the African American studies department, there wasn't much art being taught; art history there were no black artists being taught so I, you know, I was making this up a bit, but African American studies gave me a sense of what I needed, to then say, "I want to be a curator and I want my curatorial work to focus on black artists." Story_ID: 521521 Speaker 1: What year was James Baldwin there? Have you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) James-- Speaker 1: Was that your fir- was that your first two year, in your-- Speaker 2: Yes. I was in his class in my sophomore year, so that would have been '85 [1985], but Baldwin came a few years before that, and was there until the end of his life. So, he came back to the states, and was given this position called the Five College professorship, which made it so each of the five colleges [Five College Consortium] in that area supported his being there, and each class he taught was open to all of us. There were several amazing lecture courses that he taught, one about the Civil Rights Movement, one about literature, but there was a, a special seminar that he taught that allowed for five students from each campus, by application, to get in. Most of the students that got into that class were aspiring writers. Some of them are writers now, this day, I was not. I applied to that class saying, "I'm an art history major who's going to double major in African American studies, interested in being a curator who might work with African American artists." And for some reason, that engaged him, and I was one of the five Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts] students who got into the class. It was a profoundly life changing experience for me, not only because it solidified for me my interest in art, which had always been there, but it actually made it clear to me that my interest probably actually was artists right, so being in that room with this incredible artist made me understand that that's something that I wanted to be part of my work, right? How can I be someone who supports the work of artists? Also being in that classroom, Baldwin gave me a sense of the importance of supporting the culture, right, and the understanding that what it meant to have a museum like the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], or to have theaters devoted to black directors and actors, dance companies, that this was radical work because our culture had to be supported. And he made me understand that as distinct, right, from the mainstream. What also was important is that, for me about Baldwin is James Baldwin gave me Harlem [New York, New York]. Now, Harlem was in me, but Baldwin gave it to me because, when I was a student in his class, which was meant to be a literature survey so we had a reading list, and he would beautifully veer off of it; I mean we loved it. Like we would start on the book and he would just go, right? And in those conversations, in that voice, which I could hear until the end of my life, he would just talk about literature and art and the world and politics, and he would often, when asked questions even about his own work or something else, would delve into memories of his childhood, and he would talk about Harlem. And he would often, in telling me stories, reach for a word or a street. So he'd say something like, you know, "Yes, and we used to go past the Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York] because you would see the movie stars coming out of there," and I was always interested in what that meant. And he said, "The Theresa Hotel was on," and he'd be reaching, and I knew that he was trying to say 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard]. But I didn't know how I knew that because I'd not been to the Theresa Hotel, but he would say, and I'd say, "7th Avenue." And he would just look at me strangely and he'd keep going 'cause that's what he meant, you know. Or he'd talk about on Sundays how when he and his family were coming from or going to his father's church, they would see the people who would be going to the dance halls for the dances on Sunday, and he'd say, "Oh, and the best one was," and he'd reach for, and I'd say, "The Rennie [Renaissance Ballroom, New York, New York]." And again, he'd look at me strangely, and I would look at myself strangely, and my classmates would look at me. And as I got to know him when we talked, what we realized to his joy and my great amusement, was that these stories that he was telling were the same stories I heard from my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.], same stories. So I knew; like when he was saying these things, I knew what he was talking about though I hadn't experienced it; it was all in me. And it made it so that I then could take what Jimmy was saying to me and I'd say it back to my father, and he'd say, "Oh, okay, now you're really going back." He, he would say, "How do you know this?" And I'd say, "James Baldwin." Or, I would take things my father said and I would say them, you know, to Baldwin, and that was, for me, amazing. And it was such an important part of my relationship to Baldwin. Story_ID: 521522 Speaker 1: Baldwin [James Baldwin] most importantly gave me artists, because he told me about the artist Beauford Delaney, and in telling me about Beauford Delaney's life, his life and his death, what Baldwin was telling me was that there was a role very specifically for me as a curator because there was a generation of artists whose stories were not told, whose work was not shown at the level it should have been in their lives, who did not have the institutional support, and that by being a curator, perhaps, I could have a role in that way. He knew of the pioneering curators who were before me, right? People like [HistoryMaker] David Driskell and others who'd done the pioneering work, right, to, to write a black art history, and he knew that that history had to continue to be written about, right? The names had to continue to be spoken; that was something, you know, Jimmy would do in class, just speak names; sometimes he wouldn't explain them, but he knew, you know. To say some of these names made us, as students, responsible for them, right, and responsible for carrying those names forward and carrying those legacies forward. And so, by just telling me about Delaney he again created for me a personal mission at a very deep level. It, I cannot say how much it was important for me to have him in my life at that point in my life as a teacher, but as an example. Speaker 2: It's a wonder your father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] didn't wanna come and sit in the class (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, of, of course he did. And you know, but on the other hand, you know, what was so interesting about it, too, is that, you know, Jimmy, at that point in his life, like most people, you know, later in life you start thinking about the past, and you think about things, and you remember things that you hadn't thought about for a long time, and I think, for me being between the two of them in this was incredible. Story_ID: 521523 Speaker 1: Were there other significant things that happened to you at, at Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], do you think? Were there any other significant things? I mean where were you spending your summers? Speaker 2: Back here in the city [New York, New York], you know? I, I am, and remain, you know, a, a lover of this city, so I came back home every summer and interned; I got internships. And I would combine that sometimes with a couple weeks working for my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.], he'd save projects for me. We used to have what's called the dead file, right? When someone had stopped having their insurance for a certain number of years, he had to keep the file, and then at that point, the file could go and be shredded, that would be left for me; like I'd get home from school and I'd have to do that job. But I had internships every summer. One summer, I worked at Saks Fifth Avenue that was indulging, you know, my, my love of style and fashion because I got a discount. And another summer, maybe the summer before I went to college, I worked, also retail, at Lord and Taylor. And those were important experiences for me because, again, it was my first indication of how the world might underestimate me, you know? 'Cause here I was, this child who was so deeply loved, and deeply sort of raised with all of these amazing role models and great confidence, and I remember the summer I worked at Saks Fifth Avenue. And before that, I worked a shorter retail job when one of the stores that's no longer here in the city was doing inventory. And because I knew I wanted a retail job, I took that job first, hoping that I was gonna get something, and I did, after three weeks, get the job at Saks, which was a salesgirl job in the swimsuit department which, in the summer is, you know, a busy department to be in. But that first three weeks at the department store where I was working inventory, hoping to get experience, I remember my manager, right, in that department, who set out the task to, to say you have to count, right, the items in the stockroom, and you had to count them by color and you had to count them by size. And I sat down, and she gave a piece of paper and just left. And I sat down and I made a graph, and I put, you know, small, medium, large, extra large. Then I put yellow, red, blue, light blue, dark blue, red, pink, okay? And then I went through and I put, you know, like a checkmark, then I added up my checks and I put it at the bottom. And I handed it to her and she looked at it as if I had written the Holy Bible. I mean her sense of shock and surprise and just, she showed it around to everyone else, and I had never had an experience like that. Now, at the end of my three weeks when I had to say I was leaving, and she said, "What are you going to do?" And I said, "Well, I'm gonna work at Saks Fifth Avenue now as a salesperson, you know, out on the floor," I said, "but then I have to go back." And then she said, "Well, if that doesn't work out, come back, 'cause I know I could get you a job full-time." I said, "Well, no, I have to go back to school." And she says, "Oh, you go to school? Where are you in high school?" I said, "No, I'm actually in college." And she said, "Where are you in college?" And I said, "I go to Smith College." And again, just this utter sense of shock and surprise. And I, I always kept that with me; I, I didn't feel bad about that; that was actually very powerful, it was a very powerful experience for me because I realized that her lack of sense of who I might be, right, conditioned every way in which she was treating me. And my own sense, you know, of who I was, was already fully formed, right? And, and I could laugh about it even then, you know, as a young person; but even later in life, you know, I sort of realized that, how profound that was for me that kept me on the path where I was. Story_ID: 521524 Speaker 1: So you graduate, and then what is your first job upon graduation? Speaker 2: Well, I graduated, but Artie [Arthur Golden, Sr.] and Thelma Golden [Thelma Eastmond Golden] said I could not leave Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts] until I had a driver's license. My mother grew up in a home where my grandfather [Evans Eastmond] did not believe women should drive, so back when my mother was in her teens and should have been learning to drive, this was only allowed of my uncles, right? And this is, you know, back in the '40s [1940s], so of course my mother didn't learn to drive. My Aunt Evelyn [Evelyn Eastmond], her older sister, did later in life, and my Aunt Joan [Joan Eastmond], who was younger, did, as a young person. But my mother couldn't drive, and she always saw this as an issue. And one of the things I also got at Smith College, which I realize my mother had but didn't call it this, was feminism. And Smith is where I became a feminist, but I realized I'd been raised by a feminist, and so my mother resented the idea, right, that driving was something that was seen, at that time, as the province, you know, of men and boys, and a woman, especially in New York City [New York, New York], would not need to do it. And so my mother was adamant that I was getting a driver's license. Now, I was a New York City kid, so my lack of interest in a driver's license had more to do with where was I gonna drive? I mean you just did not drive in New York, but my mother and my father felt like this was something that was important. And my father said to me, he goes, "Okay, you have a college degree, but guess what? Almost anyone can get a driver's license, and you're getting one before you come home." So I ended up having to stay with one of my professors, who let me stay with her, and I stayed at Smith for about three weeks while I took drivers ed [drivers education], and took the Massachusetts state driving test, and I passed. I came home, and my parents were willing to give me the summer off, and I began working at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York] in September of 1987. Speaker 1: Now who is, who's head, is, is [HistoryMaker] Mary Schmidt Campbell still at that, who is, who is head-- Speaker 2: She, well, at that moment, Mary Schmidt Campbell had become New York City's commissioner of cultural affairs, and Kinshasha Holman Conwill, who had been deputy director at the Studio Museum, working with Mary, being, really, Kinshasha was the administrative head of the institution; she did all of the strategic planning, she was really involved, so had really worked side by side with Mary as her deputy director, she became director. So, Kinshasha was director, and a woman named Patricia Crews then became deputy director; she curated with Sharon Patton, and I was hired as a curatorial fellow, which was a year long position, a position we still have at the Studio Museum for recent college graduates who major in art history, to work in the curatorial department, working on exhibition related research. And so I came back and I spent a year. Speaker 1: And what is, what is the, the state of the museum at that time too, 'cause, or do you have a good idea being where you were? Maybe you didn't. Speaker 2: I did, you know, the state of the museum was, you know, Mary Schmidt Campbell became director in 1977, so I then was back here in '87 [1987]. The Studio Museum moved into this building, opened it up in this building in '81 [1981], so the museum was in this building then for about six and a-half years. So there was, when I came back in '87 [1987], there was a whole level of effort at this museum towards the next steps of institutional growth. Seeds had been planted in terms of the move from the rented space that was 5th Avenue and 125th Street; Mary Schmidt Campbell made that happen, getting us into this building which the museum bought, so here now the museum had ownership. A renovation had been done by J. Max Bond [J. Max Bond, Jr.], the architect who made this into a museum, and now under Kinshasha's leadership, the museum undertook perhaps one of the critical moments of the museum's career in terms of this institutional growth, and that was they began working on accreditation. And the Studio Museum in Harlem became one of the first multicultural institutions to be accredited based on a process that began in that moment to fully catalog the museum's collections, to sort of look at our art archives and begin to create a museum history, to take our education programs which had long been legendary, but really began to systematize the documentation of those programs, and really look towards what, not just accreditation meant, but what it then would provide as a base for the museum to begin, build out its collection, and our commitment to conservation and care of artworks, the ability for this museum to publish, you know, important catalogs, all of that was, was happening in that moment. Story_ID: 521525 Speaker 1: Describe the, how large the curatorial department is. Speaker 2: At the time I was a curatorial fellow, the curatorial department was three curators, but also a registrar and a preparator and a registrar's assistant because the museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] then has now had a collection. It was a small department but it produced at a level far greater than the size of the department. Also, a hallmark of [HistoryMaker] Mary Schmidt Campbell's formation of this institution was creating relationships with art historians and curators outside of the institution, so that many of the exhibitions were also being curated by others, and we continue to do that to this day, right, being a platform for those art historians and curators doing important, rigorous, significant work in African American art and artists of African descent, and providing them with an institutional base from which to present those works, so that department at that time also was doing the kind of work that really nurtured a possibility for exhibitions. Speaker 1: And you were saying [HistoryMaker] Kerry James Marshall was here. Speaker 2: So the studio in the Studio Museum in Harlem's name comes from the fact that from the founding of the museum, there have, has always been an artist residency program which hosts three artists every year in a studio in the museum, that they get free access twenty-four hours a day to work in; they receive a financial stipend while they're here, and then an exhibition at the end of their year. It's meant to be a program to help artists launch themselves into a sort of professional context; it's meant to provide that kind of first step of support, but also create some community around their practice because while they're here at the museum, of course, they get to interact widely within the art and culture world. So when I was an intern here, it was the year that Kerry James Marshall was an artist and resident at the Studio Museum, so really in that time in college, again, James Baldwin made me know that I was as interested in art objects as I was artists. And coming here to the Studio Museum, a museum that had artists in the museum where I could just walk back to the studio space and see artists working and engage with artists, really is what made me commit to the idea of being a contemporary art curator. Speaker 1: So, what did you learn here that you had not learned at Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Oh, well, I learned that the study of art history is just that. What, what I learned working at the Studio Museum was the practice, right? How to put it all into practice, that, in the abstract, that this kind of conversation about works of art is amazing and it's wonderful, but the actuality of institutional structure, what it means to engage the public, what it means to be an artistic institution but an educational institution. I also learned here, very practically, how to take what was my passion and infuse it deeply with purpose, right? To sort of move beyond the sort of hypothetical space, right, that I might work in that says, "I love art," and move into a space that says, "As a curator, how can I be an active agent towards the conversation about art in our culture?" I also learned here very practical skills, you know? When I was working with Cheryl Lynn Bruce and she was the head of PR [public relations] here, she knew that in that moment the Studio Museum was not on the top of any newspaper or magazine editor's list, and I sat in that office with her while she made calls, and she was gracious and charming and, and, and convinced people to, to return her call, and then got them up here to see the exhibitions which resulted, when you look at the press file in those years, in an amazing recognition for this museum but it, it was hard won, and I learned the hard work that goes into that. You know, I learned what it meant to be a museum where everyone has equal responsibility for what was done, so I knew Dr. Campbell as one of the most important art historians working, but I also saw Dr. Campbell in a role as a leader of this institution working alongside with all other staff to make whatever needed to happen, happen. Story_ID: 521526 Speaker 1: Dave Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], was he mayor at that point, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety-four [1994]. Speaker 1: Ninety, oh, that's later, '94 [1994]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Why was I thinking, okay, okay, okay. I don't know why I was, okay. I was think, I don't know why I was thinking this, this is around the time that Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] is running for president. Speaker 2: Yes, this is late, yeah, it's late '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: And it is late '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Late '80s [1980s]. So, you know, so I also, this was also a time Harlem [New York, New York] was very different than Harlem now, so I also learned about how an arts institution has to be a part of their community, and how they have to understand how to serve the community. You know, in those days, right, this was a New York [New York] where, you know, sort of the, the drug epidemic, the crack [crack cocaine] epidemic, crime in this neighborhood were intense, and there were many important, still existing, social service agencies that were trying to provide opportunities for young people in this neighborhood, a very different neighborhood than the one my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] grew up in, and how this institution worked with those organizations, how we were providing art and art engagement for the after schools and daycare centers and summer camps and enrichment programs because there was a sense in the community that this was community work that had to be done. You know, I understood in those days the aspiration for the neighborhood, you know? I, I remember working here in the '80s [1980s] and meeting, you know, those homeowners who stayed in this neighborhood, right, even when the neighborhood declined, who organized block associations, who organized, you know, all sorts of activities to, in their minds, keep Harlem, right? The Harlem that they knew and that they loved. And that this museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], for many people, was seen as an anchor, and it really is what gave me this idea of what a cultural anchor is and can be. Story_ID: 521527 Speaker 1: So that program was one year, right? Speaker 2: One year, a one year job funded, you know, through a grant program which still exists, and so it was meant to give you that year to gain some skills, to perhaps be able to find an actual job, and that's what it did for me. I applied for several jobs and applied for a job at the Whitney Museum [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] as a curatorial assistant, went to the Whitney's personnel office, sent my resume there, got a call for the preliminary interview which, at that time, involved a typing test. I failed the typing test, but the personnel, the human resources manager at that time, a woman named Hillary Blass, had interviewed me, and I had deeply made her know that I had wanted to be a curator since I was fifteen years old. I told her how I went to the Whitney after school most days, and it would be my great, great, great honor and pleasure to work at the Whitney Museum. And my failed typing test notwithstanding, she put me in a pool so that I might be able to have a second interview. When I had the second interview and it seemed that there was interest in me being a curatorial assistant, she said, "All right, you just have to pass that typing test. Come back in; you have to pass that typing test." And I went home, and in my father's [Arthur Golden, Sr.] office on that typewriter, you know, my father, who could type many, many words a minute, we sat down and I practiced and I practiced and I practiced, and I came back in and I passed the typing test and I then moved to the next set of interviews which put me in a position I didn't even think I would be in. I was going to the Whitney hoping I could get a job in any department, right? I hoped for an assistant job in any department. I just thought, I wanna get my foot in the door, right, working in a museum. And when I came back, Hillary let me know that I was going to interview for a curatorial assistant position, and I was interviewing against some young people who'd already worked two or three years in the field in, in actual jobs. I'd only had my one year [curatorial] fellowship but, again, I'd written in my application about my coming to the Whitney, you know, all the time; my internship at the Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York], my internship at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. And later in life when I had the interview with Jennifer Russell who was the deputy director at the Whitney, she said one of the things that impressed her was that in my year here at the Studio Museum, even as a curatorial fellow, you had experience doing many things. If we had an event, you might work at the front desk, you know? If it was time to do a publication, everybody, you know, was involved in the collating and getting things together, and that that's what impressed her and made her feel that I could be a curatorial assistant. And I got the job working for Jennifer Russell and for Richard Armstrong who was a curator at the Whitney then, now the director of the Guggenheim Museum [Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, New York]. And in those days it was the early moment of personal computing, so that there were three curatorial assistants working for Richard Armstrong, Richard Marshall [Richard D. Marshall] and Lisa Phillips, the curators who were responsible for curating the biennials [Whitney Biennial] in those years, so this is, you know, the, the, the center, right, of a kind of contemporary art life. And the three of us, their assistants, sat in one office together, and we were responsible for answering the phones, doing all of their correspondence, typing all of the publications, working directly with artists and lenders around works of art, but it was in a pre-computer moment, so this was all very hands on sorts of work. Any message anyone wanted to get to one of the curators they had to relay to us, right? I mean it was even before voicemail. And in that job I learned so much because I was engaging deeply in the life of the museum as Richard's assistant and as an assistant among the other curatorial assistants working for the curators, working on these amazing exhibitions. Story_ID: 521528 Speaker 1: What did you learn? Did you learn how assignments were given out or distributed? Did you learn about hierarchy? Did you-- Speaker 2: I, I, I learned all of it; I mean I learned how much the process of exhibition making is in the details, and those details come from a deep amount of research, right, and engagement. An exhibition of sixty paintings would start out with a process that might have looked at three hundred paintings to get to those sixty, and I understood that because it would be my job to keep those files, right, in order, right, to say that Richard [Richard Armstrong] had seen all those paintings and now he was making a selection. It meant that, you know, one had to use all those skills that when you're in school they tell you you need to know, right? So my, you know, not so great math skills, you know, had to get better because every single work of art was listed with its dimensions, and I had to know the difference between seven-eighths, you know, and one-half and metric, you know, to, you know, all of that. It meant that I understood how much museum work, curatorial work, but (unclear) all work was based on relationships. I realize how much, you know, the work that the curators was all doing was based on a deep relationship with an artist, the level of trust that it meant for an artist to work with a curator, to engage with presenting works to the public, how much it was involved with donors, how much it was involved with colleagues at other institutions around the world. I learned how much curators were responsible for interpreting, right? How much they were working with every other department in the museum, marketing department, PR [public relations] department, education department, around the interpretation of works of art. I understood how, how demanding it was; I mean I, you know, I, I did Richard's schedule. I understood what a day looked like with a breakfast, a lunch and a dinner, and a million meetings in between, and a stop out to an artist's studio and maybe another stop at a gallery, and then the next day to do it again. I understood the travel; in those days, you know, you had to make travel arrangements on the telephone, right? I was calling, you know, hotels and airlines and trying to figure out, well, how is he gonna get to this place on this day and be where he needed to be the next day? I understood how much museums live within their present but also their past, right? So, at any given moment, you know, the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] was founded by Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney, and that was an important legacy. She formed the institution, and so much of what we did at the Whitney every day was about the legacy of that past and I, you know, had to know that and understand that, but I also learned from looking at art. I went with Richard on appointments; I was there to, to, to take the notes, but I watched how he could walk into a studio and look at two or three things and how he would come to the decision about which one was the best one. And it's nothing that can be explained, but I could ask him and he could explain to me, right? Or, sometimes he'd ask me, "What do you think?" Right? And I could begin to form my own sense of what that means. I typed all of Richard's writing. So, he would write an essay for a catalog in longhand, legal pages, number them; they would come in every morning (laughter), you know? Sometimes it would be ten pages but sometimes it could be thirty, and I would have to type them because then that's how they went to the editor. But through typing Richard's writing, I learned about writing about art. I learned about the art itself because I was reading, right, what he wrote. Sometimes I would begin to memorize, right, what he was typing. That, I learned from my father's [Arthur Golden, Sr.] office, right? I, I would memorize so I could remember, you know? I would wanna memorize your name and your address so that I knew, you know, which policy I had to put with other. I learned to do that when I was typing. I would kind of remember the paragraphs so when we got to editing, I could remember, okay, you know, that paragraph came before that para- now it's gonna move, so I need to, I'd have to retype it. But that was important-- Story_ID: 521529 Speaker 1: I learned from the group of curators at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] at that time, Richard Armstrong, Richard Marshall [Richard D. Marshall], Lisa Phillips, John Hanhardt [John G. Hanhardt], and Barbara Haskell. I learned the Whitney was a museum of American art and I really understood, with my base coming from the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], this idea of cultural specificity, right? The Whitney being a museum of American art, Studio Museum being a museum of arts of African descent, this idea of when you take on the definition of cultural specificity. You know, I also learned, you know, what it meant to just look and look, and look again, you know? Working in a museum I say it, you know, my whole life. As a twelve or thirteen year old, I thought my fantasy would be that I could spend every day in a museum; well, I do, I have my whole career. But in those days at the Whitney, you know, when I had to go from the office upstairs maybe down to the collection storage, I would walk so I could stop the gal- on the gallery floors, you know? What it meant to have the experience of looking at works of art was amazing. I also learned about the people and the places, and again, it was resonant to me because when, growing up, when my father would share The New York Times with me, something that I always appreciated about my father was that we would read about things, and quite often, sometimes friends or neighbors would make fun; they'd say, you know, my father would read, for example, a review of some fancy restaurants in New York [New York] and they'd say, "Why are you reading that? You're not gonna go to that restaurant." He goes, "You never know, right? You never know." Or, when my brother [Arthur Golden, Jr.] and I didn't wanna know something and my father would say, "Read this." And we would say, "Why?" He goes, "'Cause one day you might have it on a test," right, those are his two things. And so I can remember so much when I'd be at the Whitney because my father read everything and he would know everything and, you know, I can remember once there was a time when I was setting up a lunch for one of the curators at the Four Seasons [New York, New York], and I knew what that was because I can remember once there being an article about, maybe it was a time when there was some restoration going on, but about Philip Johnson and the Seagram's Building [Seagram Building, New York, New York], and the Four Seasons. Well, I'd never been there and I don't think Artie [Arthur Golden, Sr.] had ever been there. I remember looking at that article, reading it, and knowing about that. And I can remember so many times in my life at the Whitney, as I was working, I was realizing how much I had picked up or I knew, from the ways in which, you know, again, my father had just always sort of kept me in the space of information, you know? Artists would call on the telephone and I knew what they looked like 'cause I would read New York Magazine in the arts pages, and in that era, the '80s [1980s], you know, all the art stars of that moment were featured constantly, so when they'd be on the other end of the phone I would know, you know, who that was because I was so voraciously constantly reading and knowing about that, so I learned so much there. I learned from those curators though, what it meant to be a curator, you know? What, what, the, not the job description, but what it meant in one's life, right? And, and that was, you know, really, again, how I, I, really, again, each, each of these places it made me know, okay, this is, this is who I am, who I wanna be. Story_ID: 521530 Speaker 1: And curators held, hold, held and do hold a lot of power, but they may even hold more power now, but they, they held a lot of power-- Speaker 2: Exactly (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in terms of whether you get in, I mean to be able to get into a major institution. Speaker 2: And I understood that; and in understanding that, I, that's what made me want the job, but it also, I understood how that power, perhaps in a wider group of people's hands, also created more opportunity, right? That's, that's what James Baldwin was trying to say to me, right? That, that, that's where the opportunity would come. So I deeply, deeply loved working at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York]. Also, at that time, the Whitney had a corps of guards who were middle age African American men, and they loved that I worked there; they were more proud of me in that role than I could ever know. And of course I came to know that later in my career, from them. But even in those years where, you know, again, in the, in the stereotype of the assistants, you know, I, I, you know, I was always running somewhere, literally, because, you know, you had to get things done. Running to the mailroom, running down to the messenger bay; that, you know, in those days, again, we had to use messengers, and there was always this moment something had to go. And, you know, and I'd see the guards along the way, you know, and I felt, like they always would tell me later, you know, about how proud it made them, you know, that I was there. Even in that very beginning role, right? No sense of where I was going, but just that beginning role, that there I was, you know, at the museum. Speaker 1: Had they, had there been many other Af-- Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: You were the first curatorial (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, to, I, no, now, I always say this publicly 'cause I really do want someone to, to raise their hand and say, "No, I was there, you know, before." But there, to, to anyone's knowledge I, I was the first. Story_ID: 521531 Speaker 1: You were there in that position [curatorial assistant at the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] for-- Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988] to about '89 [1989], maybe '90 [1990], you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think '89 [1989], then you went to the Jamaica arts center [Jamaica Center for Arts and Learning, Jamaica, New York]? Speaker 2: So, when I was here at the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York], really even before that; when I, when I was at Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts], one of my professors at Smith, whose name is Dr. Johnnella Butler, she taught African American studies literature and was one, again, an important professor for me at Smith, she told me when I expressed my desire to be an art history major and an African American Studies major, she said, "You have to get to know Kellie Jones." Kellie Jones went to Amherst College [Amherst, Massachusetts], graduated some years before me, and she had made her own major which combined African American and Latino studies, art history, and kind of cultural history. And Kellie had graduated from Amherst and come to New York [New York] and had been an assistant curator at the Studio Museum. And so Johnnella said, "You all have to meet." And in some circumstance that I can't remember, we did. When I was an intern here, I think I must have said it to someone, and they said, "Oh, yeah, you can meet Kellie." And I met Kellie Jones, and Kellie immediately became a mentor but really a friend. By that point, Kellie was working at a museum that no longer exists in SoHo [New York, New York] called the Broida museum, meant to be a museum of a private collection, but she also, more significantly, was working as an independent curator doing exhibitions of young black and Latino artists all around the city, and she was also a writer, so she was writing critical writing and catalog writing very actively, and right at the pulse. I mean she was right, right, right in the midst, in that middle '80s [1980s], of what was becoming this incredible world, right, of black artists. So when I met Kellie, she immediately kind of said, "Come see me, let's talk." At that time, one of her positions was as the visual art director at the Jamaica arts center, which was coincidental because it was in Jamaica, Queens [New York], right near where I grew up. I had been to the Jamaica arts center, known for its, they have amazing arts education class, dance, music, theater but, have a gallery also at the first floor, and Kellie had been hired to curate the gallery and had real free reign there to curate. And so she hired me first as an intern because she'd been selected to be the commissioner for the Sao Paulo Biennial, and it was the year that Martin Puryear was representing the U.S. And in her freelance life, she couldn't do both at the same time, so a job quickly came to be where Kellie hired me as her assistant. I left the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], was working at the Jamaica arts center, managing the exhibitions that Kellie had set out for the year, but also working for Kellie on the massive research she was doing for all these kinds of projects that she was doing all over the world. It was a wonderful also because Kellie, at the Jamaica arts center, had created in what was a community arts space, this renown citywide exhibition program where she was showing artists at the cusp of their emergence, and having openings that people were coming to from all around the city, and so the first opening, when I was there, my parents came. My parents came to everything I ever did. And Thelma Golden [Thelma Eastmond Golden] walked in; she was so proud to, you know, meet Kellie. This, this young woman had hired me, thrilled I was working, you know, there, right there in, in Queens at a, at a place around the corner from, from our church [First Presbyterian Church, Queens, New York], but along a street where many of those stores were clients of my father's, insurance clients. So my mother walked in, and Kellie and I had done our best, I think we had a few bottles of soda and some cups. I think we had a table; I'm sure we didn't have a tablecloth fully. Kellie had, to this point, always herself at home, made platters of hors d'oeuvres and things but, herself, as curator, and Kellie had done that, and then we were serving and my mother saw that, and she said, "You young ladies are doing amazing work here, and you're doing amazing work with these exhibitions, but this you should not do; I will do it." And the next opening rolled around and my mother, all of a sudden we had tablecloths, and she had gotten the florist from the neighborhood who did all of her flowers to give us free flowers, she got her caterer to donate, so now we had a watermelon basket with the toothpicks and the, it, coming out; we had a, her silver punchbowl from home was coming with me, and we had punch. And I ended up there for more than a year, working while Kellie was working in Brazil. But what I learned from Kellie was Kellie really was operating in a way where she was defining the space of new art, right? It was, even more so than a museum. I mean Kellie was working with artists who were at the edge of what we might consider what was going to happen; she was always ahead of it. Kellie came from a family of writers; her father was Amiri Baraka, her mother Hettie Jones, her sister Lisa Jones, a writer, so she came from this incredibly rich cultural environment, so Kellie believed in the interdisciplinary. If we had an art exhibition, we had a poet reading, we had music, which is why even more of my mother's, you know, party planning was fantastic. And I learned that from Kellie, the idea that you can make your own context, right? You don't always need an institution to create it; you can make your own context. I also learned from Kellie how important it was to be in community with the artists that you were going to work with, right? The hierarchies that may be in museums; curator artists that, Kellie was creating a very communal environment, and I loved that. I worked for her until the funding ran out, and that was a moment of, of some, you know, funding challenges in the public funding sector in New York, and a lot of those kinds of projects, like at Jamaica arts center, were publicly funded. So, I was then not working, but a job opened up, again at the Whitney, and that's what got me back to the Whitney Museum. Story_ID: 521532 Speaker 1: So you became the branch director-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: --for the, an exhibition coordinator for the Philip Morris branch [Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So the Philip, so is this the Philip Morris cl- so how is that arrangement? Is this, are they expanding into the Philip Morris Collection, or-- Speaker 2: Yeah. So, when I went back to the Whitney Museum [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], it was at the time that Whitney hired a new director named David Ross [David A. Ross]; he'd been the director at the ICA Boston [Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston, Massachusetts]. And the Whitney was a pioneering museum in this idea of the branch museum, the idea that you could bring your collection, as a museum, to diverse spaces in a city. And here in New York [New York], the Whitney, at that time, had three branches in New York, one downtown [Whitney Museum of American Art], one over in Equitable's headquarters [Whitney Museum of American Art at Equitable Center], and one in Philip Morris' headquarters, and then one in Fairfield County [Whitney Museum of American Art, Fairfield County, Stamford, Connecticut]. And those branches, the idea was that they would show exhibitions from the Whitney collection, they'd be free and open to the public in those areas; like the Whitney at Philip Morris was across from Grand Central station [Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York], right in the midst of Midtown [Midtown Manhattan, New York, New York], and the audience would be the people in that neighborhood during the day. And the ideal was that they would encounter the Whitney and the collection there, but perhaps then travel and go to the Whitney on Madison Avenue. We also did public programs in those spaces, so we had lunchtime lectures because people would come to those spaces in their lunch moment; we had after work events where we'd have performing arts and, and, and other kinds of public programming, and really it was working with artists and the Whitney collection in those spaces. Speaker 1: I see. And was there any intersection with the Philip Morris Collection at all with that (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Philip Morris Collection was shown in the building, you know, throughout the headquarters, but we did not, they, was not in that space because there were spaces in the building, right, where the collection, from the front door, actually, where that collection was sort of beautifully presented, and we did have opportunity for our audiences often to get to see those works as well. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was your charge there? Did-- Speaker 2: Well, my charge there, under David Ross the new director, was to kind of imagine the sort of branch museum as this great opportunity for what we now call access and engagement. So the idea was that with an audience that wasn't coming with the expectation often, of specificity in what they might see, the way a museum visitor says, "I wanna see this exhibition, I'm going to this museum on this day to see this exhibition." We had a super captive audience, right, of people who might be coming in every day at lunch to sit in the air conditioned atrium and have their lunch, and would look across and potentially see what's on the walls and not know what it was. So my charge was that I could be relatively daring in that space if I was willing to be open and accessible, right? So, I could be daring in the art, but I had to also provide points of access. So in that space, for example, I often was doing the lunchtime lectures and loved them because I loved what it meant to be talking often to people who weren't coming at it with a sense of what their opinion might be, but were open to the idea like, "Okay, tell me more about this." I love that we had regular visitors, you know? The sort of UPS [United Parcel Service] or FedEx [Federal Express; FedEx] people in the neighborhood who would see every exhibition, and then give me reviews, you know? Like "Hm, I like this one better than I like that one." I love that it did turn some people into museumgoers at other museums, right? Once they began to experience what we were able to do there. So the mandate was really using the collection and artist commissions to engage, and engage broadly and widely. Speaker 1: David Ross had done some innovative things also in Boston [Massachusetts], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had, and he really was a museum director who was someone who was a leader in this idea of the reinvention of how a museum could live and exist, and I learned that from him, but I also feel that he encouraged it in me, right? He knew that perhaps this is a place I could have a role, and so that being at that branch museum knowing that, you know, I was game for what it meant to be in a space where, you know, art could have a, a real, you know, could hit up against people's just daily life. Speaker 1: So this is when you, and maybe before, but I think this is when you start developing relationships that are still very strong today. Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: Artist relationships. Speaker 2: It is. Story_ID: 521533 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who are some of the artists that you're, coming in? Speaker 2: So, at that moment, in the early '90s [1990s], a group of African American artists were beginning to emerge, and I was very fortunate to get to know those artists in that moment, and in many ways, we grew up together but, in that beginning moment. And there were artists like [HistoryMaker] Lorna Simpson and Glenn Ligon, [HistoryMaker] Carrie Mae Weems, Gary Simmons, Fred Wilson, you know; Alison Saar, you know, a, just a, a range of artists, you know. I look back on that period and I can think of, you know, a couple dozen artists who all, in different ways and different parts of the country, not all here in New York [New York], but were emerging. And because at that moment I had the purview at the Whitney at Philip Morris [Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris, New York, New York] to commission work and to work directly, you know, with artists, I could often work with many of those artists and we could do projects together, as a young artist and a young curator, that were incredibly exciting. Speaker 1: So, how much were you, were you able to commission at? Even being able to commission work is pretty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that point I was able, the whole program primarily were site specific installations. Often, I chose to do exhibitions that were not, but I had an incredible, incredible opportunity to commission new works for that space and to work with this group of artists to do that, a range of artists, African American artists and others and, and really in that point in my career, it was incredibly exciting as a curator, and a young curator, to have that opportunity. Speaker 1: So David Chung was one of the, he's one of the others? Speaker 2: Yeah. David Chung was from Washington, D.C., Suzanne McClelland, you know, Leone MacDonald [Hillary Leone and Jennifer Macdonald], Matthew McCaslin, I mean just a range. And again, at that time, these were all emerging artists so, you know, now they're all artists who've had long careers, and I'm super proud when I see other work they continue to. But this was at the beginning when we all were just beginning to figure out the sense of vocabulary of, of what we could do and say in the space of contemporary art practice. Speaker 1: So you're getting to know them, you're going to visit (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Going to studio visits. I'm out, I'm looking at exhibitions all the time, I'm going and doing studio visits, anyone who would invite me I would go, with some artists I'm developing relationship beyond the studio so that we're looking at other art together, so we're beginning to form, together, a sense of ideas, not just art, you know? With Gary Simmons, for example, you know, I had not had the experience of being able to experience hip hop firsthand, you know, as it was happening in the '80s [1980s], but by then, in the '90s [1990s], Gary Simmons was an artist whose work was deeply influenced by conceptual art, but he was an artist living in his moment, and also very much a deep fan, and a real expert in his knowledge of the music of that era. So with Gary, it was just as likely that I was going to a studio as I was maybe going to a show with him, right, and hearing the music that was influencing, you know, the work that he was making, you know? With Glenn Ligon I was going to see a lot of other art. Glenn is an artist who deeply thinks about, and of course has begun writing about, over the years, other artists, but we would go see other art together, you know. Lorna Simpson is an artist, at that time, who was working photography and video, but her work is often informed by, you know, a whole engagement with visual culture through photographic images, magazine images, film, and video. And again, experiencing all of that with her, incredible, incredible. Speaker 1: So how many works did you actually commission during your time? Speaker 2: Over that time, I'm going to guess four, eight, maybe twelve, 'cause I'm just thinking how many would have been in a year, and I was in that position for about three years before moving uptown fully, so I'm going to say, we can confirm that. There's a book now; that branch has closed, and a book was done of the whole history of the branch, so there's a list in there of all, all of my projects, but, yeah. Speaker 1: So how much were you commissioning for? Do you, do you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, it ranged, it ranged, but I mean I had, you know, incredible resources to do so, but it really did range. I mean one of the most exciting projects I did in that space, because it was an atrium that had a forty foot ceiling, was a project with [HistoryMaker] Sam Gilliam who was a very known and senior artist at that time, but I got to know Sam Gilliam and his work, and I had heard him speak about the kind of paintings he had made in the'70s [1970s], the drape paintings, was intrigued by them. And while those paintings would have been too heavy to hang from the ceiling, he just began experimenting with some new canvas supports that were very light. And when I offered him the opportunity to make one for that ceiling, which means it would have been thousands of yards of painting that could be draped from the ceiling, he jumped at the opportunity and we had this amazing experience working together. And he actually called the piece 'Golden Element inside Gold' [Sam Gilliam], which I always was very proud of that work and that, you know, we envisioned that together, and that he made such an amazing, amazing work of art. And so in that time, to work with very senior artists, you know, Terry Adkins also made a spectacular work for that space, these horns that, you know, rose over twenty feet, that then, because we had the opportunity for public programs, there was a performance where they were played, and just an incredible experience being in that atrium and having the public outside the space, inside the space experiencing what that meant. Speaker 1: So, do you, were there other things you were proud of during that period of time? Speaker 2: Oh, I was just, you know, proud of the fact that in, in a small way, being director of the branch was like being director of a mini-museum, and I really was proud of the way in which I could exist in that space as a curator, right, making exhibitions. But also, I had to maintain and create, you know, a space of dialogue with my, our corporate neighbors, people who worked in the building who experienced, you know, the exhibitions, people, you know, who worked in the neighborhood who were part of our program. And I just found that to be so rich and amazing to be in this kind of Midtown [Midtown Manhattan, New York, New York] environment, but being in that environment with art at the center for me. Story_ID: 521534 Speaker 1: I wanna ask, is it later that you're coming to meet people like Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire]? Is that later? Speaker 2: No, I, that had already happened. Speaker 1: So that had already happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All ready, yeah. It had already happened. Speaker 1: Because he said that you were very helpful in the building of his collection. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, can you tell me who-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. I-- Speaker 1: --and, and what point in time are you meeting-- Speaker 2: I, I, we met in probably '88 [1988] or '89 [1989]. So I met Ray McGuire through a trustee of the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], [HistoryMaker] Nancy Lane, and Nancy Lane had been a trustee of the Studio Museum basically since its founding. In, incredible; I mean a pillar of the Studio Museum. And sometime in the late '80s [1980s], '88 [1988], '89 [1989], maybe even '90 [1990], Nancy began to engage with a group of young professionals, as she felt the future of the museum was dependent on engaging younger people in the life of the museum as collectors, as supporters, and potentially even as trustees. And Nancy had a brunch in her home, which is beautifully installed with her amazing collection of African American art, and that day I met many people, several of whom are trustees of this museum now, many who are collectors who were inspired into collecting that day, right, hearing Nancy's story. Nancy was connected through many of them through her involvement with Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] as a Harvard Business School alum, and her involvement in the alumnae, involvement in the alumni involvements there, knew many of the young people she had engaged. And that day I met Ray McGuire who was an investment banker, as he is now, and he had already begun thinking about collecting, and through his interest in collecting, he and Nancy had already talked about art collecting, art engagement. She had, of course, told him about the Studio Museum, he became very interested in what the museum was, and we, Ray and I, became friends really that day at that brunch. Shortly after, we got together, we went to see an exhibition, and maybe sometime after that, he asked me, in a way that was probably harder than any assignment I had got in college [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], that if someone was going to think about collecting African American art, who would I say the ten most important artists are? And to this day, I don't really know how I answered. I mean I answered in writing, you know; I typed it out and, but, I remember it opened up a conversation that we began that day that we've been having ever since. And it's informed the way in which we've looked at art together for years now. I, Ray has said it's informed his collecting, and the way in which he's collected. But Ray quickly also became a supporter of mine, so Ray, perhaps more than I did, understood then, by the time it was '91 [1991], '92 [1992], '93 [1993] when I'm working with these young artists like Glenn Ligon, [HistoryMaker] Lorna Simpson, Gary Simmons, he understood that it was important to support me in that work as a curator, but also to support those artists. So he began also, you know, while his collection at its core, is 19th century, Henry Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner], at a core, early 20th century into the middle of the century, right? He then began collecting contemporary artists because, he loved their art, of course, but what I realized, like Ray did that with so important, that's such an important part of philanthropy. He also was deeply interested in supporting them as artists; like letting them know, right, that there was someone who supported their work, and by buying that work, hanging it in his home, you know, living with it, having people see it, he was supporting them in ways that we all are deeply grateful for now, you know, almost thirty years later. And so that's how I got to know Ray. Story_ID: 521535 Speaker 1: When I went back to the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] in 1991, I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, how did that happen? Speaker 1: That happened because David Ross [David A. Ross] was interviewing to be director of the Whitney Museum, and Marcia Tucker, who was the founding director of the New Museum [New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York, New York], pioneering museum director who was a mentor, she called me and said that David Ross was going to be the next director of the Whitney, and she felt I should meet him, and she was having a dinner at her loft downtown, and that she'd invited Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire]; Ray who, by this time, was on her board at the New Museum because, again, inspired through his own interest in art. And Ray and I went to that dinner, and there were many people there that Marcia wanted David Ross to meet, artists, curators, but she particularly said to me, "I want you to be there." And being there at that dinner, that's when David Ross said to me, "I'm starting in a couple of months; I'd love for you to come talk to me." And when I did, I imagined I was interviewing maybe for any job that might be open at the Whitney; I was thrilled at the opportunity, and he said, "There's a job open at the branch, curating." And I have to say, while I had articulated and put it out in the world since I was fifteen that I wanted to be a curator, it didn't occur to me at that moment that the opportunity was gonna present itself right then, and it did. And David said, "The Philip Morris branch [Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris, New York, New York], which has a program that I want to be engaging for a public, I would love for you to consider this position," and I applied and I got the position, and I began working at the Whitney in that role for David. And shortly after that, David and Whitney board members, chair of the Whitney board, Leonard Lauder, and David Ross, who was our director, and several other board members, began to talk to Ray McGuire, and very shortly after that, Ray McGuire became a Whitney trustee. Speaker 2: That's pretty, that's a pretty amazing story. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, for me, that also became important for me at my time at Whitney (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, for your career, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 521536 Speaker 1: You were in that position how long then? From, we're, we are in 19-- Speaker 2: So, '91 [1991], '92 [1992]. But you see, David Ross [David A. Ross] also wanted to, he reformed the sense of how the curatorial department worked, so in '92 [1992], David asked me if I would participate as part of the curatorial team for the '93 [1993] biennial [Whitney Biennial], and that meant that I move physically from my office at Philip Morris [Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris, New York, New York]. I was still curating shows there, but I came to the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] on Madison Avenue and 75th Street and moved into an office there. Shortly after that, David then promoted me to associate curator, so in that role, then another director is brought into the Philip Morris branch; I had managerial responsibility for it, but I now was on 75th Street with the possibility of curating Uptown [Upper Manhattan, New York, New York]. And so '93 [1993] biennial opens, I presented an exhibition idea at the curatorial meeting to make an exhibition that would look at the intersection of race and gender in the work of contemporary artists. That exhibition came to be called 'Black Male' ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'], it got approved on the schedule, and that exhibition opened in November of 1994 in New York [New York], and then opened in Los Angeles [California] in the spring of '95 [1995]. So, I was at the Whitney Museum on Madison Avenue from '93 [1993], 'Black Male,' '94 [1994] and '95 [1995]. Sometime in '95 [1995], I was no longer a managerial head of the Philip Morris branch, someone else got promoted into that position and I got promoted into the position of full curator, so I became just curator. Speaker 1: Which is, which is really (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. So, so in that role I was making exhibitions, but I also was working on acquisitions; I was working deeply. And that's where, you know, again, the lessons, you know, of James Baldwin came to me because I was inside, and I knew that I had to be in that institution and make things happen, you know? And I really felt deeply and profoundly like I was there with lots of other people there. I was the first African American curator at the Whitney, but I often say to people, "I was the first African American curator in a moment where there was a lot of public recognition of curators." And in some ways, that is problematic to me because there's a whole tradition of curators who came before me, of African American curators who did groundbreaking work, but not always with the recognition, right? That they should get. But I was living in an era where curators in general, right, became, you know, a, a way you lived in the world, and the way institutions had you live in the world, so my work was very public, you know? In those years, you know, when I, when I think about those years, a very important person for me in those years was Lowery Stokes Sims because when, again, when I was in high school, my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] saw a picture of Lowery Stokes Sims in a magazine and he ripped it out and he gave it to me, and I had this vision of Lowery, this picture of her in the galleries of the Metropolitan Museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York]. Lowery was the first African American curator at the Met, began working there in the early '70s [1970s], and worked there until 2000. But when I was at the Whitney, I'd gotten to know Lowery, and Lowery grew up in Queens [New York] as I did. Lowery got to know my parents, I got to know her mother, and Lowery, really, in those years, I was at 75th Street and Madison Avenue, she was at 83rd Street and 5th Avenue, and there are any number of days when I was walking up there to see Lowery, and she was supporting me and cheering me on, and really giving me the real, the real lessons of what it meant to not just work in the institution, but to work on behalf of a goal, on behalf of others in the institution. And I felt that profoundly and, and loved working at the Whitney, and imagined that I would have worked there my whole career. I mean curatorial careers can be that way, you know. Sometimes, you can be a curator in the same museum for years, and that's an amazing thing, and I just imagined I would be a curator at the Whitney forever. Story_ID: 521537 Speaker 1: You did the 'Black Male' ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'] exhibit before becoming curator, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, that's what prompted my, yeah, I beg- I got-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's what prompted-- Speaker 2: --promoted, yeah. Speaker 1: I see, and that's what prompted in time for the biann- okay-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. I was able, yeah, to kind of work fully, you know, making exhibitions and working also on acquisitions at that period, so I did 'Black Male' in '94 [1994], two installations of the Whitney collection in ninety--probably '6 [1996], '7 [1997], and then in '98 [1998], I did a retrospective of the painter Bob Thompson, an African American painter who worked in the '60s [1960s], died young, in the late '60s [1960s], but there'd never been a full scale retrospective. There'd been a small exhibition of his paintings here at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] and I encountered the small catalog of it when I was a curatorial fellow here, always kept it, and kept feeling like it was something I wanted to do. And then, given the opportunity at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], learning the lesson of the Studio Museum, the leading art historian who'd written what should have already been a book about Bob Thompson; she'd written it as a dissertation, and it had never been published elsewhere, named Judith Wilson. I called her and I said, "I have an opportunity here, so can we publish your dissertation as the catalog? I will secure the loans, we'll, you know, be able to put the biggest group of Bob Thompson works ever together, and will you work on this exhibition with me?" And she agreed, and I was thrilled that she agreed. Bob Thompson's widow, Carol Thompson, was still alive at this point, and she worked hand in hand with me, you know and could remember, even though it had been so many years before; she was a young woman in her twenties married to Bob, he died at twenty-nine, but here all these years later, she could remember everything. I could show her a painting, she knew the date, she knew the title. And so working with Judith Wilson, the leading art historian, and the widow, you know, I saw myself as, this is a place where I could be the agent that made this happen. I could act as, you know, someone who could make things happen in a museum. We, together, could make this exhibition for this important artist happen at the Whitney. I could not have done it on my own, but I had the resources in this Whitney position. I was able to take both the power and the privilege of the position and make it work to something that was bigger than perhaps even my own imaginings. Story_ID: 521538 Speaker 1: How do you think your experience at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], since you're in conversation with Lowery Stokes Sim [Lowery Stokes Sims] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: How are your, how are your experiences different? Speaker 2: Different. You know, I think our experiences were different based most, mostly on the differences in our two in, in the two institutions, and the difference in the era, right? So, you know, I was coming of age as a curator in the age of multiculturalism; it was an age that Lowery made happen. Lowery was one of those curators who made multiculturalism happen, and I came of age at the point where this was not simply an issue that was of importance to people of color, but this was sort of opening up an issue that was becoming important and interesting for all. So I became a curator in a moment where what I was curating was really at the center of the artistic dialog. I think the difference is also I was working at an institution, the Whitney, which operated more within its 20th century than context. The Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York], as an encyclopedic museum with modern and contemporary being a part of it, was just a different way into working. I think as a curator, I was at the Whitney at a time when I was equally as interested in the work I could do in the Whitney as the work that I could do outside of the institution because I, I had more opportunity to think that way, whereas Lowery worked at the Met where outside work was often her way to radically influence what could happen in her own institution and others, so that is, when Lowery took on projects where, you know, she was writing important art historical essays, laying out art historical timelines. That was not just work like I was doing, maybe writing about one artist or working on an exhibition; you know, Lowery was creating, you know, like I say, the framework? Lowery's work was building that, both inside the Metropolitan Museum, and the work that she was doing outside of it. So I think our experiences were different because Lowery had a much harder job than I did, much harder job. Speaker 1: At a much harder time. Speaker 2: At a much harder time, and, she did a better job at that harder job, right, than I did at the job that I was doing because I could make my choices as my own, right? Lowery had so much more sort of outside and inside pressure, right, because of the need for change. Like Lowery had to really do, you know, I often say it's like, you know, making a path, you know. Everyone says who paved the way. No, Lowery didn't pave the way, Lowery had to knock the trees down to then pave the way. I mean she did, you know, critical, critical work that defined what the work could be. I don't know if I could be a curator, and know what work I would be doing when I was doing my work, if it hadn't been for Lowery, right? So she had to almost set out for us a framework. "Okay, here's, here, here's what the frame is." And that's what I got, you know, from Lowery. Now, Lowery is so incredibly brilliant but also really humble about this that, you know, she often will frame, you know, her time in different ways, but I know from where I sit now, in particular, I get it, and I get that also because I had the privilege, of course, when I left the Whitney, to come work for Lowery, right? So after all those years of Lowery supporting me and mentoring me, I could actually serve her, and serve her vision. And in that role is where I saw how deeply, deeply formed her ideas about this work are, right? Like that it doesn't come from the simple desire to show art, think about artists; Lowery, you know, has an incredibly deep formation, right, of what this work means, and that comes from the hard work that she did, and did so successfully. Speaker 1: And when we talk about this work, we're talking about the acceptance for integration (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, um-hm. Speaker 1: And in this particular case of multicultural or black voices-- Speaker 2: That, that's right. Speaker 1: But then, or validation-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, right, yeah. Speaker 1: --even the art of, black people's art. Speaker 2: That's right, that, that, that, you know, had, had not been there and, and maybe still wouldn't be there if there hadn't been voices like Lowery, right, that made it possible for the arguments to be made, you know? To, to open up the space to say, you know, "Here are these voices, here are the contributions," and begin to have them live within the art history that we know now, right? I say to young people now, so much of it feels like such received history now but, you know, there was work that was done to make that possible. Story_ID: 521539 Speaker 1: 'Black Male' ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'], how long had that been in your, in your thought process? Speaker 2: Oh, you know, I'm not an exhibition maker who is linear, so 'Black Male,' as a show, was not in my thought process for a long time, but every single thing that that exhibition was about had been there for years, and what became clear to me is that I tend, my exhibitions tend to come from artworks first, right? Like, that often I see artworks, and sometimes when I'm seeing artworks, I begin to put them together in my mind, so in the moment of working on the '93 [1993] biennial [Whitney Biennial], you know, and being in that moment, you know, of Rodney King, in that '93 [1993] biennial, we included George Holloway's [sic. George Holliday] video of Rodney King in the biennial. And talking to artists of all sorts about what that particular moment meant, and then opening out the lens and looking at the work, for example, that some black male artists had been making about identity; work that other artists, right, looking at gender and race, I was interested in how I could make an exhibition that understood what, at that moment, hip hop was and was becoming, you know. I knew that wasn't an exhibition about hip hop, but I was trying to understand, you know, what, what, what is this and how can I make this make sense in art? I, to my mother's [Thelma Eastmond Golden] great horror, cut my hair off and went natural in 1989 probably; that put me, at that moment, in the realm of barbershops, that's where I was getting my hair cut. Really, my brother [Arthur Golden, Jr.], you know, I went to the barbershop my brother went to which was run by high school friends of his who started a barbershop, and so being in those spaces and kind of understanding the real lived experience of the men of my brother's generation with my father's [Arthur Golden, Sr.] voice always in my head about what opportunity or lack thereof was there for them, how they understood themselves, but more importantly how others understood them, you know? That was the age of the cultural wars. David Ross [David A. Ross] was one of those brave museum directors who showed Mapplethorpe's [Robert Mapplethorpe] work, you know, at that time, and so that was work I was deeply interested in, but came to a particular interest in, you know, Mapplethorpe's presentation of the black male body and, and what that meant in those cultural wars, right, how, how that sat. It was an exhibition that was about authority because so much of what I knew and understood about this idea of black artists making work about the black experience got complicated when we started talking about artists who were not black making work about the black experience, and I wanted to explore that complexity. I was interested in the way in which the media, which had been such an important part of conceptual artists understanding of art, the way in which black masculinity lived in the media and the way that collision between media interest in art and this media, you know, around the black male image; I deeply, deeply, deeply wanted to look at that. So there were so many things that got me there that then made it an exhibition, right? All of that might have been, I don't know; all of that could have turned into many things, but a lot of it really kept pulling me back as, as always. I mean when I have questions, you know, I look to art, and quite often, if I'm asking questions and looking at art, if I imagine that those questions are interesting and profound, usually I'll think of an exhibition. Story_ID: 521540 Speaker 1: Did you know the maelstrom that would result as a result of the exhibition (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. And part of that is I was very young; I was a very young curator. Speaker 1: Very young curator. Speaker 2: And, you know, in some ways now I look (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're, you were like twenty, let's see-- Speaker 2: Was I twenty-eight or twenty-nine at that time? Speaker 1: Twenty-nine. Um-hm. Speaker 2: You know, I, I had no idea. I mean I had no idea because I was a very young curator making a very big exhibition, and my first, so, meaning I didn't have an experience of a big exhibition. I'd been curating, obviously, doing works at the Whitney at Philip Morris [Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris, New York, New York], I'd made, you know, exhibitions before, but at this scale, this was my first major exhibition, and this was it. The '93 [1993] biennial was incredibly controversial, so I did understand what it meant for the institution to be in the space of controversy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because they were saying, explain what people were saying about the biennial, that it was-- Speaker 2: Well, that biennial, which was the first biennial, which truly took on multiculturalism, had the most artists of color than any Whitney Biennial had ever had, and really looked at what was already in the world happening, right, out in the world in the art world, but brought it to the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] which, for many, was the center of the art world. And for many people that biennial was incredibly controversial, most people hated it at that time; it, it created a dialog that was intense, so I understood that. But I have to say 'Black Male' ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'] still took me by surprise because it was all of those things plus. It forced me to be in an incredibly public role in the space of my work. Now, it's something now that I couldn't imagine my work without, but at that time I didn't choose it, right, it chose me, and so there I was, right? In the world speaking about, not just my exhibition, but having to kind of defend a whole set of issues that many people thought my exhibition represented in the world, and that, for me, was an incredible experience and a deeply profound one. I am only, in recent years, able to unpack it because it all happened in real time. It was my reality, you know? There are times when David Ross [David A. Ross] sort of talks about it and he uses, you know, a sort of baseball analogy, and because I don't know sports at all, ever, I always get it wrong. But, you know, he sort of positions it as being, you know, in the last game of the World Series with all the bases full and being the last hitter, that that's what I was do- that's what that was, right? That, that, you know, everything, you know, was positioned towards this being at the center of the public conversation, and when it, it got so big, there I was. But, you know, I-- Speaker 1: Little Thelma [HistoryMaker Thelma Golden] (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, I was made for this, you know? And so, so many of the, so much of what was deeply at the core, you know, of who I was made to be by my parents, came into being in that moment, you know. My mother's [Thelma Eastmond Golden] desire that we always be able to live in public, and speak clearly and convincingly about and for ourselves, right, her, her desire that that be how we be understood. So all of what felt like, you know, her, you know, need that, you know, I had to always be one doing a recitation at church, or a dedi- you know, all, all of that, right? All that was, I realize in her mind, for this. You know, my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] sense that I'd be deeply well informed and be able to form a good argument to, to be able to sort of be nuanced in my understanding, you know, of, of what I was doing. You know, one of the funniest things that happened during 'Black Male,' is that my father, in his office, listened to WLIB [WLIB Radio], which was the African American talk radio station here in New York City [New York, New York], and they had a daily morning call in where people could call in about anything, and my father kept this on in the background all day. And when the show opened, of course, it opened to, 'Black Male' opened to all the controversy; within a couple days, people started calling in and asking the host, like, "What have you heard about this show," you know, "at the Whitney Museum?" And the, you know, getting all of, because the, the, the controversy was from all fronts; it was from white audiences, it was from black audiences, it was from everyone. But this, in the African American radio space, there were people calling to complain about the show, and had complicated conspiracy theories about its formation, what it was there to do, and then, and this went on for a couple of days, my father very upset, each day saying to me, "You need to call in." And I'm, you know, "No, I'm not gonna call in." Then, by day four or five, when the callers were beginning to describe the curator of this exhibition about black men, this terrible controversial, derogatory exhibition which would, had been curated by this middle aged Jewish woman named Thelma Golden, then my father went berserk and threatened to call. Like he said, "I am calling in right now." And when I approached my colleagues, you know, in the PR [public relations] department at the Whitney and, and said this, and they thought, interesting. And that's literally what prompted a lot of the TV I did that came right after that, right, that because it became clear that to have the exhibition understood, I had to be understood. Yes, it did make a difference to people who organized the exhibition. When it was thought of as this big powerful institution, understood to many people to be a white institution, making an exhibition about black masculinity with a range of images that read through a particular lens some people found derogatory, yes, I saw why, you know, there was this outcry. But when I was able to exist in these spaces, African American media, mainstream media, but as myself, right? So, whether it was, you know, going on 'Charlie Rose' or, you know, being on some of these radio shows it, it didn't make the conversation less controversial, but it opened it up in more interesting and complicated ways. Story_ID: 521541 Speaker 1: My parents [Thelma Eastmond Golden and Arthur Golden, Sr.] invited all of their friends, all of my relatives to the opening, you know. I said to my mother, "Oh, you can have," you know, "I'll be able to get ten invitations." And she didn't say anything to that, but then, the next time I saw them, maybe that next weekend, my mother had typed out mailing labels and, you know, each sheet probably represented twenty, and there were about ten sheets, and I was just was like, "There's absolutely no way." And she was like, "I'm sure there's a way," you know? And so, of course, invited everyone, and my parents were incredibly proud. My mother, I have to say, I'm still convinced of this. I don't think she really walked past the title wall at the exhibition, right? She was well aware, right, of, in her mind what she knew was, you know, my own way that I'd come into this, and it was going to engage with, you know, all manner of presentation of the body and sexuality. And my mother would never have said to me, "Don't do that," she could just choose not to engage with it herself, right? So my mother stayed at the title wall. Plus, the title wall's where my name was, so as far as she was concerned, you know, she, she needed to be a receiving line right there so that she could be ready to take any praise and credit that was going to be given. My father was deeply interested because for the catalog, I was able to commission a group of amazing writers to write for the catalog, and in some cases they were essays that had been written maybe for other reasons, academic journals, and so, and some were commissioned for it. So, for example, my colleague, who was then a young important scholar, Elizabeth Alexander, the poet, had written an amazing essay about Emmett Till, you know, and about this idea of looking at images, right, of racial violence and what that means, and the photographic image. And as these essays were coming in, I shared some of them with my father, so he had read some of what was going to be in the catalog 'cause I knew it was of interest to him. And also, the catalog included documentary photographs, right, from history, so we included many photographs. And again, I was sharing those with my father, so he came to the opening excited and eager at the possibility to meet, you know, Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] or, you know, just, many people who were there because, again, he was a man who was reading these things and knew about, you know, all of these ideas, and for him that was incredibly exciting. My father was also interested in the artists, and my parents together had become very engaged with the younger artists who were the artists of my generation, so that by that time, my parents had met [HistoryMaker] Lorna Simpson and Gary Simmons and Glenn Ligon, you know? Those artists had been to my house in Queens [New York] where I grew up and, you know, they had experienced my mother in her hospitality because if I had a party at my house, inevitably that food was coming from, you know, again, my mother ordering on my behalf and sending me, you know, her china because, you know, "What are you gonna serve it on?" And, you know, whatever I was gonna say would not be appropriate to her so, you know, there would come, you know, the whole, she'd send my father to my house with all of those sorts of things, and so my, my artist friends all knew, right, my parents in that way. So that was also very exciting for my parents to see all of the artists that they'd gotten to know in the context of the exhibition, you know? And it was something that, through the rest of their lives, they continued to be excited about, right, the idea that this generation of artists were, were showing and in museums all, all over. I think my parents were also very excited because, really, I think it was at 'Black Male' ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art']. You know, through the years, when I said I wanted to be a curator, my parents were always supportive, but they were cautiously supportive because they understood it as an incredibly competitive field that many people say they want to enter into and there just not the opportunities, meaning there just not enough curator jobs in the world for everyone who wants to be a curator. They also knew the sort of diversity dynamic so while, you know, we held, you know, Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims] in great esteem in our house, you know, my, my father knew even more than I did what Lowery, you know, had done. So my parents were always guarded in their enthusiasm because they felt that perhaps at the point this path ended for me, that I was going to have to consider something else, right? And their feeling at that point was well, there were many options open to me. I'd already evidenced certain skills, but I think it was really that night at the opening of 'Black Male' that they really, for the first time, understood that not only that this was what I'd always said I wanted to do, but I was actually doing it, and that I was really on my career path. And I know that's what made them feel incredibly proud and incredibly exciting, and that's what was exciting about it for me, you know? Story_ID: 521542 Speaker 1: My mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden], you know, my mother's one of those people who can't like take an extra straw, you know, when she's, you know, at, you know, the take out in a restaurant, and I remember that night there were brochures in the little thing at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], and my mother took all of them (laughter), and I said, "Mommy, you can't, please." Now my father's [Arthur Golden, Sr.] mortified, put them in her purse, you know. And then I remember coming home that next weekend and she made me sign them all, and then she was mailing them, you know, with notes to all the people who couldn't come, right, who she'd invited from out of town. You know, she really, you know, deeply, deeply, deeply, you know, sort of believed, and I, you know, often think, you know, my father would often have a sense of disjunction because we spoke all the time, right, even 'til the end of his life. And, you know, but, whenever he would hear me speak, when I wasn't speaking directly to him, so whether on TV or radio, he still found it somewhat jarring, right, that it was me. And through 'Black Male' ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'], when all that's going on and all these things were happening, he said that would be the experience for him, that he would look and just not believe that it was actually me doing that, and so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is the realization of their dream; they couldn't, I mean this is-- Speaker 1: You know, I think it was that, but I also think it was that, you know, as I say, I always felt equally, but differently loved by both of them, you know? And I always felt like when I could evidence what were the incredible ways that both of their sense of interest would come to play, I always felt very proud, you know? So, in those years after, when people would apply to the Whitney to be an intern, if they mentioned that they'd seen the show, or it was inspiring to them, you know, my mother's, I got from my mother the sensibility that I would just say, "Okay, I have to interview all of them," like I have to do that 'cause that's how my mother was. I knew that, you know, my mother, you know, something, when my father would say to my mother if we were getting ready to go somewhere, you know, and my father would say, "Are you ready?" My mother would say, "I was born ready." And that was a big thing for her, and she would say that to me, "You always have to be ready." So I knew, like the time when 'Black Male' was up, I came to work every day prepared at a moment's notice. If someone said, you know, "So and So's in the gallery," to go down and give the tour. I mean I, every single day I walked in with the idea that I don't know what's gonna happen; my mother is like, "You don't know who you're gonna see today." I completely operated, you know, in that. And I was fully available to that because I also felt like this was my great opportunity. (Background noise) I also felt, in that moment, my ability to work with scholars, to produce that book, you know? That's what I got from my father, this love of knowledge, you know? The love of, you know, what it means to people who have a life of the mind. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: You know, I, you know, I understood from my father, you know, what a, a, a privileged exalted place that was, right, people who lived their life in the life of a mind. So to be able to work with this amazing group of scholars, and produce that book and have the, the, the context to discuss these ideas, you know, was very important to me. By the time I made the exhibition, of course, Baldwin [James Baldwin] was no longer alive, but I sort of thought about, you know, what, what he gave me and, you know, what I took from that that maybe allowed me to do what I did. You know, Verne Oliver was still alive, so was Walter Morris-Hale and, you know, and these were the people who taught me, literally, to read and write, I mean, and I mean that in the broadest way possible. So, for them to see this happen, so, you know I, I, I, I, I know that it just felt like, you know, everything that I had done began to make sense for me, you know? And as much as I had a little bit of angst about the fact that I'd never had a moment of indecision about this, and I never had a moment of, you know, well, maybe I should try another choice. I, it, it felt right that that was the case. Story_ID: 521543 Speaker 1: Did you have any indication that evening that there was gonna be this maelstrom afterwards? Or was it when the reviews come out and people's responses, people are responding (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I had a bit by the evening of the opening because some of the previews had begun to indicate, you know, a, a, an attack on the museum and a sense of the museum's interest in fashion or political correctness as to be why this would happen. Often, that was conflated with me, right, the idea of this sort of radical in the machine trying to upend the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York]; that had already started but, again, I, as much as I say it, I still had no idea the level at which it would enter into the depths of a pubic conversation across all media in the way that it did. No, I had no idea. And this is before the Internet, so, I mean the truth is it was probably bigger than I knew it was but though, you know, that, in that moment, you know, I only had access, right, to what I could see. Speaker 1: So how do you handle all of that? That's what I'm wondering. And who is, who is supporting you within the institution? Because, see, that's the other, that's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Everyone, everyone, from Leonard Lauder to that entire board, to my director David Ross [David A. Ross], to my curatorial colleagues, they all supported me. They supported the exhibition ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'], they supported me. And I cannot say enough of how critical that was. I was not out there on my own; this was not, you know, I, I know it now sounds like, when I speak to younger curators who have been grown up in an art world where their radicalism can be encompassed in an institutional structure. I know they prefer the story that says that I went rogue and kind of, I don't know, handed in a different checklist, and then the day of the opening, here is this exhibition, not at all. This was an exhibition that happened with the deep support of my colleagues and the board. And not only that deep support, but so much of what now lasts of that exhibition was not fully of my effort, but my colleagues who had as deep commitment to it as I did, the book. The publications department at the Whitney Museum made that book and they knew, even more than I did, how important the exhibition would be, but how the book was going to live, and every detail that they put into it, every resource that they brought to the table to say, "No, we need more photographs because this particular essay requires that." That was incredible. The support of the board that, you know, where, in the case where I'm sure every dinner party they went to, somebody said, "Wow, that exhibition you have at the Whitney." They supported the exhibition and they supported me; I mean they really supported me. I also had support of the artists, and I had support of my friends, like people who understood that I perhaps had it in me to engage in this kind of public debate, and encouraged me towards it so I, I did, you know? But I remember in those days, again, the guards at the Whitney. I remember how much the guards would say to me, "Forget what you're reading in the newspaper. I was here on Sunday, and there have never been more black people in this museum who are coming here." I mean the guards were telling me what the actual response on the floor of the show was, and how that response, for me, was more important, in some ways, than what was the controversy that was really circulating among the intelligentsia and in some quarters, right, of, of a kind of black establishment, you know. But again, I was a young woman jumping out, right, in, into the realm of a, you know, big important topic in a significant museum, in a contemporary art world that was complex. So, in a way, I fully welcomed the opportunity to have my voice be a part of it. Story_ID: 521544 Speaker 1: So, who schooled you on, or were you on your own in how you responded? Because response I mean that's major media and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. You know, yeah, I guess they call that media training now, so I didn't really have that (laughter) at that time, but I certainly, there were people who were around me, David Ross [David A. Ross] being one of them, a museum director who lived through the culture wars, right? So, David Ross was incredibly helpful in allowing me to understand. But I also had friends, at that point, who were in the media themselves, right, who were journalists, who helped me, right, on the sidelines who were able to help me understand. I talked to some of my colleagues, people like Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims] and others, who made me understand the stakes of a personal voice in that way, but I also, you know, made a lot of mistakes in that moment, you know? (Background noise) It was hard for me, in that moment, to walk away from a fight, and I certainly feel like there were moments in the press where I handled myself appropriately, but I didn't necessarily back away from what could sometimes be the great challenge that was put to me. And quite often, the challenge was not simply the show, but it was of me, right? I remember there was a review that wasn't of the show ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'], but really was positioning, you know, what was wrong with me, right, and, and at large, what happens when you let them, right, into the museum [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York]. I mean it was just, it was horrific. But, and I remember, I could not, not comment about that. Now, I realize I gave that more power in that moment than perhaps I should have. And of course, you know, time, you know, changes everything, you know. I have certainly, in the last couple of years, had conversations with a number of journalists who read about that show in that moment and hated it, who have revised their feelings about it and, by extension, about the ideas that the exhibition was about, which was the opening, right, of a space in which we can understand contemporary art. But, you know, how did I handle it? But I also learned, you know, these issues of, you know, poise. I mean, you know, was I mad at my mother when she insisted I be in a cotillion? Yes, super mad. Did it come in handy when I learned how to like sit and not move at the, in the face of sometimes these pubic like debates I would go to and someone would, in the audience get up and, you know, make that attack, and that I could remain fully poised all the time? Wonderful. Was I able to take the full sense of my education and answer questions in a way that served not just the question but allowed the questioner to understand, you know, my expertise? Yes. You know, those were the years when I, you know, understood the sting of, you know, people saying that "You," you know, "speak so well," you know? I can remember at my, the end of my mother's life. We were in a, an emergency room, as we would be often, you know, late one night, and I had shown up after getting the call, you know, that, that she was going and, you know, kind of got there right at the same time. And the attending, you know, on duty began kind of lacklusterly dealing, and I just very clearly kind of gave him her whole medical history, told him, you know, what meds she was taking, what she'd already had, and sort of diagnosed what was going on, right, and said, "Here's what will make this better." And he sort of shockingly, you know, looked at me, looked at my mother, you know, laying in the gurney, and he said to my mother, "My goodness, she speaks so well." And my mother, now this is, you know, the, what, third, fourth stroke, you know, deep into the dementia and all that (laughter), you know; she looked up and she looked at him and she says, "Well, English is her first language." She did. And, you know, and I loved her for that, in that moment, right? I loved her for that. But, it was one of those things where, you know, again, you know, and it's like even in that moment her body, you know, had, had, had betrayed her but, you know, I knew like Thelma Golden [Thelma Eastmond Golden] was still there because, you know, and he was probably even, maybe he was younger than I, you know, this, looked at my mother and my mother, you know, looked at him. And I laugh, 'cause that was an evening where it was middle of the night, so I had my pajamas on but I put on my best coat because I, again, I couldn't have that be the thing that we were gonna talk about when we got there, right? So, you know, so here I am, you know, my, my yoga pants, you know, my pajama top, my best coat, right? And I'm doing what I'm supposed to do, right? I am, you know, the daughter in charge. So I'm there, and I'm saying to him, "Okay," you know, "with," you know, "this, where she is. This usually means this is where she is. These three tests right away will tell us that. Can we go there?" You know, and his response was, "Oh, my god, you're so articulate," you know. And my mother could have none of that, you know, in that moment. But, I think that that was something, you know, again, that was important, you know, to my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.], that in all situations. So, I think that what I, was most important for me in that moment was that I was able to represent us all well, that the artist, the art, the ideas, our people, I mean everybody, everyone. I always felt that responsibility deeply. Story_ID: 521545 Speaker 1: So, was there, at any point during that controversy, that you were afraid of your job and what the aftermath would be [of exhibiting 'Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'], even though you had the support of the board [of the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], the (unclear), you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. You know, I, I wasn't afraid for my job; what I was afraid of was that the, the art world has ways of turning, you know? And, and you look at the history of art. Something that is incredibly important in this moment all of a sudden, fifty years from now, is forgotten. And sometimes it can happen quickly. And what I feared is that in that moment that we had come through this moment of multiculturalism, opened up the museums, and here I was with my effort towards that, but I knew it was possible for museums to say, "You know what? We did that, we wanna close back up again, we wanna become the province of," right? And that's what I was afraid of. So my rush to do work had to do with the fact that I just did not know how long the moment would last. I realize that was a very immature pessimism because I wasn't putting myself into that equation and saying that I could have an effect on making the moment last; I was more working on the, I have to get a lot done. I was twenty-nine at the time. For my thirtieth birthday, Glenn Ligon made a fake book cover of what he proposed would be the cover of my biography and my autobiography, and he had a couple of alternate titles. And I remember at my birthday party sitting there, and everyone remembers this, and one of them was, I'm curating as fast as I can, right? And it was because I did have this profound sense like, I don't know how long this is gonna last, so while I'm here, while I'm in this seat, I just have to do as much as I possibly can. Story_ID: 521546 Speaker 1: So what are the other things that were important to you? Did you ever feel that that ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'] was gonna overshadow everything else? No, no (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, no, I did, and it did in some ways. I mean it's the only, you know, I always say, you know, people say, "What's gonna be on the first line of your obituary?" I know that, and I know it's the first thing that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're asked. Speaker 2: --anyone starts with and, you know, it used to be more problematic for me; I'm deeply able, you know, can, twenty, now two [twenty-two] years later, deeply able to handle that. What I really worked on, what I'm most proud of at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], I'm proud of the exhibitions definitely, but really what I'm proud of are the acquisitions that I was able to make because in museums, collections are forever. So the ability to identify and buy works of art and have them enter the collection, is really changing the museum; that's what I learned from Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims], that that's what is the fundamental change. Because long after we're gone, those works of art will still be in the collection. So really, while the public was focused on me as a curator making exhibitions, really where I saw my work and my most radical political work happening at the Whitney was my ability to make it possible for works by black artists and women artists to enter the Whitney collection. And that involved gaining the skills that were involved with fundraising and, you know, so many things, because acquisitions really come, you know, when the ability to buy works. Story_ID: 521547 Speaker 1: It really was a wholesale change, but now, looking back on it, you know, it's perhaps, it's, it's not the best thing that could have happened to me because I still deeply, deeply, deeply believe, you know, so deeply in what the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] is, but I often say, you know, I've worked in two museums, Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], this is now my third time working; the Whitney Museum I worked twice, so my entire career is really bound around two museums, and both of them equally are important to who I am, you know? There's so much that I learned at the Whitney that I bring in my role here, but there's so much I learned here that I brought to my role at the Whitney; it, I mean it's just, the, the two are so linked for me in such an important way. So I won't say it's the best thing that happened to me that I left the Whitney 'cause it wasn't; it was sad, I incredibly loved my time there, I was proud of my work there, I had incredible colleagues that I learned so much from, but it was the right thing that I left. And it was the right thing, and it became even more clear it was right because then, seven months into my having left the Whitney, Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire], who is now on the Studio Museum board, leading a strategic planning process, let me know at the time, confidentially, that he and the board had been in some amazing conversations with Lowery Stokes Sims who, by then, had been a curator of modern and contemporary art for twenty-seven years, and that Lowery had agreed to take on the directorship of the Studio Museum in Harlem, and I was thrilled to hear this. I actually thought this call was more news. And then Ray went on to say, "And we all, Lowery included, would like to talk to you about whether you would like to be considered for the first role Lowery has to hire, and that would be her chief curator and deputy director." And I instantly said, "Yes." And instantly spoke to Lowery first, and then we had a real conversation and interview, and then with some of the board members here, and got a sense of their vision, and then together, Lowery and I spoke to them, and I began working at the Studio Museum, as Lowery's deputy director and chief curator, on January 3rd, 2000. We came in together that day, our very first day, and she sat in the office that's now my office, and I sat right across the way, and we kept our doors open, so we spoke between these two offices and together, you know, I feel like we were able to do great work. I loved working for Lowery; she had an incredible vision of what this museum needed in that moment, and she did the very hard work of creating the infrastructure to make it happen, so much of what people give me credit for in now my eleven years as director, sixteen years here, are really seeds that Lowery planted. And, and she did that in what's characteristic of Lowery, sort of unselfishly, knowing that they would not come to fruition in her five year tenure, but knowing that they would be necessary for anything to come after, and that was fantastic. We both came here with the experiences of working at amazing institutions, old, hers [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York] very old; Whitney old institutions, but big institutions with big infrastructures. And on, sometimes, we relied on that for what we were doing here, and sometimes we both reveled in actually realizing that we didn't need to do things that way, right, because this institution being smaller and nimble, there were things that we could do differently, and they could be substantial here. We also began to think about the future and, and we didn't put a date on it but we sort of imagined out, right? Lowery, you know, in year one, you know, we sort of first started talking about five years out, you know, and then we started talking about ten; by the time we got to year three, we said, "Okay, what do we want to have happen in ten years?" But then we really began to think about the future in the broadest way, and that's what began the thoughts that have led to the moment we're in now. I was chief curator, and Lowery gave me an incredible amount of autonomy to form the exhibition program, and I began the exhibition program here relying a bit on my sense of myself as a curator at the Whitney but also actually trying to be very different. So, in most big museums, exhibitions are planned far out, they have to be; I mean just the, the nature of it makes that possible. Here, we didn't inherit very much of a schedule, and in the beginning it felt like we were organizing shows very quickly because we had to. But then I realized that there was something that was making our exhibitions interesting based on that, you know, being that nimble. So, meaning the ability for me to go to an artist studio today and commit to a show in six months, which in other environments would not be possible, here made it so that we were ending up doing projects that were really, you know, current and had a real presence to them. On the other hand, we could also do what [HistoryMaker] Mary Schmidt Campbell had done, and Lowery really sat at the middle of this community, but look at our most significant art historians and say, "Okay, what work are you working on now?" And write a grant like, and Lowery could, you know, raise the funds, and we could say, "In three years we will turn that book, that project into an exhibition." And we had many exhibitions that came because of our ability to convene, right, among, you know, the art historians. Story_ID: 521548 Speaker 1: I was able, I always felt very lucky, as a young curator, to be nurtured as a young curator, as a director, and I decided that we could do that here, so that I built our curatorial department around this principle, that we would privilege inexperience and youth, right, which required of me a different way of thinking about what we would do, but that this place could be the place you could start. And in starting at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], you could learn how to make exhibitions, you could learn, you could work with artists, you could develop artist relationships, understand collection, and Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims] supported that, so that we were able to create a system that now has trained curators of color who are in museums all around the country, right, in this sixteen years that, you know, I have been here. Also though, with Lowery, I just got the pleasure of getting to know her as a, she'd always been a friend, always been a mentor, I'd always idolized her. But clearly, just in what is the, you know, mundane, sometimes overwhelming task of day to day administrative duty, you know, I really got to know and love Lowery, you know? I mean we encountered situations when we got here that, you know, could make us on some days feel like, "We should go home today and not come back," right? But the fact that we were doing it together kind of made us laugh and say, "Okay, see you tomorrow, see you tomorrow," and just come back in and make that happen. We had moments where we could see the possibility; like we'd be working hard on something and there'd be a glimmer that made us know, "Wow. Okay, this is possible; it's going to work." You know, as I say, Lowery was so, gave me so much freedom and autonomy with the program, but yet supported it in, in very profound and deep ways, so at the point when I started, for example, envisioning what the F shows ['Freestyle,' 'Frequency,' 'Flow,' and 'Fore'] would be and sort of said, "Okay, Lowery," you know, "we're gonna take a pass at jumping into this arena where we're gonna show really new artists, really new work, make the Studio Museum be a part of what that whole idea can be." Lowery was, you know, open to it when I, you know, jumped into wanting to do exhibitions around architecture and design, fantastic; thought about commissioning work even with small resources, you know, Lowery was right there. I mean she really allowed me, as a curator, to grow in ways that I would not have without having this leadership role, because as chief curator, I didn't just have to think of the shows I wanted to do, I had to think of a program, right, a program that would be important and informative and art historically sound, but engaging, that would reach our various audiences, and that's a bigger job than just thinking about my one exhibition, but Lowery gave me a lot of space to do that. Story_ID: 521549 Speaker 1: You know what's interesting is that the board, I have to applaud that they were able to recruit; I mean that's transformative for the organization (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --'cause the organization had hit some rough years, right, in between, and I can't remember who was before Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims], but it had hit some, you know, rough years. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, you come on as sort of the dynamite, dynamo team, and, and you're coming Uptown [Upper Manhattan, New York, New York] to an institution-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and then the board like, I know, so when did Ray [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire], was Ray, 'cause Carol, Car- that was the other thing is [HistoryMaker] Carol Sutton Lewis-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --played a role, right, in your-- Speaker 2: Incoming; so by that point, Ray was not chair of the board yet. Ray McGuire was not chair, but, as, I said [HistoryMaker] Nancy Lane had recruited a group of younger people to be involved in the museum in different ways, and by the time Lowery and I came in 2000, many of those same people, themselves, or sometimes their spouses, were now involved in the institution formally as board members, right? So Ray McGuire was now on the board, but, had, involved in the strategic planning process; Carol Sutton Lewis was on the board, Rodney Miller [Rodney M. Miller, Sr.] was on the board at that moment, Tracy Maitland [Tracy V. Maitland] was on the board, [HistoryMaker] Susan Fales-Hill was on the board, and these all were people who had been involved, and many more, in that moment, right, and so because of that, they were now moving into leaderships, so Lowery and I coming sort of opened up the possibility of what that meant, and it also meant over maybe the first couple years we were here, the transition from the former chair, George Knox [HistoryMaker George Levi Knox, III], to Lowery Sims, our former chair George Knox to Ray McGuire as chair, while Lowery was director, that all happened. And then shortly in that moment, Carol Sutton Lewis became our vice chair, right, and Rodney Miller became our treasurer. And so all of that happened in Lowery's tenure where the museum leadership also shifted, and that was sort of critically important to our success, having a board that was deeply engaged in the thinking about the present but also thinking about the future. Speaker 1: And they were seriously involved in fundraising (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: --'cause that's when the Studio Museum gala became-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --the (laughter) Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: That's right. And it became that really through the efforts of a former trustee, the late Gayle Atkins [Gayle Perkins Atkins], and Gayle Atkins, on this board also at that time, again, every single board member who was on the board when Lowery and I came, two of one, sort of positioned themselves to us in a space of aid and support, meaning, like every single one of them, when we got here, "How can I help you?" And in many cases they would say, "Here's how I can help you." And so much of what we are now comes from those initial outpouring, that initial outpouring of support. And so Gayle Atkins said, not only, I mean everyone on the board knew we had to raise more money. We had to raise more money to run the museum, we had to raise more money to, you know, be able to support the present and the future, but there were different ways in which we had to raise that money, and the board was involved in all of them. But Gayle, in particular, said, "This Studio Museum benefit has got to galvanize a community of people who will see support of the benefit as a primary source of support for the institution, right?" So she created in her idea of what the gala could be, not only what is, and has always been, since she created a fantastic, amazing evening, a fabulous, wonderful, glamorous party, but one that, for many people, is the first step or the pillar in their support of this institution that has grown into their support in many other ways. And, and, and she, with Lowery, created the idea of that, that then was taken on by other trustees such as Joyce Haupt and Kathryn Chenault and Carol Sutton Lewis and Jackie Bradley [Jacqueline L. Bradley] and Teri Trotter who, over the years, have, as a group, individual and group, created for us what has become a primary way in which this institution presents itself to the world, and in exchange receives critical support for our programs and our exhibitions and our collection, and our education programs that make this museum happen. Story_ID: 521550 Speaker 1: So, in those five years that you and Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims] were working together, are there other things that you were, you know, that you were proud of that you, that you put in place that were important things? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Because you had to even put staff in place, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. I was, I was proud of watching Lowery take on a very methodical approach. It was almost diagnostic, right, how, how Lowery looked at this institution [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. And she said, "What do we need to do in every area to make the institution great?" And many of those areas are not very glamorous, things that no one wants to talk about, but Lowery looked at every single one of them and she, what she did in looking at every one of them was sort of set out a process for us to address it, and she engaged with a lot of help; again, several board members were able to allow us to get consulting help on some of these areas where perhaps there wasn't; we needed state of the art expertise, but Lowery sort of said, "What are we, what are we gonna do, and how are we gonna do it?" And I was very proud of that because in some ways it's easy to come in and change program; that's that I did, that's what's on the walls, right? And, and, and, you know, my ability to come in and say, you know, from the time we got here in January of 2000, by the spring of 2001, to do an exhibition like 'Freestyle,' that I knew how to do, right? I knew how to do that, I could do that. But Lowery was saying, "Okay, let's look at this building and let's talk about what is the useful life of all the systems in this building? And when do we have to begin to think about what that means?" She looked at technology. We came here and there was a, a, a, a, a website, a simple one. There was, did we have? I don't think we had our own broadband connection at that point, but she knew that our ability to communicate with our publics was gonna be dependent, right, on that infrastructure, and we got several grants and some amazing consulting work to help us build out a digital infrastructure. She looked at our collection which is, you know, the heart, the gem of this institution, but began to look ahead and say, you know, "What are the methods we can put in place that begin to allow us to digitize the entire collection so that these works of art can be accessible to other people?" She reinvented our relationship to storage space, to come to a more fiscally, sort of prudent way for us to understand our need for storage and the growth of the collection, right? We inherited many different storage spaces; Lowery was able to consolidate that. Lowery put the financial life of this museum deeply in order, but also created a template that really made it understandable to say, "What, what does it take to run this institution at the level that the board, our audience, our stakeholders want? And what are our resources to make that happen?" Lowery also recreated the organizational chart to better reflect the priorities at the institution, so that was hard work. There are things that maybe we were doing before that we had to realize we could not do at the same depth because of the fact that we didn't have the staff to do it, so we had to slim down on certain programming to be able to then build out the staff, right, so that we could add that programming. You know, Lowery really also sort of put us at the center of a conversation about museums, and urban communities and diversity and change, and that's just 'cause she's a thought leader and was out in the world speaking out loud about these ideas while she was director here, but that made it so that we were being visited by people from all over to see the way in which we put artists in schools, or to see the kinds of programs that we do, engaging, you know, the community and various audiences. So, I was very proud of all that; I was very proud of the fact that, you know, Lowery, after a twenty-seven year career, sterling career, ground breaking career, path, you know, finding, you know? She was a pathfinder, a path maker, it, her career, that she came and rolled up her sleeves and said, "Okay, here, here's what we need to do," and then set out a plan to do it. Story_ID: 521551 Speaker 1: So 'Freestyle' you did, because that got a lot of publicity, 'Freestyle,' too. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: 'Freestyle,' it wasn't my first exhibition here, but it was the first one where I really wanted an exhibition. I knew I needed to make an exhibition that was gonna set out some ideas of what I imagine our program should be. And it's easy to say things, you know. I could have said to people, "I want a program that's gonna--." It, it, it felt better to let that play out through exhibition, and so I inherited, when I got here with Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims], maybe there was one person assigned to the curatorial department, but it was clear to me that that wasn't going to be enough to do what we're doing, or in the right combination of what we needed, and I went back to my own formation and wanted a real curatorial assistant, and I hired Christine Kim [Christine Y. Kim], and Christine came in in, maybe I came in January, she was here in May. And together, Christine and I started working on acquisition collection, and began started talking about exhibitions. Now the first exhibitions that we made we had, we made a couple of exhibitions with single artists, artists that I had relationships with who I could call and have them come up, and explain that, "Here I am now in Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], we've worked together for all these years, but I wanna make something with you here because I wanna set out a new program." So we did a lot of projects like that. But with Christine specifically, we began looking at young artists. What I was positioning there in the year 2000, as a group of 21st century young black artists, as a way to show the world maybe what the Studio Museum would be looking at in the years to come. I wanted to make an exhibition that would set out, perhaps over the next ten years, a program through the ideas in these emerging artists. I also wanted to make a national exhibition 'cause this museum always had a national footprint, so I wanted a show that had artists from all over, and I also wanted to make an exhibition that was of artists that I hadn't worked with. I mean it would have been so easy to come here and work with all those artists I adored, Glenn Ligon, [HistoryMaker] Lorna Simpson, Kara Walker, you know, Gary Simmons, David Hammons, Adrian Piper, Fred Wilson, I mean I could keep naming them. I could work with that generation of artists forever, but I knew that there was this whole generation of artists sort of becoming and, for me, it would be a harder job to start over, but I wanted to start over and so, made an exhibition where I was starting from scratch, going into people's studios fresh, and sort of having that conversation about work and making an exhibition that looked at all of them. Speaker 1: And so who were some of the artists that you found during that period? Speaker 2: In that 'Freestyle' exhibition, that first version now of what we call the F shows ['Freestyle,' 'Frequency,' 'Flow,' and 'Fore,'], was Julie Mehretu, Mark Bradford, Sanford Biggers were in that exhibition; Kori Newkirk was in that exhibition; John Bankston was in that exhibition; Eric Wesley, Jennie Jones [Jennie C. Jones], I mean it was an incredible exhibition not simply because the whole group, but because, yes, many of those artists have become, you know, incredible voices in, in the, in the contemporary art world, yeah. Speaker 1: So that showed your touch once again, really, or the relationship there. You know, I mean when I say-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --your ability to identify talent. Speaker 2: You know, and we all have gifts as curators, and I acknowledge that is one that I have. You know I, I wish I could say what it is; people always ask me what is it. I, I can't describe it but I know it, and it is how I've worked as a curator. I can, I can tell, I can walk into a studio, I can see it, I can feel it and, you know, I am, I'm sure about it, I'm sure. Story_ID: 521552 Speaker 1: Can you tell me what you look for or what, or is there not, it, it's not-- Speaker 2: It's not. I mean, you know, for example, Mark Bradford was in that exhibition. Mark was one of the oldest artists in 'Freestyle,' you know. The term emerging, in the art world, is used to speak about a point in career, but sometimes artists can be older, and still emerging, simply because they've yet to be, you know, enfolded in the art world itself. So Mark Bradford was an artist that I heard about through an art dealer named Christian Haye, and an artist named Danny Martinez [Daniel Joseph Martinez]. Danny Martinez is an artist I worked with in the '93 [1993] biennial [Whitney Biennial], who made the admission buttons for that '93 [1993] biennial that said, "I can't ever imagine wanting to be white." And that statement was split across the buttons, and people coming into the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], you have to get an admission button and they would get one of the buttons. They might get imagine, but they also might get white. They might get, I can't. It was a very volatile piece, right, of audience engagement that not every audience member wanted to engage with. Danny was an artist I deeply, deeply, deeply adored (unclear) so smart, learned so much from him. And Danny had also been an artist who, who told me, taught me so much about L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know? Like after the L.A. uprisings, Danny drove me around L.A. to kind of show me in real time, not what I'd seen on the news, but what, you know, was really happening. And Danny told me about this artist, Mark Bradford, who he knew who'd gone to Cal Arts [California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California], but who had not been showing in the art world, still had been making work, but he was in L.A. And he said, "You should go see him." And that's because many artists, I listen to artists when they tell me about artists, and most artists, my relationship to them has been made by the fact that I knew of their work and went to see them, so artists will often send me to see someone else, so I was thrilled when Danny suggested this. I went to L.A., I've seen many artists, and I went to see Mark Bradford and I was given an address, and when I got there, it was a hair salon. Now I knew that Mark Bradford's mother [Janice Banks] was a hairstylist and I knew that he was a licensed hairstylist because I think Danny might have told me that in the larger story of Mark growing up in South Central, L.A. But when I got there, it was a hair salon, and I assumed as a, you know, maybe the door was the door next door to the retail space but it wasn't. And I walked in, and there was Mark Bradford with a client in his chair; there were three other operators in the salon. And he'd made the appointment with me, he had told me the address; he said, you know, I'll see you at whatever the appointed time. But when I got there he looked surprised, and I was surprised because I'm walking into this salon and I, there he is. He was surprised because he actually wasn't quite sure I was gonna come, right? He had not been showing or engaging with the art world in years, and so the potential of what he imagined as this curator coming from New York [New York], he didn't clear his book that day; he went right along with his day with his clients and had, you know, a woman sitting in his chair who had her appointment to get her hair done, and I walked in, and he was taken a little off guard 'cause there I was. And he, of course, said to her, "Excuse me, Miss; please move over for a minute." And so here she was, half done, had to move over, and Mark, then I sat down and we talked and he said, "You really wanna see my work?" I said, "Of course I do." And we walked into his studio. And people say, "How do you know?" Mark showed me one painting and I knew. I mean I saw many more that day, but the first painting, I saw it. And what I saw was a fully actualized artist. I saw works that were so significantly complete in their understanding of themselves but also their knowledge of art history; I saw the way in which he was intervening in the great history of abstract painting, but yet he was creating work that was deeply personal. I saw the ambition of them. Mark is a very tall man, and these works were of huge scale, deeply ambitious in their scope, and I felt it then, I knew that these were works of art that I would be looking at for the rest of my life. I knew instantly that I wanted to include him in the exhibition, I knew also that he was, this work was going to enter into the world; I knew that, I knew all of that. And I felt it deeply and profoundly and I, you know, was thrilled in that day to have the, you know, we had a wide ranging conversation, and looked at lots, and he told me about what he was thinking of making, you know? So I began to hear what he imagined for himself. And every single artist that I've worked with in a deep way, the encounter has been something like that, it's been something like that where I see it and I feel it, and I bring to it my entire notion of the history of art; I understand it within that, but sometimes I see where it's ahead of that, right? I see artists where I know they're actually creating a whole new dialogue, whole new vocabulary, one that has yet to be seen. And that's how I know. I don't have a formula, you know? I don't have a, a, a way that I can say that I always know, you know? I mean there are artists that I could be unsure about, but even that unsettling feeling means something to me. Story_ID: 521553 Speaker 1: Was that the same thing with Glenn? I mean he was earlier, with your early artists. Are these, you know 'cause (unclear) Glenn became a friend, I mean Lorna [HistoryMaker Lorna Simpson] became a friend (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Is that the same, or was it-- Speaker 2: With Glenn Ligon, I met Glenn Ligon when I was working for Kellie Jones because Kellie had an incredible set of exhibitions and essays she was always working on. So, working for Kellie was being half assistant but half research assistant. And I met Glenn because Kellie was beginning to work on a project that became an exhibition ['Malcolm X: Man, Ideal, Icon'] about the way in which artists understood the life history and legacy of Malcolm X in work. And Glenn had made a group of works that were about Malcolm X, but before that, he made a group of works, paintings on paper, and he'd sent them to Kellie simply for Kellie to know his work. And when he sent them, the labels that had the titles of the paintings had fallen off of the slides, so Kellie had the slides but she couldn't match up the paintings with the names. And she asked me to call him to ask if he might either walk me through it, or did he wanna come get them and relabel them. And in that, I had a conversation with him on the phone. Now, I'd seen his works and I was intrigued by them; I knew Kellie already thought they were important but I, in my mind I thought, okay, these are really interesting. But talking to him, I entered into what is his incredibly deep mind when it comes to the ability to speak to ideas at such a high and brilliant level that in that brief phone conversation, I was already enamored. We didn't meet each other in person until a year later, and when we met, he remembered that we'd, you know, spoken on the phone; he knew I'd worked for Kellie. By then I was back working at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], and he was just about to be in the Whitney's '91 [1991] biennial [Whitney Biennial]. And that day, we talked about the works he was making, and again he spoke with such incredible precision and rigor about his ideas that, you know, one, it made me understand fully, for the first time, what conceptual art is, right, the idea of art that's sort of based on ideas. But it also made me understand the depth of, of Glenn's commitment to the practice of painting, you know, what a painter he was. And from that moment, when we met that year later, that day, we exchanged numbers that evening and he called me the next day and we started talking, and we basically have talked to each other every day ever since. We have worked together dozens of times on, you know, all kinds of exhibitions. I have traveled to see almost all of his exhibitions when they exist somewhere else, so we've traveled around the world together. We have, he has spoken to me, we speak together about every exhibition I am making, so I am completely and totally informed by the way in which Glenn understands my work. And quite often, before an exhibition is that, it's an idea for me, and I've, quite often, I speak those ideas out loud to Glenn, and in my speaking them out loud to Glenn, he often speaks them back to me, and it's how I begin to understand them for myself. So we've had an incredible relationship intellectually, you know, where this conversation has, has helped me form, you know, my own ideas. But it's also a personal relationship. I mean we do, you know, many things together, and some of the best conversations I've had with Glenn about his work have not happened in the context of his work, they've not been in his studio. You know, Glenn and I talk about art all the time, Glenn and I, you know, driving around in the car we'll talk about art. We, you know, we, we have a way where that's at the base of how we talk about everything, and so that is incredible and it's, you know, one of, it's the, really, the primary artistic relationship that I have. Story_ID: 521554 Speaker 1: And what about Lorna [HistoryMaker Lorna Simpson]? What about your relationship with her? That happened around the same time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That happened around the same time because I met Lorna because Kellie Jones did an early show of Lorna's work, and Kellie and Lorna were both involved with a group of women artists, visual artists, performance artists, and writers, who were all an incredible group of young feminist women of color making work about women and about being women of color, and strong work, conceptual work, you know, really intense investigations. So Kellie introduced me to Lorna but Lorna, of her generation, achieved a level of renown very early in her career. So, even when I was in college [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], I remember seeing images of Lorna's work reproduced, like in the Village Voice, not knowing she was as young as she was then, thinking of her as being a more, an older, more advanced artist. And Kellie, when I met Kellie after my professor Johnnella Butler told me to meet Kellie, Kellie immediately introduced me to her close circle of artists, particularly those women artists, and Lorna was at the, the base of that. Lorna and I became friends very quickly because Lorna's work is very process oriented so, you know, Lorna, the photographic work, the video work, you know, happened right in process, and Lorna invited me to, over the years, in a very casual way, to witness some of that. So with Lorna's work I got to see, you know, sort of work being made, and the way in which she, you know, to, to get to a video work, all that went into what would happen beforehand, the way she would look for every detail, right, when she was, wasn't just the figure she might be filming, but all the details in the room, and her incredible use of old photographs, right, as a reference point. I had several photo albums from my grandmother [Anna Campbell Golden], from my father's mother, that had photographs from Jamaica, and then from here in Harlem [New York, New York]. And this is the kind of material that Lorna deeply engaged within her work. So I can remember the first time I brought them from my parents' [Thelma Eastmond Golden and Arthur Golden, Sr.] house home so that Lorna could see them, how Lorna immediately began, you know, using some of that in her work because this was, at core, she allowed me to see, you know, very differently. I also, Lorna was one of those women artists that made me really again, I mean think about--sort my relationship to art in relation to race and gender, so that the idea, you know, as someone who, as an African American studies major, I had studied a lot of African American women's literature. I, you know, I, you know, was sort of born out of the intellectual crucible of Toni Morrison, right, that those words, you know, form everything that I am, you know? Read 'Sula' [Toni Morrison] in my junior year of high school [New Lincoln School, New York, New York] and, you know, again, profoundly changed the shape, you know, of how I thought about the world. And in Lorna, I met an artist who was sort of evidencing, right, these same ideas in visual art. So Lorna really, you know, sort of opened up my ability to take that foundation I had out of the literature, the poetry, the theater work and the, and, and the fiction, right, of black women that I had, such a base and, and really begin to understand then the visual art component of that in artists like Lorna and all the many artists that she influenced that have come after her. Story_ID: 521555 Speaker 1: You know, my life has forever been changed by artists. That first encounter, sitting in front of James Baldwin, all the way to this day, right? My ability, through my work, to work with artists directly in the moment that they are making their work, being able to present that work, to think about the work with them, to write about the work, to talk about the work, but to be in the space of art being made is, for me, the greatest pleasure, and it's a real privilege, you know? I mean my work is as a curator, but through this work, particularly in this time at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], I've also been able to form very strong relationships with artists working in other fields as well, you know, 'cause for me it is all one. I mean I am a curator of, of visual art in a museum devoted to the, you know, collection and the preservation of works of art. But the whole span of art, you know, and all the different ways in which people make art, are as equally interesting and important to me, and the ability to be engaged with that is incredible. Story_ID: 521556 Speaker 1: So let me ask you this, 'cause I know that, I think I had read this, and I, this is just a natural question. The older artists-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, with the focus on the younger artists, and I think, actually, the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], when you look at [HistoryMaker] Dawoud Bey and [HistoryMaker] Kerry James Marshall, they were in those early years, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yeah. Speaker 1: --of, of the residency program. So, if the focus is on the younger artists, what are the older black artists saying? Speaker 2: Well, here's, our program here at the Studio Museum, in this time I've been here has, has tried to look at the entire span of an artist's career, and perhaps the way we look at it differently is that we look at different periods in a different artist's career in different ways. As an institution, one of the things that's been important to me in my leadership here, being able to benefit from the great example I had in Dr. Mary Schmidt Campbell [HistoryMaker Mary Schmidt Campbell], in the great example I had working for Lowery Sims [Lowery Stokes Sims], is that I, I knew I needed to define a space in which I would work as director here, and while I was chief curator, one thing I realized was that in that very important exercise that Lowery went through to envision this institution, it meant defining priorities. And one of the things that I realized that we could do well is that in looking at what our resources are, without a judgment towards them, but looking at our relatively small space, our relatively small budget, our relatively small staff, that we could have the greatest impact if we put a certain kind of effort towards emerging artists, right? If we could say we could make a real primary impact with emerging artists, be the museum that shows artists first. Then, with mid-career artists, artists who are already out there in their career, showing in museums and collections, that we could offer them at the Studio Museum a very particular context to do something that might not make sense anywhere else, and that could be because of its subject, it could be because of its size or scope, but we could say to an artist, "What is it you wanna do? You're at a point in your career you can do whatever you want, everyone's asking you to do different things, but what would you wanna do here?" And that, for us, has produced some fabulous projects. So, for example, at the time I got here, Glenn Ligon was already having exhibitions in museums all around the country; his work was in every major collection, and when I said to him as a mid-career artist, "I'd love to work together," we'd done so forever, "What can we do here?" What we decided to do, which tied our history together in a beautiful way, was that he'd been making paintings for years using the text of James Baldwin's 'Stranger in the Village,' the essay in which Baldwin, being then in the Swiss Alps, reflects on his coming to be, right, childhood in Harlem [New York, new York], into this space where he then finds himself in this village with his lover as the only black person and the one they see, right? This beautiful essay of Baldwin's. And Glenn had made those paintings for years, but they'd never been shown together. And it felt like, while they could be shown together anywhere, he felt it was interesting that we show them together here in Harlem and that we make, again, this exhibition out of those coal dust paintings, out of Baldwin's words, in this physical space. It was an exhibition of maybe six paintings, small but profound. And, in its presentation here, had the layer of being not just a presentation of Glenn's work, but an exploration of abstract painting for our audience, also an exploration of Baldwin and his words, and that's what made it rich. So, for mid-career, we could do things. When Martin Puryear made a set of beautiful woodblock prints that illustrated a new edition of Jean Toomer's novel, 'Cane,' the opportunity to show those wood blocks here, Martin Puryear known for his sculpture, sculpture that we revere, but these amazing prints, again, against this amazing work, seminal work of African American literature, again made sense here. And so for mid-career, we can do projects that are specific; we can work with an artist. They can call me and say, "Hm, I've been thinking about," and we can do it. For artists who are what we call, our masters, right, artists who've worked, you know, many, many, many years, we can celebrate them if they're no longer with us so, many of the exhibitions we've done of artists who are not with us, it's to bring their works, so that Alma Thomas exhibition ['Alma Thomas'] we have on the wall right now is based on this idea of this pioneering African American woman painter who has not had a major show in many years and that we, the Studio Museum, with our mission, can do that. Or, when they're still alive, like our current [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt exhibition ['Richard Hunt: Framed and Extended'], that we can say to an artist, you know, in his eighth decade, working for so many years, just as we say to a young artist, "Is there a project you'd like to do?" And we can put together, as we did here, a look at the sculpture against the works on paper which show the way in which his aesthetic develops and the language of the work develops. So we have found a way to have a program that can encompass artists at all points in their career, but we just do it in different ways, you know? It might be more common if, if you come and you see an exhibition that fills the whole museum; that might be a big group exhibition, right? We might make exhibitions where we do a focus smaller. We often try to combine exhibitions, different kinds of exhibitions, so you might be coming right now to see Alma Thomas, but you also will see our emerging artists from the residency program this year. The idea is also to create a rich experience for people, and when we show the collection, we make a very particular effort to create intergenerational dialogues, putting works up of artists across the generations that show the incredible sense of both continuity and change that exists within the years, the over, the century, that this museum's collection represents the work of artists of African descent. Story_ID: 521557 Speaker 1: Was there a time ever that you got frustrated with the space that you had? Because, think about it; you know, when you did 'Black Male' ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'], when you have like, I mean, or your other exhibits you did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: So was there ever a time when you've, you know, been frustrated by that? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, I, I think that the sort of pedigree of this space is made very special to me because this building was not built to be a museum; it was a bank. And the vision that it took on the part of Dr. Mary Schmidt Campbell [HistoryMaker Mary Schmidt Campbell] to see this building, derelict at the time, and say, "We're gonna acquire it and make it into a museum," is an act of great courage, but also an act of great creativity. So that while this space is not ideal as a museum space, it has been ideal to present the generations of artists and exhibitions here in this institution. Did I ever wish for formal rooms and galleries? For a moment, but it never felt like that would be possible, at least in the immediate moment. Certainly, the envisioning towards our expansion comes from, right, what we all might hope for what this museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] would have. But, you know, I never, ever, ever thought to not make an exhibition here because I thought the space could accommodate it. And the truth is, what I'm always interested in as, as, as quirky as the space is, and you know this space was renovated by Max Bond [J. Max Bond, Jr.], and Max did an incredible job creating what really is just the most open possibility, right, for how in the space as it was built, the museum could exist. And what I find is that quite often, really people here focus on the art, so that sometimes people will say to me, they come into the space and they say, "Oh, is this bigger?" "Oh, is it smaller?" "Is it higher?" And none of that ever changes. All of that's been the very same since 1981, but the art in it is what changes people's experience of the space. Story_ID: 521558 Speaker 1: So you also did an exhibit ['Patrick Kelly: A Retrospective'], I think it was in 2004. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Pat, around Patrick Kelly. Speaker 2: I did at the Brooklyn Museum [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Oh, you did that at the Brooklyn Museum, sorry, that's right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I did that at Brooklyn, which was just a project that was presented to me as an opportunity and because, again, I've had a lifelong absolutely obsession with fashion, which turned into a very particular interest in black fashion designers, which opened up the possibility for me, for the Brooklyn Museum, which has a costume department, to curate for them an exhibition of Patrick Kelly's work, and I loved working on that. Speaker 1: Okay. So, 2005, how is it that you become director? What is it that Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims], what, what happens there? Speaker 2: Well, when Lowery came, you know Lowery had had a long career at the Met [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York]; I think she imagined that, at the end of her career at the Met that she might enter back into the academy teaching and writing. Lowery is a, you know, has a Ph.D. in art history, is an expert on the work of Alfredo Jaar, but also an expert on the work of African American artists and Latino artists and Native American artists, you know. So there were any number of ways that Lowery would have had a life within her academic and intellectual pursuits. But Lowery was sort of adamant that, what she was clear about to the board when she was coming here for five years as director. And what was super generous of her (pause) is she might have decided that she was coming here for five years, and in year five she might have said, "Oh," you know, "this is going well, I wanna stay." No, she was very, very clear that she was coming for five years and then at the end of that five years, she would decide what she was going to do but that we, the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], would move on. And so at year about three and a half, Lowery began talking about that, and I did not take it as seriously as I should of, you know, in the sense of understanding what that transition would mean for me, and it really hit home for me in a, in 2005 when we sort of facilitated the transition to sort of say, you know, at what point Lowery was going to leave, and at what point I would assume the duties. And this, there was a process created, a committee of the board, that functioned like a quasi-internal search committee, that sort of set out some parameters to kind of understand and make a process to allow me to express my desires to be director and what that would mean, but also created for Lowery the sense of how she would wanna transition, right, what she wanted to get done, how we could support that in, in that last year, right, she was in the museum. One of the last projects she worked on was creating a kind of white paper for thinking about the collection of this museum, something that I am deeply working from right now on a collection project. But that was, one of the last things she did was set out just, again, some ideas about how we might look at the collection moving, moving forward. And then at the point, I became director on July 1st, 2000; it's the beginning of our fiscal year so it's an arbitrary date, but it was a easy way to kind of make that happen. And Lowery, you know, in a way that was a little bit jarring for me, was not director, you know, meaning like all of a sudden I was director and began in what was the job of being director of this institution. Now, you know, I have to say I really am grateful to the staff and the board because everyone made the transition an easy one. It was hard for me because it is a very different job, very different job, and so I know that there was probably, I probably am gonna say six months, they might say a year, where everyone had to help me in that transition, right, where, you know, all of a sudden just my perspective even, right, on the institution had to change, you know? And there is a, a way I understand it because the director's office is in, on the front of the Studio Museum building on 125th Street; the curatorial office is on the very back of the museum on 124th Street. So walking from the curatorial office to the director's office is a city block; this building is two hundred feet deep. And in a way I think it's ironic that these two offices are as far as they could be from each other in this institution because that's how it felt to me, moving from the curatorial office on 124th Street up here to the director's office on 125th Street that I moved this incredible distance and that it was a distance that I had to remember every day, right, that I was now director. In some ways it was made easy because I'd worked side by side with Lowery, so I knew a bit of what I should be doing because I knew what she had done. But I also know that she had left me with a lot that I had to define for myself, right, like there was a lot to begin doing, and that I had to begin doing that for myself. And, and so that was my transition. Story_ID: 521559 Speaker 1: Who took your position? Speaker 2: Well, I became director and chief curator. Speaker 1: That's right, so you really had both titles. Speaker 2: I had both titles, still do, and, but what I was able to do at that point is, by then we had a bigger curatorial department and a bigger curatorial department in this vision that I had created as chief curator, to have a department where could actively, through the ability to work on our exhibition program here, really train curators, and have that training, have as part of it the idea that being here for three, four, five years, it then would be time, with that training, to leave and go on to other institutions, then someone else coming in and starting over. So by then, we were fully within that, and so the curatorial department was actually very well, very well managed through that. And I also arbitrarily, as director, decided to stop curating. So I do not actively curate, and I decided to actively stop curating because I felt if I continued to do so, it would never allow the curators here to develop in their own curatorial voice. And being chief curator means that, yes, I can provide a sense of leadership, a sense of management to the department; I can provide a kind of larger vision, and I can also nurture and support the curators, 'cause just as a more experienced curator, when they come to me and say, "Okay," you know, "this is what's going on," I just have a little bit of experience with that, just like Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims] had more experience than I did and I could ask her, you know, what to do. So that's why. I also did because, one of the longtime supporters of this museum was a woman named Joyce Alexander Wein, the wife of George Wein. Joyce is no longer with us, but George still is, and George was the founder of the Newport Jazz Festival, and he and Joyce worked together for years in that realm of jazz and the music world. Joyce (background noise), Joyce was also an avid collector of African American art, and a board member here at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. And through George and Joyce, I got to have an incredible education in jazz music, going with them over the years to shows and to concerts and to clubs. And after Joyce's passing, continued to do that with George, and I remember once George talking to me, you know, about sort of the jazz quartet trio structure, and how different bandleaders sort of take a different approach to it, and how some bandleaders, when the other members of the band are having their solo, stay on the stage so that the audience is still focused on the bandleader. But, as he once explained to me, some of the best leaders of trios and quartets would leave the stage, because then the audience could focus fully on the other members as they played their solo, right, and that, he always explained that to me as being able to understand that the bands still exist within your orchestration, but in that stepping aside, you are allowing, right, each individual instrument, right, and each individual player, in their individual style, to be heard, that then after the solo, you all come back together again, right, in, in making the music together. And I remember when George was saying that to me, it sort of then confirmed to me what I was already feeling, and I thought, I'm gonna stop actively making exhibitions. I love curating, I love making shows; it's the thing I wake up every day, I have a new idea for an exhibition, every single day. But, I also knew that what I could probably do most, and however long it would be that I'd be director, is if, of all the things I did in my career, all the exhibitions, all the rest of it, if the thing I really did was create the space for more curators, that that actually is the thing that would make me most proud. And so I stepped away from the active making of exhibitions, and we have a team now that, I, I think of them in generations now, you know, of, of teams that are out in the world all over: L.A. [Los Angeles, California]; Chicago [Illinois]; Washington [D.C.], all over. Super proud of all of them, thrilled at all of their individual voices as I see them manifest in their exhibitions, and thrilled to be able, here, to continue to provide that opportunity for new young curators coming in. So that's why, in that transition, though I kept the title I, I defined it differently than perhaps some might. Story_ID: 521560 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you, though, about the director. What did you, it's one thing to work closely with someone-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and it's another to be in that seat because-- Speaker 2: It is, it is. You know, it's a great amount of responsibility, it's a huge sort of sense of understanding, you know, responsibility. You know, I operate within the position, however, with a great sense of responsibility, not so much to myself, but to the directors that have come before me, you know? I, I feel very lucky, extremely lucky, to have had [HistoryMaker] Mary Schmidt Campbell in my life, since 1985, as a mentor and a supporter, and an example, but never more than in this moment that I am director of this institution [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], you know? When I often talk to people, I say, you know, "We have to believe that things happen because they happen," you know. I know that because I grew up in this house with a [paternal] grandmother [Anna Campbell Golden] who believed that there was a reason that my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] married a woman [Thelma Eastmond Golden] with the same name as her child [Thelma Golden] that died; I have to believe there was a reason that I came an intern here in 1985, and worked for Mary, so that I could be here now, I know that. I know that none of this is coincidence, but it all is part of a greater plan, and I feel responsible to that. And I also feel responsible to the fact that anything that I think I'm doing that's hard, I know was much harder when Mary was director of this institution and when Kinshasha [Kinshasha Holman Conwill] was director, and even when Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims] was director. And I feel responsible to all the work that those women did in doing the work that I'm doing, in the hope that whoever does this after me will feel responsible to honor the work that was done. Story_ID: 521561 Speaker 1: I don't feel that anything I'm doing here [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] sits upon itself alone; like I feel like everything I'm doing is really culminating, in this moment, the seeds that were planted, you know, at our very founding. And very specifically for me, those that I got when I worked here first to then, you know, come back again. So that becoming director, I had a vision of what it meant because I've also been incredibly lucky as a curator. I've worked as a curator for three really great directors, you know? I mean really, I wasn't a curator when I was here with Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Schmidt Campbell], but really, David Ross [David A. Ross] and Lowery Sims [Lowery Stokes Sims] really were fantastic directors for me, to me, when I was a curator, so I had those examples. I had David's example of being, you know, a real institutional thinker in the sense that David always thought about what you could create new, right? David didn't take any received ideas as being just those ideas, right, that you had to rethink them, reimagine them, and then create something new out of them. David also, in his support of me as a young curator, really taught me deeply, what it meant to be a supportive boss, like what that means, right, and how, how to make that, just at core, a part of the kind of manager I would be. David also made me feel deeply responsible to the public, right, that, that an institutional life could not be an ivory tower life, right, that it, that it had to be one where you really thought deeply about the public, you know? Lowery really gave me the sense of responsibility of the work that had already been done but still the work that needs to be done in the field of African American artists and artists of African descent. We're still not at a place where we can feel like all the books have been written and all the shows that, have been made, and I know that while I won't get to make them all or write them all, that I can, in the frame of this museum, allow for the possibility for more to be added, right, to the canon, and Lowery taught me that. Lowery also made me understand that, you know, in the sense of how you understand opportunity, that you have to have priorities, right, that, that to be able to do great things in this institution, it meant we had to define where our priorities would be. We couldn't do everything. And that became incredibly important and has remained important to me as I've moved on. But I've also learned a lot just from being in the world and sort of watching the ways in which other people in other fields sort of understand the sort of work of, you know, the sort of creation of institution and institution space. So I, in some ways, I feel I'm a director who is a curator. I'm not curating shows, but I still feel like what I bring to even my director job is the same sensibility I had as a curator. You know, people ask me about artists but people say to me, "Well, how do you know," you know, "when you meet a young aspiring curator?" It's the same as with artists; I had the same ability to kind of feel and look at that and say, "Yes, I can make a difference; I can, I can create the possibility of an opportunity here." I also, as a director, had to learn that I was sort of operating from two distinct places. There were many things that were pushing me, right? Those are the obligations, the demands, but then there was also a lot that was pulling me, right, my sense of the desires, my aspirations. And trying to stay in balance with those two is something, as a director, I had to learn, right, knowing that both, together, are where I can create the best possibility for the institution. There are obligations and demands, and we have to meet them, we have to meet them at a high level, and I, I need to be able to do that all the time. But then there're also aspirations and desires, and we have to have the opportunity to reach for those and create what it means to be able to do that. So that's been, you know, deeply important. But, you know, I am ruled deeply, you know, by passion and, and this is what, you know, my parents [Thelma Eastmond Golden and Arthur Golden, Sr.] saw, you know, my enthusiasms. You know, I mean I just wore them down, right, because I just would not let go. At the point that I was enthusiastic about something, I wouldn't let go of it and that's why they nurtured it. And I feel the same way in my institutional leadership, you know? In, in a sense, my passions towards what we are and what we can be as an institution are what drive me, you know, every single day. Story_ID: 521562 Speaker 1: What about the fundraising and the, the relationship with the board, and the representing of the institution? So, that repre- so one part is the, just the running of the place in many ways (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, did you have to create a different structure to help in the running of it? As there were more demands on your time as a public face. Speaker 2: It, yes. And some of that also had to do with the fact that I came into the job having already, also, a very complex and, you know, sort of public life in the art and culture world. I was on many cultural boards, I have lectured and spoken about art and juried all over, forever, and I feel very responsible to that work. It, it brings me great pleasure, but I also know that I sit within those spaces, again, with my passion and expertise around black artists, and that is another way in which I can further the mission of this institution. But that meant that, yes, we had to change the structure a little bit and create, change the org chart [organizational chart] a bit to create some new positions that then allowed for support for me in that role. In terms of the role around fundraising, it is, you know, the fundraising is what makes it possible for us to do what we do. And if I think about the fundraising and the fundraising alone, of course I would have the reaction many people might have to it, which is that it's hard arduous work, but I see it as the means to the end, you know? When I am out raising funds, I don't actually think about the funds, I think about what the funds are going to make possible. And I think sometimes my success in fundraising is 'cause that's what I am talking about, you know? So, yes, the money is necessary; but in exchange for the money, what I'm saying is I wanna produce, right, deeply in this space of ideas, and that's what makes the fundraising feel to me like a necessary part of my job, but also a privilege, right? The, the ability that I have to go out and get resources to make us do what we are able to do here, to allow us to do it is incredibly important to me. Being a public face of the institution right here in Harlem [New York, New York], in the city at large, and in the country and the work, is incredibly important to me, and I have always lived in a space, I feel very lucky for, of great energy, so I'm willing to do that at a very high level, you know? I am very willing to do that, but I also know now, personally, being thirty years into this career, I also live in the space of the community of artists where I also want to represent what I know is now the world of support around all these black artists as they achieve what hasn't been achieved before, right? So when, you know, all of these artists are showing all around the world, literally, are representing us. It's just like the Venice Biennale or Documenta, when they're winning awards of, you know, the highest order, I also, you know, feel myself lucky to be in those spaces, kind of representing what all of this means. Speaker 1: But when you think about it, because so many people never had that exposure, and that, not that there was not the talent but the exposure, and this has come at a relatively short period of time with these artists, though (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, exactly, you know? Really, in this generation. And so I feel, you know, really lucky to be able to do that, and also for me, you know? The fact is that we're at a point now in the culture world where the dialogue around artists of color is one that is central, so it allows me in spaces that, you know, make it possible for me to be speaking about black artists and speaking about the work of artists of color, and doing that in an international context because, of course, our mission here is not simply that we're a museum of black artists, but very intentionally a museum of artists of African descent. And that allows us, at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], a way to think about the global black experience and the artistic expressions that are coming from black artists all over the world. Story_ID: 521563 Speaker 1: I mean you've been in this position [director of the Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], as we were saying, eleven years, and you have definitely become the face, and the persona of the institution, I mean, and, you know, we had talked about you as a public intellectual at a time when, I think in the last, I don't know how long, maybe the last ten years? I don't know when, that there, there has been a, a real focus on that, that role in the media and also just some public programs. And, and a lot of young people coming through want to be public intellectuals (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right. Well, I think, you know, to, to imagine that you wanna be in the world of art and in the space of ideas, I actually think there's a responsibility to be public. I could never imagine myself as the kind of isolated academic intellectual. I, I would find absolutely no pleasure in that, you know? I mean for me, the most engaged possibility is not when I'm thinking about the exhibition, but when the exhibition is on the walls and the galleries are full of people, and people are engaging with the artwork, and I have a chance to engage with the public as they engage with the artwork and the artist perhaps. You know, for me it, it's only interesting in the context of the world, and so having learned that, and knowing that, and having had to be in that role for my entire career, I actually find it to be the most productive because what it does is it allows for this conversation to be wider and to be bigger. I also think it's just a question of representation; I mean, you know, what we know and imagine for ourselves often becomes much clearer when we can see it, and I've had that through my life, right, because my parents [Thelma Eastmond Golden and Arthur Golden, Sr.] were so adamant about making that possible for me, me seeing things so I could see the possibility. But then, through my work and academic experiences, I had people that I could see an example. And so I love it when I walk down the street in Harlem [New York, New York], and people don't know my name but they say, "Museum lady." I love that because what I know is that while we might talk about the fact that museums can be inaccessible to some people, or seem like an ivory tower, I know for many people in this neighborhood who see me in this neighborhood, whether it's my walk three blocks to my house, to this museum, or in our supermarket, or down the park, associate me, not with me, but with this institution, and I, that thrills me, it thrills me. Story_ID: 521564 Speaker 1: Let's talk about what you feel that you've accomplished, in these eleven years [as director of the Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because you're about to start on a major, I mean you were in the midst of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We are. Well, we are. Well, we are, we're in it, but I feel in these eleven years that I have accomplished a culmination of some of Lowery's [Lowery Stokes Sims] major projects, which is bringing this institution into not just financial stability but sustainability, creating some new models that allow us to understand and make possible growth in the institution (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what are the new models you (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, one, looking at ways that we think out in multiple years, right, so that we can, you know, imagine sort of working towards and around things, and then funding them, right, over time. Lowery set that up and I've been able now to execute towards many of those kinds of projects where it's not something that we do once for one year, but we can say, "No, we're going to commit to this," and that expands our programming or expands, you know, our abilities. I've been able to widen and, and enlarge our audiences, so the number of people coming here and their ability in coming here to experience art and to be engaged with art. I feel I've been able, in these last ten years, to work in concert with what are the very important conversations happening in urban education reform, and begin to think about new ways in which we can exist within the arts education space. Those have not actualized yet because we're in it, but just knowing that what schools need now, what principals are saying they need, what students need in a community like Harlem [New York, New York] means we will have to shift and change, and how can I now begin to build the infrastructure so that we can do that? I feel, in these last ten years, I've really worked hard to build a collection with, with real speed because of our ability through an acquisition committee and through fundraising that allows us to more actively buy, to be able to be really intentional about the building of the collection. I also, in these last ten years, feel proud of not simply the expansion in our staff, but our ability to create positions here that can exist as models in the field as a whole so that the positions and the work attached to those positions allow whoever's in them to not only be important here at the Studio Museum, but to be speaking to some of what we know is important in museums right now, so, like our community engagement position, and so any others here. I feel really proud of our program because it has primarily been created in these last ten years by a group of curators, some here, but many who have gone on who, to me, represent, you know, a whole new generation of significant, fantastic voices of curators of color. Speaker 1: So who are some of the curators that you're speaking of? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm speaking of Christine Kim [Christine Y. Kim] and Rujeko Hockley and Naomi Beckwith and Thomas Lax [Thomas J. Lax] and Jamillah James. I mean I could go on. This is, you know, what, nothing makes me prouder than, of that set of curators. And then if I widen that lens and look at educators, sort of communication staff, it even gets larger than that, right, when I can talk about it in the, in the broadest way. But, you know, that makes me, you know, incredibly, incredibly proud, you know. I think of the number of curators who've been here who continue curating but also then have begun to move into leadership roles. So I look at Naima Keith [Naima J. Keith], who was here as a curator, and now is the deputy director at the California Afro American Museum [California African American Museum, Los Angeles, California]; so not just at another museum, but taking on what has been, for me, this great passion, this rethinking of culturally specific institutions. So there are any number of ways in which just the, the staff progression, you know, at the Studio Museum, makes me proud of so, so, so many people. You know, I'm really proud to work for an amazing board with incredible board leadership, but that it's also had an incredible way in which it, it's continued to enlarge itself, right, so a group of people committed to the governance of the institution, the financial life of the institution that continue to work hard as we think of the future-- Story_ID: 521565 Speaker 1: And I feel most proud that I was able to create the environment to begin what is this expansion project, which lines up with also the fiftieth anniversary of this museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. So, even if we weren't having an expansion, I already, you know, about seven years ago, began to think about the fiftieth, and knew that it was important to mark the idea of this institution not simply just being around, not just surviving, but being so fully actualized, right, in this neighborhood in what would be fifty years later, in 2018 or '19 [2019], depending on how we do the math. And, so when I began thinking about this in 2007, a, it felt far away. And it also is a time we began to think about the future generally, and that's when the real decision was made that we had to begin to think about the physical plant of the museum, not just in terms of what we wanted or needed for a more expansive program, or the ability to serve these larger audiences, but also in some very practical issues which had to do with the age of this building, how would we manage, you know; what, what's the physical assets of this building, the roof, you know, the, the, the facades. How would we imagine that? And there had been a lot of effort, money, and time spent in, in keeping this building functional. But when would that not be practical anymore? And that led to a strategic planning process, a board, ad hoc committee, building committee, all that were put together to really study and analyze and, after a lot of work, came to what would be the idea that we would embark on a major expansion which involves building a new building, ground up, on this lot that we're, the museum's on now, but building new, from the foundation of this building, into what would be, for us, our first custom built, fully built, state of the art museum building, which will be designed by David Adjaye, and will create for us and for the institution, but also for this street, for 125th Street and for Harlem [New York, New York], an architecturally significant home for what we know is already the cultural, cultural significance of the museum as it will be fifty years old and beyond. Speaker 2: 'Cause when you think of it, 'cause David Adjaye did the, he's doing the National African American [National Museum of African American History and Culture, Washington, D.C.], he's doing here, and is he doing the, I don't know, is he doing the Obama library [Obama Presidential Center, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: No, he didn't get the Obama, okay. But, but I think, I mean when you think about that, these are very important institutions within the African American experience that he has his hands on. So, what are you wanting to, what do you wanna accomplish? I know you want to increase your exhibition space (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I mean we, we really want to be able to increase our exhibition space, increase our space for the public, right, so that now the street, being almost fully a commercial street, we wanna create what is a building that also opens itself as a public space. We wanna create more space for our education programs, we wanna create more specific space for that, classrooms, workshops. We want to, of course, continue to have artist studios, and so create more space for that. And then we want gallery spaces that allow us not just more space, but different kinds of spaces that allow us to show not only our collection, but to continue with our program which will continue to look at emerging artists, mid-career artists, and then the masters, and to be able to do that in concert with a program that also highlights our collection, that's what we're looking to do. Speaker 2: So, when are you, it's 113, 112, 113 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're still in planning, and so that, both in budget, size and price, those are things we are now deep in the process of. Our hope is that with all of that working as it should, you know, our hope is that we would be, in a couple of years, beginning the process of being out of this building and starting what would be a construction process (simultaneous). Story_ID: 521566 Speaker 1: So how long would you plan to be out of the building? Speaker 2: Probably we would be out of the building for about, probably four years. But, again, some of that is, all has to do with certain aspects of how long it will take to not just build the, the building but, you know, how much time we would need to move in and move out, but four years. And while we're out of the building, we've created a program called, In Harlem [ph.] because our name is the Studio Museum in Harlem [New York, New York]. And I often say, you know, the gift of our founders was they gave us mission in the name of the museum, studio because they wanted this museum always to be a place that supported artists through the residency program, giving artists space and time and money to make their work; museum because that was a direct assault on the exclusion of museums of black artists; and Harlem [New York, New York], right, where we are. But at the time the museum was founded in '68 [1968], that was a great expression of faith in both the history of this community, but also its future. So, the in Harlem in our name is the name of the project that we're doing, which will take us in Harlem. We will create exhibitions, art projects, public projects in and around the neighborhood, in spaces that are not normally used for art, will, and better education programs in the schools that we work in in the neighborhood, and we will also engage artists who are working in the neighborhood in ways that create interventions into art practice and the public. For us, it will be an exciting way to work because we've had a physical building since the museum's founding, so it's a challenge for our curators. For all of us it's a different curatorial muscle to kind of imagine exhibition and project not in gallery space, but it also, for us, will be an investment in this idea of being in the neighborhood quite literally. You know, we are in the neighborhood, right, we've always been, but it'll allow us to do that in a way that I think will plant seeds that again will grow as we move back into the building, right, so having this time out of the building in the neighborhood when we come back in, my goal is that all of that come back in with us. Speaker 1: Well, you'll know a lot about the neighborhood; a neighborhood is, it's changing every, oh, my, I can't even, every time I come here it has changed so dramatically (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes; well, that's it. And, so that, for that reason, to be in it, right, allows us just a whole different relationship. We will still, we are building out our web presence, so we'll have a lot of what people have come to know and love about the institution. We will be able to facilitate through the web; so, access to the collection, we'll make some collection exhibitions online, we will do some of our public programs from the past, you know; we'll be able to put up and have those featured. So the web will be important for people just to know where we are and where all these projects are, but also to dig back into our history as we get towards the fiftieth. We'll continue publishing our magazine, Studio, so that will kind of live in the world also. But we'll also do some projects with other museums in the city, you know? We'll work collaboratively with some of our peers, and that will allow us, in certain moments, to be able to be in physical space again, so we look forward to that. Here in Harlem, our Harlem cultural peers, like the Schomburg [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] and the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] and Harlem Stage [New York, New York], you know, as well as some of our peers citywide. Speaker 1: And that planning has started already. Speaker 2: Yes, we've been deep in that planning already, deep in thinking about how this will play out in terms of just timing, how we will facilitate some of the ongoing projects. We've been soliciting artists proposals, so we've got ideas that have already come from artists, so we're looking at how to make those work. And then just also looking at just the practical issues of, you know, how do we just stay present in our audiences' minds and really beginning to think of the avenues that we can create that also create for people whose experience of the museum is not simply coming to the museum but coming to the museum and then being a community, with others coming to the museum, how we can replicate that in other spaces. Speaker 1: Boy, you know it's interesting because you will have been, I mean you're still very young; I know you say you're fifty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, well. Speaker 1: --but I mean you're young in our world, and at the same time, the artists that you, that came along at the same time will be, they'll be mature (unclear); their careers will be mature in many ways. Speaker 2: Right. Well, that was the idea behind 'Freestyle.' You know, when I got here in 2001, I really imagined myself being here for a while, and that was why I made that as an assignment to myself. I said, "Let's do an exhibition now that gives us a base from which to understand maybe the artists that we might be looking at ten years from now," and we continue to do that. So that it means that even artists we're looking at today, I imagine by the time we're in this new building and we open up the new building, some of those artists will be deeply at mid-career or beyond by then, and that's the, the great amazing thing about watching the way in which the institution can play a role in the life of an artist. Story_ID: 521567 Speaker 1: Now, you had come up with the term, post, post-black. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that was, the, that term had, had some controversy when (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It just fol- you know, well, you know what? I could have had the term, it could have been jello, and it would have been controversial; that's just how it goes for me. But, yes, it was controversial. Speaker 1: And what, so, can you talk about what its controversy was at the time? And then can you talk about it in terms of recent events? Speaker 2: Well, when thinking about the exhibition 'Freestyle' in the year 2000, the show happened in 2001, I was interested in looking at a new generation of artists. I also was interested in how the institution [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] could begin to build an intellectual dialogue that allowed us to be a place that was forming ideas, not just presenting art, but that we would be in the process of forming ideas. And one thing that felt important to me to define was the idea that sometimes people wanna talk about African American art as is, if it's a direct lineage, and it's not. And so what was very interesting to me is that artists who came of age in the '90s [1990s] were understood in their work through a context that often referred to the Black Arts Movement, right? So the Black Arts Movement being in the late '60s [1960s], by the time we got to the '90s [1990s], there was still a way that you had to talk about the Black Arts Movement as this defining, important period that sort of opened up the space of an identity driven ideal in art, in culture that then came into the '90s [1990s]. But it was also clear to me that culturally, right, in black culture and culture generally, we were at such a different point in 2000 around these issues of race that there were young artists who had benefited from the fact that they could define themselves within a more complex racial association. Some of it came from just the acknowledgment that was then seen in the change of our mission, which is that we were talking about a black culture that was a global black culture versus an American black culture. So that was one way that I felt like looking at young artists, I had to have that in the mix. The other way was I was interested in the idea that these younger artists fully embraced an idea of identify, and their identity as being their right, right? So, post-black was a, a shorthand that Glenn Ligon and I came up with. Glenn, I talk to about everything I'm thinking about, and we had begun referring to young artists that we were both seeing individually and together, as being post-black art, right? So, meaning they were post, a kind of black art formation in their work. Their work was coming with an idea of race as a sort of primary experience, but one that they lived in a world where that experience of race was understood through popular music, understood through pop culture, just a wide way where it was understood by the culture at large through that, as a generation born where, you know, the primary musical form was hip hop. So, and that was for, you know, all young people. So, post-black was a way to talk about artists who were post-black art. For me it was also important as a way to understand could we create an idea around a group of artists that looked at a different way to understand their work through race? Could they be, now, a generation that was setting out some new ideas and ideals in their work? Story_ID: 521568 Speaker 1: It was controversy because it got understood through the ways in which the term had been used sociologically; many people conflated it with an idea that I was saying that these artists were post-black, like meaning not black anymore, and that's the way the term has been used in the public. But something that has always been important for me, from the time of 'Black Male' ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'], is that, you know, I make my work within the context of my work. When it enters the world, I know I have no control of that, and I'm very clear about that, so that post-black was a way to create a new vocabulary for young black artists to be able to work. The Harlem Renaissance had a vocabulary, you know Black Arts Movement had a vocabulary, social realism, it's like, how can we create for this group of artists at this dawn of the 21st century? And that was it. And it was a way to say that there were many different ways in which they could make their work; many different ways in which they could understand their identity; many different ways in which that identity could be informed by race, gender and sexuality, and that all could come into the work. And many different ways in which that could be as uniquely and significantly and authentically black, as the work that came with the tenants of what black art could be or should be, right, which sometimes could be very narrow. So that's really what it was. What happened after that, I have to say, kind of moved well beyond my definition and into the world, right, as it got defined, you know, in many ways, and I don't, what I like about that idea is I do think ideas should be shared, I do; I don't feel, in any way, I should own an idea, and I do feel that ideas should be shared in a way that they should be defined differently by different people. Speaker 2: And how do you feel that--because when, you know, President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know, then the term post-racial came. Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --and then that is sort of like the same concept as post-black, sort of in a, or you don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't because, again, post-black was not about a sort of post-racial consciousness and, you know, what I know is that living, you know, within art and culture world in a cultural dialogue, you know, and in the world, right, I can, I remember like right after the show opened and a critic of it, you know, an older black male critic, you know, kind of said something like, "Yeah, I, I wonder what happens when those post-black artists leave their museum opening and try and get a taxi." Okay, you know, funny and sharp way to sort of poke fun at the difference between, you know, lived racial politics, right, and intellectual ideas, but, in, in this case, I live in the space of art, and in the space of art I, as a curator, feel responsible to create the space of intellectual ideas for artists to work in. What I was saying is, "Here we are, at the beginning of the 20th, 21st century, and isn't it amazing?" You know? "Isn't it amazing, almost one hundred years after the Harlem Renaissance that black artists can be making work about anything and everything, and that is black art?" That's what I was saying. Story_ID: 521569 Speaker 1: What do you think about your, the concept in the days, 'cause I think really, a lot of us are fearful of the times, well, I don't know, amazed and sort of fearful of what hap- you know, what, you know, between, I'm talking about, I don't even wanna talk about him, but between Trump [President Donald John Trump] and, you know, what is sort of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --fermenting in society right now, and, and so I was wondering what your thoughts are, or do you see beyond that. Speaker 2: Well, I have always felt that I see the world through art; I see the world through art in amazing moments in the world, but I also see the world through art in hard, complicated moments. So I, right now, am deeply engaged in the work that's being made, for example, photographically, by young photographers and photojournalists who are on the front lines of the protests going on all over this country, right, in the face of all the violence that's happening, the racial violence and the violence that's happening because of the racial violence. I understand what I understand about some of that through their eyes, and through the way in which they are documenting and then capturing it, some of them not even with the idea that it's art with a big A, but it is art to me, and I'm intrigued. I know that's what will be the record of what people who will know about this moment, this complicated, awful moment, will know about it a hundred years from now; it's gonna come, right, in that work. And as a curator, I actually have the added responsibility, in some cases, of collecting that work to make sure that somebody has the opportunity to see it. So, right now, I look at what's going on by looking at the ways in which artists are responding. It always isn't direct, however. Do you know what I, like it isn't always direct; there aren't always direct manifestations in the very moment by artists; that, that's not what I mean to say, what I mean to say, however, is that art reacts to the world it's in; art reacts to the world it's in, so being someone in the world of art means that I have a way to understand some of the complexity of what's happening in the world. Story_ID: 521570 Speaker 1: I wanna go to 2006 when you met, you had the chance meeting with your husband. Speaker 2: Oh, I was gonna say, who did I meet in two thousand--I knew you were saying, artist. I'm thinking, which artist did I meet in 2006 (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, no, Duro [Duro Olowu], yes, okay, yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: Because I found, you know, that's like a year after you assume, almost a year-- Speaker 2: Yes, well, let me get-- Speaker 1: --that you met him, are they-- Speaker 2: Did we meet, we met in the summer of 2006, so I became, yeah, director [of the Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] in July of 2005. We met in July of 2006, Speaker 1: Right, about a year-- Speaker 2: But I knew his work before I met him. Vogue had covered him and his line in 2004, and I, you know, have had a lifelong love of fashion, have been a long, you know, sort of ardent fan of fashion and fashion design and fashion designers, had all, myself, made my own curatorial study of black fashion designers; that's what led me to curate an exhibition on the work of Patrick Kelly, but that's what led me to become, you know, an, a very enthusiastic fan of the work of designers like Tracy Reese, who also became, you know, a dear friend, and therefore, I was able to really also understand the art of that world, her creativity, her artistry, right, and to see her as an artist develop in fashion. So, I'd always been deeply invested and involved in fashion; I'd read about Duro in 2004, was deeply intrigued because here he was this London [England] based fashion designer of Nigerian descent. The article that Vogue wrote really, in some ways, launched the sort of recognition of his work in the U.S., and it marked, in, in the article, it said that in the U.S. his work, his, his dresses would be sold at Barneys [Barneys New York], and I went to Barneys and of course I wasn't the only one who had this idea, so when I got there, they told me there was a long waiting list, and that when the dresses came in, the shipment came in, that they would, based on the waiting list and size, I might get a call. And I got a call, and the call that I got was for a dress, but it was about four sizes bigger than my size, right? So I was left in this position where I could buy the four sizes too big, and of course they're saying, "We can alter it," or not take the dress. And I was feeling a, sort of, like I'm never gonna have the opportunity to have one of these amazing, beautiful dresses. That really was my thought in that moment, and I thought, I'd better take the larger size. But then, as I was having that conversation, I called a friend, and she was like, "There is no way that that's gonna be a good alteration; that's just too many sizes down, do not buy the dress." So I didn't. And I was disappointed and, and after that, of course, I, you know, would run into people I knew who had these dresses, I'd see women on the street and I just felt like, okay, this is like absolutely never gonna happen. At one point, I called his shop and I left a message on the voicemail saying I came to London all the time, 'cause I did because, again, in my work here at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], my work was confined to American artists, which was rich and, and moving and important work. But when I got to the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] with our mission of artists of African descent, it allowed me to begin working with some artists in London, in particular, that I'd known for a long time but I'd never been able to show. And they were artists like Isaac Julien, Yinka Shonibare, Chris Ofili, who I'd known their work for years, spent time in their studios, but could not curate around their work as a Whitney curator. I also knew other people in London in the creative world, many writers, people who were working in the sort of music world I knew, architects in London, including David Adjaye, I mean this was my London life, so I was spending a lot of time in London. Speaker 1: How much time do you think you were, and for what period (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that time, oh, I was in London three, four, sometimes five times a year; I was working on one of, again, a profound experience for me was getting to know Stuart Hall, and Stuart Hall, in those years, had led the founding of two important arts organizations in London, Autograph [Autograph ABP] and Iniva [Institute of International Visual Arts], both devoted to the work of black artists in the British context, black and brown artists. And Stuart asked me to be on the board of Iniva, so I was an Iniva board member for-- Speaker 1: And what year is this? Speaker 2: Oh, this would have been from about '93 [1993], '4 [1994], all the way into about 2005, you know, I mean, I was still doing all that when I met Duro, 2005, '6 [2006]. But, you know, I had real deep friendships with curators, you know, in the U.K. [United Kingdom], really, really, really deep ties there, and loved London. Story_ID: 521571 Speaker 1: So, I left him [Duro Olowu] a message saying, "I come to London [England] all the time, would love to come to your shop." It was by appointment, never got a call back. It's 2004, 2005. And 2006, I was, went to a party hosted by a dear friend, Kim Hastreiter, who is the editor and founder of Paper magazine, which had always covered the arts in such an amazing way, and that's how I knew Kim. And she invited me to this party and said that I should come because there were some artists that she wanted me to meet and that perhaps I would meet. She was also friends with Duro, and he was in New York [New York] for a very short time, called her to get together, and she said, "I can't because we're having this party tonight but you should come because there'll be some artists and some fashion designers who will be there who you should meet." And so we both were at the party, and Kim was focusing on the artists that she wanted me to meet, right, had an idea that, that maybe I could work with this artist, but Duro was standing right there and she said, "Oh, do you know Duro?" And I said, and she said, you know, "He's a designer in London," and then she said who I was, then told him. I said, "I'm thrilled to meet you; I'm a huge fan of your work. I read about you in Vogue, I went to Barneys [Barneys New York]--." I told the whole long story. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, you know, and he, of course, there was not much he could say to that at that point, but he, then Kim mentioned to him that she knew that we, the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York], was having an opening the next day 'cause she was coming up. She said, "Oh, you're in New York tomorrow night; we should go to the museum." But he was leaving. And at the end of the evening, I didn't think a thing of it except, in my mind, I thought, okay, maybe now when I go to London, I'll be able to go to his shop. But he asked Kim about me, and she then called me a couple days later and said he'd asked, and could she give him my contact information. And I said, "Sure." But, again, I was thinking of this in a very different way in that moment. And a few weeks went by, and I was away with my dear friend the writer Veronica Chambers, and we were together and Veronica was talking; she was working on a big project at that time and we were talking about the project, and I mentioned it to her as a by the way sort of thing. I said, "Oh, yeah, and I was at this party and I met this fashion designer," and I didn't say anything else about it, but when I got back to New York and to the museum, there was a package, and in it was a dress from him. And so that was the beginning of our relationship, and he, you know, had heard, I didn't think he'd heard what I said and the way that I said it, but he heard it very distinctly. And asked Kim, and there was a note with it and, with his phone number, and I called him and we talked (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it was his own, he han- he chose-- Speaker 1: He made it, yeah, he made, yeah, he made me a dress and sent me a dress, and, and then he told me that he was going to be in New York in a, in a couple of weeks, which was fashion week [New York Fashion Week], so he was going to be in New York for fashion week, which made sense to me because that's the, the work week of, of his world. And we saw each other again at that point and, you know, very quickly after that, we began talking on the phone, and then I was going to London a few weeks after that, September, like first week in October and, you know, very quickly, you know, we began imagining, even though there were a lot of things that were complicated, meaning the most important being I lived in New York, he lived in London but, you know, many others. You know, at the time, my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] was very ill, you know; she had had the first, I think, of the couple of strokes that she had; his parents were in Lagos [Nigeria] and also aging, so he was spending a lot of time from London going to Lagos, which is not such a long way but, you know, it's a long way from the U.S. So, you know, we, we both had extenuating circumstance which, in a way, is what I think made it possible that it happened, right, because we operated within all of the reasons that this was complicated and hard, and we decided to take a risk and imagine that we could actually be together. And so that's, you know, how we met. We met, I would say we met through the work because truly, I did feel I knew of him through his work before I knew him. Speaker 2: I think his story is that he took one look at you and, or I heard him saying it, you know, and he said, "What a cute thing," (laughter). Speaker 1: Right. And I didn't, that's not the feeling I got at all, and of course when he asked Kim later, you know, Kim says even in that moment she, Kim is the ultimate connector. I mean as a person, this is what anyone will tell you about Kim. If you say to Kim, "I'm interested in making an exhibition of artists who are working in Indonesia," she will, in two days, have a person and she'll say, "You'll have to call my friend." They, she's just a connector. So even that night, Kim was not, you know, making like, you know, a, a, a love link there, but Kim just felt like, oh, Duro is this fantastic designer living in London from Nigeria, Thelma [HistoryMaker Thelma Golden] loves art, has worked, she knew, worked with many artists, you know, from all over the world, and she just thought you all should know each other. So even when he asked, I think she felt that that alone was important. Like, "Oh, I can't believe you guys don't know each other; you should." But was, of course, thrilled, you know, as she often said, you know, it was a mitzvah, she made a marriage. And Kim and Glenn Ligon were our witnesses at our wedding; we got married in City Hall [New York City Hall, New York, New York], but Kim, you know, really was the one who, you know, actually brought us together. Story_ID: 521572 Speaker 1: --You know, kind of primary caregiving role, so Duro [Duro Olowu] coming here for the weekend he knew, you know, and at some point, and that I was there; I mean he got to know completely the huge web of people (laughter) and places that I had together that made that all work. So, my father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] got to know Duro really well, and I actually got to know my father-in-law because Duro's mother passed away after my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden], so if my mother died in 2010, his mother died in 2012, which left us both with our fathers, so my father passed at eighty-nine; Duro's father is eighty-six, still alive. But like, for example, we had it so that they could talk to each other on the phone, so my father-in-law in Lagos [Nigeria] and my father here kind of got to know each other through talking to each other on the phone; they never met in person but were able to connect in that way. Speaker 2: So, how were you envisioning your, your, I mean you're both, he, you have, he has his celebrity, you have your celebrity, and they, extends beyond, you know; so how, how are you, how did you talk through a marriage that would be viable? 'Cause it's-- Speaker 1: You know we, we didn't talk through how it'd be viable; what we did from the very beginning was acknowledge that we couldn't do it in ways that other people might expect we would, right, because, you know, many people, when we were not living together, thought that was simply an issue of neither of us wanting to move and leave our jobs and it wasn't; it really, in both of our cases, was about our role in our parents' lives. Both of us had, and when we met, that was something we shared immediately; it didn't come out like the first or second time we met, but very quickly we both realized that we had a similar relationship to, you know, this sort of creating the possibility of an infrastructure around, you know, our parents' later years, so Duro, like I, I had a much easier role in that because I was here in Harlem [New York, New York] and my father was in Queens [New York], so the same call that I would get that meant that I'd get in a cab and go to Queens, Duro was literally on, you know, one phone hearing what's going on, the other phone booking a plane ticket, right, and, and getting himself to Lagos, harder to do that, but still we both had the same relationship to that, you know. We both, in the early years of our marriage we didn't spend Christmas day together, and that never seemed like a big deal to us, but other people would be so weird. But for both of us we, we knew; we, we met each other at points at, you know, when we both had two mothers who were ailing, two fathers who were in good condition but older, that there was no traveling for any of them, right? So what would it mean for us not to be together so that he could be in Lagos with them, and I could be in New York [New York], and then we would, one of us would leave on the 26th and we would go wherever we were going. And that felt the most natural thing to us because it felt arbitrary to sort of say, "Oh, well, because we're not together on December 25th that that's," you know, "a terrible thing." So what we really worked out was a sense of mutual respect for both, how we saw each other, having defined these roles as children first, and then how, the children of people, and how then, as a couple, we would respect each other's professional lives and sort of not create a situation where one of us felt the other needed to change, that that would have to be a decision we made together, and when it felt that we needed to make it we would but that, to this point, we've not felt the need. Now it does mean we do things that other people wouldn't do, which is that we fly all the time and that feels like nothing to us that we approach getting on a plane like other people might approach getting on the subway, and that's just how, you know, we make it possible to see each other and to be together. But we also are able, in some ways, to do things that I think make it more interesting for both of us, make our lives richer, so that is, we both try to plan travel around each other's work, right? It's what's allowed me, for example, to travel, right, on the continent because Duro has a reason to do that, and that gives me a way to do that. Duro loves art, and so he often travels with me, in the space of my travel, to some of these exhibitions around the world, and he loves that because he gets the chance to see that, and we find that that's an equally great way for us to be together, not to be together in London [England] or New York, but in some other place where we can make that happen. You know, we are very, very adamant that we have to communicate a lot, but the world we live in allows that, the technology means, and that was something else that used to (laughter) amuse my father, but the way he felt we spoke on the phone, the way he and my mother spoke on the phone, except his attitude was that they were in, you know, the same borough, not even across the river into Manhattan [New York], and he, he would say often, "Pick up the phone and call him," like he's down the street and, you know, because we'd be talking and I would forget something, and he'd say, "What's happening (unclear)?" And I'd say, "Oh, let me call Duro," and I would, and he looked, you know, and he still had that, you know, idea of long distance, right, that I was making a long distance call. I was like, "No, this is facilitated through," you know, "long distance packages on our mobile phones." So that, you know, makes it possible-- Story_ID: 521573 Speaker 1: Thing is we both, we, you know, deeply love each other, but we also are deeply invested in each other's pursuits. I mean Duro [Duro Olowu] is an artist and I treat him just like every other artist in my life in that I am deeply invested in the ability for him to be able to make his art, and that means many things that don't form around conventions, and I have to, I know I have to allow that because I know that's what's necessary. And Duro knows how deeply I feel about the work I get to do here at the museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] and as I see the future, so he deeply supports, you know, what it means for me to have this position. You know, he's had the chance, of course, to meet Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims], you know, and to meet, you know, Mary Campbell [HistoryMaker Mary Schmidt Campbell], so he understands, you know, the sort of what this is. He's come to know all of my former colleagues from the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] so he, again, has a deep sense of what it means to be in my life and the life of my work. One of my dearest colleagues from the Whitney, Elisabeth Sussman, she directed the 1993 biennial [Whitney Biennial] that I was a curator in and, again, Elisabeth's another of those curators that really gave me a real opportunity in making that exhibition, and I remember, you know, when we got married she, you know, as a woman and a woman in this field who, you know, raised children and was a curator and, you know, married, and all of that, you know, really felt like the opportunity for me at this point to have found Duro and to marry him, and she said it was worth it to just, even in the imperfect circumstance of not being in the same place, but that we would find a perfection of our own making in that, and I found that to be very incredible. Speaker 2: So have you cross- now, do you have two homes then? Speaker 1: We do, yeah, one in London [England] and one here in Harlem [New York, New York]. So we live in Ladbroke Grove in London, and we live in Harlem just around, right around the corner from the museum. Speaker 2: And you're seeing each other an average of how, how many-- Speaker 1: Oh, gosh, I mean it, it, it definitely can be once a month but it's even sometimes more than that because, again, we do all of this shared travel, you know? I mean it's like a jigsaw puzzle of a sort but, you know, I just committed to think about going to South Africa in like November, and so Duro just said to me, "Okay, I'll," you know, "I'll come," right? So that means he'll go from London and we'll meet there, so, but then I know I was planning to be there the next week, which is our Thanksgiving, which is not a holiday in London but, you know, I had already thought, oh, I'll go, at that moment. So, you know, there are ways that we don't even have. I know I've met other couples that live apart that have these incredibly impressive schedules, you know, that are all worked out and, and we just are not that organized (laughter). You know, we're a little bit more free form, but it works, it works. Story_ID: 521574 Speaker 1: So it's li- it added a different dimension though at, you know, when you're, you were in your forties, you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was like thirty-nine; I think I was forty when we got married. But you know, well, yeah, when I met him I was, you know, in my forties, yeah, really; I mean, you know, in, by, by the time we got married, yes, yeah, you know. But, again, you know, the getting married, I think, was, you know, a wonderful thing; it was Duro's [Duro Olowu] idea definitely, and it-- Speaker 1: It was his idea. Speaker 2: It was his idea and, you know, it was his idea because, to me, at that point in my life and in the circumstance of our life, even what we had as a couple together felt real and bonded and lasting; it didn't feel to me like we needed, because we weren't, in my mind I didn't think, oh, I'm gonna have a wedding, you know, none of those, the symbols of it didn't seem that significant, so it felt like, (background noise) it, it felt as if, you know, quite simply, that we could just exist. On the other hand, I think that, you know, Duro is Nigerian, and what I am so fortunate, you know, 'cause again, I feel like so many seeds of my life were planted early, and my professor at Smith [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], Walter Morris-Hale, who studied independence movements in, on the continent and taught deeply, to me, this idea of a, you know, an African cultural consciousness, I realize that every day because, you know, within the space of my marriage I now kind of exist in a world that spans three continents and really speaks to these different important moments in the history of black people in the 20th century. So I have a father-in-law who was raised in Nigeria during the time of colonialism, a British subject, right, who went, was educated in the U.K. [United Kingdom] as a lawyer, to go back to the colony and serve, but then independence comes, and there he is as someone who already had a culture, a lineage and a history, right, through his Yoruba lineage that then now is at the forefront and, and, and Duro, who's born and understands that so, you know, lives where he can talk about family and lineage for generations, right, the village where they come from, you know, the, the lineage of those people. And I, you know, inherited that in this marriage, and I think those things were very important to Duro in a very natural way, right? It makes me understand what had always been intellectualized to me, right, about what it means as African Americans, right, to understand our stories through this diaspora to be married to someone who understands, you know, his lineage and legacy directly, you know, on the continent, and can reach back to that history and understands it, you know, as a parallel history, right, one that I had to seek out and be taught, you know, is the history he grew up in. Speaker 1: And it's actually the, the thing that we haven't yet done successfully. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: You know, represented by your marriage (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right. Speaker 1: We haven't quite as a, a U.S. black community, been able, really, to do that within-- Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. And in small ways. Speaker 1: Small ways. Speaker 2: Because, you know, I had read, again, in my study of African American literature, I had read so many of the amazing accounts, particularly of African American women, who went to the continent in the '60s [1960s]. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's right. Speaker 2: Most significantly, of course, [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou. So I felt like everything I knew I knew through the writings she wrote about those years living in Ghana and her whole way in which she understood, you know, what that meant. But, in principal you're right, but I, in my own marriage, you know, this idea of African and American, you know, sort of comes together, and when I think of my father-in-law's story and I think of my father's [Arthur Golden, Sr.] story, or my mother-in-law's story and my mother's [Thelma Eastmond Golden], in that already, I'm living within a whole black history. Speaker 1: Um-hm, and the lineage. And it may start coming together. I do believe it's coming, it will start coming together and manifesting as Africa is now being looked at from a, even a, a, a global investment standpoint in ways that it had never been looked at before (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, exactly, yeah, yeah. And that the culture, you know, is sort of surfacing in ways that live around the world, so I see with young people, you know, their understanding of the continent is through the culture because they are all experiencing the richness of the music, you know, and all that comes and travels now, right, digitally, that they all see. So that's really also what's so interesting to me, being there, being a continent with so many young people and seeing the way youth culture plays out in not simply Nigeria where I get the opportunity to visit, but other, other places on the continent as well. Story_ID: 521575 Speaker 1: There's some significant things that have happened to you, or appointments under the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And even before. I think, you know, the Aspen Institute [Washington, D.C.], and participating in that. Was that an important experience? Speaker 2: It was. I am a Crown Fellow [Henry Crown Fellowship Program] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Crown, that's right-- Speaker 2: --at the Aspen Institute, and so my Crown Fellowship was sort of game changing for me, you know. It's a mid-career program for mid-career professionals who want to explore the nature of their lives and their careers to that point, and begin to set out more of a path and a mission for what they will do. And for me, what was important is while it didn't change the trajectory of my professional life at all, and I didn't imagine it would. It really did change the trajectory of certain ways I thought about my personal life. And being in a cohort of other mid-career professionals from all fields, and from around the world, also just was incredibly rich for me, as rich as what it was like to be at Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts] as an eighteen year old and a nineteen year old woman, and meeting all these women from all over the country and the world, and beginning a path of study together. To be in a Crown Fellowship was incredibly amazing, you know? I, it also, for me, kind of reinvested me in thinking and making me question my own ideas about the world. One of my closest colleagues in that program is a veteran and a Republican who works in the defense industry, and there's nothing about me, the New Yorker, the liberal arts person that, in my life, as it had been constructed, that that ever would not just be an encounter, but become a close relationship, and nothing has been more expanding for me because, as a person, he is truly one of the most soulful and spiritual people I have ever met, and we disagree on so many things, but have a deep amount of respect so that I've began to understand those positions in a different way that I know I never would have. Speaker 1: So who is, you, can you say his name? Speaker 2: No, I, I don't know if he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, you don't, okay-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean just (gesture), I mean 'cause, you know, he lives in the world, you know as, you know, as who he is. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: But that's also what, what's so amazing about the Crown Program is it creates what are these personal connections that we can have in a way with a group of people who you know, once you've done this, always have for you a sense of being willing to be in dialogue with you about who you are and where you are and what you're doing, and support you in that. And you make all kinds of incredible connections. And for me, you know, that was one connection that was incredible, but there were so many others that just, you know, changed my life, opened my eyes, created for me, you know, just new ways of seeing and thinking, and a connection to the institute, which is an amazing place. And that, you know, has continued as I've participated in many of their programs, you know, after that. But being a Crown Fellow was an incredible achievement. Story_ID: 521576 Speaker 1: And then your role with the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] administration, can you talk about that 'cause you've had, well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I, I am-- Speaker 1: --you've had, you've had, I think, the first lady [Michelle Obama] here [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] twice, but you've also served on the-- Speaker 2: Right. So I was appointed by President Obama to the Committee for the Preservation of the White House, and was very thrilled and honored to be a part of that committee; it's an ongoing committee that is charged with support for the upkeep and preservation of the White House [Washington, D.C.], which is maintained like a museum, right, as this country's house, the people's house, but with its collection of art and the decorative arts that are the furniture, as well as the historic preservation that goes into the upkeep of the building itself. And it's a committee of people from around the country who have expertise in decorative art, historic preservation, and art. And I was thrilled to be nominated for this committee by the president as someone who represented 20th century art because that was new for the White House and for the White House collection, and was thrilled to be able to work with the White House curator [William G. Allman] as well as the first lady in these last seven and a-half years on that committee. Also, we have been really proud and thrilled to have the first lady visit the museum on several occasions, sometimes to see our exhibitions because she is a great supporter of the arts and a real lover herself of the visual arts, and so we've been thrilled when we are able to have her here to see the exhibitions on view. But we were also incredibly proud to host her annual lunch that happens during the UN General Assembly [United Nations General Assembly] for the other spouses of the UN General Assembly members. And so, that day here at the museum, we had about fifty first ladies from around the world, from, you know all, from Monaco to Micronesia [Federated States of Micronesia]; like, you know, all those different countries, who came here for a lunch hosted by our first lady, Mrs. Obama, and they first had a tour of the museum, and then we were also thrilled because in setting up the day, it was with the idea that they would also experience cult- the culture generally. So, students from the Dance Theater of Harlem performed and Audra McDonald sang. And it was a lovely lunch that was catered by [HistoryMaker] Marcus Samuelsson at the Red Rooster [New York, New York], who made a menu that also was resonant of the culture, and it was just a fantastic day, and we were really proud and thrilled. And we also were thrilled to have the president come here to the museum. The president came here in 20--probably was 2011, for an event. He was coming to Harlem [New York, New York] and had, went to several places in Harlem and, but here, had two hundred people who were invited to hear him speak, and they had the event at the museum, and we were so thrilled and so proud to have that event happen here and, you know, and I think we, you know, have felt that this museum has had, you know, the opportunity to host many, many, many people, you know, not just artists but, of course, it being a, you know, community institution, we're really proud to open the museum and perhaps never prouder when being able to do it for the president and the first lady. Story_ID: 521577 Speaker 1: What did you learn about the collection at, at the White House [Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The White House collection? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well, the White House had an incredible collection that represents some different genres of art. The most, for me, interesting part, is that it has an incredible collection of landscape paintings that represent the landscapes of America, so through many of these paintings, you are seeing the painters that have documented the landscapes of this very diverse country in its landscapes, but it's also a collection that represents art by some of the most significant American artists, as an example of the work made by America. I was thrilled at, that my first visit going to the White House early in the administration, being able to see Jacob Lawrence's painting, which is called, 'The Builders,' from 1940 [sic. 1947], which is hung in the Green Room, and has been there for many years so, really proud, for me, to see Jacob Lawrence's work there. And then, also what I knew about the collection is that there wasn't very much work from the 20th century in the collection, and so in this administration, that is what has shifted, and this first lady [Michelle Obama] has made an effort towards collecting art and design from the 20th century, and that has culminated in the renovation really overseen by the White House curator, Bill Allman [William G. Allman], of the Old Family Dining Room, a room that had not been used, that has been redone, and now used but includes the work of Anni [Anni Albers] and Josef Albers, Robert Rauschenberg, and Alma Thomas, along with some pieces of 20th century design. So it's a real wonderful showcase; it's now on the tours that brings the White House collection into the 20th century and allows people on those tours to see some amazing 20th century art and 20th century design. Speaker 1: There was another thing that you did; you were invited to the states--state dinner, you and your husband (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, we were. Speaker 1: Well, you were-- Speaker 2: We were, no, we were invited together-- Speaker 1: And, and I think he also has designed one of the first lady's dresses, right? Or, or design-- Speaker 2: We are very proud. She is, the first lady has been an incredible supporter of fashion designers, particularly emerging designers, and she has worn Duro's [Duro Olowu] clothes on several occasions and, you know, again, to me it's an example in the way in which she sort of understands the importance of creativity in the culture, creativity as it plays out in the performing arts, you know; they, she's been host to many events for young people at the White House which bring, you know, the creative arts. We all know, of course, the amazing story, you know, of 'Hamilton' ['Hamilton: An American Musical'] where, you know, Lin-Manuel Miranda, the first time, did what became, what has become, you know, the opening song in that incredible musical as part of the spoken word event that was, happened at the White House that then, of course, you know, moved towards what became, you know, this incredible, incredible musical in his brilliance. So that, you know, we know that this is who she is, and it's one of the many reasons I deeply admire her because what she understands is that art creativity is an important part of our culture; it's what makes us who we are, it's what makes America understood in the world, right, the way in which our creativity, right, is out in the world, to be experienced by all. Yes, in museums and concert halls, but also, you know, in neighborhoods all across America. And she has been such an amazing champion of the arts, and the importance of the arts in the lives of young people in particular. Story_ID: 521578 Speaker 1: Talk about the state dinner, though, because you were seated right next to the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]; this was the state dinner for the French president [Francois Hollande] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, president of France. And I was thrilled to be invited, honored to go, had never, I'd never been to a state dinner; certainly had, you know, read about state dinners and seen depictions of them in fictional accounts of the presidency so I, you know, had a sense of what it meant but had never been. And when receiving the invitation, was thrilled to receive the invitation and then Duro [Duro Olowu] and I went, and went to Washington [D.C.], and when we got there, we received a seating assignment, as everyone does, a card, and it had a number on it, nothing that would indicate to me (laugher) anything different than what I expected, which is to go there and to be seated at a table and have it be a lovely, fantastic evening and to, you know, go home and say, "Wow. We went to a state dinner, isn't that fantastic?" And in the receiving line, when I expressed to the president how thrilled we were to be there, and thanking him for inviting us, and he, you know, asked me about the museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. He says, "Well, you know, we're gonna get to talk about art because you're sitting with me." But I took that to mean with me, right, just like I'm sitting with him now, meaning he's the president, so anything I do is in the context of, right, his presidency. I did not take that to mean at his table; I thought he meant in the room. And when we got to the tables, to the dinner and followed the numbers to the number that was our table, it became very clear that the table we were sitting at was the table in the front, and then even clearer, when we got close to the table that my seat indeed was next to the president. Speaker 1: That was amazing. Speaker 2: And I have to say that in that moment, it felt surreal. But the moment I sat down, it felt, I don't even have a way to describe it; I mean it just was the most incredible, amazing experience to experience it in the moment but then, of course, to experience it as it was experienced by everyone else, right, the next day, right? So, you know, I was having the experience in the moment, you know. Duro, right then, was the only person in our world that knew, but by, you know, the next day, the whole world knew, and that was, it was incredible. It was a great honor; it's something, you know, that I will deeply, you know, of course, I'll remember it my whole life but it, it, it stays with me, you know? It stays with me; it just, it's, you know, again, when we imagine our lives, when we imagine what will happen, of course we hope for, you know, amazing and wonderful things to happen, but when they do, you know, nothing is more gratifying. And so it was an incredible, incredible, incredible experience. Speaker 1: And that was two years ago, right? That's 20--was it '14 [2014] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I feel like it was, yeah, you're right; I think it was. Speaker 1: It was 2014. Story_ID: 521579 Speaker 1: There is one woman that I've not asked you about who was a collector. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Peggy Cooper Cafritz. Was that it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wait, no, I know Peg, oh, I know Peg, I love Peggy (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay, okay (unclear)-- Speaker 1: But no, what's role, what is, role has Peggy had? Speaker 2: Well, Peggy had a role of, again, being one of those people who, early on in my career as a curator, when we were talking about philanthropy, Peggy was a supporter, and Peggy, of course being the sophisticated philanthropist she was, she understood that in very nuanced ways, and always in ways that were one step behind what I might be able to see, did things that created incredible opportunity for me. Peggy also, as a cura- as a philanthropist and a supporter and a friend, very naturally, in the context of her generosity, created opportunities for me that I realize gave me a lot of parody with my peers. So, Peggy, for example, traveled a lot around art, and Peggy, of course, took her kids, and Peggy often took nieces and nephews, and Peggy often would invite me. And it meant sometimes I was getting to go places and see things that I never would have as a young very junior curator, but that Peggy, you know, very naturally, in the way in which she just engaged always, right, and that's her legacy, right, and her, you know, founding of the Duke Ellington School [Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.], and all the things Peggy does, that's who she is. Peggy, however, also taught me a lot about just the, just the ways of the world, you know? Peggy was someone who, you know, made me understand, you know, the sort of subtlety of all of the minutiae that sort of lives within the worlds of culture and philanthropy, and the power and the privilege and, you know, was just a great guide and teacher to me. And then, of course, she was also a very, you know, amazing collector, and we shared just a love of art, and so Peggy was always willing to go where I would lead in that regard, you know? If I called Peggy to talk about a young artist, Peggy wanted to go see it, see their work the next day, and that I loved and adored. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause she had, she had, I mean that, her fire, though, but then she's built up her (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Have you done her? Speaker 1: Yes, she, yes. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, good. Speaker 1: And I was just talk, 'cause I haven't seen her in years, and I don't think we've actually finished her interview, but we, you know, we haven't seen each other, and I just spoke to her maybe, I don't know, two or three weeks ago 'cause I was actually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, she's, we're hoping, you know, we've been trying to talk about how to, she has images of everything that was lost in the fire, but trying to make that into something because it's important, you know, it, it's, strange as that sounds, those works don't exist, but I keep saying it's important in the history. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: But, you know, we couldn't make an exhibition of it, but we have to somehow put together that collection in, in some way. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. I wanted to cry; I couldn't believe it (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so we've talked about that. Story_ID: 521580 Speaker 1: There was another collector, a white collector who lent you dresses, wait, no, no, SoHo [New York, New York]; it went back to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, that was Holly Solomon who's an art dealer. Speaker 1: Oh, art dealer, okay; you've talked about that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Holly Solomon was an amazing art dealer, pioneering art dealer in SoHo who also was deeply, deeply, deeply the, like one of the chicest women in New York [New York], had a fantastic, fantastic wardrobe and also was a small woman, five feet tall. And she kept, basically, all of her clothes, so she had amazing outfits from the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s], until knowing her in the '90s [1990s]. And she would often, I mean the kinds of outfits you'd only see in a museum, you know, originals that, that come off the runway that she had. And she would let me look at them in her closet, try them on. She's also the person who really, again, taught me so much about art because she was one of those art dealers who, artists that I studied in books. I would say, "What about So and So?" And she'd say, "Oh, in 1968 we had lunch." That, that, that's how the story would start. And then you'd hear the most incredible things about that artist or the context of their work. But she also knew so much about style and fashion, and was beloved by fashion designers. And she taught me a lot about alterations, that's why a woman, like Peggy [HistoryMaker Peggy Cooper Cafritz], she, Holly, was the person who really sort of made me understand that it wasn't just about size, it was about fit, and that was always interesting to me 'cause in one conversation she could go between the two, right, and we would have these amazing conversations. Late in her life, designers still called her all the time wanting to, you know, dress her and offer her to see things. And she would often take me with her and, you know, sometimes she'd say to them, "You know, I'm not you know, I've got enough; I'm not interested in new things," but she would say, "but, you know, Thelma [HistoryMaker Thelma Golden]," you know, "she's really fantastic." And there were moments where I can remember getting to wear the most beautiful Stephen Sprouse dress that he made, inspired by Warhol [Andy Warhol], that's why he showed it to Holly, that he lent me to wear to an exhibition of Warhol's, you know, shadow paintings ['Shadows'], and that all because of Holly. She also introduced me to several jewelry designers, and I can remember one of them, Kazuko [Kazuko Oshima], who sold her jewelry at Barneys [Barneys New York]. And Holly passed away, but I walked into Barneys on, you know, one day, and literally, and I saw Kazuko and she said she'd had a dream about me and Holly the night before, and she made this necklace, based on the dream. And again, you know, it was one of those things where I felt like there's so many people in my life who, even when they're not in my life, I always feel this sense of them around me, and I always feel that about Holly. Holly didn't get to see me in this role, you know, as a director, but again, I always feel like, you know, as one of those people, particularly one of those women in the art world, and I, again, I had many women in the art world as an incredible group of women who really are, were and are real forces in the, in the ability that they change the art world, you know, people like Alanna Heiss, who founded PS1 [MoMA PS1, Queens, New York], and Kathy Halbreich, who was director of the Walker Art Center [Minneapolis, Minnesota], and Elisabeth Sussman who was at the ICA Boston [Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston, Massachusetts], then a curator at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], and Lisa Phillips, who was a curator at the Whitney and now the director of the New Museum [New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York, New York] and, you know, Marcia Tucker, who founded the New Museum. And, of course, Lowery [Lowery Stokes Sims], who I knew through my life, and Susana Leval [Susana Torruella Leval] who was, you know, a curator then director of El Museo del Barrio [New York, New York], and Vishakha Desai [Vishakha N. Desai], director of, you know The Asia Society. I mean these were women who, from the time I was a young person in this art world, were always just there for me, you know? There, able, and willing to support me, and that support is what made everything I did possible, everything I did, you know? And I always appreciated that, and I equally appreciated that while I'd come out of this women's college environment [at Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], which made me understand the importance of, you know, having an important female network, I also felt very supported by my male colleagues and peers, and I really felt like those colleagues that I grew up with in the field really had a sense of parody when they understood my voice, really willing to be engaged with it, but also some of the more senior figures in the field who were in this field when it looked like them only, who were more than willing and welcoming, right, when the field began to open up and change, and look not so much, right, just like them, that they welcomed me into it and sort of said, "This is our world and we welcome you into it as well." And I, you know, can never be grateful enough to all of those people who made it possible for me to be doing this work now. Story_ID: 521581 Speaker 1: --Reading The New York Times arts pages or the New York Magazine. And I read about curators and exhibitions, and I read reviews. I imagined this is what I want to do, and one day I want to read an ex- a review of an exhibition that I have made. And when I read about places and I read about the art in Paris [France] and the art in Rome [Italy] and the art in Japan, and I said, "I wanna go to those places," I did imagine that this would be possible. You know, when I imagined, when I was reading, you know, sort of novels, you know, like people like James Baldwin or Toni Morrison, these, you know, sort of towering figures, I imagined that I wanted the opportunity to read, to know the people of my generation who were those voices, and I have been able to. You know, right before my, what birthday would it have been? Right before my, maybe it was my forty-seventh birthday. I'm trying to think if she was still alive. Right before [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou passed away, whatever birthday that was, I realized that I had read, you know, 'Caged Bird' ['I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings,' Maya Angelou] as a young woman, but then I'd read all the others not in order, right? I'd read them at different points. And I decided that I was going to read them start to finish. The Library of America [New York, New York] has them as one volume, and I was gonna read them start to finish. I was gonna read, because I was interested, you know? And this is again, something I got from my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden]. My mother really was able to project a lot of her own desires on me, so my mother knew, and this is why I always felt there was some incredible generosity on her part because, you know, as a woman who, primary life was as a homemaker, my mother had some jobs but, you know, small scale jobs that she had different ways--who never really had a full professional life of her own. Though she had a huge leadership role in the community, she imagined the life she might have had, right? With different circumstance, different opportunity; but she also knew there were things she didn't know so, for example, when I was going to college [Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts], my mother was very happy to allow my Aunt Joan [Joan Eastmond], her younger sister, who was younger, who had gone to college, to be much more in a primary role around what then felt, to my mother, to be the real critical decisions I had to make, 'cause while she had an opinion, she felt that my Aunt Joan had a better sense, you know, of the now, and being able to do that. My mother was very generous; she was never threatened by that. She was not threatened by the fact that Verne Oliver sort of felt like my mother had done, (pause) am I okay? Oh, sorry. Verne Oliver--you know, my mother had done all the important work, right? And like raised me right; Verne would say that all the time, you know? Like, yeah. But, that Verne now, was the one who could insert, you know, what became this incredible sort of sense of responsibility to the development of an intellect, and my mother, again, totally, completely appreciated that. And I really look at that, and I see how important that was, and I know that when I started envisioning the sense of who I would be, these are things that my mother couldn't imagine, but yet she encouraged them, and she was supportive of them, and she was supportive of me going out in the world and finding people who could provide example and be supportive of me in, in these worlds. She, and that's, you know, something, again, I feel always so lucky for. Story_ID: 521582 Speaker 1: So, when you said you read [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --all the way through-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you do it? Speaker 2: I did it because what I realized is I didn't have a good example of sort of how to have a new life at mid-age, you know? I grew up with a woman for whom, you, know, middle age came, and that was marked by, you know, her children moving on and moving into a role that was a good one but it didn't have like a new life. And I sort of thought, I was around women who I saw having a second and a third act, and I just thought, okay; I was, whatever age I was, and it was not fifty, but I just thought, okay, how does one, because, you know, the thing about reading the Maya Angelou straight through is when you realize that she had about four lives before she was thirty, so just on that point (laughter), I saw let, let's, let's see what this means. But then I thought, okay, let me get to Maya Angelou at forty, at fifty; I just--I really wanted to understand that, and I began in a very--that started this open study. I was deeply invested in this idea of black women's lives at mid-age, and looking at the different ways it plays out generationally, you know, the way in which women who were younger than my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] then older than me kind of took on these second and third acts, the way women older than my mother, you know, it was all just over, over; they were consigned to a kind of old lady-hood, you know? Very quickly, you know. And I just was intrigued because I thought, Well, how am I gonna make this make sense for myself? So I read Maya and I thought, you know, you get to a whole, you know, relationship, everything that's happening at that point in her mid-age, right? You know, the work, where the work's going, where she lives in the world, and it was so inspiring, deeply inspiring. And I read that ['I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings,' Maya Angelou], and that was the year she passed away, right? That then happened. And it was so amazing to me to read them start to finish because then I also saw how when you read, you know, her work, you also see how things begin somewhere. It doesn't all come out of nowhere, but they begin, and you start at the beginning and you see, you know, the way in which it all comes through. And I also, from reading, you know, her amazing story, I felt a deep sense of, you know, what it means to be open to just letting it happen, right? How life happens to you, right? And that's what her life really showed. So I read it, and it was a very great way to enter into my fifties, right? To begin to imagine what will the rest of my life be like, you know? I mean-- Speaker 1: And so what, what do you, you know, it's so fascinating to me when you mention her because I was gonna mention her to you because I was thinking of her in the context, you know--you--or you in the context of her because she did--you know, I mean she started here, and then she went all the way there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And just did so many things, knew, you know, so many people, had words for it, right? Had words for, you know, what I also have taken from her work is what it means to understand that you're living in a moment of history, and that's how I feel with so many things that we've discussed that have happened in my life. I'm living in a moment of history, I'm experiencing moments in history, I am witness to them in my own life. And I also, you know, I have to say in, in knowing her work from the time I was, you know, again, a teenager, but then also seeing the way her life progressed, also being able to take from not just the work of, you know, the autobiography, but the work generally, right? As a way to understand, again, another version of the life of an artist, so much that, you know, I have understood about, particularly the lives of black women artists, come from understanding the circumstance that make it possible, again, for that generation of women artists who have made their work. Nothing inspires me more than the idea of the fact that Toni Morrison got up before her children were awake, and sat down and wrote those early novels before getting them up, getting them off to school, and then going to her job as an editor. And I just find that example of work ethic and creativity, and life in the world, to be incredible and, you know, incredibly, deeply a way that I model--try to model in my own life. Story_ID: 521583 Speaker 1: So we're at 2016. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How do you envision yourself, or what are your dreams for yourself going forward? Speaker 2: Well, well, I would love to build this building and to see the new Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] on, here at, you know, 144 West 125th Street and, in some ways, because this has been such a fruitful position for me, and because I've had such an amazing career in the museum field, I don't know if I imagine my next role will be in a museum. There are many things, I remain, of course interested in art and artists, but I, I wonder if I might have the experience that people have in their twenties that I might get to be able to have at sixty, which is to try a different version of this because I never have; this all began for me very early in my professional life, so what might that mean? I also, though, am interested, I feel, for example, that I would like, at some point, for some point to live on the continent. I know that's something that my husband [Duro Olowu] thinks of, but in a much more natural way, meaning he doesn't think of it that way 'cause he does think of himself as living on the continent, meaning that's his home, he lives in London [England]. But I would love for us to do that at some point and I, I wonder where that might intersect also with my work, because at the same time I'm also deeply interested in what's going on there in terms of the creative life, and the creativity. And I wonder if my skills that I've gained here in this institution at the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], combined with my desire to live there, could come together, right? In some way that would be new and different there for me. I know I should probably write a book; I don't have a personal motivation towards that but, you know, people say that to me. And I also feel like I would love to be able to live out a part of my life without a professional engagement that's institutional. You know, I've always worked in institutions and I'm, you know I, I, I'm of a generation, you know, many of my peers have abandoned the corporate world for the startup life; many have become entrepreneurs, and I admire that because as much as I believe deeply in institutions, I also believe deeply that there's a quality in these other structures, so I am curious, you know, what it might be. But the truth is my life has not happened in a way that I have had really good set plans; I've just had ideas, and opportunities have presented themselves that have matched those ideas so precisely that it has been magical, and so I'm really just hoping to continue working in that way. Story_ID: 521584 Speaker 1: What also are your hopes and concerns in two ways about the black community-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and about the evolution of the black and, and minority artists? Speaker 2: Yeah. My concerns for the black community are the ways in which a persistent inequality have created less and less opportunities as we move further and further away from the moment of slavery. My father [Arthur Golden, Sr.] often said, weekly, in the latter years of his life, as he read the newspaper every day, that the outcomes for a young boy being born in Harlem [New York, New York] today are much worse than the outcomes for him being born in those years right before the Depression [Great Depression] in the Harlem of 1926. And that should not be, right? That is something that upset him deeply. And I know that, I believe that, and I know that that's an issue. When I think of, you know, the way Verne Oliver gave me that lecture about the kind of complicated racial and gender politics of this country, it makes me feel that all that my own efforts, as a person, need to be toward are, towards a sense of possibility and opportunity for young women, and particularly women of color because, again, I am concerned, I am concerned. It's why I remain so deeply committed to women's education, because while women's education, when created in this country, whether it be at Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts] or Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], or at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], was about a moment in this country when women could not be educated. Now, we really understand women's education is about the world, right? Where, you know, most of the young women in this world do not have the opportunity to be educated, and that single factor is what makes, for them, a lack of opportunity. And when we talk about that in terms of the black community and here in this country, that is equally as profound and incredibly sad for me. So, I think about that but I also, what I worry about is I worry that, I have great hope; I'm an incredibly optimistic person, I am a living example of what possibility and opportunity and a whole lot of faith can be about, you know? I came from people that believed in that, but I also know that I cannot sit within a space of comfort in it, so that when, you know, my father would say to me, "The outcomes for a boy being born today in Harlem are worse than mine," what he's really saying to me is, "You need to do something about that." You know, when my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden], who understood that my outcomes were going to be much better sort of based on her direct engagement with me all the time, makes me know that she saw that as mothering but not as just a biological act, but a political act, and that can happen even without the biology, and that I have to bring that into my life, right? That I have to understand that, that our community requires nurture, and that we can nurture in many different ways. What gives me hope is just the fact that, you know, I live in a space where I see, you know, what hope can produce, and I hope to continue my own contributions to make that possible, and I hope to continue to be in community where many people, you know, wanna make that possible. My hopes and concerns for artists of color are quite simply that we can continue opening up the canon so that when we talk about art, we are speaking equally about artists from all backgrounds, all cultures, all ethnicities, and that we can understand in our history that really equalizes our ability to understand that the art being made by all peoples is really all of our culture, right? It represents us all. And I hope that, to continue to be a person who lives a life of art, who lives within the context of art, and continues to make that possible through my own work as a curator, but also as someone who will continue always to support the idea of arts as a necessity in our culture. Story_ID: 521585 Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about [HistoryMaker] Thelma Golden? Speaker 2: I want people to say, about Thelma Golden, that she loved art and she did great work. Speaker 1: And what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I want my legacy to be the possibility that black art and artists live, and are presented, and are shown everywhere, and that their power and their beauty is fully respected and understood. I want my legacy to be that the possibility for more voices in the space of museums and the art world at large are possible, and that there's space and support for that. I hope my legacy will also live within the physical space of this building we will build, not simply in its walls, you know, but really in the ideas and the spirit, because I have had the ability to live within the ideas and the spirit of those that come before me in this building, and I hope that my legacy will be partly made possible by what will continue to happen in this museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York] and in this building for years to come. Story_ID: 521586 Speaker 1: This picture is from 1972. I was a child model, and that was my composite photograph. I appeared in several local New York City [New York, New York] ads; the most significant one was for a bank advertising savings bonds, but these were the pictures that my mother then sent out and got me jobs. Speaker 2: So, how old were you then? Speaker 1: That was, I was seven, so I was seven but I, I did it from the time I was about three or four until about seven or eight. Speaker 2: That is a picture, probably 1983; my brother and I in the basement of the home we grew up in in Queens [New York]. I see on the left is my father's either law school or college degree, and my brother, his name is Arthur Golden [Arthur Golden, Jr.] and he's a year younger, so at this point I would have probably been about seventeen, eighteen and he would have been about sixteen, seventeen. Speaker 1: That photograph is from about, '75 [1975], '85 [1985], probably about 1981 or '82 [1982]; I'm probably thirteen or fourteen at the time. That is riding my bicycle on our street, Lewiston Avenue, in Queens. Speaker 2: That picture would also probably be about '72 [1972], '73 [1973], my brother and I. That is us on a cruise ship on our way, on vacation on a cruise. We traveled a lot with my parents, and my parents particularly loved cruises. This I can tell, because we have coats on, would have been a winter, so that would have been a Christmas cruise probably. Because we have our coats on and we're on the deck and because of the streamers, I can tell that's the bon voyage. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That picture, if Brian's [ph.] four, I would be, before my brother; maybe he's five, my brother's six, I'm seven. Again, 1972; I'm probably seven years old, my brother Arthur is six years old, and our cousin Brian, my aunt Joan's [Joan Eastmond] son Brian, is probably four years old. That is in Flushing Meadows Corona Park in Queens with my father, Arthur Golden [Arthur Golden, Sr.], and we are bike riding. Speaker 1: Oh, gosh, how old am I? Am I like four? Looks like four, so that would be what, '65 [1965], so maybe that's 1969 on the back patio of our house on Lewiston Avenue with my brother who would be, if I am four, he is three; he's on his tricycle. And that baby stroller, I believe, is a toy. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Meaning, I'm just saying-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter) If you think of a size (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it's a boy; yeah, I can't, I'm looking at it like who's baby stroller would that have been? Speaker 1: Okay, so that is my mother, Thelma Golden [Thelma Eastmond Golden]. She is probably twenty at that time. That picture was taken on a trip that she made to Boston [Massachusetts] where we had some relatives; it was a trip she took on her own, it is a dress that she bought on her own, and she was with her boyfriend at the time, who she always told me took this picture. Speaker 2: Okay, oh, that's already-- Speaker 1: Okay, darn it, okay, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah. So that is my father, Arthur Golden, when he was in the [U.S.] Army. Artie was an officer, a major, I believe, in the Army, in the infantry, served in Korea; this was one of many pictures. He had a camera. He bought a camera when he was in Korea when he told me he was on a R and R [rest and recuperation] weekend in Japan, and he bought a Nikon camera, and he took lots of pictures, and I have some amazing pictures of his fellow Army mates, but also, also of some Koreans that he took pictures of when he was in Korea at this time. And this picture, someone took of him, but he used to send the film home in the packages he would send home also, with his paycheck, to my grandmother. Speaker 1: I'm gonna have to look and see which one that is. Okay, so, that's my great-grandmother Mimi [Miriam Garvey] at the center, and to the edge of the photo is my Grandmother Anna [Anna Campbell Golden]. This would have been in the '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s] when Mimi was still alive. And Anna was my father's mother, but when she came to this country from Jamaica, she quickly, like a year later, earned enough money to send for her mother Mimi, and they lived here together in Harlem [New York, New York] until Mimi died and my Grandmother Anna moved with us to Queens. Speaker 2: So that's another picture of my mother on her trip to Boston with another outfit, so there, somewhere in our family there are about ten pictures like this (laughter) of my mother posing on this trip. This is interesting, my mother was involved with several church groups and youth groups and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth group, and she traveled a lot on the East Coast as a young woman, with those groups, on buses. They would go to meetings and retreats, and she found that to be an amazing way that she got to see a lot of the East Coast at that time. That would have been late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay, so that is Mimi, my father's grandmother, so my paternal great-mother, on the roof of their apartment building in Harlem on 135th Street and 8th Avenue [Frederick Douglass Boulevard], 300 West 135th Street. That's the roof of the building. Speaker 2: That is my brother Arthur and I, circa 1973 or '4 [1974] in the backyard of our house in Queens, garage door open. Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's a picture, I'm gonna say I'm about twenty-five. So in that picture, I am probably twenty-five or twenty-six years old, and this was a birthday party of my brother's, who would then have been twenty-four or twenty-five years old, where all of his friends had made tee-shirts, and my mother, father and I are all there wearing these tee-shirts for my brother's birthday party at a bar on the Upper West Side [New York, New York]. My mother always liked this picture 'cause this picture comes right before she got sick, and that was in her room for years. Speaker 2: So, this is a picture, I'm trying to remember what the occasion would have been. Something happened in New York City where either the great ships came to New York, it was something down in the Financial District [New York, New York] and we all went as a family, but that was a picture in front of our house at 18936 Lewiston Avenue. The house sign probably on that house with our name, as well as my father's American flag, which hung outside the house July 4th, Memorial Day, Flag Day, and any other holiday he felt it was appropriate to hang his flag. Speaker 1: That's what you were saying, he was very (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Okay, that's, that photograph is from my junior year at Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts], so 1986; that's on the campus of the college, a set of pictures that my friends and I took that year, sort of marking our junior year. Speaker 1: That's a photograph that was taken for O magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine] in my apartment in Brooklyn [New York], my second apartment. So, after the first apartment I moved in when I moved out, my second apartment in Park Slope [Brooklyn, New York]. Above my mantelpiece is a painting, one of Glenn Ligon's Richard Pryor paintings. And that dress was made for me for that day by Tracy Reese. Speaker 2: That is Kellie Jones and I at the opening of the 'Black Male' ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art'] exhibition at the Whitney Museum [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York], and that was in November of 1994. Story_ID: 521587 Speaker 1: That's Walter Morris-Hale, who was my professor at Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts]. He was a professor of political science and government and I took all of his classes while he was--while I was at Smith, but he remained a friend and a real force in my life until his death. Speaker 2: That's my mother [Thelma Eastmond Golden] and father at some New Year's Eve, sometime in the '80s [1980s]. I say some New Year's Eve because there would have been a picture like this every single New Year's Eve all through the '70s [1970s] and the '80s [1980s] and into the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my parents in about 1968, so about five years into living in the house that they bought in '63 [1963] that I grew up in but right at the time that they finished the basement in that house with the wood paneling and made it into what became our family room and our rec room, and this picture was taken on the occasion of a party, hence their groovy outfits. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah. So that was the picture of my, that's a picture of my father that was in the yearbook from his officer training school [Officer Candidate School] in Fort Benning, Georgia, which was always interesting to me because he always talked about going to officer training school and what big deal that was in becoming an officer, but it was only when I found that yearbook that I realized that he was the only African American in his Officer Training graduation class. Speaker 2: Hm. Speaker 1: And he never told me that. Speaker 2: And, and, and he was in what branch? Speaker 1: [U.S.] Army. Speaker 2: Army. Speaker 1: U.S. Army. Speaker 2: That's a, Walter Morris-Hale and I at Smith College when I received Smith's highest award for alumnae called the Smith Medal [Smith College Medal], which is given out every day at a Smith event called Rally Day, and that's when I received it for my work in art and in culture, and Walter, I was thrilled, was there and was very proud of me that day, you know, winning a Smith Medal. Speaker 1: Didn't you give a commencement, the commencement (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I received an honorary degree after that, but that was early on, and Walter was thrilled. Speaker 1: That's my brother [Arthur Golden, Jr.] and I at about, you know, six and five years old, in the backyard of our house in Queens [New York], in front of my mother's rose bushes. She dressed us alike, and liked to do that. Speaker 2: That is a picture of myself and the writer Hilton Als. Hilton was really the creative genius who helped me envision 'Black Male' ['Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art']. He edited the catalog and he envisioned the entire way in which the exhibition sort of played out as a project, and we are pushing the stroller of my goddaughter, Zora Simpson Casebere, who is now seventeen years old, the daughter of [HistoryMaker] Lorna Simpson and James Casebere. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So, that's a picture that was taken for Elle magazine in front of the work of Julie Mehretu when she was artist and resident here at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. That was a site specific mural that Julie made as her artist in residenceshow. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Yeah, a picture taken for New York Magazine on the occasion of an article done about me, and I think that's the same photo shoot that that one comes from, both New York Magazine photographs, many years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture with Lowery Sims [Lowery Stokes Sims], Kellie Jones and myself. So, again, two important women in my career. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my husband Duro Olowu and I on our wedding day at 1 Center Street [New York, New York], which then was the New York City Marriage Bureau. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's me. So that's me at my christening. That is, I'm guessing, I'm tryin' to remember. I was born in September. I feel I got christened sometime that winter; I've seen the invitation for the lunch that my mother had. But that's me in my christening dress, which I still have. And a whole set of photos; there are hundreds of these, posing me, as one could a newborn, in many different ways. And that was a handmade-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) I mean that's quite a dress (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Handmade, handmade, handmade; that's why I still have it. So I still have it. My mother always said, "We have to keep this." Speaker 1: That's a picture of me with Alma Thomas' painting 'Resurrection,' which I now am so proud hangs in the Old Family Dining Room at the White House [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's a picture of my father, Arthur Golden, and I at the opening of 'Black Male.' We're in front of the work of the painter Leon Golub, and that was the evening of the opening. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is a picture that my father had taken as a gift for my mother when my brother and I were sort of seven and six years old, and taken by my uncle, who's a photographer, that hung in our house for many years. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So that's a picture taken on the day of the inauguration of Dr. [HistoryMaker] Mary Schmidt Campbell as the president of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]. I was asked to speak that day, and that was sort of immediately following my words about her and her influence on this museum and in my life. And looking on is former president of Spelman College, Dr. Johnnetta Cole. Speaker 2: That's me, here at the Studio Museum in about 2005 on the occasion of an exhibition of the work of Kehinde Wiley, giving a gallery talk, something that I still love to be able to do. Speaker 1: That's, that's Glenn Ligon and I, here at the museum, talking, what we are always doing. Speaker 2: Mark Bradford, here at the museum, and I having a talk in our auditorium, but on the occasion of the opportunity to talk to Mark about the trajectory of his work and the way in which he was then and continues to think about art and ideas and community. Speaker 1: That's here at the opening of our Stanley Whitney show with [HistoryMaker] Debra Lee, who is a great fan of Stanley Whitney and a proud collector of his work, and she--we were thrilled she was here that evening. Speaker 2: This is a picture from our Studio Museum Gala last year. We try to get this picture every year with the board members of the Studio Museum who are there. It always happens in the midst of the cocktail hour, and it takes everything to kind of get everyone together for that one moment but it, it happened last year in that moment. Speaker 1: Can you go from left to right? Speaker 2: Sure. So, left to right is Gordon Davis, Kathryn Chenault, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Lane, [HistoryMaker] Thelma Golden, Carol Sutton Lewis, Sandra Grymes, Ann Tenenbaum, and Bernard Lumpkin, and then at the back row, George Knox [HistoryMaker George Levi Knox, III], Rodney Miller, Raymond McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire] and Valentino Carlotti. I was trying to see if there someone stuck back there. Oh, I could see it from here, yeah. Speaker 1: That's Ray and I also, that evening of the Gala, probably in the moment that we both get on. The Gala, Ray, of course, gives the main comments as our board chair, but I have to speak and present our Wein Prize [Joyce Alexander Wein Artist Prize], and that feels like that was the moment before I had to do that. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This was at our spring luncheon, which was a benefit that supports our education programs, and I was thrilled that day we honored three amazing artists, Faith Ringgold, Lorraine O'Grady and Emma Amos, who is in this picture. And I am standing, looking at Emma, with Chirlane McCray, first lady of New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: This is a picture with George Wein, his fantastic partner [HistoryMaker] Glory Van Scott, and Njideka Akunyili Crosby, who won our Wein Prize which George has endowed in the name of his late wife, Joyce Alexander Wein, who was a trustee here. Njideka won this prize, which is a fifty thousand dollar cash award to an artist of innovation and promise, each year. Next to Njideka is Jerome Chazen, a long-time friend of the Wein's, who also comes and supports the museum. Story_ID: 521588 Speaker 1: That's a picture with the architect David Adjaye, who is, has designed our new expansion here at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. It is at the opening of our exhibition of Stanley Whitney's work ['Stanley Whitney: Dance the Orange'], and that was the summer of 2015. Speaker 2: So that's also our summer 2015 opening with the 2015 artists in residence. From left to right, Sadie Barnette, Eric Mack [Eric N. Mack], and Lauren Halsey. Their opening every summer is the culmination of their year in the residency, and every group of residents has an exhibition. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: That's a photograph, I don't know if I can date that, but I almost wanna say that that's from the Whitney [Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, New York] era. I don't believe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you think it is? Speaker 2: I think it is. I actually think that might be from, prior to my being here just 'cause of even where it is. I see those crates. I think that's a Whitney, but I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh yes. So, this is a photograph taken in our galleries when we had an exhibition of the work of the Spiral group ['Spiral: Perspectives on an African American Art Collective'], and it's a photograph of myself and first lady Michelle Obama as I was giving her a tour of the exhibition. And particular, in that moment, talking to her about the work at the center of the photograph called 'Bonfire' in our collection by Norman Lewis...