 Story_ID: 466929 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Beverly Guy-Sheftall, that's G-U-Y, hyphen, S-H-E-F-T-A-L-L. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: Six, one, forty-six [June 1, 1946]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: College professor. Speaker 1: Would you tell me the location of this interview? Speaker 2: 719 Myrtle Street, my home, Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And today's date? Speaker 2: September 11, 2007, I think. Story_ID: 466930 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Right--today it's orange, in the past it's been green and purple. Speaker 1: And what do you like to eat? What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Seafood, probably lobster. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: April, in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: And when you go on vacation, what's your favorite destination? Speaker 2: My favorite destination for vacation is New Mexico, in the U.S., Italy, outside the U.S. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I have two favorite phrases. One is a phrase by Harriet Tubman which says, "I freed a thousand slaves and I would have freed many, many more if they had known they were slaves." And then I also like bell hooks' phrase, "Feminism is for everybody." Those are my two favorite phrases. Story_ID: 466931 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother and her family. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's name and when and where she was born? Speaker 2: Ernestine Varnado Guy, V-A-R-N-A-D-O, born in Canton, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Do you know what year? Speaker 2: I could figure that out. She had me when I was twenty-seven, when she was twenty-seven, subtract two, subtract twenty-seven from hundred--1946, and what do we get? Speaker 1: Oh, please. Speaker 2: If you name the year, I'll, it'll be familiar to me. I'm terrible with numbers. Speaker 1: Nineteen thirteen [1913]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Twenty-two [1922]? Nineteen twenty-three [1923]? Speaker 2: Yeah. My father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.] was born in 1911. Speaker 1: Eleven [1911], okay. Speaker 2: And so she would have be--she would have been-- Speaker 1: Oh, you're twenty, okay, twenty-seven, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. So what is, what is that? Let me just put it this way, she died in 1981 and she was sixty-two. So what does that make her (laughter)? Speaker 1: We'll, we'll figure it out. Speaker 2: Okay, died in, in 1981 and she was sixty-two. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that'll, we should figure, be able to figure that one out. Speaker 1: Yes, we will. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me about your mother. Did she share any information about her growing up? Did she share any stories about when she was growing up? Speaker 2: You know, lots of stories. One of those, one of the stories she always shared was that she was glad the family got out of Canton, Mississippi when it did and they moved to Jackson, Mississippi, then eventually to Memphis, Tennessee. So she was happy not to grow up in Canton, Mississippi, which is where she was born but lots of, lots of stories, you know, throughout her life, her college days [at Lane College, Jackson, Tennessee], all kinds of things, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, well, share some of those with us. Speaker 2: Oh, well she talked about all the boyfriends she had which was, which was nice. She talked about playing tennis. She talked about how much she wanted to be a CPA [certified public accountant]. She was a math major in college and always wanted to be an accountant but never really did that. She talked about her marriage. She talked about her divorce. She talked about the kinds of jobs she liked. She talked about all kinds of things. Speaker 1: Okay, so, but do you have any specific stories that she might have shared with you? Speaker 2: One of the ones that she shared, that I think I remember, she, she would always talk about the importance of being punctual and she would speak about her own father [Willie L. Varnado] who was a Baptist minister and very punctual and she talked about a story, there were four girls and a boy and I think a couple of the girls had a curfew and they got in later than their curfew and so they moved the clock back so he wouldn't know exactly what time they got in and they forgot to move the clock back. So the next morning, Sunday, when he was scheduled to get on with his Sunday activities, he thought it was a time different than what it was. And so she talked about how hilarious that was to see him running around trying to get himself ready and when actually he had more time than he had but they never told him, they never ever told him what had happened with the clock and he used to always try to figure out how he could have gotten, been so off that Sunday morning. (Laughter) So that's a story that I remember. Story_ID: 466932 Speaker 1: We're going to talk more about your mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] but tell me who her parents were. Speaker 2: Her parents were Willie Louis Varnado [Willie L. Varnado], also, from Canton, Mississippi and Etta Carmichael [Etta Carmichael Varnado], which would have been her name before she got married. Her, her mother was, didn't work outside the home and her father was a Baptist minister who moved around in Mississippi and then eventually settled in Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you visit them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well actually-- Speaker 1: --as a child? Speaker 2: --actually, yes, and in fact, when my mother got married, we actually lived with my grandparents and then when my mother got a divorce, we moved back with my grandparents. So we actually were living in an extended family household. Speaker 1: Okay, and where your grandparents lived, where you lived with them, was that in Memphis or was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Memphis-- Speaker 1: In Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 2: --in a, in a segregated black neighborhood in Memphis, Tennessee, yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about your, your grandmother and your grandfather. Since you lived with them, you had a relationship, so tell me what you remember about your, well let's talk about your grandmother first. Speaker 2: Well, my, you know, it's what I call a trad- now in retrospect, a traditional patriarchal household, you know, father worked outside the home as a Baptist minister and, and his wife was a stay-at-home mom. They had five children and she was a very typical minister's wife. So, a very loving couple but a very traditional household. I mean my grandfather was clearly, you know, breadwinner and very devoted husband and father. My, my grandmother was rather quiet and I just mostly remember her being at home and doing whatever minister's wives do, going to church on Sunday and doing those kinds of things. Story_ID: 466933 Speaker 1: Where you lived in Memphis, Tennessee, if you could give me an idea of what the neighborhood looked like (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --during that time. Speaker 2: This, you know, it's a very interesting segregated black neighborhood, in, in Memphis but interesting in the sense that the street on which I grew up was what I would call a mixed neighborhood, a range of classes of black folk, from probably welfare moms to middle class black folk and one of, one of the things is interesting is that Aretha Franklin's, lived on, lived on that street when I was young. Her father [C.L. Franklin] was also a minister and I can remember actually playing with her, with Aretha Franklin on that street. Now they eventually left and went to, what, Detroit [Michigan]. So, you know, all black, mixed class street in the south side of Memphis and then literally, on the other corner of the street, an all-white street, and there was no, you know, no connection between the black folk who lived on one side of Lucy [Avenue], on one side of Lucy, and the white people who lived on the other side. It was as if we lived in two different worlds except my best friend's mother, who lived across the street from us, actually worked as a domestic in, in one of the households on the other side of the street and that was the only connection that I was aware of. So black people on one side of the street, white people on the other side but no communication. Story_ID: 466934 Speaker 1: Now tell me about your father. What was his name? Speaker 2: Walter P. Guy, Jr., only child, grew up in Memphis, Tennessee, went to LeMoyne College [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] and ended up teaching art in the public schools for over forty years and the thing I like to remember about him is he actually taught in that same school at Manassas High School [Memphis, Tennessee], where we actually went, same classroom for all those forty-three years. So, so my father was an art teacher and a commercial artist, sort of on the side and also had a sundry store, a neighborhood sundry store, so, and also worked on the railroad in the summers when he was away from school, in Canada, so had a very interesting life. Speaker 1: Now, who were his parents? Speaker 2: His parents were Walter P. Guy, Sr. who was a tailor and had a lumber yard and his actual stepmother, his, his biological mother died when he was fairly young and his father remarried so his mother, Sadie Guy, was an elementary school teacher, both of them were from Memphis. Story_ID: 466935 Speaker 1: Did they [Guy-Sheftall's paternal grandparents, Sadie Guy and Walter P. Guy, Sr.] own the home that they lived in? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember where it was? Speaker 2: Yeah, because it was right around the corner from where, from where my [maternal] grandparents [Etta Carmichael Varnado and Willie L. Varnado] were. So my father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.] actually continued to live in the house he was born in, actually, which was right around the corner from where my grandparents were and after we moved from my grandparents' home at a certain point, we moved to my father's, I guess, ancestral home, which is where he was born, and he continued to stay in that house, which was heir property, property that had been in his family for generations. He lived in that house around the corner from my grandparents' house until he died. Speaker 1: Okay, now speaking of heir property, do you know how or, well how the property was given down? Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did they-- Speaker 2: All I know is that it was property that had been in the family for generations. Speaker 1: Was there any talk about any of the ancestors being in slavery at all? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: On either side of your family? Speaker 2: No, but, but, not, not any talk, not any talk of that but lots of talk of, of the difficulties that the family had because they were, for the most part, in Mississippi for generations and then in Tennessee but not any, not any specific talk about family members who were enslaved. Speaker 1: Okay, so as far as you know, the property was purchased? Speaker 2: Yeah, the property would have been purchased and, in fact, the property next door to where my father was, was also heir property because when my [paternal] grandparents got older, they moved next door to my father and so that was heir property as well. Speaker 1: Do you know how much property it might have been? Speaker 2: No, just two, you know, normal size (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two lots? Speaker 2: Two lots, well actually three lots because there was a lot on the back of the house where we grew up that was vacant, and then, and then my grandparents' house also around the corner, which my grandfather purchased when he moved to Memphis [Tennessee] from Mississippi. Speaker 1: And, and this is, you're talking about the, the Guy, I'm sorry the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Varnado-- Speaker 1: Varnado. Speaker 2: --my mother's father purchased that-- Speaker 1: Father purchased. Speaker 2: --house when he moved to-- Speaker 1: From Mississippi? Speaker 2: --Memphis, I mean, moved from Mississippi, right. Speaker 1: Mississippi, okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: And he was sort of your typical Baptist minister who, you know, moved, moved around because of various churches. Speaker 1: And did you always move with him? Speaker 2: No, that was my grandfather. Speaker 1: Oh, your grandfather (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, that, his family, my mother's [Ernestine Varnado Guy] family moved with him, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But once he got to Memphis, he, he stayed in Memphis. Story_ID: 466936 Speaker 1: Talk to me about your one-on-one relationship with, with your mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy]. We're going back to your mother now-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and tell me some of the things that you think of today that you learned from your mother and maybe even characteristics that she, that you might have gotten from her. Speaker 2: Well, my moth- you know my mother worked outside the home. My mother was very independent and, and now in retrospect I realize that she was really a feminist. I mean, almost all of the messages we got, three girls, were messages that had to do with being independent, earning your own income, having a mind of your own, which she called, it was a little saying she had, "Every tub sits on its own bottom." So she was always talking to us about, not getting preg- pregnant as a teenager, not marrying too young in age, not hanging out with folk, especially certain kinds of men that would get you in trouble, but the main thing she talked about was getting a good education and being independent and that even if you married that would not have anything to do with your need to continue to be independent. So that's what I remember about my mother with respect to those kinds of messages, always get an education. She would excuse you from housework if you said you were doing homework, which of course we exploited quite a bit. She was very big on us being well-rounded so we took, you know, piano lessons, were hauled to Brownie and Girl Scout meetings [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], and just all kinds of activities. I think she thought that staying busy was an antidote to getting in trouble. So she was very clear about us being well educated so that we could live an independent life. Speaker 1: So your mother had feminist ideas-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --before it was actually-- Speaker 2: Oh, before we would have used that language, yes. Story_ID: 466937 Speaker 1: And what about your father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.]? Speaker 2: My father was a free, was a free spirit, very artistic and in many ways, I think was not suited for marriage. I mean one of the things that I remember was he worked all the time so he would leave the public schools [in Memphis, Tennessee], go to his sundry store and work until late at night and then come home and then, you know, and then, you know, get prepared on Saturday, all day, he was at his, his sundry store working and in the summers, he was gone working on the railroad. I mean, I just think that he liked being out and about and, and didn't like the sedentary life. And so he was a free spirit, eccentric, thought minister's work hypocritical, didn't go to church. My mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] on the other hand was a righteous churchgoer. So my father, my father was much more transgressive, didn't bother at all with bourgeois black social life, thought that was boring. So, that was my father, very different than my mother, much less pragmatic and, and sort of fun-loving. Story_ID: 466938 Speaker 1: So did your mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] and father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.] divorce? Speaker 2: My, my mother and father got a legal separation when I was in eighth grade, I was eleven, but never got a, got an official divorce and neither one of them remarried. Speaker 1: I see. Well before we talk about them separating, was there a story about how they met and got married? Speaker 2: (Laughter) My father has a story which may or may not be true. My father recalls these Varnado girls, there would have been four of them, moving to Memphis [Tennessee] from Mississippi and being both country but very pretty and, and, and talks about the fact that when these very beautiful Varnado girls came to Memphis, all of the guys were, you know, salivating, I suppose. So, I don't know ex- so he doesn't, he doesn't describe specifically how the two of them met but he does describe these girls coming from Mississippi, rather country but also very appealing. My, my mother, I don't recall any stories if she told about their meeting. Story_ID: 466939 Speaker 1: Now, you said your father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.] went to-- Speaker 2: LeMoyne [LeMoyne College; LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: LeMoyne? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, yeah, as a, as a, went to LeMoyne in Memphis [Tennessee], to college, and my mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] went to Lane College in Tennessee [Jackson, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: And what did she study? Speaker 2: She studied math. He studied, interestingly enough, political science, which he never did anything with because his, his real interest was art, even though he was a political science major and, and thought he was going to law school but ended up teaching art. And my mother initially taught math in the public schools and then ended up doing accounting in the business office in various black colleges [HBCUs] in Memphis, first Owen College [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] and then LeMoyne and then eventually when Shelby State [Shelby State Community College; Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis, Tennessee] was founded, that was her last job. Story_ID: 466940 Speaker 1: Well let me ask you, what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I think the earliest memory I have is, I think I must have been four years old when my mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] came home in an ambulance with my last sister [Francine Guy]. That's the earliest memory that I have as a child. I must have been, I would have been four years old. And then I, and then the next memory I think I have is going to nursery school. Speaker 1: And what do you remember about nursery school? Speaker 2: What I remember about nursery school was my mother, this was a private Lutheran school [Lutheran Cooperative School, Memphis, Tennessee] for black kids and I remember, age four was really a young age, so I would have, I would have been in nursery school at four and I remember feeling that I was being abandoned, I think, because I was, I just recall being very young and being taken off to this, you know, school in Memphis [Tennessee]. Those were my two earliest memories as a child. Story_ID: 466941 Speaker 1: Now when you think about maybe a sound or a smell or a sight, what do you remember about that time? Where does that take you? Speaker 2: I can't think of any, I mean I have a very vivid memories of what Memphis [Tennessee] looked like when I was growing up, maybe the Mississippi River, I remember in terms of particular sight because, because we used to drive by the Mississippi River on Sundays. That, that would probably be something that I associate with Memphis and also Beale Street, the, those two. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm, and lots of, lots of music and Beale Street. Speaker 1: Any smells come to mind? Speaker 2: Nope. I remember those segregated fairgrounds we used to go to once a week and the zoo that we had to go to on a particular day of the week. I sort of remember the, the, I remember segregation. I remember the, the, the actual meaning of segregation because we could only go to the zoo on Thursdays and we could only go to the fairgrounds on a particular night. So that's very vivid in my head. Story_ID: 466942 Speaker 1: You said your father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.] owned a sundry store-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and it was in your community-- Speaker 2: It was actually, it was in the black community but not right in our neighborhood, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me about what stores or merchants were in your community? Where did you shop? Where did your family shop? Speaker 2: Well, we went to Kroger [The Kroger Company] actually (laughter). So, the, the neighborhood stores were white-owned. I remember very vividly the shoe store, the, the, we used to go to the shoe store in the neighborhood to--all of the, all of the businesses in our immediate neighborhood, generally speaking, were white businesses but, but, but there were loads of black businesses in Memphis [Tennessee]. So, I mean, I, I can remember, you know, of course black, black funeral homes, black churches, black dentists but the actual stores in the neighborhood tended to be white neighborhood, I mean white store, white-owned businesses. Speaker 1: So, what type of neighborhood would you consider where you lived (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The neighborhood I grew up? I, it was a mixed, it was, it was a mixed neighborhood, both racially and in terms of class. Story_ID: 466943 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you go to? Speaker 2: I started off at this private Lutheran school. Speaker 1: And that was as a pre-K student, right? Speaker 2: That was from kindergarten until the sixth grade and then in the sixth grade I transferred to Manassas [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee] where my father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.] taught. Speaker 1: And what was the name of the, the Lutheran school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lutheran, Lutheran Cooperative elementary school [Lutheran Cooperative School, Memphis, Tennessee]. So I was there from kindergarten to the fifth grade and then in the sixth grade I transferred to Manassas where my father taught and where, from which I graduated in twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Now in your elementary school, do you remember any of the teachers, maybe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I remember, I remember the teachers, yeah. Speaker 1: Was there one in particular or a couple in particular that might have encouraged you or someone that you looked up to? Speaker 2: All I remember, I was obviously a very smart person in elementary school because I don't know that I really wanted to do this, but anyway, I got skipped out of nursery school to the first grade. I should have stayed in, I should have stayed in nursery school longer but they brought me out of nursery school when I was five so I went at four. I would have, I should have stayed when I was six, 'til I was six but they brought me out to the first grade. And then, I had the second and third grade the same year so they doubled up two grades on me and I actually remember the teachers who suggested that so that when I got to the fourth grade, I should have been eleven but I was nine. So they, they just, you know, pulled me out and just, you could do that at a private school, you couldn't do that at a public school. So that means I just, you know, kept being identified as this smart but very quiet student. So, so that's what I just remember, being, being plucked out of spaces (laughter) where I probably should have stayed as a, as a young girl. Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers? Speaker 2: I can see them, I can't really remember their names (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Names-- Speaker 2: --right now, yeah. Speaker 1: Were they black and white? Speaker 2: They were, oh they were all black. All my teachers were black, yeah. I didn't, I didn't have any white teachers until I got to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Interesting. Now you were very smart but what type of child were you? Speaker 2: I was a shy, quiet, sort of loner type, very self-sufficient and not very social as a child. Now, I, I grew out of it but I was, I was really the oldest of three daughters and very quiet and a bookworm. I spent most of my time inside of the house reading. Had to be pushed outside to play. So I was definitely the shy stereotypical bookworm. Speaker 1: When did you learn to read? Speaker 2: Oh, my mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] says that I actually learned to read when I was three or four years old, that I could read actually when I went to elementary school. I have no recollection of that. Speaker 1: And what did you like to read? Speaker 2: I liked to read everything. I mean, you know, those little books that parents give you. I remember reading 'Little Women' [Louisa May Alcott] and I also remember reading 'Diary of Anne Frank' ['The Diary of a Young Girl,' Anne Frank] as a young girl and then I also remember reading the lives of Russian dancers for some reason. I was really interested in Russian ballerinas. And so I read all of those stories about Russian ballerinas. I have no explanation about why. Story_ID: 466944 Speaker 1: You talked about being the oldest. How many, you had three sis (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two girls, two sisters-- Speaker 1: --two sisters. Speaker 2: --younger, two years, we were each two years apart. Speaker 1: And what were their names? Speaker 2: Carmella [Carmella Guy] and Francine [Francine Guy]. Speaker 1: And were they more outgoing? Speaker 2: The, Carmella was, Francine wasn't. Francine was probably even more shy than, than me. Carmella was the outgoing majorette-type social, gregarious talker. Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the extracurricular activities that you were involved in? Speaker 2: Too much church (laughter), Brownies, school, Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], swimming, what else. Speaker 1: Did you belong to any organized, any organizations, you know-- Speaker 2: Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]-- Speaker 1: Jack and Jill. Speaker 2: --briefly, Jack and Jill briefly. Speaker 1: What about the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And all of this was involuntary. If it had been left up to me, I would have just stayed at home and read. Story_ID: 466945 Speaker 1: So, you go to high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee] and you actually go to the high school that your father's teaching-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well, what was it like to be a student in the school where your father was a teacher? Speaker 2: A little bit difficult because I, I lost the anonymity that I had in, in elementary school because everybody knew that I was Mr. Guy's [Walter P. Guy, Jr.] daughter. So, you know, I think I felt like I was sort of under a microscope. Luckily, I was well-behaved and did well in school otherwise I would have been embarrassed but, so, you know, I was not able to just move around because it was a fairly large, I mean, this was a school that went from first grade to twelfth grade. So, under normal circumstances, I would have been anonymous at a school this size and this was a very large public school but because my father had been teaching there for so long, all of the teachers knew me and then, of course, that spread among the students. So, it was a little bit difficult. Story_ID: 466946 Speaker 1: --So were you any more social in high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Not really in terms of organizations. I, I probably was more social in terms of my friends but not in terms of group activity. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you join any organizations, maybe like the Honors Society [National Honor Society] or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --debate team. Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: None of that? Speaker 2: None of that. Speaker 1: What were holidays like at home? Speaker 2: Holidays were family oriented. My mother's [Ernestine Varnado Guy] siblings would come from where they lived, which would have been Mississippi and Detroit, Michigan and my mother's sister, who had six children and who lived also in Memphis [Tennessee], would, we would spend a lot of time with. So family, holidays were with family for the most part. Speaker 1: Were there any traditions that are, you know, that you think are unique to your family (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --during the holidays? Speaker 2: Can't think of any, no. In fact, we didn't, we didn't even, we didn't even really exchange gifts outside of the immediate family. So, not really. We just would gather and eat and go back home. Story_ID: 466947 Speaker 1: Did you attend your high school prom? Speaker 2: I did attend my high school prom under duress (laughter) because I was, in the eleventh grade [at Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee], I was fourteen, not sixteen, and my mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] insisted that my prom date and I be escorted by my father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.]. So, I was probably the only person at my high school prom who had to be driven by her father to the prom. Speaker 1: Who was your prom date? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I think my prom, I think my prom date was my, was my first boyfriend in high school, I think. Yeah, that, yeah that's true. Speaker 1: And what was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Billy Doss [Billy J. Doss], who was a, I remember his name mainly because he was a star football player. So, yes, so I think that was my, I think that was my prom date actually both years, both eleventh and twelfth grade. Story_ID: 466948 Speaker 1: Well let me ask you, who was the principal of your high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: That was Louis Hobson [Louis B. Hobson], was the principal. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Um-hm, very, very memorable. Speaker 1: So you were able to, to go outside of your community to go to school because there were no rules or regulations about (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I think there were no rules and regulations, right, about the fact that you had to go where you live, I'm assuming. Speaker 1: So that would, so none of your neighborhood friends (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we're, no, we're at the same school, no. Speaker 1: So they gave you different sets of friends? Speaker 2: I had about three different sets of friends. I had a few neighborhood friends, I had my high school friends and then I had my mother's [Ernestine Varnado Guy] friends, family friends that we would visit on the weekends. So I had very distinct, a very distinct group of friends. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now you graduate from high school at what age? Speaker 2: Fifteen. Speaker 1: At fifteen, and, and-- Speaker 2: And I turned sixteen over the summer. Speaker 1: So this was in-- Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-two [1962]. Story_ID: 466949 Speaker 1: Did you know that you would go to college? Speaker 2: Yeah, I always knew I would go to college, um-hm. Speaker 1: So who prepared you to, was your mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] an influence? Were there counselors, teachers? Were there any teachers that might have been influential-- Speaker 2: In terms of my decision to go to college? Speaker 1: Or, well, yes that and, and any other aspect during your high school years [at Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Not really. I mean, you know, I think that my teachers knew that I was going to college, thought I was smart and would go to college and I mean I think that when you're the teacher's child, people just assume that you're going to go to college. And so there was not any partic- any special mentoring or urging. I just think they knew, okay, these daughters of, of Walter Guy [Walter P. Guy, Jr.] would go to college. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know what college you would go to? Speaker 2: I wanted to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], my mother chose Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] because I was very young, fifteen when I graduated, sixteen by the time, so she, she wanted me to go to what she thought was a sheltered place as opposed to Howard in Washington [D.C.] where she thought I would need more supervision than I, than I, she, she wanted me to have supervision that she thought I would have at Spelman and not Howard. So I ended up going to Spelman. Speaker 1: And did you think that you would need more supervision? Speaker 2: I knew that I was, I knew that I was sheltered and I knew that I was not worldly. I did not think I needed the kind of supervision that I had at Spelman on the other hand (laughter) which, for me, was like going into a convent. I did not think that I needed to be in a convent (laughter). Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, Spelman had very rigid rules and regulations when I went. You couldn't go out in groups of less than three. You couldn't ride in a car. You had visiting hours of guys from 4:30 to 6:00. I mean, this was really, even my mother eventually said, "I didn't realize I was sending you to a convent." Speaker 1: So was this the first time that you are away from home? Speaker 2: For any length of time, yeah, first time. Story_ID: 466950 Speaker 1: And so tell me more about your experience at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], your first year. Speaker 2: Well my first year was, was, it just, what I described (laughter), it was, we were really confined to the campus for the most part. We could only go out in the evenings, until ten o'clock, to the library. We could not get in cars. So it felt like I was, it felt like I had gone to one of these boarding schools where, where you are really watched. So what that meant is that I developed very close relationship with a group of girls because we were always together in the dorm, you know. So, so what I remember about my first year was just spending a lot of time with my roommate who was from Memphis [Tennessee] and another person from Memphis and then the group of girls from Durham [North Carolina] that we met our first year. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, who paid for you to go to college? Speaker 2: I had a partial tuition scholarship and my father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.] paid for the rest. Speaker 1: And how did you receive the scholarship? Speaker 2: Probably on the basis of test scores. Story_ID: 466951 Speaker 1: And who did you meet that you remember as, well, as a friend or as a teacher, someone that stands out in your mind during your college years [at Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: During my entire college years? Well, you know, teachers, maybe only one, my, my, maybe the most memorable teacher was my, the person who taught me the most English courses. I majored in English so that would have been Richard Carroll, I think, because I experienced his classrooms as very challenging and his paper assignments as very challenging. So I remember him. I also remember, I had two white teachers, white male teachers that I remember, Staughton Lynd and, and Howard Zinn, who got, who were fairly well-known historians, sort of very progressive historians, so I remember them, and I remember [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding, you know, each of these three names would be recognizable now, Vincent Harding, Staughton Lynd, Howard Zinn. So those would probably be the most, the ones I remember with respect to positive memories. And then I just remember several other ones who were, I thought, very weak teachers, I remember them too. I won't call their names. Story_ID: 466952 Speaker 1: Because you did a lot of reading, is that why you chose English as your major? Speaker 2: I think so, I think so. I was, I was thinking that I was going to major in math, which I discovered I didn't like and then I thought I was going to be a pre-med student and then I discovered I didn't like that either and so then I ended up majoring in English because I like to read. Speaker 1: Well, at, you had one thought earlier that maybe you would become a teacher. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, were education courses a part of your curriculum (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I majored in secondary education though I did not really want to teach public schools (laughter) but I did major in secondary education. Speaker 1: Tell me more about your years, your sophomore and junior and senior years at, at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Most, more, more books, more study and more fun with my girlfriends, that's what I remember the most 'cause we were really mostly, mostly on campus. I remember the Civil Rights Movement. I remember the sit-ins so that part of outside the gates I remember. Speaker 1: Okay, well let, let's talk about that. Well first let me ask you, who was the president of Spelman at this time? Speaker 2: Albert Manley [Albert E. Manley]. Story_ID: 466953 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: Okay, so I got to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] in '62 [1962], so I was there from '62 [1962] to '66 [1966], which was the height of the Civil Rights Movement. So I remember sit-ins. There were, I remember exchange students, mostly white exchange students from college in the North who participated in sit-ins. One of my very good friends who had come to Spelman with me from Memphis [Tennessee] actually dropped out of Spelman and joined SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] so that was Gwendolyn Robinson [Gwendolyn Zoharah Simmons]. So I, you know, remember the Civil Rights Movement. I remember the assassination of John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy]. That was my sophomore year. Speaker 1: What do you remember about it? Speaker 2: Just, just the news, you know, that circulated on campus and people then, stunned. This would have been 1963 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three [1963]. Speaker 2: I remember the Bay of Pigs before then. So I, so even though we were, we were sort of cocooned on campus, there was a way in which the external world would peep through because of the news. We didn't have, we didn't have televisions in our room so, you know, television wasn't as present in our lives as it is in young people's lives now. So, you know, there was only the six o'clock news and that was in the lounge downstairs so you weren't like pinned to the TV. Speaker 1: Did you participate in any activities (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Participated in, in one or two marches downtown, Rich's [Rich's Department Store, Atlanta, Georgia], that Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] would have organized on a Saturday, I believe, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He would come to the AU Center [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] and, you know, encourage us to participate in marches and I, I participated in two. Speaker 1: Do you remember what happened and where, you know, what you did (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just remember, just remember walking from the AU Center to downtown, Rich's, and confronting police and all of that and being very, very frightened. Speaker 1: You were frightened? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Story_ID: 466954 Speaker 1: You said earlier that you became more social. Did you join organizations at all (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't join any organizations (laughter), social meaning more social with my friends, but I did join-- Speaker 1: Was there a black student union at, at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: No, not at a, not at a majority, I mean, not at a black college [HBCU], no. I mean, there were all kinds of organizations but not a black student union. Those were at white colleges. Speaker 1: Okay, well, did you join a fraternity (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No-- Speaker 1: --sorority? Speaker 2: --luckily, we didn't have sororities-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --at Spelman when I was a student. I would have joined AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] probably because that's what my mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] and aunts were but we did not have sororities at Spelman when I was a student. By the time I came back to teach, there were sororities but no sororities. Speaker 1: The March on Washington. Do you remember-- Speaker 2: I would have remembered that because it took place in the summer, I was back in Memphis [Tennessee], by then. I mean, I was back home across the summer and I remember looking at it on TV at home with my family. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, anything that you can remember or stands out in your mind through, up to your senior year? Speaker 2: Not much except for, you know, writing papers. I was very, a very serious student. So I remember writing lots of papers because I was an English major, doing a lot of reading and spending time with my girlfriends, that's what I remember more than anything else, and, and being aware of the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Did you write for a school news- for the school newspaper (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, didn't write for a school newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay. So, nothing sticks out in your mind about that time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Story_ID: 466955 Speaker 1: Well, 1966, you-- Speaker 2: Graduate from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) graduate from Spelman and tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: Then I decide--I, I go, mainly because of my mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy], rather than go immediately to work or to graduate school, graduate school, I applied for a fifth year study at Wellesley College [Wellesley, Massachusetts] because I didn't exactly know what I wanted to do. And so they had discontinued the exchange program and had what they called a fifth year of study and so I left Spelman and went to Wellesley. This is the first time I would have lived outside the South and spent a year at Wellesley taking English courses and then while I was there I applied for the master's program at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and I came back to Atlanta [Georgia] to get a master's degree in English. Now I'm, I'm, I think I'm preparing to be a college teacher. Speaker 1: All right. Now, while you're away studying, tell me what your thoughts were because this is the first time you're out of the South? Speaker 2: The first time I'm out of the South, first time I'm in a non-black environment, first time I'm around white people for, you know, on a daily basis and first time I'm in New England, first time I'm in cold weather. The only thing that's familiar about it is that Wellesley is a women's college. So, first time I'm, I'm living in a non-urban environment because Wellesley is a sub- suburban Boston [Massachusetts]. So all of those things I'm experiencing for the first time. Speaker 1: And what were your thoughts about these? Speaker 2: It was a nice break. I mean, I was glad that I was experiencing something other than southern black community so it's broadening, so I get a chance to see another aspect of U.S. culture and get a chance to, to interact with and meet people very different than myself. First time I've been around really wealthy folk. Wellesley has lots of wealthy students and so it was a first time I had been aware of how, of what class really can mean in the U.S. context. So that was interesting. Speaker 1: Who were some of the classmates there? Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting, I got to be really close with the, with black students who were at Wellesley as well as a few white students and the person with whom I developed the closest friendship was [HistoryMaker] Alvia Wardlaw who now teaches at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] and is an art historian, um-hm. Speaker 1: Anybody else come to mind? Any professors, anyone there? Speaker 2: Patricia Spacks [Patricia Meyer Spacks]. I took an English course from, probably the first women's studies course I took, it was a course called, Women in Drama, so I remember her. Speaker 1: So you would say that you enjoyed the experience? Speaker 2: Yeah, I enjoyed the experience. I didn't enjoy the weather (laughter) but I enjoyed the experience, yeah. Story_ID: 466956 Speaker 1: So you come back to Atlanta (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: --University and tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: Well, I'm living in a dorm and for a year I'm studying, again, reading, writing papers and that's what I do for a year and then I leave Atlanta University and take my first teaching job at Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] where my [maternal] uncle [Levi Watkins, Sr.] is president. So I'm at Atlanta for a year and then I go to Montgomery, Alabama, 1969, and join the English department, that's my first job and I'm, I think twenty-three years old. Speaker 1: And your thesis was? Speaker 2: On Faulkner's [William Faulkner] treatment of women in his major novels and so now I'm clearly interested in women's studies and African American studies. Speaker 1: Okay, and, let me see, you're teach--then you begin to teach at Alabama (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now I begin to teach at Alabama State University. Speaker 1: And what do you teach? Speaker 2: English. Speaker 1: And this is in 1971? Speaker 2: Yeah, 1971. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got your master's [degree] in 1970? Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, or '71 [1971] because it took me a little, longer to finish the thesis, yeah (simultaneous). Story_ID: 466957 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So in '68 [1968] is when you go back to-- Speaker 2: No, I go to Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] to teach in '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Oh, '69 [1969], okay. Speaker 2: From '69 [1969] to '71 [1971] and then I return to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] to teach in '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what do you teach at Spelman? Speaker 2: English for the first ten years and then in '81 [1981] I start teaching women's studies. Speaker 1: Now in 1971 at Spelman-- Speaker 2: I'm in the English department teaching English. Speaker 1: Who's the, the president at this time? Speaker 2: Albert Manley's [Albert E. Manley] still there (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's still there, okay, all right. Now, tell me about the difference of teaching at Alabama State and Spelman? Speaker 2: Well first of all, you know, Alabama State is a co-ed institution, public, Spelman is private, all girls, Spelman's much smaller and it's a liberal arts college. So, those are huge differences. The department is smaller, the students are, are a more national student body. The students at Alabama State are probably less a national student body because it's a public school in Alabama but I guess the main difference would be the difference that you would experience teaching at a co-ed versus a small women's liberal arts college. Speaker 1: Which did you prefer? Speaker 2: I prefer small women's liberal arts college. Speaker 1: So you, you began by teaching English and you knew by this time that women's studies was something that you would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was interested in, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me-- Speaker 2: But even, even when I was in the English department, I was teaching basic English courses and I taught the first two women's studies courses in the English department at Spelman as well. Story_ID: 466958 Speaker 1: So tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: Well, in, in 1980, I'm exploring, women's centers are beginning to crop up in various places and so as a result of my foundation grant, I'm exploring the possibility of starting a women's center at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] which I do in 1981. So I leave the English department and am the director of the women's center [Women's Research and Resource Center, Atlanta, Georgia] constructing a women's studies program which started out with a minor in '81 [1981] and that's what I've been doing for twenty-five years since. Speaker 1: At Spelman? Speaker 2: At Spelman. Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me about the development of the women's studies program, how, well, it started in, tell me about how it evolves into what it is today. Speaker 2: Well we start off in '81 [1981] with a small grant from the MOF Foundation [Microsoft Operations Framework Foundation] and we begin to work on a women's studies minor within the context of a women's center whose, whose mission is community outreach. So lots of activities outside of Spelman, the development of a women's studies program and research on African American women, so, the center has that broad mission. So that's, that's what we've been doing for twenty-five years. We now have a women's studies major. We have loads of community advocacy projects around issues of race and gender. For thirteen years we hosted a journal called, SAGE [SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women] and we managed a Spelman archive so we also are involved in programs that have to do with researchers coming to Spelman, dealing with the Spelman's archives as well as the special collections we have and we now have two. We have the Audre Lorde papers and we have the Toni Cade Bambara papers. Speaker 1: Okay, well you, you, you said a mouth full so let's back up a little bit. The activities outside of Spelman, what were some of them or what are some of these? Speaker 2: Well we, oh, there's so many of 'em. We, we have partnered with all kinds of organizations, Black Women's Health Project [Black Women's Health Imperative], probably it's the one that we had the earliest partnership with and most recently we partnered with black women's organizations around the world, Brazil, the Caribbean, South Africa, particularly around HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. So, so we've, you know, we've been doing a lot, we go to international women's conferences. We took a delegation, for example, to Kenya and to Beijing [China] so we see ourselves as participating in something we call a, global women's movement and we also see ourselves having linkages with black women who are doing similar work outside the U.S. Story_ID: 466959 Speaker 1: The archives. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me about the archives at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well this, this is, it's the standard institutional archives but because it's also attached to the women's center [Women's Research and Resource Center, Atlanta, Georgia], we are interested in, in being a repository for selective black women's papers like Audre Lorde and Toni Cade [Toni Cade Bambara]. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and tell me about Audre Lorde and Toni Cade, just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well Audre Lorde, um-hm-- Speaker 1: --just give me a little background. Speaker 2: Audre Lorde, well, Audre Lorde is probably most well-known, a black feminist lesbian writer and she came to Spelman when Dr. Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] was there and as a result of that relationship decided to donate her papers to Spelman. So, we read Audre Lorde in our women's studies classes, I teach her in my black feminist, I mean, in my feminist theory class and when we celebrated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the women's center in October of this past year, we dedicated the program to Audre Lorde. We looked at her work and her legacy with respect to women and African Americans. Speaker 1: And, and the same for-- Speaker 2: Toni Cade? Speaker 1: --Toni Cade. Speaker 2: Toni Cade was briefly writing in residence at Spelman after she moved to Atlanta [Georgia] and we decided that we wanted to keep the memory of Toni Cade Bambara alive so we named the SAGE internship program [SAGE Scholars Internship Program; Toni Cade Bambara Scholars/Writers/Activists Program] after Toni Cade and then for the past seven years, we've had an annual conference [Toni Cade Bambara Scholar-Activism Conference] during Women's History Month in which we celebrate the life and work of Toni Cade Bambara. Story_ID: 466960 Speaker 1: During your tenure here [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] you, not you, Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] becomes the president. Speaker 2: Yeah, in '87 [1987]. So from '87 [1987] to '97 [1997], she's president. Speaker 1: And tell me, do you have a relationship with her? Speaker 2: Yeah, we began the relationship when she came and actually started co-teaching the intro to women's studies course and then developed a collegial friendship and have been doing all kinds of collaborative projects, the most visible one is, 'Gender Talk' ['Gender Talk: The Struggle for Women's Equality in African American Communities,' Johnnetta Betsch Cole and Beverly Guy-Sheftall], which is a book we co-authored which took us five years to write and which, I think it's been out since 2005. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we're working on another project now with Rudolph Byrd [Rudolph P. Byrd] which is a collection of Audre Lorde's mostly unpublished writings. So we continue to do book projects. Story_ID: 466961 Speaker 1: I want to go back to SAGE [SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women] and talk to me more about how it was begun and who inspired you. I understand Ruby Sales [HistoryMaker Ruby Nell Sales] might have inspired you to, to get going (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Ruby was, well Ruby, what happened in particular was I developed a, a collegial relationship with Patricia Bell Scott who was, at that point, at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] connected to a women's project and she and Barbara Smith and Gloria Hull [Akasha Gloria Hull], who had co-edited, 'But Some of Us are Brave' ['But Some of Us are Brave: All the Women are White, All the Blacks are Men,' eds. Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith] did a faculty development workshop at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] that was funded, I think, by (unclear), and at the end of that workshop, Pat Bell Scott and I decided, with a lot of encouragement, including from people like Ruby, that we needed a scholarly journal on black women so the idea of that journal began at the end of that workshop in, that would have been, I think, 1982. And so, that's what we did for thirteen years. Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me some of, tell me about some of the issues and, and who else joins the, the staff or the editorial group (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, the editorial group, the editorial group is joined by Jackie, Jacqueline Jones Royster who's in the English department at Spelman and then Janet Sims-Wood [HistoryMaker Janet L. Sims-Wood] who's at the Moorland-Spingarn [Moorland-Spingarn Research Center, Washington, D.C.] at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and [HistoryMaker] Miriam DeCosta-Willis who is a professor of foreign languages. So that was the editorial group and we did both thematic and non-thematic issues. Some of the thematic issues were mothers and daughters, science and technology, male kin, African diaspora. We did a student issue of the journal. We did some, some open issues. What else? Can't think of any more but lots of thematic issues, and I remember the mother/daughter one in particular because it resulted in a, in a book project called 'Double Stitch' ['Double Stitch: Black Women Write about Mothers and Daughters,' ed. Patricia Bell Scott] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 466962 Speaker 1: You were going to, you said that, that project led into a book called (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that, that project, there were two issues, I think, of, of the mother, daughter issue and we ran out of the issue. There were, there was lots of demand for it and so then we decided we would approach a publisher and had it, had the two issues sort of synthesized to 'Double Stitch' ['Double Stitch: Black Women Write about Mothers and Daughters,' ed. Patricia Bell Scott], black mothers talk about, the daughters. I can't remember what the subtitle, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, oh so that's how 'Double Stitch' came about? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's how 'Double Stitch' came about, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and that book also was very popular? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was very popular, I think because it was the first time, certainly between two covers that there had been that much attention to black mother, daughter relationships. Speaker 1: And what year was this published? Speaker 2: Don't know, I can't, don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can't remember, okay. Speaker 2: I don't know what year that was. I'm terrible on dates. Story_ID: 466963 Speaker 1: What is your next project as far as the literary writings? Speaker 2: There are two anthology projects that I'm working on, the Audre Lorde project with Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] and Rudolph Byrd [Rudolph P. Byrd] which is a collection of both her unpublished writings and her writings that are in journals that may or may not still be in print and part of the motivation was that, for that, was the writings in the Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] archives which may or may not have been published. So, there's the Audre Lorde project which Oxford University Press [Oxford, England] will publish and then there's another project in which I am involved with Frances Foster [Frances Smith Foster] and Stanlie James and this is a new edition of 'But Some of Us are Brave' ['But Some of Us are Brave: All the Women are White, All the Blacks are Men,' eds. Gloria T. Hull, Patricia Bell Scott, and Barbara Smith], that first black women studies reader, that Feminist Press [New York, New York] published about, I think twenty years ago. So, we have completed the table of contents and are in the process of getting permissions and so Feminist Press will reissue 'But Some of Us are Brave.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I'm thinking about writing an academic or intellectual memoir over the next two years. So that will be, that's what I'm working on right now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right now. What are some of the other books that you have edited? Speaker 2: Well, the first, the first one was 'Sturdy Black Bridges' ['Sturdy Black Bridges: Visions of Black Women in Literature,' eds. Beverly Guy-Sheftall, Bettye J. Parker, and Roseann P. Bell] which was published in 1979, that was with a colleague, Roseann Bell [Roseann P. Bell] from Spelman. It was the first anthology of black women's literature. Story_ID: 466964 Speaker 1: And then my dissertation was published, 'Daughters of Sorrow: Attitudes toward Black Women, from 1880-1920' [Beverly Guy-Sheftall]. Speaker 2: Now that was very interesting, talk about that. We're, what did you, how did you come up with that that would be your, your thesis? Speaker 1: Dissertation topics have an interesting history and I don't even know if you can remember but I was interested in African American studies and women's studies and I was interested in black women's studies and I was interested, because I was getting a Ph.D. in American studies, I was interested in, of course, doing interdisciplinary work. So that dissertation combines the methodological work of both history and literature. And so I was very much interested in the whole subject of, of what people think about black womanhood, of black women, starting at the turn of the 20th century, 1880 to 1920. I was very much, I was not interested in the contemporary period at that point. I was interested in, in the era--in the period after slavery and up to the 1920s, before the Harlem Renaissance. And so that's how, that's how that dissertation emerged. Speaker 2: Now 'Daughters of Sorrow,' that comes, isn't that-- Speaker 1: It's a quote from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Quote from-- Speaker 1: Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] in a, in a under-read book of his called, 'The Damnation,' [sic. 'Darkwater: Voices from Within the Veil'] in an essay called, "The Damnation of Women" in which he talks about the sort of plight or well he talks of, daughters of sorrow alludes to, makes visible the ways in which black womanhood has been demonized within the national psyche and, and I say would also globally. So, I, I pulled the title from that essay by Du Bois. Speaker 2: And did you find his works or him as a champion of women? Did you, did you think of him in that light (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he, he was, he was definitely a champion. I mean, he has a complex history with black women but, and I tried to capture a little bit of that in dissertation but he was clearly a, an, what I call an apologist, at least ideologically for black women and also a champion of women's rights, no question about that and also in many ways a champion of, of black women. He was very bothered by and talked about the treatment of black women in slavery. So, so I was interested in, in Du Bois' attitude about black women as well. Story_ID: 466965 Speaker 1: And what did you find during that time? What were men saying about women? You said that, you looked at it globally, I guess, men-- Speaker 2: Well, I looked at the U.S. though (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --at that point. Speaker 1: Okay, U.S.-- Speaker 2: I was looking at, at white male attitudes, white female attitudes, black male attitudes and how black women saw themselves and, of course, there's a, there's a range within those categories but I was, I was interested in, I was interested, for example, in what the, what the families of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], what their racial attitudes were. I mean, Spelman is, is a case study in the, in the dissertation ['Daughters of Sorrow: Attitudes toward Black Women, from 1880-1920,' Beverly Guy-Sheftall]. There, there are a range of opinions, obviously, but I was interested in what, what white women who came south, like Harriet Giles [Harriet E. Giles] and Packet [sic. Sophia B. Packard]. I was interested in their racial attitudes. I was interested in what they thought about black women. I was interested in what white female writers thought about black women, I'm talking about U.S. ones, and I was interested, perhaps even more in what black women thought about themselves during that particular period. So, the, the essay, the dissertation is a sort of broad look, not, not, not individual people, though I did look at some individuals, but basically it's an intellectual history, that's, that's really what it is, not so much the behavior but what these people wrote about black women. Speaker 1: Now you, did you find in your studies, as you were, you know, studying literature and, and, and black women that there wasn't very much information in black women's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there was loads of information. Speaker 1: Oh, there was? Speaker 2: There was more information than I could, I could even handle. I mean, newspapers, books, I'm talking about, there's a huge amount of what we would now call race literature coming out of that period. So, there was more material than I could even get a handle on and I didn't, I didn't even really do a whole lot with newspapers 'cause I would have still been writing the dissertation but there was a lot of race literature that I looked at. I looked at journals. I looked at church journals. I looked at novels and I looked at what we would call propaganda, a lot of racial propaganda that came out of that period. So that was, that was lots of primary sources, print sources, that I could use. Story_ID: 466966 Speaker 1: The next book was, this was in 1991, I'm talking about 'Words of Fire' ['Words of Fire: An Anthology of African American Feminist Thought,' ed. Beverly Guy-Sheftall]. Speaker 2: Oh, 'Words of Fire,' okay. Speaker 1: That came-- Speaker 2: That was later. Speaker 1: Later on, okay. Speaker 2: By this time, I mean, after doing the dissertation ['Daughters of Sorrow: Attitudes toward Black Women, from 1880-1920,' Beverly Guy-Sheftall], I, I also began to realize that there was a huge amount of, of material that we would put under the category of black feminist thought. And so what I decided to do, because I was totally tired of white feminist and black people saying that black women had not been involved in the production of feminist thought and I knew this was not true from the dissertation. So I decided to do an anthology which would trace the development of black feminist, started going all the way back to 1832 with Maria Stewart [Maria W. Stewart]. So that's what 'Words of Fire' is. It, it, and I could have had three volumes but I only could have one volume. So, I talked South End Press into, into publishing an anthology which would trace the evolution of black feminist thought, going from Maria Stewart to the present and so that's what that big anthology is and it's, one of the best things that I've done because it's used a lot in, in women's studies and black studies classrooms and so people don't any more have to go around making stupid statements like black women haven't been involved in feminism. And then I decided, with Rudolph Byrd [Rudolph P. Byrd], that I would do an anthology called, 'Traps: African American Men on Gender and Sexuality' [eds. Rudolph P. Byrd and Beverly Guy-Sheftall] because I was also interested in, in making visible progressive pro-feminist writing by African American men. And so that's what 'Traps' is. Speaker 1: Okay, and in 'Gender Talk' ['Gender Talk: The Struggle for Women's Equality in African American Communities,' Johnnetta Betsch Cole and Beverly Guy-Sheftall]-- Speaker 2: 'Gender Talk,' Johnnetta [Johnnetta B. Cole] and I were interested in synthesizing the work that both of us had been involved in for most of our academic life, that is working African American studies and women's studies and what, and so what that book is, is a black feminist analysis of the situation, broadly speaking, of gender issues within the African American communities. Speaker 1: And, and what year was-- Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-five [1995]. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-five [1995] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we worked on it from 19--we worked on it for five years and then it was published in 1995. Story_ID: 466967 Speaker 1: Now if we just step away from the academic side for a moment and talk a little bit about what's happening in your personal life. Do you marry? Speaker 2: I, I married in 1969, yeah. The person that I married I met in graduate school, actually, at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]. He was a graduate student in economics, I was a graduate student in English. He had graduated from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] in '64 [1964], I had graduated in '66 [1966]. So, we married, we stayed married for ten years. We both taught at Alabama State [Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] and then came back to Atlanta [Georgia], he, at Morehouse, me at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and we married for ten years and divorced and have remained friends. Speaker 1: And what is his name? Speaker 2: Willis B. Sheftall, Jr. Speaker 1: Okay, any children to the marriage (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No children, decided neither one of us wanted any children. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so-- Speaker 2: And I have not, and I'm not remarried. Story_ID: 466968 Speaker 1: Let's talk more about your years because you've been at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] for twenty-five years-- Speaker 2: Thirty-six years. Speaker 1: Thirty-six years, I'm sorry. So tell me some of the other, the other things that you are involved in with the women's studies or, or anything at Spelman. Speaker 2: Well, women's center [Women's Research and Resource Center, Atlanta, Georgia], and women's center keeps me, keeps me very busy because in addition to teaching women's studies and doing lots of work that women's centers do and belonging to boards and giving talks and traveling outside of the country and spending a lot of time with students, with progressive student organizations. I've also been involved with faculty governance issues as president of Faculty Council but most of my work at Spelman has been with faculty and curriculum development and with, what I call, the important work of politicizing young African American women students around issues of race and gender. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so that takes up a lot of my time. Speaker 1: So what are some, you, faculty development programs (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have workshops, workshops, the last one we had was on global black feminism. We tried to get faculty who are interested in broadening their knowledge to come at the women's center and we read and listen to other scholars and hopefully get them to rethink courses they might be teaching. So lots of faculty and curriculum development. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and, is there anything else that you do? Speaker 2: (Laughter) At Spelman, that's a lot. Speaker 1: Well, it doesn't have to be at Spelman. Speaker 2: Well I do a lot of work away from Spelman (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, I do a lot of faculty development workshops away from Spelman, at majority institutions around, all kinds of diversity issues. Story_ID: 466969 Speaker 1: What other organizations are you involved with? Speaker 2: I'm involved, I'm still involved with the, I'm involved with the National Council for Research on Women [New York, New York] as a board member which is an umbrella organization of, oh goodness, probably now a hundred centers, women's centers, both on and off college campuses. I'm involved with a project called, the Future of Minority Studies at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] which is a mentoring project for faculty of color, junior faculty of color, to help them navigate the academy. What else am I involved with? I'm still, I'm involved with the, still involved with the National Black Women's Health Project [Black Women's Health Imperative] which is an, which is an old involvement. Work with women's studies programs at various places, Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina] for women would be one. Go to black colleges [HBCUs] trying to get them to think about starting women's studies programs. Go to majority institutions trying to get them to be more sensitive about issues of race in their women's studies programs. So lots of off-campus women's studies work. Story_ID: 466970 Speaker 1: The health initiative [Black Women's Health Imperative], you mentioned HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome]. When did you begin working with that project? Speaker 2: Well about five years ago we got a Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York], another Ford grant, another faculty curriculum development Ford grant which would enable us to start a women's health concentration within the context of our women's studies major. And so, one of the, there are about four issues that we're concerned about in terms about women's health initiative, violence against women, obesity, stress and depression and HIV/AIDS. And so the HIV/AIDS work, you know, which is global, has resulted in an invitational international conference that we had at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], I think two years ago and we continue to partner with organizations, Afro organizations outside the U.S. who are also interested in eradicating HIV/AIDS. Story_ID: 466971 Speaker 1: As far as women's studies and talking about women's rights and, you know, things like that, now I know that at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] they had a group of women that, that spoke with, on 'The Oprah Show' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] about Imus [Don Imus]. What do you, would you share what you felt about the whole issue? Speaker 2: Well first of all, it's important to back up. The students that got involved with the Nelly incident- Speaker 1: Okay, that's-- Speaker 2: --those students actually were in my feminist theory class and, and so that whole initiative actually got catalyzed in my feminist theory class one Wednesday afternoon, one Wednesday evening. I teach that class once a week, from six to nine [o'clock], and so that, so the Nelly incident and the protest was the precursor to the Imus incident. Speaker 1: Well let's talk about Nelly and we need to say what it was about (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, well, Nelly, a rapper who was interested in his, what, sickle cell drive was coming to Spelman's campus to talk about sickle cell, I think it was sickle cell. Speaker 1: Yes, 'cause his, his sister [Jacqueline Donahue] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, 'cause his sister had it. Speaker 1: --had it. Speaker 2: And in the meantime he made a very misogynistic music video called, 'Tip Drill' which the students saw over the Christmas holidays because it was on BET [Black Entertainment Television] at three o'clock in the morning and the president of student government was in my class as well as a group of students from an organization called, the Feminist Majority Leadership Alliance and they were in a dilemma about what to do because basically what they wanted him to do within the context of him coming to Spelman with his sickle cell drive, is to address the issue of 'Tip Drill,' the video. They were very disturbed by it but they did not disinvite him but they indicated to his handlers that when he came with his drive that they would be asking him about 'Tip Drill' and he decided that he would not, he would not come to Spelman to talk about his sickle cell drive because I guess he didn't want to be interrogated about 'Tip Drill.' And so the students decided that they would mount, and it's very interesting because it's probably the case that had he come to campus, things would have totally turned out differently but he decided not to come to campus, so the students decided to continue with their protest activity and to, and to go national with respect to the issue of misogyny in gangster rap. And so they had a town hall meeting to which national media came from all over the place. And so that began the, the, what we now call the Nelly protest and it involved a whole range of things, including writing letters to BET and eventually Viacom [Viacom Inc.] about their disgust with music videos. So, that protest got a lot of attention, the students decided to continue the activity and so when the Imus situation occurred, the, the memory of our students and their Nelly protest was, you know, still in the minds of people and Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] decided to involve students at Spelman in that controversy because they had been so active before. Story_ID: 466972 Speaker 1: Tell me what your feelings are about the Imus [Don Imus] situation. Speaker 2: Well I have to again back up. I think I have feelings first of all about misogyny and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in, and hip hop period and have written about it with Johnnetta [Johnnetta B. Cole] in 'Gender Talk' ['Gender Talk: The Struggle for Women's Equality in African American Communities,' Johnnetta Betsch Cole and Beverly Guy-Sheftall]. There's a chapter in there called, "No Respect" ["No Respect: Gender Politics and Hip Hop"] and it's an analysis of, of misogyny in a particular form of hip hop. So, so I, you know, as a, as a person who teaches women's studies and as a person who self-identifies as a black feminist, I'm, and also as a person who understands the really toxic misogynistic messages that, that are in a lot of that hip hop so already, already we've been involved in talking about misogyny in hip hop, particularly in music videos. So, so, we've been working on that for years and, of course, nobody's paying it much attention. So the, the Imus situation happens, the Imus situation happens and so the response to that is, you know, it's like, okay, lots of us have been trying to talk about this issue for years. And so Imus, being white and male, you know, enables us to speak about an issue that, that we've been speaking about for years. So, so anyway that's, that's how I approach the Imus, the Imus issue which, you know, frequently gets me into trouble because lots of people are not bothered by those messages if it's us producing them but they got very upset because it was Imus. So, so I'm still involved in the, making visible and speaking loudly about the toxic impact of misogyny and popular culture in the U.S., particularly as it impacts black women and Imus is just a, most, one of the most recent culprits in that long saga. So that's, that's what I feel about Imus and the whole thing and I try not to separate Imus from the broader issue. Speaker 1: Okay. You said that you identify yourself as a black feminist. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me what that means to you. Speaker 2: Well it just, well it, it simply means that I am an African American women who is opposed to the sexist oppression of women in general and the connection between issues of race and gender oppression as they relate to black women. Story_ID: 466973 Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you can tell us about women in African American studies and things that you have developed or come across that we need to know about? Speaker 2: Well I just, you know, it's, it's, it's still a very contentious issue, very, you know, still a debate in black communities about the relevance of feminism as a, as a politic that's helpful to the liberation of black people. And so what I, what I argue is, is that black feminism is a lens, it's a framework for understanding the world including, African American experience but it's a, it's a, it's a battle that we continue to wage. I mean, there's still loads of folk who think that black feminism is irrelevant, divisive, useless but I think it's still important to write black feminist books, still important, I think, to teach about black feminism, it's still important, I think, to try to include men in that project which is why Rudolph [Rudolph P. Byrd] and I wrote that book called, 'Traps' ['Traps: African American Men on Gender and Sexuality,' eds. Rudolph P. Byrd and Beverly Guy-Sheftall] and why Johnnetta [Johnnetta B. Cole] and I wrote that book called, 'Gender Talk' ['Gender Talk: The Struggle For Women's Equality in African American Communities,' Johnnetta Betsch Cole and Beverly Guy-Sheftall] which is not just addressed to women but addressed to anybody. I mean, I, I, I agree with bell hooks that feminism is for everybody and I think feminism is also for black folk, including men. Speaker 1: Do you find that there are women, not only black women, but women who believe, well, there's not a need for it because we are, we are free, we are liberated, not knowing that they are truly not liberated as of yet? Speaker 2: Yeah, and actually, the, the, the propaganda against feminism has been very successful in the U.S. and I, and I call it propaganda. Increasing numbers of women, for example, would, would, would argue against the need for, for Roe versus Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973] and legal abortions. Increasing numbers of women don't, don't know, for example, that women still earn less money than men. I mean, I, I argue with people about demographic data, you know. You know, you can, you can talk to somebody who will say, well women make more money than men in the U.S. I don't know where they get that from but that's what they believe and just because Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] is running for president, people will say, well you see, or just because Oprah Winfrey is a billionaire, people will say, you see, you know, we don't need a women's movement. So, the fact that you have visible women in the media and the fact that you've had a very successful right-wing attack on feminism, makes the argument more difficult, I think. Story_ID: 466974 Speaker 1: Besides the books that, that you're going to be writing or, or editing, and oh while I'm thinking about it, when it says that edited by, would you just explain what that means so that we get a clear understanding of someone who authors a book, who actually writes it and one who edits. Speaker 2: Edits is, an edited book means that it's a collection of writings that other people have written. Now it may include writings by yours- by you but it's not a single author, or co-authored text. It means that this is a collection of writings that includes many, many voices, so that's an edited collection, as opposed to a monograph or single or double author text like 'Gender Talk' ['Gender Talk: The Struggle For Women's Equality in African American Communities,' Johnnetta Betsch Cole and Beverly Guy-Sheftall] that, in this case, actually Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] and I write ourselves. 'Words of Fire' ['Words of Fire: An Anthology of African American Feminist Thought,' ed. Beverly Guy-Sheftall], for example, is an edited collection of writings by lots of African American women, maybe as many as thirty of them and my role as editor is to collect the works and write commentaries about them. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. So you take the article itself, if it was an article in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, in--well, I, I, I collect these writings and I conceptualize some, some framework which is dictating why it is that I would put these particular writings between two covers as opposed to a whole another set of writings and I contextualize the pieces in the introduction. I don't just throw them in there. I, I give readers a, a framework or context in which to read them and then before each essay, I, I give information about the author and say something about the work itself. So the work of an editor is not just gathering up stuff and putting them between two covers but also providing analysis and a framework so that readers can enter that collection of work with a broader picture. So you do a lot of the, so that for example, if a piece is in there by Claudia Jones, the reader doesn't have to say, well who is this person. So I provide information about Claudia Jones and I also provide a context for you to read the essay that I'm including in there. So there's a lot of work that goes into editing other than just finding stuff and sticking it in a, in a book. Speaker 1: All right. I understand that but now I even understand even more how much work it takes and, and if the, the article, was the, would the article have been published somewhere else (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the article generally would be, there are two, there are two sets, there are two kinds of anthologies. One would be previously published work, that's what 'Traps' ['Traps: African American Men on Gender and Sexuality,' eds. Rudolph P. Byrd and Beverly Guy-Sheftall] and 'Words of Fire' would be. You also can have an anthology in which you do a call for manuscripts and, and you ask people to write pieces that have never been published before and then you collect them. Story_ID: 466975 Speaker 1: We were talking about editing and you were saying how much work it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Yeah. Speaker 1: --but do you actually get, when you solicit pieces from people to include in, in anthology, do you ever have to take the time to actually do some of the editing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and send it back to them? Speaker 2: And a lot of that was, when we edited SAGE [SAGE: A Scholarly Journal on Black Women] because most of, most of what was in SAGE was not published before. So we would do a call for manuscripts, we're doing a collection, we're doing an issue on mothers and daughters and here are the things, blah, blah, blah, and we did a lot of, a lot of editing, during the thirteen years that we were doing SAGE, lots of editing. Speaker 1: What, what made SAGE come to an end? Speaker 2: Just the, the sheer work of it and we were scattered all over the place and the work of the, our individual work at our individual places, as well as our own personal work, just became overbearing and we never had any staff. So, just, just the, just the, doing it for thirteen years, in addition to everything else we were doing. Story_ID: 466976 Speaker 1: So, what's next? You told me about some projects with a couple of books that you're working on, but what else is next for you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the, the next thing is to raise an endowment for the women's center [Women's Research and Resource Center, Atlanta, Georgia]. So the women's center has been functioning with funds from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and grant funds and what I would like to do when I step down as director is to make sure that the women's center has somewhat permanent funding. And so we have the, hopefully the possibility of an endowment from Ford [Ford Foundation, New York, New York] that we will match. And so for the next two years, assuming we get the Ford grant, I will be doing something that will be a big challenge which is raising endowment funds for the women's center-- Speaker 1: How much are you looking to-- Speaker 2: --in addition-- Speaker 1: --raise? Speaker 2: A million dollars. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At least a million to, to, to match the Ford endowment if we get it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So in addition to writing books and teaching and doing whatever else I do and will also be, I'll also be fundraising, soliciting money from individuals in particular and other foundations. Story_ID: 466977 Speaker 1: Is there something that you haven't done that you want to do in your life? Speaker 2: I have some things that I want to do, I probably won't do them. I mean, I always wanted to speak, learn another language. I'm not sure that I'll do that (laughter). I, I always wanted to be fluent in another language. I didn't want to continue to be a typical American with one language. I'm not sure I'll do that. There's some places in the world I'd like to travel and there's, and I'm, there's an experience that I want to have, I want to ride the Orient Express. I want, that's something I want to do. So, it, it involves travel. I, I've, there's nothing with respect to my per- my professional life that I want to do other than this endowment [for the Women's Research and Resource Center, Atlanta, Georgia] but they, there, there is some travel that I'd like to do. Speaker 1: Where have you been around the world? Speaker 2: I've been to Europe. I've been to Asia. I've been to Africa. I've been to the rainforest in Brazil. I've been most places that I, that I wanted to go. I've been to China. I want to go, I want to spend more time in the South Pacific. I've been to Tahiti, I'd like to go to Fiji. I'd like to go to Indonesia because I'm interested in their textiles. I've been in most parts of Africa. There's some, you know, so, lots of places I've been. Speaker 1: Okay, and lots of places you would like to go (laughter). Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 466978 Speaker 1: Looking around, I see that you collect dolls. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell me how you started collecting. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Well let me, I, I have to back up. My father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.] was an art teacher and I think that I was always conscious of the importance of art because that's what he did. I spent a lot of time in his art room, you know, and, and probably had a little secret desire to be an artist, though that was never cultivated. So I think I've always had an interest in art from being around him. In 1973, I went to India for three months on a study tour and while I was in India--now I've had to, I've had to reconstruct this later--I mean, when I came back from India, I discovered that I had doll, I had, I had brought dolls back from India. In fact, I'm looking at them right now. Those, the first dolls that I collected are, are there next to the thermostat from India. So, while I was in India, this is the first time that I was really aware of, of cultural differences as it related to women and I was there looking at the situation of women and so I was, you know, interested in, in that. So, I started, so I said when I came back from India and realized that I had dolls, I said, this is interesting. And so what I'm going to do in my travels is to collect dolls. So, everywhere I would go, I would bring back dolls. Now it's interesting because I didn't like dolls when I was growing up at all, particularly baby dolls and you'll notice in here that these are not baby dolls, these are girls, big girls. So, so my doll collection began in India and then on all of my subsequent travels, China, Africa, whatever, I would, I would collect dolls. And then as a result of the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival], I went to the first one, I started collecting African American dolls. There were doll artists there, African American doll artists, and I decided that I would collect art dolls by African American women. So you'll see art dolls. And then I, I discovered that I didn't have to go to places to collect dolls, I could go on the doll show, doll show of Home Shopping Network [HSN] and broaden my doll collection without leaving home. So, the dolls are, and then, and then there's various categories. I mean, I collect Ndebele dolls from South Africa because I developed an interest in issues having to do with South Africa and then I also developed an interest in Native American culture. So, you're going to see dolls from Native American places in the U.S. and you're going to see dolls from South Africa and Nigeria and the U.S. So my interest in dolls was, came as a result of my travels and came as a result of my trying to understand women's experiences around the world. Story_ID: 466979 Speaker 1: It's interesting you said Native American culture that you were interested in and that one of your favorite places-- Speaker 2: Is New Mexico, yeah, um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is New Mexico. What was your experience there that makes that one of your favorite places? Speaker 2: Well, when I was a Kellogg fellow [W.K. Kellogg Foundation, Battle Creek, Michigan] in the '80s [1980s], I began to develop an interest in Native American women. You had to pick projects and so I was always interested in, I always would read about Native Americans and was always aware of how invisible they are in, you know, textbooks. So I said, okay, while I'm a, while I'm a Kellogg fellow, I will, for the first time in my life, travel to Indian reservations and study Native American women. And so I started going to New Mexico as a result of that Kellogg grant and I continued to go to New Mexico, not so much always for study but I developed an interest in New Mexico and Santa Fe [New Mexico]. So, some of, of what I do when I'm there is total pleasure, like shopping and going to spas and other times I'm still studying Native American culture. So, New Mexico is the place that I most enjoy going to in the U.S. because of the physical beauty of it and also because it's not so urban and it's a way for me to get away from urban space and I also like the art in New Mexico. Story_ID: 466980 Speaker 1: And what was your experience like in, in India when you were studying (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) India was very difficult. It was my first time, it's what I call my first cross-cultural experience even though I had been outside the U.S. before. Speaker 1: What year was India? Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By cross-culture, I mean I had been to Europe before. I've even been to the Caribbean before but going to India totally locates you outside the construct of Western culture, the first time I had ever experienced, not experienced, but observed the kind of poverty that you see in India. And so, so the first time I had lived in, we lived with a family and it's the first time I really understood or saw what it real--what it means to be a second class citizen as a, as a woman. The, the men were fed first and then the women ate afterwards as opposed to men and women eating together. So, it was, so it was my first cross-cultural experience in that sense. You know, it was the first time I had been in a culture where the, most of the people are not Christian. It's the first time I've been in a culture which is a people of color culture even though they've actually been colonized but you, you know, that was an interesting experience to be in a culture where people, most of the people are brown. So, so India was, was transfer- transformative for me because I think that's where I developed what I call travel-lust. I decided that I would really spend as much of my life as I could traveling because I think that you really do learn a lot about human experience when you travel, in addition to reading books. Story_ID: 466981 Speaker 1: And what did you find in Africa? You've been to many countries. Speaker 2: Well, the, the, the first thing I think you learn is how vast a continent it is and how different those cultural contexts are. So, you know, I traveled to Kenya, I've traveled to Ghana, I've traveled to Niger, which is not sub-Saharan and, and much more influenced by North African context. I traveled to South Africa and Mozambique and in the post-apartheid situation, so just a vastness and the heterogeneity of that place. Speaker 1: And do you have a thought about all of the women in these different places, something that is very common-- Speaker 2: Patriarchy is common (laughter). Patriarchy is common in all of them. The, the extent and tenacity of male dominance, that's what's common and also the, the tenacity of women to resist. So I would say the patriarchy and male dominance and the, the audacity and tenacity of women with respect to resistance (simultaneous). Story_ID: 466982 Speaker 1: So your dolls bring you comfort and there's also quilts-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, quilts too, yeah. Speaker 1: --and so did the quilts come from-- Speaker 2: Quilts come from all around but I was, I was interested in women's work, their, their artistic work and I was very much impacted by Alice Walker's, 'In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens' and all of the beautiful work that women are able to do in spite of all of the things that they experienced. They still make beautiful and useful objects 'cause quilts were, you know, quilts initially, things that keep you warm but now I also collect art quilts which are not about keeping you warm but are about all kinds of things and I'm very interested in political quilts. I'm interested in quilts which say no to various things. Speaker 1: Political, like-- Speaker 2: Like I have a circumcision quilt that will be on display that will talk about the evils of female genital mutilation. Speaker 1: And who's that quilt by, do you know? Speaker 2: Penny Sisto, who's a woman from Scot- from Scotland who spent time among the Maasai in Kenya and I have a, I have a slavery quilt and I have a lynching quilt so I'm interested not just in beautiful quilts-- Speaker 1: Well, are these contemporary quilts? Speaker 2: These are contemporary quilts and I also have traditional quilts but I'm very interested in art quilts that, that say no to various things (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Things. And the life-size-- Speaker 2: Doll. Speaker 1: --doll. Speaker 2: She, she's originally a, Tanya [ph.] did small soft sculpture and the big doll is a first large doll that she did and she's, I'm also interested in crazy quilts, that's one of my favorite types of quilts and her, her dress looks like a crazy quilt and she used to hear me talk about my love of crazy quilts so, she, that's the first large, life-size doll she did and I got it. Speaker 1: And Tanya-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Tanya, I can't think of Tanya's last name, but she'll, those two dolls, the male and female doll, will be in the show that opens at Hammonds House [Hammonds House Museum, Atlanta, Georgia], November 16th and I'll have some Native American dolls and some, oh, Frida Kahlo, one of my favorite artists. So you'll, so a couple of these Frida dolls I commissioned from a doll artist in Maryland. So, there's a lot of Frida Kahlo stuff around here. So I'm interested in Mexican history too. Story_ID: 466983 Speaker 1: If you were to look back over your life-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --is there anything that you would change? Speaker 2: Hm, anything that I would change? I would avoid some of the kinds of people that I didn't avoid but mostly when I look back on my life or what sticks out for me more than anything else is how fortunate I've been as an African American woman who's basically been able to craft the life she wanted to craft. That's very unusual, I think, for an African American woman my age. I have basically lived a life I wanted to live and I don't know that there are many, I don't know that very many women, in general, can say that, but I think fewer African American women can say that. I mean, I decided that, that I would basically live the life of the mind. I've managed to not be burdened by financial issues, that is I, unlike my sister, I don't have to worry about whether I have health insurance, you know, that's, that's very, so I don't have to worry about the fact that if I end up walking out of this house and a car is hitting me, that I won't be able to go to the hospital and get healthcare, that's something that's, that we take for granted when we're middle class. I know that if I want to go to Cape Town [South Africa] in the summer, I can figure out a way to do that. You know, I can have a research project that would get me to Cape Town. I'm not burdened by grand- I'm not burdened by family members who, who drain all of your resources (laughter). You know, that's, that's a reality for most people, you know. I'm not worrying about getting children out of jail and, you know, and, and literally, if I die tomorrow, and I don't think, I don't know how many people, if I die tomorrow, I could really say that there's nothing that I wanted in life that I didn't have and I think that's an extraordinary thing for anybody to be able to say. Speaker 1: You're absolutely right-- Story_ID: 466984 Speaker 1: Speaking of not having to get children out of jail, why did you decide not to have children? Speaker 2: I was neutral about it to begin with and, and one of the reasons I think I always sort of didn't really think I wanted to have any children was that I had an extraordinary mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] whom I thought sacrificed too much for the three of us. I mean her life was shaped by the demands of her three children and I didn't, I didn't, so, so I didn't want to, I didn't think that I could be the kind of mother that my mother was. I mean, I didn't think that I could decide that my life would really revolve around children. I, that's not what I wanted. Speaker 1: But yet you work with students (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but that's different. I leave them at school and I come home and I can run away. My mother could never run away. So, so I was always conscious of what an extraordinary mother I had and, and also I was very conscious of the sacrifices that she had made even though she's said and she meant it, that this is the life she wanted, which was fine. And then I married somebody [Willis B. Sheftall, Jr.] who did not want children so that was a good thing because that means that my being neutral about it matched up with somebody who didn't want children and so that means that we could craft a life together that, that wasn't complicated by a situation where he wanted something that I didn't want. So, and people, one of the questions that I get more than anything else is, "Do you regret not having children," and I said, "No, I don't regret it." They said, "Well do you think you'll regret it when you get old and you are sick and you don't have anybody?" I said, "You know, I could get old and be sick and not have anybody anyway," so you don't have, I don't think you have children thinking about, well I'll be old and nobody will come and take care of me. I figured that some of these young people that I've connected to will come and take care of me if I need that, so that's the situation with children. Speaker 1: And I'm sure that you, you know that you have touched so many young women's lives or people in general (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --but lots of women at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], over thirty-two years, I'm sure that you have touched someone-- Story_ID: 466985 Speaker 1: If you think about the African American community today, what is your major concern? Speaker 2: We're in big trouble, big, big time trouble. It's, so all the reasons that we know with respect to racism but also now I think a lot of internal issues that are very complicated. I mean, I worry, I worry now about young black people. I mean, I worry about their obsession with material things. I worry about their total reliance on popular media which is for the most part junk. I mean, you know, they, they spend most of their waking hours looking at television, listening to music, you know, something is stuck in their ear, on the cellphone, they, they, generally speaking, don't, not so much interested in reading. I'm talking about generically. So, so that most of the information comes through a very biased public media over which they have no control and they just sit there as passive consumers. I'm also worried that they are not committed to struggle. You know, I, I think that they take their lives pretty much for granted. They just assume that, you know, what happened during the Civil Rights Movement, that's all over, you all did this, and just let me get on with my life and buy a BMW, that's bothersome for me. So, I, I, I worry a lot and I'm, I'm particularly worried about what I see as total indifference on the part of the U.S. right now in poor people, people of color, it's a, it's a dismal picture, I think. So, I mean, I worry about the, the, the millions of folk in the U.S. who don't have adequate healthcare, the majority of whom are people of color and I, and I really worry about the impact of hip hop and I know that's an unpopular thing to say. I really worry about the, the negative impact of certain aspects of hip hop on young people. You know, it's, it's violence prone, it focuses on individualism, it has real negative images about women, sex, intimacy and, you know, folk will have been consuming this stuff since they were three years old and it's very hard to disrupt those messages. So, I don't know that this is a good time to be, I, you know, I'm not, I'm not really optimistic about the, the plight of African Americans in the U.S. right now and a government that, I think, right now doesn't, doesn't, doesn't care. So, hopefully I'm wrong. Story_ID: 466986 Speaker 1: If you had to send a message to the future generations since this information about your life will be archived for generations and generations to come, what message would you want to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: That they, the same message that I got from my mother [Ernestine Varnado Guy] and father [Walter P. Guy, Jr.], that you need to get a good education and good education doesn't just mean a degree, that is you need to learn how to read, write, develop critical thinking skills and have, have much more than was the case for me, some literacy with respect to technology. You need to understand the global world in which you live, so I would say that, and, so that, and I would say number two you need to develop some values of decency and integrity and you need to pretty much say no to a lot of what gets programmed to you--it's, it's a good thing. It's the same, I think it's the same messages we got growing up, that you need to find work that you enjoy. I mean, real simple things or you need to care about other people. You need to curb your consumption, I mean, this, this culture will have you thinking that you can't live without a name brand jeans. You've got to, you've got to really understand what that's about but the main thing I would say is that you really need to develop your, your, your mind and you've got to have a critical analytical approach to, to the world so that when you look at TV, you need to, you need to understand that that's not just entertainment but programming. You need to, you know, so you need to be able to think critically. Story_ID: 466987 Speaker 1: Besides the endowment that you're establishing so that the work can continue, are you personally grooming anyone to maybe step into your shoes or to be (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not real- not personally. What I, what I'm hoping is, and I think that's true, that, that enough young people will know the work of the center [Women's Research and Resource Center, Atlanta, Georgia] and when I step down will want to come there. There's, there's one in particular that, a student in particular that I think of who's in that category, whom I didn't literally groom but she has said to herself, that she wants to return to the women's center and do what I did and that's nice but I'm, but I'm, but hopefully there will be lots of those but I haven't, I haven't literally taken any one in particular though I have some, some women that I've interacted with that I would love to come back. Story_ID: 466988 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Hm, you know, I really don't think about that other than I, I don't want to, whoever succeeds me at the women's center [Women's Research and Resource Center, Atlanta, Georgia] to have to struggle for money the way I did. So I would like for the person to be able to focus on other things and I think, you know, the main thing I think is I, I know that because I've written all these books, people will have those books. That's, that's the importance of writing books. So that's already, when I was writing I wasn't thinking about that. You know, when you're, when you're doing that, you just, you're not thinking about that but that will be something that I can't take back. And so, books, which I've, you know, been connected to since I was a little girl, I guess would be the most important thing, that these books are out there and people can connect to them or, you know, say she was, not knowing what she's talking about that I don't think that will happen. So it's really the, the intellectual legacy that, that books enable you to have. Speaker 1: All right. Is there anything that we have not-- Speaker 2: Can't think of anything (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well, if there's nothing else, I'd like to thank you for taking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're welcome. Speaker 1: --the time to-- Speaker 2: You're welcome. Speaker 1: --to share your story for The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: Oh, that, yeah, I'll just say one other thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One other thing I tell my students, they don't know what I'm talking about. I tell them that they must, like me, be, try to be as free, free as they can, that they should strive to be free women and I, it takes me a long, they have no idea what I'm really meaning but I've spent a lot of time explaining to them what that means and it's very difficult to do. So-- Speaker 1: You spend a lot of time explaining it to them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Explaining to them what that means because at age eighteen, I'm not sure they really understand what that means, and I'm not talking about free as a black person, I'm talking about being free as a, as a woman and what, what that means is exercising control over your, your reproductive life, exiting situations that are harmful, those kinds of things. So that's, that's a legacy that I want to have for, for my students, that I want them to choose to be free women. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: You are welcome...