 Story_ID: 485579 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: The first name is Tyree, T-Y-R-E-E, last name is Guyton, G-U-Y-T-O-N [HistoryMaker Tyree Guyton]. Speaker 1: Now, do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. One of those lucky few that didn't get (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. They forgot about that. Speaker 1: All right. Now do you have any nicknames? Speaker 2: Yeah. I do. Yeah, the nickname is Red. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is your--and, well, how did you get that name, nickname? Speaker 2: The nickname. I was--my uncle, when I was a small person, would call me Red because I was light complected. And, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --he start calling me Red. Speaker 1: Okay. So, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: The date of birth is the eighth month, twenty-fourth day, in the year of 1955 [August 24, 1955]. Was born here in the City of Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you're an east sider or west sider, or? Speaker 2: I grew up on the east side; the east side of Detroit. Speaker 1: All right. And, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation at this time, I am a artist. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is today's date, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Today's date is March 8, 2007. We are presently at the Franklin-Wright Settlement [Franklin-Wright Settlements, Inc., Detroit, Michigan], the Heidelberg Project has an office inside of this building. Story_ID: 485580 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Speaker 1: And, they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first questions is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? No. I--no, no I don't. No (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I do. Blue. I love blue. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes. Spring. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Absolutely. South America, Quito, Ecuador, the rain forest. Speaker 1: Okay. And, the last questions is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: Yes. I do. It's something that my [maternal] grandfather [Sam Mackey] would say to me and it's kind of part of what I, I share with people, stick it and stay, and it'll pay. Story_ID: 485581 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history. Gonna ask about the ancestors on your mother's side, and on your father's [George Guyton] side. And, we're gonna start with your mother's side of the family. Can, you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. Her first name is Betty, B-E-T-T-Y, and the last name is Guyton. Speaker 1: All right. And, what was her maiden name? Speaker 2: Maiden name was Solomon. Speaker 1: Okay. S-L-O-O-M-A-N [sic.]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: S, S-O-L-O-M-A-N [Betty Solomon Guyton]. Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. All right. And, what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, (laughter). I know she's seventy. Let's see 1930, you know what, I-- Speaker 1: It gotta be thirty-- Speaker 2: I wanna say 1930-- Speaker 1: Thirty-three [1933], I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, '33 [1933]. And, it's November 20th. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace the ancestors and what do you know about what they were doing way back when? Speaker 2: I can trace it all the way back to my great-grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay. And, who is he, and what did he do? Speaker 2: Well, my great-grandfather, they all came here [Detroit, Michigan] from Georgia, Macon, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, was your mother born in Macon? Speaker 2: No, she was born here-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right (simultanoeus). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but, my great-grandparents and them all migrated here. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he was from Macon, Georgia. Speaker 2: Macon, Georgia. Story_ID: 485582 Speaker 1: What were they doing in Macon [Georgia]? I mean, what did they do for a living? Speaker 2: Well, I would have these great stories with my [maternal] great-grandfather, and I, I feel good, I had a--the privilege of knowing my great-grandfather. And, they talked about growing up on a plantation. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which I thought was very interesting. And, he talked about his mom who also grew up on a plantation. And, they would pick cotton. Speaker 1: So, were they sharecroppers? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, they talked about raising these kids. You know, the folks who owned the plantation. They would raise their children and they would clean and wash and that really got my attention. Made me wanna sit and listen. Speaker 1: Now, what particularly about that was of interest to you? Speaker 2: Well, the mere fact of my grandmother [Mary Reese] and my great-grandmother and great-grandfather growing up on a plantation and taking care of someone else's children, or a family, and picking cotton. And, my great-grandfather would tell me that he would get up before the sun came up and they go into the field, and they would stay there all day. So, I thought that was very interesting, very profound. Speaker 1: So, you thought that was kind of different from life in Detroit [Michigan] when you were--? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. I not only thought that it was different, but I knew that it was different. And, and I found myself trying to make sense of that, you know. Why? And, that was always questioning; seeking to understand. Speaker 1: Now, when they talked about growing up in Georgia, I mean, living in Georgia, did they, did they, was it wistful or was it with contempt, or what was it like? I mean, did they like it, or miss it, or did they never, ever wanna go back there again, or? Speaker 2: Well, they left there to come here because they was looking--or seeking something better. My great-grandmother was also very religious minded. So, they talked a lot about a hope, a better day, this trust that they had in this entity that we call God. And, singing these songs and knowing that one day that it would change. And, then leaving there and coming here. Speaker 1: Now they--is there a story attached with how they left and why, you know? Speaker 2: Well, they're seeking better opportunities. Speaker 1: You know, often there's a story about it, I mean, around it though. I don't know if they told it to you. But, you know, in those sharecropping situations often the sharecropper owed money and couldn't leave, you know, by, you know, for fear of being arrested. Because, he left a debt, you know. So, I don't know if they had a story about could they, you know, how they arranged to leave, or did they just leave, or, you know, sometimes, you know, I mean, I don't know. Did they talk about how, how they left? Speaker 2: No, we never talked about that, but what we did talk about was the fact that they wanted to come here. You know, people was coming here to the City of Detroit seeking opportunities and getting away of the South and coming here to the North because they felt that it was better. Better as far as them talking about whether or not they, it was debt to be paid, we never talked about that. Story_ID: 485583 Speaker 1: And I wish I had've been thinking because my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Reese] gave me some old Confederate money that I still have today. Speaker 2: All right. I recall seeing that too, at a certain point, you know-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: In my life, somebody had it on our family and I don't know what (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I have a, yeah, I have about ten or twelve bills. And, I wanna see if I can get Jenenne [Guyton's wife, Jenenne Whitfield] to bring it over here 'cause I think you guys should see it, you know. My [maternal] grandfather gave it to me. He kept for many, many years. Speaker 2: Did he have any stories attached to the money, in terms of how he got it, and hold of it or what, what it meant to him? Speaker 1: Well, yeah, now this is my grandfather. My, my, my grandfather talked about saving money, you know, working you know, to, to earn money. He was working on the, the railroad. And, he also talked about riding the boxcars and when he came here in 1919. And, this is my grandfather. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 1: His name was Sam Mackey. Speaker 2: Okay. Did he have any stories about riding rails? Speaker 1: He did. He talked about he would (laughter), God, he talked about packing his clothes up. And, he would pack 'em and he had a stick, and he would wrap the clothes up in this, wrap 'em around the stick and he would have the stick on his back. So, he talked about that. And, then he talked about, you know, waiting for the train to come and jumping on the boxcar. And, he would get on the boxcar and there was other people, it would be other people there to that was traveling. Speaker 2: Yeah, now, that--this is something you see in the old movies-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, you see drawings of people with the stick with their clothes wrapped up on the stick. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: But, you know-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: He actually, you knew somebody that actually did it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: Right. That's what he told me. So, he would share those stories. But, he also, talked about working in the after hour joints. And, he was also a musician. He would play the piano; this is my granddad. Speaker 2: Okay. Did he play for parties, or for local events, or the church, or? Speaker 1: Mostly after hour joints. He talked about spending some time in St. Louis [Missouri], spending some time in Chicago [Illinois] (laughter). Speaker 2: That's a skill that could-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: You know, guarantee some income, I guess-- Speaker 1: Absolute (laughter). Speaker 2: --along the way, yeah. Now, I've seen other people that developed at least enough skill where they could earn more money playing the piano. So, you-- Speaker 1: My grandfather also, share with (unclear) that he saw Al Capone growing up. Speaker 2: What's the story? What does he say? What happened (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He said he just happened to be at a after hour joint and he had a chance to see Al Capone. Speaker 2: Okay. Did he--was he impressed with him? Speaker 1: No. I don't think he was really impressed with him. But, he, he did say he, he was a real bad guy. Yeah, he was a bad man. And, so-- Speaker 2: Did he do something bad in his presence, or, did he--? Speaker 1: No. He just said that he--that was a bad guy. Yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Was this in Chicago where he saw (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was in Chicago-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --when he saw Al Capone. Speaker 2: So, is your, is your grandfather the person that established the family in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: There was--so, there--was it later that he brought his father up from Macon [Georgia], your great-grandfather? Speaker 1: They all came up here around the same time. You know, they all came up here, it was a large family and they all came up here around the same time. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, did they come up for a specific job or a set of jobs? Did they know where they were gonna to work or something when they came up, or? Speaker 1: My grandfather ended up working at a scrapyard. So, he go into the scrap business. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. So, he would collect scrap materials and--? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --bring 'em to the yard and that sort of thing? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Did he operate a truck or something or did he just--? Speaker 1: No. He, just kind of worked around the yard, separating the scraps, you know, during that time that he was employed at the scrapyard. There was also a neighbor who lived next door to us over on Heidelberg Street and this neighbor had a trucking business. So, I would see my grandfather riding in the truck with him. And, at times he would take me with him. So, I would jump up in the truck, it was a dump truck and go with 'em to the scrapyard. Story_ID: 485584 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Betty Solomon Guyton] grow up on Heidelberg [Street] too, on the same street? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother grew up on Heidelberg. She grew up in that area. Heidelberg and also, before Heidelberg it was Paradise Valley [Detroit, Michigan]. They lived around in that area, down on St. Joseph [Street] 'cause my mom mentioned to me when she was a kid, sixteen, she worked down in the Valley, Paradise Valley-- Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) at a drugstore. Speaker 1: Now, kind of explain to us what Paradise Valley is. I know there's a play about it-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --right now over at Bert's [Bert's Warehouse Theater, Detroit, Michigan]. There are people, a friend of mine is making about Paradise Valley. The Charles Wright Museum [Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, Detroit, Michigan] is putting up an exhibit on Paradise Valley. What is, for those who are not from Detroit [Michigan], what is Paradise Valley? Speaker 2: Paradise Valley was locate over where I-75 freeway [Interstate 75] is located at now. It was a area where African American folks back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], they had businesses in that particular area. It's also the only place that people could work and live, for the most part. And, so, I remember my mom sharing these great stores with me about working down there and Bill Eckstine [Billy Eckstine] coming down there to perform; Sarah Vaughan and people, Duke Ellington. Speaker 1: Now, is this the same thing when people talk about Hastings Street, it's the same thing? Speaker 2: No. Hasting Street, no, it's separate. Its two separate things. Speaker 1: Well, is Hasting Street a part of Paradise Valley, or? Speaker 2: It wasn't that far away from Paradise Valley. Hasting Street was located down on Hasting Street and it, and the freeway also came in and Hasting Street kind of dissipated. So, yeah, in that same percinity- vicinity. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was Hasting Street and Paradise Valley. Paradise Valley was closer to downtown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is not that far from where we are today, traveling westbound on Gratiot Avenue and you run across, you cross the freeway and then over to yo- your right where Ford Field [Detroit, Michigan] is located is where Paradise Valley used to be. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, was there a main drag, I mean, a main street through Paradise Valley? Speaker 2: That I'm not sure about. I'm trying to remember, I believe it was Beaubien [Street] and John R [Street], and Brush [Street]; those streets, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because they're still, they still exit today. Speaker 1: Right. Right. When you think of a valley, you think of a river, you know. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, I mean, when the streets have, you know, I would of a main street being like the river in the valley, you know. I don't know. Speaker 2: You know, I don't know why they call it Paradise Valley, but, but, it's an interesting name. Speaker 1: Yeah, that, that--well, it's, you know, with all the material about it, I mean, people, yeah, that's, it'll be interesting to find out exactly how did it get the name Paradise Valley. Speaker 2: That I'm not sure about, how they came up--(cough) excuse me--with the name Paradise Valley. Speaker 1: But, is it comparable to Bronzeville in Chicago [Illinois], or I guess, I don't know, a lot of different districts and cities where there's a lot of music and a lot of-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --activity. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Back in the days, when a lot of black folks had their own businesses and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --professional offices and so forth. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, (cough) 'cause my mom worked at a drugstore that was in the area. And, I can see it in my, in my head now as we talk about it, you know, a place where African Americans folks would go and hang out. And, they have businesses and they just had a great time, a great time coming together, working together and there was a unity from what I have heard, you know, from my mom and other people talking about it. Story_ID: 485585 Speaker 1: Did you mother [Betty Solomon Guyton] have any stories about growing up in, in Detroit [Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yeah. My mom (laughter), well, my mom had her first child when she was sixteen. And, she went to work and she tells these great stories about growing up on, in Heidelberg [Heidelberg Street, Detroit, Michigan] area of how life used to be. It was a great time, it's a fun time. It was neighborhood that had houses and business, and they had houses and business that was owned by African American people during that time, and she talks a lot about that. And, she talks about this great change that has taken place today, where you don't see that anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Did she--what did your mom wanted to be when she was in high school? Speaker 2: Well, she, as I said, she got pregnant at an early age and she, she always wanted to, you know, to make it, you know. I don't think it was som- it was one certain thing that she wanted to, to do or to be. But, she talked about, you know, growing up and being successful, making it, making it out of the neighborhood. And, so, she had dreams. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did she ever have a chance to finish high school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. She, no she didn't. And, she kind of stressed that, the importance of that to us, you know, her children growing up. Going to school and pursuing that by going and getting some, some type of skill or going to college or doing something, you know, to prepare yourself for the world. Speaker 1: Okay. Just looking back on her stories and stuff, what do you think she was interest in in those days, and what kind of talents did she have? Speaker 2: You know what, I, I really don't know. I'm sitting here now having this conversation with you and I see now there's so many things that I didn't, that we didn't talk about. And, that's gonna make me go back and talk to her 'cause she's still alive. But, I'm not sure because I remember my mom back in the days when I was coming up; my dad [George Guyton] left at an early age, and my mom was on welfare. So, I'm not sure what, I'm not sure if she wanted to be a school teacher or a doctor or what. I never had that conversation but I'm gonna have it today with her when I see her (laughter). Story_ID: 485586 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's first name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: First name was George. That's G-O-R-G-E, G-O-R-E--G-O-R-O-G-E [sic.]. Speaker 1: It's spelled, G-E-O-R-G-E? Like the regular way you spell George? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know what, yeah, I'm trying--yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. All right, George? Speaker 2: Last name, Guyton [George Guyton]. Speaker 1: Guyton. Okay. All right. Now, is Guyton, it sounds--is there, is there a story behind his name, at all? It's a, I think it's a French deviation, I believe, but I'm not sure. Speaker 2: Could be, I'm not sure (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Does it, and what is your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: You know what, my father came from Mississippi. You're not gonna believe this, but, he came from Macon, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of that. I have heard of that, yeah. Now, what is his date of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know his date of birth 'cause my father--I never had a chance to really know my dad, and he's deceased. Speaker 1: Well, was he older than your mother [Betty Solomon Guyton], or--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Was he considerably older or just a little older? Speaker 2: My father, about fourteen years older than my mom? Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, 1922 (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen twenty--yeah. Speaker 1: Something like that? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, I will say that his da- 1922, August 29th. He's a Virgo. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side from Macon, Mississippi? Speaker 2: I know they all came from Macon, Mississippi. He came from a large family. And, and he came up here to better himself. I never had a chance to meet my grandmother [Bertha Guyton] and great-grandmother on his side. I never knew 'em. Speaker 1: Okay. So, are there stories passed down in the family about what life was like in Mississippi? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I will say this here about my dad. And, I'm being a little, I'm being a little, a little comical here. I--my dad came up here, he came from Mississippi and he came here to--this City of Detroit [Michigan] and, and he became this playboy. Yeah (laughter). Here was this Mississippi guy, he came here and became this playboy. So, he had, you know, he was married to my mom, and he had another family; at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he had two wives, all at once? Speaker 2: Yes. I have a stepbrother and we're the same age (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, it seems to me, you know--it's not a--you hear these stories, and especially down south but he, he, he actually pulled this off in Detroit? Speaker 2: In Detroit. Speaker 1: Two, two families? Speaker 2: I remember him being tied up in the legal system and, oh, it was crazy. Speaker 1: What did they try to sue him? Or, try to take him to court to--? Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause he had two families. And, the (unclear) of the court, it was, it was a, god it was sad. It was--yeah. Speaker 1: So, did you see him very often? Did you see your father much? Speaker 2: No. Every now and then I would see my dad. He, he would come over and, you know, he's a very nice looking guy. I remember that about my dad. He's very clean, very clean cut. He, he was in the construction business. He made a lot of money. I remember I, I wanted to know him and I would go over to, to visit with him. But, he never really had time. I was sad. I was hurt by that, that I never had a chance to really know him. Speaker 1: Is he still alive? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember those last days of his life when he was sick. He was in the hospital. I went every day to be by his side. But, he was in no condition to talk to me. He had had a stroke and, and that affected his speech. So, that's it. Story_ID: 485587 Speaker 1: Do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I, yeah, I come from a large family. It's ten of us. There are all not by my dad [George Guyton]. And, my dad, also, he had a large family too. So, it was a lot of them. Speaker 1: Okay. So, were you raised with the ten brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I was, yes. (Background noise) I didn't turn that off? Speaker 1: Now, are you, where do you fall in order of the, of your brothers and sisters? Are you the youngest or oldest, or are you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm the third oldest. Speaker 1: Third oldest; okay. Story_ID: 485588 Speaker 1: When you--when you think about your parents and their personalities, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My father [George Guyton]. Yeah. My mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] tells me that all the time. She say, you know, "You're just like your, your father." Speaker 1: Seem like moms tell their sons that (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, you know. So, I don't really know this guy. She says, "Well, you're just like your dad." I, yeah, I have a certain way that I like to do things, you know. I, and my mom said, "Well, you know your dad, he would do the same thing." And, I'm really, you know, when it comes to the house, I like everything to be nice and clean and, and my--she said my dad's the same way. And, my dad loved to cook, and so do I. They also gave him a nickname; called him Sweet Po- Sweet Potato (laughter), 'cause he loved sweet potatoes (laughter). And, so, he--the few times that he came over that I can remember, he would cook for us, he always had a sweet potatoes as part of the dish. And, so, I love sweet potatoes too, so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you think you're really (laughter)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --some truth to this? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Story_ID: 485601 Speaker 1: Now, we were just talking off camera about the house you grew up in. W- was it just the one house on Heidelberg [Heidelberg Street, Detroit, Michigan] you grew in--? Speaker 2: No, that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) grew up in or was it several different places? Speaker 2: Oh, there were several houses on Heidelberg. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: I had the house with the dots on it and we call that the house, the dotty wotty house. My [maternal] great-grandmother and my great-grandfather, and my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Reese] and my [maternal] grandfather [Sam Mackey], my great uncle, and my aunt, and the house was just full with people. And, I'm talking about a time back in the '60s [1960s] when they had the telephone and they had the party line. And, you would get on the phone, there would be other people on the phone, you have to wait for your turn to use the phone. They was pack rats and they never throw away anything. They kept everything. It was just crowded with people and things and it was fascinating to see it as a kid. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you lived at several different houses on Heidelberg but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in your immediate household was your mother [Betty Solomon Guyton] and your-- Speaker 2: Down the street. Speaker 1: --brothers and sisters. Okay. So, you all lived down the street and your-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --grandparents lived down the street too. I'm saying--now, how was that all managed that-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --everybody got a street--a house on Heidelberg? How was, how did that happen? Speaker 2: Well, my grandparents lived in the, the polka dotted house. The address is 3650A and we lived down the street, and that address is 3711 Heidelberg. And, then I had another uncle, my mother's brother who lived on Ellery Street, him and his wife. So, you had a lot of people that was living on Heidelberg Street. Speaker 1: Now, Ellery is a street over from--? Speaker 2: Ellery runs north and south. It's a, this is Heidelberg and Ellery runs across Heidelberg. Speaker 1: Oh, they intersect. Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Across. But, the, the polka dotted house, my great-grandparents' home, at that time, was a place that we would met every Sunday to have Sunday dinners. We would go to church and then we'll come back there to the house to eat. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, they always had these big Sunday dinners. Story_ID: 485602 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Well, what is it? What is it? Speaker 2: Well, when I was five, I'll never forget this here. I was five. I was a little bitty kid, my [maternal] grandfather [Sam Mackey] came home from work and he gave me this toy car. It's a toy car that was really big. And, in, and in the windows of this car there was people painted on the windows to make it appear that people was in the vehicle and I was so happy that my grandfather brought this car home and gave it to me; never forgot that. That was a special moment in my life. Story_ID: 485603 Speaker 1: Can you describe, I guess growing up, and can--you were starting to when I had asked you that questions (laughter). What was some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up on Heidelberg [Heidelberg Street, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Oh, well, let's talk about the Sundays, sights and sounds. Well, let me say this, sights and sounds; my grandmother- [maternal] great-grandmother, she was very religious. And, on Sunday I would see her dressed in white. She had on this white outfit because she was the mother of the church 'cause she was up in age. And, she was always talking about God, this entity, God, and that got my attention because she reminded me of an angel. She looked so pure and clean. And, what I heard from her, I heard, she would be speaking in tongues and quoting scriptures from the Bible. And, then, there was always cooking in that house. So, I would smell fried chicken, and apple pies being baked, bread puddings. Sights and sounds and things I would smell growing up. Story_ID: 485604 Speaker 1: What did the neighborhood look like? Speaker 2: Beautiful. The neighborhood was beautiful. It was a very diverse place. There was African American folks living there. There was Caucasians folks living there. There was all kind of businesses--especially up and down Mt. Elliott Street--that was owned by African American people. Everybody knew everybody. If someone got sick during that time, I never forgot this, the neighbors would come over and bring soup. And, and they would come over to visit and to sit with the neighbors who was ill during that time. And, it was just special. It was just a special time. Speaker 1: Was there a certain church that was associated with the neighborhood that most people went to or they just kind of go a lot of different places? Speaker 2: Well, we had several churches in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had the Catholic Church was a meeting place. And, everybody would go and have these summer programs. So, all the kids would go around there for summer vacations, summer bible classes. And, they also gave out lunches and so we would go around there. It was called Our Lady of Sorrow [Our Lady of Sorrows Catholic Church, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Sounds kind of dreary there. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, that's one other thing in Chicago [Illinois] too. But, that's-- Speaker 2: Our Lady of Sorrow (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. All right. Speaker 2: They had a basketball court and then they had these summer programs and then the summer--the lunches. And, you go around there and talk to the priest and the nuns, so. Story_ID: 485605 Speaker 1: Now, your [maternal] grandmother [sic. maternal great-grandmother] was she, you said, she spoke in tongues and that sort of thing. Was she a member of a Pentecostal church, or? Speaker 2: Church of God in Christ. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. A matter of fact, she was member of Bibleway Church of God in Christ [Detroit, Michigan] for many, many years. Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry, it's called Bible what? Speaker 2: Bibleway. Speaker 1: Bibleway. Okay. Okay. And, did the family attend that church as well? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. It was kind of like our church. It was the church that my great-grandmother took us and, and it became our church, yeah. So, all the family would go to this church to worship. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what was it like with the speaking in tongues and all that sort of thing? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I (laughter). I mean, as a kid, you, you see something like that, you know, at least for me, I was--it scared the daylights out of me. And, I thought that something was wrong with my great-grandmother, you know, to see her speaking in tongues and, I mean, she would also prophesied and she would say things like, God was telling her to speak to other family members, and she was telling them about their life. And, telling them to get ready and God was telling her to tell them and give them a message, so, I was all interesting (laughter). Speaker 1: Did she ever come to you and give you a message? Speaker 2: She did. She did. She told me that God told her that I was gonna be a great person one day. That he had anointed me. I was gonna do something great. Story_ID: 485606 Speaker 1: So, when you were growing up, I mean, what kinds of things did you like to do? Speaker 2: Art. I was always drawing, creating. I was different from the rest of the kids; my brothers and sisters. Family members and folks thought that I was strange. I was not the kind of kid that went out to parties and-- Speaker 1: Well, as a little kid first. Let's start with a little kid. Speaker 2: Yeah, a little--yeah-- Speaker 1: What did you, what did you find to draw with? I know, as growing up in a, you know, ordinary household in the black community, a lot of time there's no, there's not a lot of drawing paper just sitting around and you to--but, I mean, what did you draw on? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was drawing on my, my school notebooks, schools supplies that my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] would buy for me and I was drawing. I was always drawing. I was creating. In elementary school [Ralph Bunche Elementary School; Ralph J. Bunche Preparatory Academy, Detroit, Michigan] I had this great art teacher, great art teacher who saw something in me and she felt that I should pursue art. Speaker 1: Now, did you, is there, can you remember when you first started drawing? Speaker 2: Yeah. I can. Speaker 1: How old were you when you first started? Speaker 2: I was about five, about five years old. And, it was--then, at the age of nine my [maternal] grandfather [Sam Mackey] gave me a paintbrush and I just knew it. Speaker 1: Did you, were there, was there a particular subject matter that you drew when you first start drawing? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was drawing people. I was drawing people. I've, I was, I would study people, you know, pay attention, I would look at their faces, the body structure, and so I was always drawing people. Story_ID: 485607 Speaker 1: I, I hated school when I was a kid (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, why? Speaker 1: Well I, yeah, I hated school. I, I didn't like school. I, I felt that it was hard. You had to, to understand English. Math, I was really good at math. I loved playing with numbers, and so, when I went home I had no one there to help me with my homework, and, so, I kind of hated it, you know. I didn't care for it. Speaker 2: When you came home from school, wh- who was at home when you got there? Speaker 1: My mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] was there. My mom. But, as I mentioned, I came from a large family and so there was other kids there too that she had to deal with. And, this is right around the time that my mom was on welfare and she was a single parent, you know, trying to raise, you know, kids. We lived in a house which was on Heidelberg Street [Detroit, Michigan], I mentioned the address earlier, 3711 I could see that number and at that time, it was not a, a comfortable living situation. The house was too small, and I didn't care for it. Speaker 2: So, it was small house opposed to those big house, huh? Speaker 1: It was a small house. Yeah, it was a two family flat. Well, it was a (laughter) a house that was made into a two family flat because the landlord saw he could make more money so (laughter), so he kind of make it into a two family flat. And, we stayed downstairs, and my mom's sister lived upstairs. Speaker 2: Did, did you have a lot of cousins upstairs? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was eight of them. So, it was a lot of people in this house (laughter). Speaker 2: That creates like what, so you got ten brothers and sisters. Speaker 1: It was, at that time, it was nine of us and then my youngest brother came later when we moved. And, we had moved over in Canfield [East Canfield Street]. But, you had nine of us, my mom made ten people. Speaker 2: That sounds like it was about twenty people-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --to--in this one house. Speaker 1: In this one house. A lot of people (laughter). So, it was really hard to concentrate. It was hard to say focused when you had that many, you're surrounded by that many people, you know. It was just, it was just hard. Story_ID: 485608 Speaker 1: Was there anybody who inspired you to draw or first taught you how to draw different things, or? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was [maternal] grandpa [Sam Mackey]. It was my, yeah, my grandfather, my grandfather was kind of like that person who, who took an interest in me because other folks were saying, you know, he's weird, he different, you know, he's strange. And-- Speaker 1: Is there a story about something strange you did or something weird that would give 'em that impression? Speaker 2: Well, I was kind of, yeah, I was quiet. I was walking up and down the alleys during that time in the back of the house I was looking for things, you know, popsicle sticks and bottle caps. And, I was always making something. I was always playing with something. And, people in my family thought it was weird. And, when I told them that I wanted to go to art school, they went crazy. And, they had this impression that the people who studied art was, was crazy, they was homosexuals or they were dope fiends. That's what they told me when I was a kid. And, then they also thought it was a particular field that only white people did it. Speaker 1: Okay. They didn't know any black artists (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right (laughter). Because there was Picasso [Pablo Picasso], and van Gogh [Vincent van Gogh], and there was Andy Warhol, during that time. Speaker 1: So, they had kind of a popular culture perception of what art was-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear) newspaper, on TV, or something? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: More than likely didn't know by-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, did you, did you like the comic section of the newspaper? Did you try drawing the characters, and? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. I kind of, I love the comic books; the 'Fantastic Four,' 'Superman,' 'Batman,' yeah. The comic books, so I was drawing those, comic book characters. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite comic book? Speaker 2: Oh, the 'Fantastic Four.' Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, the stretch man [Reed Richards], yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: That's a, that's interesting, yeah, it's interesting kind of, 'cause of the way they work together and stuff. And, they all have their own personalities. Speaker 2: Yeah. That's true. Speaker 1: Yeah. Did you, did you have like close--was there any other of your brothers and sisters were interested in the same, any of the same kind of thing, a touch of the art? Anybody else that drew, drew pictures, or? Speaker 2: No. No, no. I, I was the only one. Yeah. It was just me. Story_ID: 485609 Speaker 1: Did you like music growing up? Speaker 2: I did. I--no, let me take that back. What I heard growing up, it was, it was that whole Motown sound back in the '60s [1960s]. The Temptations, and yeah that whole Motown sound. But, I had a, my brother, the oldest brother, he, and my uncle, my brother and uncles, they was, they would listen to jazz. I hated it. You know, they was listening to this music and there was--and I said, "What is that?" And, I hated it. And, now I love jazz. Speaker 1: Okay. In those days you couldn't deal with it? Speaker 2: And, I'm talking about it was John Coltrane, it was Thelonious Monk, and it was Duke Ellington, Sarah Vaughn. And, I said, "I don't know, what is, what is this?" I hated it. Speaker 1: But, did you like the Motown [Motown Records] music? Speaker 2: I did. The Temptations, The Supremes. Loved it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, everybody was trying to be a Temptation back in that time. So guys was walking around and they would go, and they had the process. They would go and they would-- (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you have any singing groups in your family? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. Yeah, yeah, cousins and something, they wanted, yeah (laughter). There was a lot of that in the family. People wanted to sing; imitate The Temptations, and-- Speaker 1: Right. I, yeah, we basically together in the basement and friends, and everybody take a part and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --sing. Story_ID: 485610 Speaker 1: Tell us about grade school. What, what was the name of your grade school? Speaker 2: Bunche [Ralph Bunche Elementary School; Ralph J. Bunche Preparatory Academy, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: After Ralph Bunche? Speaker 2: After Dr. Ralph J. Bunche. Speaker 1: Did you know that at that time? Speaker 2: I did not. But, I would see this picture 'cause it's still up at the school, of this guy and they would point out to us that was Dr. Ralph J. Bunche. And, I didn't realize until I got older, what he stood for. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: So, you didn't what--know who Ralph Bunche was when you were--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Did the school made an attempt to tell the students who Ralph Bunche was? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, absolutely. They have a big huge painting of Dr. Ralph J. Bunche hanging up in the library and that painting is still hanging up today. So, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, his picture was there but did they ever explain to the students who he was? Speaker 2: They talked about it. But, it didn't register at that time. And, it wasn't until I got older and--because that school is still, it's still up, it's still operating. And, when I go in there now, I see Dr. Ralph J. Bunche painting in the library and I realize who this man is. And-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --what he done. Speaker 1: So, you say at Bunche there was an art teacher that took an interest in you? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the teacher's name? Speaker 2: You know, I can't remember her name. Every now and then, she, she pops up now. I haven't seen her in a few years, and I can't remember her name. But, I never forget her, and she would tell me to draw in spite of my circumstances. In spite of people being critical. You know, at that time I was a kid, and people was trying to tell me to stop and they thought it was something that was taboo. And, you should not do that, and you should think about becoming a lawyer or, or a doctor. Speaker 1: So, did you like sports? Speaker 2: I did. Baseball. I was also on the track team. I used to--and I said earlier today, when I first met you guys, I run today. So, yeah, I love running. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you a fast runner, or--? Speaker 2: I was so fast that I was on the track team in school. And, and I remember trying to get my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] and them to come out to support the fact that I was on the team, and to avail did they do so, and I kind of lost interest in it. Story_ID: 485611 Speaker 1: Why do you suppose that she [Guyton's mother, Betty Solomon Guyton] didn't come out to see you run? Just too many things going on in her life, or what? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a lot of, I came up during the time where, we're talking about the 1967 riot had taken place. It was time that racial tension was really, really great. I also felt that my family was a group of folks who, who came here and, and they had, they was very old fashioned and afraid. I saw a lot of fear. Speaker 1: So, you were about what, eleven or twelve when the riot took place? Speaker 2: I was, no I was, what--1967, it's one (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it'll be about twelve, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: About twelve years old, I guess. Do you have any stories from the riot or any memories from the riot? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I do have a lot of stories. Speaker 1: Let's hear 'em. Speaker 2: I remember the day that it started and seeing the National Guard come down Heidelberg Street and all of the shooting. Speaker 1: Now, did you, I mean, when did you, when were you, first aware there was a riot? I mean, did you just, I mean, what happened? Speaker 2: Well, I knew it was riot. I knew something was wrong. I knew there was a lot of tension. You could just feel it, it was in the air. It was all over. When I saw people up and down my Mt. Elliott Street, which is a main thoroughfare. And, I saw them taking bricks and throwing them through windows of business. And, then I saw people going inside of those businesses and they were coming out of those businesses when things. With TV sets, and clothes, cases of liquor, and I knew something was wrong. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, they would set the place on fire. So, I witnessed that. I also witnessed a guy coming out one of the stores up here on Mt. Elliott and Charlevoix [Street] and the National Guard shot him. Speaker 1: So, I mean, what were you doing at this time, just kind of watching this? Speaker 2: I was walking down the street. I was just walking. I just wanted to take it in, you know. To see it. It was like a, a movie. It was like it was unbelievable you know, to see a helicopter come out the air and to land that helicopter right there on Mt. Elliott Street; tanks coming down the street. It was unbelievable. It was a war going on in the city [Detroit, Michigan] at that time, and I witnessed that war. And, there was a curfew; six o'clock. Speaker 1: Did you have any idea of why it as going on, or? Speaker 2: I heard about it on the news but I really couldn't understand what was happening. I didn't know the full gist of, of why and I was trying to make sense of it. It was a blind pig. It was a situation that happened over on the west side. Story_ID: 485612 Speaker 1: As a kid growing up, I knew something was wrong, and I knew that eventually it was gonna escalate and it was gonna explode. And, it did, during the 1967 riots. Because I'm talking about growing up in a situation and I remember this here, when my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton], we had people that would come to our home [in Detroit, Michigan] and they would--at that time, the salespeople would come to your home, and they would sell you things. And, the people who was coming, these was Caucasian folks. Speaker 2: Yeah, now, this is an interesting point because those days are over with now. But, in those days, I remember those days myself where you have often a milkman, bread man, dry cleaning man-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Insurance man. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: The doctor (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tupperware man, the doctor-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: The vacuum cleaner salesman. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Different kind of Fuller Brush [Fuller Brush Company] people and Amway [Amway Corporation; Amway]-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, Watchtower [The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah's Kingdom]. And, they'd all to your door and knock on the door, right? Speaker 1: And, what was interesting about having the salespeople to come to our home, my mom got a check once a month, I could be wrong. But, they would always come and they would cash her check and she was always buying something from them. So, she was always paying out money. And, that really got my attention, I said, you know, "This is crazy." And, I would listen to these folks and they would share with her--I would hear conversations that she would be having with these people that would come. And, they would talk while their sons and daughters, and how their sons and daughters was going to school to become doctors and lawyers; and these are Caucasian people, okay. And, I, I saw something wrong with that. I saw a unbalance and I knew that I had to do something with my life, growing up and my mom being on welfare. So, I remember these investigators would come to make sure that we didn't have a telephone. And, and my mom would hide the TV sets and my brothers and sisters 'em was running out the backdoor and they was hiding these that--because we were not supposed to have certain things during that time. Speaker 2: Okay. So, they were like a, like a social welfare inspector--? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --or something, would go to the--and, so the regulations stipulated that if you possessed certain things, you weren't eligible for welfare anymore? Speaker 1: Right. Right. And, I remember my, my dad [George Guyton] would come over, and I remember my dad would--my mom had us looking out the win- (laughter), out the window and--because they would call and they would set up an appointment. And, so, we would be looking out the window and we would kind of notify my mom that they was coming and my dad would put on his clothes real fast and I would see him running out the backdoor, or I seen my dad hide in a closet. It was crazy. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the rules were if there was a man in the household, the assumption is that he had income and was able to-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --give you--support the family without aid of the-- Speaker 1: Absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But, even having them to sit down and then to interview my mom and some of the questions they would ask my mom, I just thought it was just unhuman. Speaker 2: So, that kind of stuff made you angry, huh? Speaker 1: It did. Story_ID: 485613 Speaker 1: So, you, you're saying that there was tension in the air in the neighborhood [in Detroit, Michigan] in general, and probably based on the same kind of tension that you had around trying to interact in this world that didn't seem to make any sense. Speaker 2: True. True. So, the, so, the riots taking place during that time, me being a kid, walking up and down the streets kind of studying it, observing what was happening, I just knew there was a matter of time before it exploded. I thought the world was coming to an end during that time. I didn't think it was gonna ever stop. I thought that the world was just gonna, was just gonna explode, was just gonna do away with all of the people. Speaker 1: Now, did you see at age twelve, did you see the police coming in or the National Guard coming in as friends, or as foes? Or, did you have any opinion about it? Speaker 2: I did. Because I saw them coming in and I saw a very hostile group of folks that came in- into an area. But, they had no respect for the people; no respect. I mean, he's a guy coming out the store with a case of liquor, you gonna kill this guy over a case of liquor? It's crazy. And, then at nighttime, peeping out the window, you can see the traces of the bullets up and down the streets. And, they had these machine guns on the back of these vehicles. It was crazy. Story_ID: 485614 Speaker 1: You had mentioned before that your neighborhood wasn't always all black, there were other, there were other ethnic groups there. There were white families living there when you first, you know, in the early days, right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: Were there any specific ethnic group, were they Italians, or Irish, or? Speaker 2: Yeah. We had the Cousimanos [ph.]. And, I would play with the family, the kids, and they also had a fish--they was in the fish business and so they had a fish store. And, it's, and you would, we would go on Fridays and buy fresh fish. So, yeah, the Italian folks. A lot of them was in the neighborhood. When my [maternal] grandparents [Mary Reese and Sam Mackey] first moved into the area back in 1947, there was a lot of German people. So, it was an old German neighborhood; Heidelberg [Heidelberg Street, Detroit, Michigan]. A lot of German folks came from Germany and they ended up in that area. There was a lot of German business over on Mack [Avenue] and Ellery [Street]. I remember this German bakery and they would make these wonderful, wonderful donuts. And, they had this one donut that I would go and buy all the time. It's called a elephant foot. It was huge. So, so, I saw a change take place (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: The more blacks came in the more other ethnics groups would leave. Story_ID: 485615 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that '67 [1967] riot that was like the, that's where the altier that--I mean, I'm sorry, the Algiers Motel [Detroit, Michigan] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Algiers. Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --incident took place and was that the cause, I mean, the spark that--? Speaker 2: Well, that's what I, you know, I heard, it's been a lot of talk about that. And, that's what they're claiming that is the situation that took place over on the west side. It was a blind pig and, and it kind of escalated. But, what I said earlier, I gonna kind of go back to that. As a kid growing up, I saw that it was great division in the city, in that area. I saw where black people, they wanted more. And, I saw where they didn't know how to go about getting more, at that, at that time. And, and then when the riot took place, I kind of knew that eventually it was gonna explode. And, seeing the riot just kind of said to me that people was just fed up. I also remember Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]. I remember seeing them march up and down Mt. Elliot Street. I remember seeing them go through the neighborhood. Even today, I have one of the flags that they used to carry, because one of the neighbors, a guy name Peewee [ph.], they call him Peewee, he was one of the Black Panthers. And, this guy would have this uniform on and he had these, these army boots and they would spit shine the toes of 'em and, and I would see them marching down the street and they was, it was this, a beautiful sight to see. Speaker 1: Well, som- well, do you remember some of the other black organizations in Detroit [Michigan] in those days? I know they, the Nation of Islam of course, this is the home of the Nation of Islam. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were there Muslims in your neighborhood? Speaker 2: Not in the neighborhood. But, right next door to where we went to worship over at Bibleway Church of God in Christ [Detroit, Michigan], the mosque was right across the street from us (laughter). So, I remember, at that time, our minister, the pastor of the church, had some problems with the Islamic belief or the Nation of Islam and he would tell us to stay away from it, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. I know there's a, there's the Ahmadiyya branch of Islam, and that was big in Detroit too. You know, more of a seemingly more orthodox-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they're more orthodox. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, they got some group from Pakistan originally. I mean, but the teachers taught black people in the, in the inner cities, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: There was, let's see, Shrine of the Black Madonna [Detroit, Michigan]. Did you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know anybody associated with the shrine? Speaker 2: No. I did not. But, I had a guy who used to work with me who was a member. And, him and I was pretty close and I would listen to me and we would have a conversation about the Shrine of the Black Madonna. And, I thought it was very interesting, very--having him to share with me the philosophy. I thought it was very interesting. But, also, I used to listen to Malcolm X on the radio. I also would listen to Minister Elijah Muhammad on the radio. I would listen to Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] because we couldn't have a television so we had a radio. So, we would listen to a lot of programs on the radio. Story_ID: 485616 Speaker 1: Okay. So, according to the welfare laws, you couldn't have a television? Speaker 2: Couldn't have a television. There was times we didn't have a TV set. We just had a radio. There was times we didn't have lights in our home. My mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] couldn't afford to pay the bills. So, they would turn our lights off. So, we lived in darkness. We also lived in, that house on Heidelberg Street [Detroit, Michigan]; that house had rats in it. So-- Speaker 1: You're saying, rats. You're not, you know, it's mice and it's rats. They were rats? Speaker 2: I'm talking about these little things that look like miniature kangaroos that would come in when they got ready. And, they would be all on top of the refrigerator. My dad [George Guyton] was bit by a rat. These are big rats we have in our house. We were afraid to go to sleep at night. They just took over the house. We had three of them in the house at one time. So, we lived in some hell growing up, trying to survive in what we call the U.S.A. of America. Story_ID: 485617 Speaker 1: You said you didn't like school early, but did you do okay in school? Speaker 2: You know what, no, I got Cs and Ds and Es on my report card (laughter). And, I kind of made it, you know, they, yeah, they just kinds of pushed me on through the system (laughter). Speaker 1: Social promotion they call it. Speaker 2: Absolutely (laughter). They didn't wanna be bothered with me and they just kind of sent me on. But, I remember when I was in elementary school [Ralph Bunche Elementary School; Ralph J. Bunche Preparatory Academy, Detroit, Michigan] and I found out that I had flunked and wasn't gonna pass. And, I went to summer school. Then I knew that I had to get it together. Went to summer school, did okay in summer school and I made it. So-- Speaker 1: So, in order to enter to high school, you had to go to summer school? Speaker 2: Junior high school-- Speaker 1: Okay, jun-- Speaker 2: I needed to go to summer school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Catch up to, you know, to stay with classmates. Speaker 1: What junior high school did you go to? Speaker 2: Miller [Sidney D. Miller Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, that's a well-known junior high school in-- Speaker 2: Yes, it is. It's been around for many, many year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Detroit [Michigan]; Miller a high school--yeah. Was it Miller high school [Sidney D. Miller High School, Detroit, Michigan] at one time? Speaker 2: It was high school. Yeah, my some of my rel- family folks, relatives attended Miller when it was a high school. They're talking about closing it now. Speaker 1: Right. Yeah, they are. That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. I can't believe it. They're talking about closing it. I was up there last year, and I had a chance to walk through the hallway and it just brought back so many memories. And, I remember every classroom during that time was occupied with students. I remember going to the swimming--I was on the, the swimming class I had a swimming class and now today the swimming pool is not being occupied. It's not being used. A lot of programs--woodshop, they had to close the programs because, when I was kid and we would go into the woodshop we would use the tools, chisels and stuff. We were learning how to use those tools. And, today they became a weapon for some students so they had to close the programs. Speaker 1: The students actually using the tools against each other as weapons (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To hurt each other. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what is, what was so special about Miller? I know, it's, it has--people are very sentimental about it in the Detroit--what is the, what is the attachment to Miller? Speaker 2: Oh, you're growing up now, you teenager, you know, you, you're growing up and you look down and you're getting your pubic hairs, and, yeah (laughter). You're growing up and you wanna be part of that, you know. It's--you start to pay attention to girls, and you're in junior high school, and so you're moving in life. And, so, it became very interesting during that time, yeah. You were talking to people, you're talking to girls on the phone. But, then you realize that you're in junior high school so I started to change. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean, in what ways? Well, how did you, how did you personally change, and--? Speaker 2: Well, personally I began to realize that I was a teenager and was getting older. And, so, as you began to grow up, you began to wake up. And, so, I began to wake up. I began to pay attention; began to realize that one day I'm gonna be out here in the world and I need to have some kind of plan. I need, I need to know some things. And, then I mentioned about the swimming so, you know, here's swimming and I learned how to swim over at Miller. And, then do woodshop and those was classes that I, I loved. And, then there was the drafting class. Story_ID: 485618 Speaker 1: Okay. So did you get a chance to do a lot of art at Miller [Sidney D. Miller Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan] when you were there? Speaker 2: I did, yeah. A lot of drafting and-- Speaker 1: Now, did you get any recognition for your art up to this point? Speaker 2: No (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were people saying, you know, [HistoryMaker] Tyree Guyton can draw, he's a good artist? Did they put your work on the board or have exhibition of it or anything? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Nothing like that? Speaker 2: Nothing like that. I was known as Tyree Guyton who come from that large family. Don't bother--don't mess with him, he has a lot of brothers. 'Cause it was eight boys and two girls. And, he's got a lot of cousins and you don't wanna get involved, you don't want any kind of confrontation with that family. I was known for that at that time. And, then I had a brother by the name of Andre [Andre Guyton] and he was kind of a, a bag [TW1]guy, you know. He, he was really tough and he was mean, and he didn't take any stuff. And, so, people knew he was my brother. So, I was known for that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, your family had a tough reputation as a tough family (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right (laughter). Speaker 1: That you didn't mess with. Speaker 2: That's right. Yeah, there was the Reeses and the Solomons and the Williams [ph.], and so people knew. So, we had a reputation of--I guess it had a lot to do with the size of the family and then, you know, my brother who's deceased today, he was known. He didn't take any stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Did he stay out of trouble? I mean, did--? Speaker 2: No, he stayed in trouble. He loved trouble (laughter). Trouble is what got his life taken away from him. He loved it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lived for it. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: He was fearless. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was there gangs in Detroit [Michigan] when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, yes. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, I know, we interviewed Judge-- Speaker 2: Cray [ph.]? Speaker 1: No, no, no. Speaker 2: Damon, Damon Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith]? Speaker 1: No, no, no. Judge--that was on television. Judge-- Speaker 2: Oh, Mathis. Speaker 1: Mathis, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Judge Greg Mathis [HistoryMaker Gregory Mathis]. And, he talked about the Errol Flynns. Speaker 2: Yeah. I remember them. Speaker 1: And, that was an east side gang. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They was pretty tough (laughter). Speaker 1: Was that the gang in your neighborhood? Or, were they, was it a different gang? Speaker 2: No. They wasn't really in my neighborhood. We had, we had the Gratiot crew, the guys who lived across Gratiot [Avenue]. I mean, who chased me home one night (laughter). But, I remember those different gangs, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you all weren't part of a gang over where you were? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: But, there was a Gratiot crew was the closest thing that you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: It's just the guys that lived on Gratiot over there? Speaker 2: They lived across Gratiot; the other side of Gratiot. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. The guys that lived on the other side of Gratiot and you had the folks that lived on side of Gratiot. And, so, somehow-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, they knew, when you went across Gratiot you was looking out, you was looking over your shoulder. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, were you, were you, is it pretty much like that in Detroit in those days, when if you went to another neighborhood, you had to kind of look out to make sure that--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Especially in this area here, which is the lower east side. I, I've witnessed this here. I've been, you know, I've been chased home (laughter). The guys was trying to take my stuff from me. You know, I had a little summer job. And, I remember one day I went downtown. I cashed my check, went shopping. And, I went through the wrong neighborhood and they came out. And, they had their little du-rags on and they was chasing me, and they had a baseball bat and meat cleaver, and they was trying to--and something said run. Speaker 1: I guess (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Too many of 'em to try to fight 'em (laughter), yeah. Story_ID: 485619 Speaker 1: So, at, at Miller [Sidney D. Miller Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan] were there any teachers or people in the neighborhood that took an interest in you as an artist, as a person that had a, you know--? Speaker 2: The gym teacher. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was great. He was a great guy. It was, it's the same gym teacher I had here at Bunche [Ralph Bunche Elementary School; Ralph J. Bunche Preparatory Academy, Detroit, Michigan], who went over to Miller, who was my coach when I was running track. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I went over here and he taught me how to swim and--yes. Yeah. He would come to my, come to talk to my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] and, yeah. He was always trying to get my mom to take an interest in what I liked. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She never did. Story_ID: 485620 Speaker 1: So, that, well, that couldn't be a, you know, now you didn't see your father [George Guyton] that much and your mother [Betty Solomon Guyton], for some reason is not, you know, can't be persuaded to come out to these events. Mostly track events and you played baseball too, you said? Speaker 2: Yeah, we played baseball. And, you know, they was trying to get her to come to, you know, the programs we had at school during that time. And, every now and then, she would come, never when I was in junior high school [Sidney D. Miller Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan]. I don't ever remember my mom coming up there for anything. She was busy (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, what do you think, what do you think with just being busy, or? Speaker 2: Well, her being busy and there was other kids. Her trying to survive, single parent. I don't really know. I don't really know. I think it had a lot to do with, and I just wanna be honest, I think my mom was very disappointed. You know, very disappointed with my dad, and disappointed that her life turned out the way that it did, and-- Speaker 1: Just kind of depressed, you think? Speaker 2: She was--yeah, depressed, unhappy. Didn't know, she didn't know how to make herself happy. I also saw it in my, my [maternal] grandmother [Mary Reese] who lived in a box, who very seldom went out for social events to socialize. Story_ID: 485621 Speaker 1: How was your social life in--as you approached high school? Now, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I, I started off at King [Martin Luther King, Jr. Senior High School, Detroit, Michigan], and I dropped out of school. I never made it over King and I, I went to the [U.S.] military. I went to the [U.S.] Army. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you start--now, you didn't do that 'til you were sixteen, right? Speaker 2: Went in the Army at age sixteen. Speaker 1: But, what was, what was King like when you started? I mean, was it just weren't doing well, you know, at all? Speaker 2: At that time, I was very disappointed with the whole set-up, with the whole system. Speaker 1: You were running track then, right? And, did you run in high school? Speaker 2: No, I didn't run in high school. I just--over at junior high school [Sidney D. Miller Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], then it stopped. And, then, that was it. I stop wondering. I became a high school dropout. And, that was for a period of time, and-- Speaker 1: So, you dropped out before you joined the military, then? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The military--my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] knew, thought it was great to get me into some kind of program. I also thought it was great to get in some kind of program and so, it was the military, so. Speaker 1: So, what would you, I mean, when did you, how soon did you dropped out of high school? Speaker 2: I never really made it to high school. I dropped out in junior high school. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you never even--okay. Speaker 2: Never really (unclear). Speaker 1: Well, you should've gone to King-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but, you didn't. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And--did they, I mean, was there any major incident that, I mean, something that just marked where you just knew you weren't going back to school? Speaker 2: Well, I, I felt that I wasn't smart enough. I had some challenges and was not sure how to deal with them at that time. I didn't have any family support. I felt like I was more or less out on my own. I was kind of different. I was strange from the other kids in the family. The other kids kind of pushed me aside, you know, my brothers and sisters and because, you know, people in the family. And, I kept talking about this art thing, you know, becoming an artist, going to art school. Story_ID: 485622 Speaker 1: I remember my first visit to the Detroit Institute of Art [Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit, Michigan]. I went crazy. I fell in love with it. Speaker 2: How old were you then? Speaker 1: My first visit? I was six. Six. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Never forgot it. It was a field trip that we took. And, I went in there and I remember walking into the museum and seeing these paintings. And, then when I went into the modern art section, I just went, I was just blown away. It was just, I could relate to it, and I just knew that I needed to pursue that. Speaker 2: And, again, the Detroit Institute for the Arts is one of the great art institutes in the country. Speaker 1: I think it's the third largest. And, they just recently spent $150 million on the renovation of that institution. Speaker 2: Yeah. A huge Diego Rivera mural as you go in. Speaker 1: Yes. Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. So, I mean, so you looked at, you were impressed. Did you keep going back? I know, it's not that far from here. I mean, it's not real far away from this neighborhood? Did you go back to the DIA [Detroit Institute of Arts] a lot, or? Speaker 1: Yeah. I did. And, especially as I began to, to grow up. I would go back. I would, I would spend time in that area. In that whole cultural center. Down at, you know, Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan], they're CCS [College for Creative Studies, Detroit, Michigan] and it was, you know, the sculpture works outside and so I would spend time down there just taking it in. Speaker 2: Okay. You got the library [Detroit Public Library, Detroit, Michigan] there too, I mean, it's-- Speaker 1: It's a library. I would spend time in library, yeah. Speaker 2: It's one of the few cities where a lot of the culture things are concentrated into one, a couple of acres, you know, in the same, you know, all the stuff is kind of pushed there together. Story_ID: 485623 Speaker 1: So, when you dropped out of, when you, you just didn't go to high school, right? Speaker 2: No. I didn't go. Speaker 1: In the first place? And, did, well, how would you spend your day? Speaker 2: I spent my day walking around. I would go downtown and hang out and, and go back home. And, (laughter) I remember the truant officers could come to my house (laughter) you know have these conversation. And, so once you turn sixteen, you know they leave you alone. So, after I turned sixteen, they just say, "Hey, heck with it," you know. And, I knew that I needed to do something. So, my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] knew this guy who was in the [U.S.] military and had a conversation with him and so he was able to sign me up. Speaker 1: Okay. But, did your rel- any of your relatives say, hey what are you doing? Did they know you weren't going to school-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --at that time, when you first--? Speaker 2: They thought it was great because a lot of my relatives thought I should do it because they did it. Speaker 1: No, not the military. I was just asking-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh. Speaker 1: About before you, when you were walking around not going. Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: So, nobody really saying anything to you about it? Speaker 2: No. No. Speaker 1: Okay. But, they did eventually come up with this solution to go to the military, right? Speaker 2: That had came up because they, you know, my uncle, my brothers, cousins, all of them went to the military-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is-- Speaker 2: --to fight for this country. Speaker 1: This is what year? What year is this? About 19--? Speaker 2: This, this was around '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. Nineteen seventy-two [1972], the country's in the latter stages of Vietnam War. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] the president. Speaker 2: I never made it over the Vietnam but I went in there in hopes of going over the Vietnam. But, I couldn't go because I had cousins and I had two brothers that's over in Vietnam, so I couldn't go. So, I stayed stateside. Speaker 1: Did you want to go to Vietnam? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Explain, please (laughter). What--yeah, 'cause it's a lot of time you interview people, people, you know, they didn't wanna go to Vietnam. But, you actually wanted to go, so, what was, why did you wanna go? Speaker 2: Because my brother, I had two brothers that was over in Vietnam. I had, my first cousin that was over there, second cousin was over in Vietnam and I just thought, hey, man, you got all my family is over in Vietnam, so I wanna go too. I guess, I was trying to prove that I was a man, and I wanted to go and I thought it would be great to go and fight for this country. Speaker 1: Were they different when they came back from Vietnam than they were before they went? Speaker 2: Oh, hell yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, hell yeah. My cousin stepped on a, on a mine over there, so he was all messed up. He had all this scrapped metal and stuff, and so he was all messed up for a long time. My brothers came back. Both of them dope fiends. My cousin a dope fiend. My brother's dead today. My cousin's dead. They was all dope fiends. They was all crazy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, all of the guys, quite a few of the guys that I grew up with who lived in that Heidelberg [Heidelberg Street, Detroit, Michigan] area, who also went to Vietnam, they came back and they was all messed up. Speaker 1: Okay. But, you-- Speaker 2: Everybody was all messed up. Speaker 1: --but, you still wanted to go 'cause you figured that was what you should do, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. But, see I didn't know that. But, know that now, now. If I could do it all over again, knowing what I know now, it's no way I would go. It's no way I would even enlist in the military. There's no way I would fight for this country. I don't believe in the system anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not today. Speaker 1: So, but then you, it was a-- Speaker 2: I think it had a lot to do with me being young and ignorant. Didn't really understand, knew something was wrong but didn't know how to really think for myself. And, you grow up and you begin to say, hm, hm, you start thinking. You start realizing that you gotta think for you. You start making some major decisions about what's important and what's not as far as life. You realize somehow I gotta make it out there and then you have to put together a plan; something that's gonna take you through all of this. That's what I had to do. Story_ID: 485624 Speaker 1: Now, well, how did you adjust to U.S. Army at age sixteen, when it was hard to go to school? So, I mean, but the, I guess they can't make you stay in school-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --but they have--they can make you stay in the Army, right? So, how did you adjust? Speaker 2: I--it was fun at first. It was fun. And, I went in, you know the basic training; learned how to shot the M14--M16 rifle. I lo- learned how to march and then I, you know, we was always running and so I got a thrill out of running. You know, get up at six o'clock in the morning, you get up and you take off running. And, it wasn't until later that I decided I no longer wanted to be part of that. So-- Speaker 1: Well, what happened? Speaker 2: I just got fed up with it. Yeah. Speaker 1: Was it something--what particular aspect of it were you, did you dislike? Speaker 2: I believe I got fed up with the fact--I remember when I was stationed in Fort Riley [Kansas], I was station in Fort Knox, at Fort Knox, Kentucky. Speaker 1: That's in Kentucky, right? Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you're at Fort Knox, Kentucky where all the gold is (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm down there at Fort Knox, Kentucky. And, I'm down there with people who, who was also in the [U.S.] military with me. And, you know, you take an oath. You know you raise your right hand, you take this oath to fight for your country and you become the property of the United States government. And, I'm down here in Fort Knox, Kentucky and I'm down here with people who has got this same uniform on and I'm now there and they calling me niggers, spitting on me. I'm down there fighting with people. Speaker 1: So, did it seem like a contradiction in--? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, we're gonna go over here to fight. And, I was thinking because I had--when I signed up I said the hope was for me to go Vietnam, and I'm gonna go over here with these guys. I can't trust these folks to watch my back. So, I was faced with all of that. I mean, I had a chance to really see it. Yeah. And, to have somebody to spit on you. Speaker 1: So, tell us now, what happened? What was incident where you were spit on? Speaker 2: It was a Caucasian guy who, who was in the military with me. I can't remember this guy's name and just came up with me and, came up to me one day and took my hat off and called me out by name and spit on me. Speaker 1: Now, was he a superior officer for something or a higher rank, or--? Speaker 2: Same rank. Speaker 1: Same rank. He comes up and takes your hat off and spits on you. Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: I (laughter), I--the sergeant saw this and I met this guy back and they have a sawdust pit where they let you fight. And, I met him back over at six o'clock. Story_ID: 485625 Speaker 1: So, you were explaining this, this fight now, this sergeant arranges with you and this fellow that spit on you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. His name was Epps [ph.]. That came back to me, yeah, Epps. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a plantation name from Louisiana. I don't know if you know that. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: A big plantation in Louisiana called Epps that has popped up in a couple of our interviews. The name of this plantation, yep (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His name was Epps. He was a tall guy. He's from the South and, well, what happened, you know, the drill sergeant saw this here, and I had this little short drill sergeant. He was this Smokey the Bear kind of guy, you know, real short and real thick. And, he told me to meet him back over in the sawdust pit at six o'clock. He was gonna fight it out. And, so we, so we did. That guy never did apologize. Never did. Never did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Beat him down to the ground and he never said I'm sorry. Never apologized. Speaker 1: So, you can image then his beliefs are ingrained, I guess. Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah. Speaker 1: He thought he had the right to do that or thought he--I mean, what one would assume. Speaker 2: Well, for me, I mean, that was a rude awakening. I was out there and I was all alone. And, you know, way, away from home, almost five hundred miles away from home on a [U.S.] military base and I, I was confused. Story_ID: 485626 Speaker 1: I was confused about a lot of things. And, I think I need to back up because there's a part of this that's missing and I wanna share how to put this into this interview but Jenenne [Guyton's wife, Jenenne Whitfield] pulled me out in the hallway and she felt that was important. My life was really different and as a kid my, I had a trauma that I went through that, that devastated me for a long time. And, also family members and family members didn't know how to deal with it. So, I was kind of pushed aside. And, I indicated early on that I had all of these problems growing up, in school where I was always drawing and at the age of fifteen, I went through a trauma that blew my mind. I was playing with a gun and this gun accidentally went off, discharged, and killed my cousin. It devastated me. There was a blockage up in here, mentally wise for a long time. And, when that happened, it was my first cousin, and him and I, we was real close. His name was Anthony Williams [ph.]. And, his mom and my sister, I mean, his mom and my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] was sisters. And, I went through so many changes and the family didn't know how to deal with it. And, so, that was a division that took place, and my mom kind of pushed me away to comfort her sister. So, I said, early that she had this friend who was in the [U.S.] military. He was a sergeant, a first sergeant and she kind of talked to him and signed the paper for me to leave, and was trying to get rid of me. Speaker 2: Now, that had to be tough. Now, you-- Speaker 1: It was unbelievable. Speaker 2: Were like guns a big part of growing up? Were there like easily--? Speaker 1: Everybody had them in our, well, not everybody. A quite a few folks had them in the family, you know. It was time when people carried guns. And, if it wasn't a gun, it was a straight razor (laughter), yeah. And, I just happened to be exploring this particular Friday night and it was bunch of kids and, and I had this weapon, it was a shotgun, and it went off. Had a trigger--hair--what do you call it? Speaker 2: Hair trigger. Speaker 1: Hair trigger, yeah. Speaker 2: You didn't realize what--do you know it was loaded at the time? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: No. That changed my life. Speaker 2: I can imagine. That, yeah, that has to. Speaker 1: So, there was a blockage for a long time. And, so, I found myself trying to run away, escape. Speaker 2: Did you have to go through the criminal justice system-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) with this? I mean--okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: What did they determine? I mean, what did they--? Speaker 1: Well, I--they determined it was an accident. But, it was family members who was trying to make it something else. And, it was just a lot of, it was just a lot of confusion for a long time; for many years, for many years in my life. So, so, I was out there kind of by myself, you know. I--It was many times I wanted to talk to my mom about the situation, many times I wanted to talk to my aunt and her children about it. And, and it wasn't until a few years ago that I made my mind up to go and to, to do it. So, I did it. Speaker 2: Okay. To talk to your--? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --aunt about it? Speaker 1: Right before she died. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, you know, her kids. And, so we talked about it. I was--I needed to share with them what was happening with me. I knew what was happening with them. And, I knew that they did not understand what was happening with me. And, when that happened, it was like I was froze in time for a long time; I froze. Story_ID: 485627 Speaker 1: That's a profoundly sad experience and it's the kind of thing I think people who don't have that experience, they look at what juveniles are doing now, somehow forget some of the things that they did as a juvenile that could've ended up the way yours did. But, didn't for one way or another, one reason or another. 'Cause there's plenty of things that juveniles do that are, we look back now, and say, how could we have done that? You know, or, what were we thinking about? But, you know, fortunately they don't all end like what happened to you. But, does it, I mean, how does it affect you? That when you look back at that time, who does it affect how you look at what juveniles do today? Speaker 2: Well, it makes me very sympathetic at times when I look at the juvenile system and I work with a lot of young people. And, the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan] is in the area where 75 percent of the people are in poverty. The African American mortality rate is 55 percent. So, I see a lot of young guys that's caught up into, you know, the gang life, or the thug life, selling drugs. And, and my message is trying to get them to understand, there's another side that they need to try, or they need to explore. I can tell them from my experience of what I went through as a young person, in hopes of getting them to understand that it don't have to be that way. It's a mind thing, you know, it's what you think. It's you making choices about life. Do I wanna be over here, or do I wanna be over here? You have the power to do that. Yeah. See, I look back at my life and I remember when I thought--I was that close, that close, that close (gesture), to snapping; that close. And, the only thing that I could do that helped me to deal with it was to run. So, I would run. I would run. I would run. So, then I found myself running from things that was important to me. So, I had to go back and I had to really examine what I was doing. And, that's what I see with young folks out here today. Last year two of my cousins was shot and killed here in the city; two. Speaker 1: They were shot and killed here--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the city; two. And, I'm talking about young folks who were not twenty-five years of age. Speaker 1: Was it involved, were they involved in some kind of, was it accidental or was it some kind of a dope deal related thing-- Speaker 2: Drugs. Speaker 1: --as often is today? Speaker 2: Drugs. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That led to their life being taken away from them. Not knowing what they're doing. Thinking that this is, you know, this is a exciting life to, to live and, and, and all of sudden your life is taken away from you. And, then going to these funerals and looking at all these young folks that came to the funeral, and having them to see him there in casket and then to listen to them. And, a lot of times, it's out of stupidity; not knowing what they're doing. Because a lot of these young folks don't have a father in the home. So, here's a single parent, a mom in most cases, trying to raise these young men. Story_ID: 485628 Speaker 1: Now, you described when you were contemplating going to the [U.S.] Army, you were describing the behavior of some of your cousins when they returned and how they were changed. And, you saw yourself and says, well, you know, I gonna go down the same path. But, at the same time you said that they were crazy, you know. What, what kind of behavior did they exhibit after coming back from Vietnam? And, do you see that, I guess, now--maybe I'm asking too many questions at once, I don't know-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --but, do you see that now as somehow related to what's going on out in the street now? 'Cause I remember there was a generation of guys that came back that were, we would describe as being kind of crazy and some of them were addicted, and didn't make necessarily good fathers or role models when they came back (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yeah. Speaker 1: They couldn't. Speaker 2: Yeah. When I came back, well, I need to say this way here to answer your question. Well, first of all, you're going to the [U.S.] military, and I don't know if you've ever been in the military, but you're going to the military and so you go through this whole psychological, this mental thing where he's teaching you how--the military is teaching you to, to kill. So, that is instilled in you, you know, you are learning how to kill, you know. You're, you know, you got this rifle and you're out there at the rifle range, you learn how to shoot to kill, to kill, to kill. You got this baronette [sic. bayonet] that fits on the rifle and you're out there and you got this, you know, you got this, this target, you know, you got this, God what do call it? This mannequin of a person that you're sticking and you, you killing this person. Then you come back here and they tell you to be normal. I still know how to shoot. I never forgot that. I can still see myself on the rifle range, shooting that M16. Then I learned how to break that thing down in so many minutes, to clean it and then put it back together. So, my cousin--and, they was all in Vietnam. They was over there, they was killing people. They was in the jungle. And, so, they, you know, they sand these, you know, the planes are dropping these bombs and then, and everything is blowing up. And, my brother talks about it all the time, all the Vietnamese folks that they killed over there. And, so, they're out there in the jungle, and so they're out there and they're smoking hash, opium; doing drugs to deal with it. Oh, here's all this action. Here's all this energy. Another guy that I know, a friend, he talks about jumping out of a plane, he's jumping out a plane over the, the war zone. And, the Vietnamese are shooting up at him. And, he said he pissed on his self. So, then you come back here and you gotta fit in. How do you fit in? How do you forget that? My brother's a heroin addict today. Bona fide dope fiend. And, my cousin, my oldest brother and my cousin both died from drugs. Came back here, couldn't cope with it. Speaker 1: Now, this is since the early '70s [1970s], right? Speaker 2: Early '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Came back, went into the military during the '70s [1970s], the Vietnam War, came back here, couldn't fit in. Story_ID: 485629 Speaker 1: Now, here you're at a crisis point at Fort Knox [Kentucky], you know, got people calling you a nigger and you had to literally fight, you know, your fellow soldiers and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, what are you thinking at this point? What are you, was there any opportunity for you to do any art and even, even exploit your running skills, or anything? Speaker 2: No. I very seldom got a chance to do art during, during that time. But, I ran every day. And, that was my form of a way of releasing that energy. The running would, would help me. I would run six miles a day. So, that gave me, it was like a medicine for me. And, it gave me, it gave me some hope. And, then I went AWOL [Absent Without Official Leave], and-- Speaker 1: Well, how did that happen? What, well, just walk us through what happened? Speaker 2: I came home on a visit and just decided I wasn't gonna go back. I had just had enough of the [U.S.] military. I felt that it was a contradiction. I felt that there was something totally wrong with this whole, the military life. I mean, how could I be in United States Army fighting for this country and, and there are people that I'm fighting with in my unit. I was in Charlie Company, and we down there, and we--I'm fighting with these guys and we not even talking about going to Vietnam. But, I'm down here fighting with folks because I just wanna be treated like, with some respect. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you came back home and you didn't wanna go back, so--? Speaker 2: I didn't wanna go back. But, then-- Speaker 1: So, you-- Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: So, I guess you didn't for a while if went A-W-O-L (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't for a while. Yeah. Speaker 1: You didn't go back. Speaker 2: So, I got an early release. I went back and to start my, you know, you do your training and then you, and then they assign you to a job, so I went to do the training for that. I was in communication. So, I would put up switchboards and hang cable and climb the telephone poles, so I did that. But, I ended up getting an early release and an honorable discharge. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, how did they--so, you can get an early release in the Army if you--? Speaker 2: Well, under my circumstances I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: --just simply told them I no longer wanted to be in there and I was fed up with it and so, they gave me a release-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --early out, and a honorable discharge. Speaker 1: That was about the time, I think, that they started like, easing up on the draft 'cause I think they had already, the Vietnam War had been criticized to this point so badly that, I think, that they--'cause they were drafting like crazy a couple years before. But, I think they started easing up on it, I think, as the country withdrew from Vietnam. Story_ID: 485630 Speaker 1: But, also, I need to mention to you too, 'cause I think this is really important. That I was sent down the Fort Riley, Kansas to wait for my discharge to come from Washington, D.C., and I was stationed in a, I was put in a special unit. I was put in a unit with guys who had, they had just came back from Vietnam, a lot of these guys. And, I was in this unit with them. And, so, all of these guys was waiting of their discharge along with myself. And, during the time they was waiting, I was assigned to another job. And, the job that they gave me was to get rid all of the marijuana that was growing for the United States Army. It was a product that the United States government was working on. They was studying the effects that drugs would have on a person during the time of war. This program was terminated and they had to get rid of all of the marijuana that the United States government was growing. And, I was put in that position, in that job, to help get rid of all the marijuana that the United States government was growing. Speaker 2: I mean, how do they--now, this could be seen by some people as a dream job (laughter). Some people would probably say, oh, boy, I get a chance to do this. But, I mean, how did, I mean, how did they proposed that you all get rid of it? Speaker 1: Well, we was instructed, and you know, we had a, a sergeant and the sergeant took us out and they showed us how to cut it with the bara- baronetts [sic. bayonet]. You cut it at the base and you would stack the marijuana, you would stack it up so high, you would saturate it with gasoline, you would burn it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's what we did. These plants was like seven feet tall. There was acres and acres of marijuana that was growing for the United States government. Speaker 2: Okay. Did they ever tell you in detail what--they were just trying to find out what affect it have--would have on soldiers, or who, or what (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was a program, it was a program that had been in effect for many, many years, and it was over with because of soldier that was coming home from Vietnam so they was getting rid of this program. And, they needed to get rid of all of the marijuana that they had on the base. The program was terminated, it was over with. They was studying the effects it would have on a soldier during the time of war. Speaker 2: Okay. So, they was actually growing it, then sending it to Vietnam, or what? Speaker 1: Well, I don't know if they was sending it to Vietnam. I was just told that it was a program and they would have soldiers to smoke it and they would study the effects it would have on the soldier, on the, under combat during the time he was fighting. Speaker 2: I just trying to image the soldier that would get a job of the experimental (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --and, what he would do in the Army to smoke marijuana for-- Speaker 1: Oh, we smoked a lot of it. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: We smoked a lot of it. So, people today that's rolling, call themselves rolling blunts (shakes head), we was rolling joints that was so big it was unbelievable. We couldn't believe it. We was taking bags, pillowcases of marijuana back to the barracks with us. We would smoke every day, all day. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, this is during the eradication program? Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah. It was over with so, you know, we went to work from nine o'clock to five o'clock. Speaker 2: Now, did they, they make you promise never to tell about this sort of thing (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: Okay. So, well-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --nobody uses our archive that much anyway, so-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --we, this may, this may never even be heard by anybody, who knows. But, that's interesting (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't think they care now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 485631 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I've been talking about it. I talk about it because people find that hard to believe that the United States--there're so many things that we don't know and that the government is part of, you know. We don't know. I mean, like I shared with you that my brother them was over in Vietnam and they was over there doing heroin and they was over there smoking opium, and hash, and all of that, in Vietnam. Speaker 2: Yeah. There's a lot of documentation of that these days and some of the problems in Vietnam in terms of the out of proportion number of black soldiers that were shot as opposed to the white soldiers (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: And, the kind of assignments they would get in Vietnam though. Some of the soldiers even fighting back and shooting their officer. I mean, there's a sol- a lot of horror stories in Vietnam about-- Speaker 1: But, quite a few of the guys that I was stationed with in, at Fort Riley, Kansas who had just come back, said that what the Vietnamese would say to them was for them to go home and they was talking about the African American people to go home because it was not their war. Go home. We don't have a problem with you. This is not your war. Go home soldier. Speaker 2: Yeah, I've heard that, those stories too. Hey, black G.I., you know-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --go home, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. So, after the marijuana eradication project, what did they call it officially? What was official name for it? Speaker 1: You know, I'm trying to remember because, yeah, there was name, and I'm trying to remember. You know, I can't remember the, the terminology that they used during that time. But, it was, a way, you know, 'cause you know you got this army, this military language what they used. And, I can't remember what they called it now. I can't remember the name. But, we was told not to tell anybody on the base that we was part of this project. And, and I, I just remember being out there, and I loved, you know, waking up in the morning going to work. 'Cause we would go out there, and we was just cutting down dope (laughter). It was the best dope I ever smoked in my life, so. Speaker 2: In Kansas, where the wheat grows real high (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 2: There was acres of this stuff, huh? Speaker 1: Acres of it. It's unbelieve- I could not believe. I could not believe it; acres of it. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: It was pure, it was good. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: I was trying to send this home too. I was calling people up and I said, "People do you want some dope?" And, I was trying to figure out, how do I get it off the barracks, and stuffing pillowcases. Speaker 2: So, did people actually, were, were people actually able to get some outta there and send it home? Speaker 1: Well, we was taking back, you know, to the barracks with us. And, you know, we went to work at nine o'clock and we was off at five o'clock. So, you go back to the barracks, take you some marijuana with you, and change your clothes, you can go off the base. You can do whatever you wanna do. So, yeah. They was taking bags of it (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Okay. Speaker 1: I don't think they really care, you know, they was trying to get rid of it. So, they had all these soldiers from Vietnam and myself that was out there cutting it down. Story_ID: 485632 Speaker 1: So, when did you come back from, from Vietnam? You went and sat--well, no, from the [U.S.] Army, not from Vietnam? Speaker 2: I got out in--I went in around seventy-- Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], you said, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, around '72 [1972]. I got out around '73 [1973]. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's an early--so, you didn't do the two years that most people would do. Speaker 2: No. I got an early release. Speaker 1: You got out in '73 [1973]. Speaker 2: With an honorable discharge. Speaker 1: So, what, what did you do when you got back? Did you have any, did you have access to G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] money and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No. I was not entitled to that and that's--they gave me the honorable discharge with no benefits. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you have no veterans benefits at all-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --then, even though you served. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. If I had stayed longer, I could've got the benefits, but I wanted the early release. So, that came with no benefits. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what did you do when you got back home? Speaker 2: I came back home and my [maternal] grandfather [Sam Mackey] got me a job. Speaker 1: So, you're still like seven- seventeen, eighteen? Speaker 2: Right. At the automotive industry. Got me a job at a factory. Speaker 1: Which one did you--? Speaker 2: My first, the first factory job I had was Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Jefferson Assembly Plant [Jefferson North Assembly Plant, Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Is that here in the city? Speaker 2: Yes. It's over on Jefferson [Avenue]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, how did you fare there? Speaker 2: I did pretty good there. I stayed there about nine months. And, I'm around seventeen now. So, my girlfriend, she's pregnant, and she has a baby. And, I left there to go to Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan]. So, now I'm eighteen. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is like the next year or something that you go to Ford? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Seventy-four [1974]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I got a better job out there, and-- Speaker 1: So, what did you do at Ford? Speaker 2: I was working in the frame plant. So, we was building these car frames. Speaker 1: Like, Fisher Body [Fisher Body Corporation] plant or something or--no, I guess--I don't know if Ford uses Fisher, but. Speaker 2: Ford has its own frame plant. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: It has its own plant. Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan] has a Fisher things-- Speaker 2: Yeah, G-- Speaker 1: I guess, yeah. All right. Speaker 2: Ford has its own frame plant and has its own glass plant. Ford makes its own glass, own frames. Story_ID: 485633 Speaker 1: Meanwhile, like are you still, are you thinking about becoming an artist at some point still? Speaker 2: I'm drawing now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm drawing. And, the lady that I'm involved with, she also studied art in school. So, when I was working in the afternoon shift, so I would come home at night and so we would draw by numbers. We had this draw by number kit sets. So, we would do that late at night. Speaker 1: Is that like paint by number kit, where you paint the (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Paint by number, yeah. Draw by number, paint by number kits. So, I would do that. Speaker 1: So, were those useful in term of learning how to use paint? Speaker 2: At that time, yes. Yeah. Yeah, they, they helped. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know people that did that, too. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, it, it seem to help them, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: It's--so, this was a time, well, early '70s [1970s] was a time when they'd been a big explosion of black art in the late '60s [1960s]; Black Arts Movement they call it and Detroit [Michigan] was one of the centers for that, certainly. I don't--were you familiar with (unclear) in Detroit and the, any of the black artist that were--? Speaker 2: You know, to be honest, no. I was still dumbfounded. I--no, no, I was still, no. I knew nothing about black art, or black artists; nothing. Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. So, what were the, what was your subject matter? Well, you use the paint by number kits but-- Speaker 2: Yeah I was doing fruits. You know, still life, and fruits, and landscapes. And, (laughter), I didn't bring any of my paintings with me. So, it started off, you know the paint by numbers, with the still life and the landscapes. And, then there was those ocean scenes, you know, water scenes, landscapes, trees, and you know, lakes, and things of that nature. And, and then I just kept growing. Story_ID: 485634 Speaker 1: Now I don't wanna leave anything out but you eventually became an inspector at Ford [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan]? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so, what, what leadership qualities did you show to, (laughter) to get that job? I mean, at that point. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, you, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. I was really dedicated. I went to work every day, and I very seldom, you know, missed a day because I knew that it would help me to do other things. I got back in school at that same time. I got into a adult educational program to position myself to, to get my GED [General Educational Development]. And, so, you know, I would go to school during the day and then I would go to work. I was working the afternoon shift. And, so, my supervisor saw something in me and so I kind of worked my way up and I became an inspector. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, you would inspect the work that someone else had done down the line or something-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --basically, to see if it was done right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. 'Cause I started off in, until you're working on that assembly line building the frames. That was hard work. You know, you're putting in these side beams and you're doing that for eight, nine hours. But, it would take two guys. And, so, I put in so many and then we would rotate and this guy would put in so many, until we, until I mastered the job and it became a science. And, so, then I would work thirty minutes on and he would work thirty minutes on and so we would rotate it. And, then it got to the point we--I was working an hour on and he would work an hour off. And, then got it to the point now he work half, a half a day on it, and I'd work the other half. Speaker 1: So, you all had it made. It was pretty good for your own benefit? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It puts some muscles on you 'cause these frames are pretty heavy. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, you're making, you know, a lot people in Detroit [Michigan] come to Detroit to work in those days came to work in the plants. So, you got a grown man's job making decent wages, I guess, for those days, and benefits and everything. Now-- Speaker 2: The factory's a city. Story_ID: 485635 Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you, like how did you maintain or develop the stability, you know, after all the trauma you've been through before in the, you know, before you went to the [U.S. military] service and then, you know, in the service? Did you, I mean, how did you maintain stability enough to go to work every day and doing these jobs, which is not the most exciting job in the world and to do this, you know, steadily and become promoted and that sort of thing. How did you manage? Speaker 2: You know, for a long time there, I was crazy. I was out of it. I was really confused about life. And, there was times that I--a lot of times I was fighting with myself. Because you hear things and then there was so many people who knew about this, you know, who heard about it. A lot of family folks kind of shunned them self away from me. And, I would hear things, and I heard things for many, many years. Even now, I still hear things about that, you know. People won't let it go. Speaker 1: About the shooting from--? Speaker 2: Yeah, the shooting and, you know, everything else. There was always something inside of me that was pushing me to, to succeed. And, it was my [maternal] grandfather, Grandpa Mackey [Sam Mackey]; through the shoot, through all of it. My grandfather never gave up on me. When everybody else had bad things and negative things to say, it was my grandfather who would reach out and say, "It's gonna be okay. It's all right. I understand." And, he gave me strength when I was weak. He gave me hope and he helped me to believe in myself. And, yeah, you was talking about, you know, the mind and your daughter. The mind is a very-- Speaker 1: Oh, the juvenile mind and the nature of the juvenile mind-- Speaker 2: Yeah. The mind is a very complex piece of machinery. And, I found myself, there was times I would have a conversation with myself and I would have to tell myself, "No, I'm not gonna do that anymore." So, I have to fight with myself. I thought about committing, committing suicide; lots of times when I was growing up and I was dealing with all of this stuff. But, I wanted something. I wanted more and then when my sons [Tyree Guyton, Jr. and Towan Guyton] came into the equation, I knew that I had to get it together because my first wife, she was killed by drug dealers. So, at the age of nineteen, I was raising two kids. Story_ID: 485636 Speaker 1: What happened to her [Guyton's first wife]? What's the story? Speaker 2: She, she was on heroin. She, she came from a real good family. She was the only child, and they give her everything and she got strung out. And, she owed the dope people some money. And, this was not the first time and so her, her grandmother and her, her aunt, they was always there for her. They was always giving her--and they decided that they had to stop because they felt they were not helping her. This very last time that she called, they said we're not gonna help her. And, they killed her over two hundred dollars. Yep. Speaker 1: Wow. So, so you're, here you are you got two sons [Tyree Guyton, Jr. and Towan Guyton], right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Two small sons. And you're nineteen at this point? Speaker 2: I was nineteen when I was raising those kids. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was off and she was, she was caught up. Speaker 1: Okay. So, she wasn't home anyway during most of this period (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I had the kids. I ended up moving back with my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton], so my mom could help me to raise those two boys. But, she was out and she was strung out. And, it was something she said to me, she had told me that I couldn't help her. And, I wanted to help so bad. But, it was nothing I could do. You know, 'cause she had something that she was dealing with. It was like a--and I can relate to it, you know, it's kind of like you have your own wars, you know, your own fight with self. And, you have to kind of beat up on self to tell self, "Hey, I'm not gonna do this here, you know, I'm not gonna self-destruct." But, I'll never forget that day I got that phone call and they told me she was dead. And, I went down to identify her body. It was gruesome. Story_ID: 485637 Speaker 1: That's a sad story. So, I guess, that had to make you a lot more serious, I guess, about what you were doing to (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it did. I mean, I was not prepared to raise--I was nineteen. But, I, I did the best I could. And, Jenenne [Jenenne Whitfield] and I, we often talk about this here. I gave my kids [Tyree Guyton, Jr. and Towan Guyton] what I had. And, I look back now and I ask myself, "What was it?" A lot of it was, I made it up. I lot of it was, if I would do it all over again, I would change a whole lot of things that I did. But, I did the best I could under the circumstances at that time. I also, I spent some time on welfare myself. Speaker 1: Now, is it, is it that tough for a male to get on welfare in those days, or? Speaker 2: In my case, I had the custody of the kids and it was not, it wasn't that hard. But, it's, it's something that I would not recommend. It's, it's, it's crazy, you know, you're going down there to get some government assistance, and what you have to go through in order to get it, it's, it's not worth it. To have somebody to make you feel like you're less than a person and all of these questions that they ask you about your personal business. It's nobody's business. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, is this before you were working in the factory? Or, was in the interim between one job and the other? Speaker 2: It was right after I left the factory to go to the Detroit Fire Department and I lost my job at the fire department and I got on welfare. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about the fire department. Now, how--you joined the Detroit Fire Department? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: What prompted you to join the fire department? Speaker 2: I was working at the factory and I was always trying to improve my, myself. And, this particular year the Detroit- the City of Detroit [Michigan] was hiring people for the Detroit Fire Department and I got an application, filled it out, and they called me. And, so, they called me to do the training, and I did something real stupid, I sent a guy in to, to do some of my training for me, and they, and they busted me and I lost my job. Speaker 1: So, you had somebody, you picked, you had somebody to do the training for you and-- Speaker 2: Part of it. Speaker 1: Part of it and then-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, what part, what was it? You were, you're pretty fit a lot of fire department (background noise) training is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was pretty fit. I sent a guy in there to do some of the, you know, the testing and stuff for me and he got caught and so I lost my job. So, I ended up on welfare. Speaker 1: Okay. So, what happened after that? I mean, how long were you on welfare, and what did you do while you were on welfare? Speaker 2: I was, I was, I was in school. I was in art school at that time. Speaker 1: Where? Where were you? Speaker 2: I was over at CCS, the Center for Creative Studies [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I was in art school. Speaker 1: This about 1980--? Speaker 2: Yeah, around eighty--around '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982], okay. Speaker 2: Eighty-two [1982] to be exact (laughter). I was so embarrassed of being on welfare. (Laughter) You know, it was, it was strange, you know, 'cause you go and they send you a check and, you know, you cash the check. And, then you go and you get your food stamps and it (laughter), they give you a Medicaid card, yeah. And, then every six months you would go down there to reapply. And, you had a case worker, and it's in your book that you had to fill out, and they ask you all these question so when you go down there, they, they go over the booklet, they go over this information to see whether or not you're still qualified to, to receive general assistance. But, here is an office you go in and there's hundreds of hundreds of people down there. It's (laughter), it's unbelievable. I will never do it again (laughter). You got all kind of people that's in this office that's waiting to talk to a caseworker and it's unbelievable. It's humiliate- humiliating. Yeah. Story_ID: 485638 Speaker 1: When did you decide to go to art school? Speaker 2: I, I decided that--and I wanna go back. It was when I was working at Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan]. In betw- it was when I was with Mary [ph.], my, my sons' [Tyree Guyton, Jr. and Towan Guyton] mom. And it started when I was at Chrysler [Chrysler Corporation; FCA US LLC, Auburn Hills, Michigan] when we was doing the paint by number paintings and stuff. And, I was in the adult educational program to get my GED [General Educational Development]. Speaker 1: So, you were able to get that? Speaker 2: Got that. And, it was a, and they had an art class. And, this art instructors had me doing--I started off, I started off doing a, I started off drawing. And, from drawing, I was drawing still life, and portraits of people. He said to me, "Do you know anything about perspective drawing?" And, I said, "What is perspective drawing?" And, so, you're working with lines. And, you know, it's one point, two point, three point. You know, you can, you know, you're putting these points up on the paper all the way up to nine point perspective. And, you're drawing from line to line. And, from that you can draw anything; anything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A matter of fact, I got a couple of drawings back there, I can show you. And, this art teacher suggested that I should go to art school. And, I got really good and so, I started drawing buildings and I started doing architecture renderings. Then I start painting. And, I started painting these beautiful landscapes. It was like it just came to me. It just start coming. And, the more I did it, the more I wanted to do it. I mean, to the point I couldn't sleep. I was just painting. And, I got really good and this guy said, "You need to go to art school." And, he asked me this questions, he said, "You know, there's an art school over here, and, it's right in back of the Detroit Institute of Art [Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit, Michigan]." And, he says "It's called the Center for Creative Studies [Detroit, Michigan]." He said, "Do you know about it?" And I said, "No." He said, "Well, I'm gonna make you an appointment for you to go down you see the facilities." And, I did that. And, I ended up in art school there the next time they have open house for them to take you around and let. Speaker 1: So, this is 19--well, yeah, this is 1980, '82 [1982]. Okay, what, did you, were there any teachers there that was special interest to you at that school? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. There was--I had this one--her name was Pat. And, it was a still life class where we go in and we would--I would draw and we would also call in models. And, so we had nude models that would come in and, yeah. Pat, I'm trying to think, I can't remember her last name. Pat Lichten [ph.] or Lichtar, or but she was really special. Speaker 1: Okay. How long, I mean, how long were you in school? Speaker 2: I was there almost two years, CCS [Center for Creative Studies]. Speaker 1: All right. This was like, was it like, like a two year degree program or something? Speaker 2: No. It was a four year. Speaker 1: Four year. Okay. Speaker 2: But, I studied there for about two years and then I, I was over at Marygrove [Marygrove College, Detroit, Michigan] for a couple semesters. But, what happened was that, I ended up dropping out of school because I started the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan]. Story_ID: 485639 Speaker 1: What events led up to you starting the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: I was over at Marygrove and I was studying art over at Marygrove. Speaker 1: This is Marygrove College [Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And, I was in a painting class, and I was studying painting then. And, also we was talking about incorporating objects and applying them to the surface, and that kind of grew. And, then I met another guy who told me that I needed to meet a guy by the name of Charles McGee. And, Charles McGee was teaching an artist-in-residency program at Eastern Michigan University [Ypsilanti, Michigan] and also at, over at Northern High School [Detroit, Michigan]. And, so, I met Charles and took a body of work over for Charles to critique. (Laughter) Charles was really funny. And, Charles is still alive today he's, he's in his eighties. And, and I wanna share with you what he told me. I wanna just be honest. When I went over I took all these beautiful landscapes over and these portraits, and I just put together a nice portfolio and took it over to see Charles McGee. And, Charles McGee, you know, back in the '60s [1960s] he was known as, you know, Charles McGee with these dreadlocks and he was just very vocal. He was talking about social ills and it was really making a statement through his work and everybody knew him. And, he looked at this body of work, and he said, "You in trouble." I said, "What do you mean?" He said, "The institution has programmed you to draw and to paint a certain way. And, I gotta undo what these white folks has done to you," (laughter). Speaker 1: I mean, how did you feel when he said that? Speaker 2: I said, "What in the hell is wrong with his guy?" 'Cause he took a painting and put it on the easel, he stuck his brush in some paint and he began to scumble over this painting that I've done. Speaker 1: Oh, how did it, well, I can image, the artist who paints a picture and somebody starts-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) I wanted to choke him. But, after working for Charles, working with him for three years, I fell in love with him. And, he had a philosophy, he had a message that was so powerful that I just wanted to be part of it. Speaker 1: Well, what was his message? And, how did he think you ought to change, you know, what did think you ought to do with your work? Speaker 2: Well, first he, you know, Charles felt that I needed to know something about black artists. I didn't really know. He said, "You need a balance." I was one-sighted. And, he said, "I wanna give you that balance. I wanna help you to understand something about you." Speaker 1: So, this is your introduction to black art. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, who did he introduce you too? Speaker 2: Oh, he began to talk about Jacob Lawrence, Romare Bearden, Blackwell [Charles Blackwell]. Yeah. I didn't know. Then he told me there are certain books that I needed to go and read, certain artist I need to go and I needed to pay attention to at the DIA [Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit, Michigan]. I needed to go to art shows. I needed to go to New York [New York]. So, I went to New York. And, I met this guy named Robert Blackwell and I--Al Loving. Story_ID: 485640 Speaker 1: Now, how are you sustaining yourself during all--this period of time? Were you, you still on welfare? Speaker 2: I was still on welfare. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, because I was in school, the agency thought it was great, I was going to school and so, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you didn't have trouble from the welfare department or nothing in terms of--? Speaker 2: No. No, they were really gre- proud of it. The fact that I would come down there and when, you know, it was every six months that I had to go back into reapply. And, so, they was excited about the fact that I was trying to do something, so. They was thrilled. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, this is like, so you studied with him [Charles McGee] about four years, or? Speaker 2: Three and a half years. Speaker 1: Three and a half years. Okay. Was this like a, so, were you, it was actually in the context of school or--? Speaker 2: It was an artist-in-residency program and he had gotten this money. It was an outside project for Eastern Michigan University [Ypsilanti, Michigan]. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were considered a, were you considered a student at Eastern Michigan when you were doing that? Speaker 2: No. I was doing, I was just part of this program, but it was through Eastern Michigan. I was just part of it. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was not considered as a student. Speaker 1: So, there wasn't any degree to get out of there-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --or something like that? But-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --you was part of an outreach program-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --through Eastern Michigan-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that he had a, he had a fellowship to reach out to people in the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --community and teach them art and--okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 485642 Speaker 1: Now, how did, how did the idea for the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan], I mean, what was the neighborhood--? Was it--(unclear) during that period of time, Detroit [Michigan] was, a lot of people criticized the city as deteriorating and so forth in those days. I mean, I don't know if your neighborhood was the same or looked better or worse during those days. I mean, you have to tell us, but there's a lot of talk about abandoned places in Detroit. You know, a lot of houses up for grabs, you know, anybody could get a house here, but nobody had a job to sustain it. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: That kind of thing. Is that--houses burning up annually during this so called devil's night thing. You know, that nobody else seem to have in any other part of the country. But, houses just go up in flames, you know, on the Halloween. So, what was Heidelberg [Street] like? Speaker 2: Heidelberg was beautiful. This city has not, I mean, 1967 the riots, this city has been burning itself down ever since. The city has not stopped. And, that's, and that's got a lot of truth to it. Well, back in the '80s [1980s] when the automotive industry started to, to lay off people and, and laying off people affected an economy here in the city. Caucasians folks leaving the city back in the '50s [1950s] that--and me growing up and I had a chance to witness that. That also played a part in the economy dropping. I remember Heidelberg Street being a very beautiful place. I remember all kind of businesses. There was not a vacant, there was no vacant lots during that time. There was no abandoned houses. I didn't see it as a kid. I would come outside and there was houses in every single one of those lots. There was Caucasian folks across the street from me and I could go over a talk 'em, and play and go around to the fish market. Go down to the corner store, and my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] would send me down there to get credit from the guy who owned the corner store. It was a Caucasian guy. There was Italians around the corner who owned the store around the corner on Benson Street and was up on Mt. Elliot [Street], so I didn't see this when I was a kid. Story_ID: 485644 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I guess what I'm getting at is that, you know, Heidelberg Project on that street [Heidelberg Street, Detroit, Michigan], you know, radically transformed the appearance of the street. And, I just was wondering like, what prompted you to, to do that? I mean, what did you see over there that prompted you to want to change the appearance of the street? And, you said, it was beautiful already so, I mean, what did you, what was the motivation and what was your conception of the project and how did you get started? Speaker 2: Well, I started Heidelberg Project in 1985. It took off in 1986. I went away for a period of time. I went to Tulsa [Oklahoma] to, you know, to live for a short time. And, I came back. I left my kids here and my [maternal] grandparents [Mary Reese and Sam Mackey] and them called me and asked me to come back to assist them. Speaker 1: Now, why did you go to Tulsa? Speaker 2: I went to Tulsa because I'd met a friend in art school who suggested that I should go to Tulsa to start over again. You know, she felt that, you know, the city, the City of Detroit [Michigan] is changing and perhaps you need to get away. And, you need to try something new. Her uncle owned, had his own architectural company or firm in Tulsa, Oklahoma and thought it would be great. And, at that time, she was my girlfriend and she thought that her family could be a big help to me. I could go down there and get started and then send for my kids later to come and be with us. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. So, you were there about a year, you said? Speaker 2: It was less than a year. Speaker 1: Less than, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't that long. And, my grandmother got ill first. They called me and asked me to come. It was my uncle, and my grandmother. My uncle had a stroke and asked me to come back and help out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I could stay, you know, there with them. So, I came back and I got back on welfare again. And, I moved downstairs. And, my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] was watching my kids while I was out of town. And, so, I got my kids and so we moved downstairs. The downstairs had been, they remodeled the basement it was, and so, it had the kitchen, bathroom, and two bedrooms down there in the basement, paneling on the walls. And, so, I lived there and I would drive the vehicle for my uncle and take him around and, back and forth to the doctor, and that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 485646 Speaker 1: So, I came back in 1985 and when I came back, it was drugs everywhere in the Heidelberg [Street] area. It was a lot of heroin and then the crack [crack cocaine] came into the equation. And, I tell you, it was like an explosion took place. So, a lot of that, saw people standing on the corners, procrastination. I've, I've witnessed shootouts. Speaker 2: Now, that's, this is the time, I guess, the late '80s [1980s] is when-- Speaker 1: Late '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: Crack hit Washington, D.C., Detroit [Michigan]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --New York [New York], and other places hard, you know, and it started-- Speaker 1: It did. Speaker 2: --to hitting hard. Speaker 1: It came in here like a bad storm. It came, (makes sound), hit the people. And, all of a sudden, I began to see people walking around mummified, just out of it, mentally wise. Speaker 2: Give us in your own words, what do you think the difference is between say, heroin addiction, you al- you had gone through a tragedy with your first wife to a heroin addiction and say, crack cocaine? Crack, crack being different, but how would you explain the difference? Speaker 1: Well, if I was doing a comparison, I know people today and my brother's a living example, he's been using heroin for thirty years. Where you know, you nod and you, you know, you froze. Where the crack comes in there, and the crack just takes you out. It's like (makes sound)! Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. All of sudden you're walking around and all in here is empty. It burns your brain. I mean, it just destroys you. It takes away your dignity, your respect, all of that. Speaker 2: So, there not, do you know any old crack addicts? Speaker 1: Absolutely. I see 'em every day. Sixty years of age, crack head. Speaker 2: So, so it's possible to last a long time in using crack? Speaker 1: You should see them. They look like the walking dead; no teeth, no nothing. Speaker 2: Okay. So, crack, and that was the, like it became like a big staple of the underground economy in a lot of these cities, right? Speaker 1: (Nods head). Speaker 2: Was that the case on Heidelberg? Speaker 1: Say that again? Speaker 2: Were they like selling crack on Heidelberg? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Absolutely. Crack, heroin, all of it. Story_ID: 485648 Speaker 1: And, I just went out there [Heidelberg Street] and in 1980--I, I started in '85 [1985], and '86 [1986] is when it took off. So, '86 [1986] it was, I was, it was moving, people was talking, people was paying attention. And, I didn't go out there trying to save anybody. I just went, simply went out there because I felt like I received this divine vision to go out there and to do something. And, I just went out there and I started cleaning out those vacant lots. The vacant lots, all of those lots had debris in 'em. And, I went out there and decided I was gonna, first thing I was gonna do is clean out the vacant lots and cut the damn grass. I went out there and clean them off and start cutting the grass. And, people start talking. And, the people, some of the neighbors said, said, that I had gone crazy (laughter). So, they called the cops on me and the cops would come over to talk to me, and-- Speaker 2: For cutting the grass? Speaker 1: Cutting the grass and cleaning up the lots. Wanted to know, "Are you okay?" Speaker 2: This is so unusual in Detroit [Michigan], right? For somebody to take on a--? Speaker 1: Because people wait here. We wait for something to fall from the sky. We wait for city to do it. And, then we complain when it's not done. We try to put it on someone else to come in to fix what is right in front of us. We don't believe in that, you know, if, you know, you go out there and do it. You make it happen. Story_ID: 485656 Speaker 1: Now, have you, have you ever heard of the broken windows theory? Speaker 2: You know, I wanna say yes to that. Yeah, I, yeah, I wanna say yes to that, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, that's the theory, just for those who are watching this who had never heard of it-- Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That crime takes place where, in neighborhoods where people don't care-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --about the community. And, that abandoned buildings draw crime. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, they draw squatters, prostitution, drug addicts, criminals and when those buildings are rehabbed, and somebody's living in 'em, or when the lot is cleaned up and, you know, and something in growing in the lot-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, people respect it, then you're like--the crime's gotta go someplace else because it can't, you know, you need those deteriorating, decapitated, broken windows places-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --for a crime to take place. And, that's the theory in a nutshell. It's famous in criminology, and I was wondering if, if some criminologist driving through there hadn't dropped it on you (laughter). But, you weren't necessarily thinking about that when you were doing that, your work? Speaker 2: You know, I had my [maternal] grandparents [Mary Reese and Sam Mackey] living there on Heidelberg Street [Detroit, Michigan], and I took into consideration that it was other folks living there was senior citizens. And, what I saw, I said, this is crazy, and, I wanted to know, how could I make a difference? I also, I began to talk with city folks, city officials. I also began to talk with the church world people. There's a lot of churches in the area, quite a few. And, I saw--what was interesting was that nobody had a plan or a solution. You know, here's government over here, and here's church world over here; two extremes. And, I, I was just blown away that they had no solution, and frankly they didn't care for the most part. They didn't care. Politicians, you know, they was saying, "Well, I don't--I mean, well, what do you want me to do?" Church world was talking this, this ideology of, "We waiting on God, we gonna pray about it." Well, you know, praying and no works, it's in vain. So, you know, you pray but you gotta get up and do something good. So, I saw where people didn't care. And, then the people that was in the neighborhood like the drug dealers and, and the folks who in the neighborhood who was patronizing the drug dealers, I saw where they was in a vicious circle. They was froze in time because it was the heroin. So, you had the heroin addicts and then you had the cracks and crack [crack cocaine] addicts. And, then you had the, the folks who was use--you know, using alcohol. And, then you have people who was using prescription drugs. So, you had a combination of things that was going on right there in that community. And, I began to write about it. I began to document it. Even now, I keep a journal and I, I write about it, and I talk about it. Story_ID: 485657 Speaker 1: So, you started clea- cleaning up the lots at first, mowing the grass [in the Heidelberg Street neighborhood of Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: People thought you were nuts-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, for doing it? Why don't you let the city do it? Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why don't you--? Speaker 2: That's what they said to me. Said, "What's wrong? Why you doing this?" Speaker 1: So, okay, so what happened next? I mean, what--did that--why didn't you stop? And, say, well, look I must be crazy, because everybody thinks I am, so, what? Speaker 2: Something kept pushing me. I found myself dreaming about it. I found myself thinking about it. I kept hearing something. It was like the more I did it, the more I had to do it. It was like something had taking over my life and it was pushing me to go out there, you know. I mean, people was coming by, they was laughing at me and some of the little drug guys told me they was gonna fuck me up. They was gonna hurt me. Speaker 1: That's the expression. Speaker 2: I'll be back, you know. "Who do you think you are, man? Don't come over here with that." And, even though all of that, I kept doing it. My family was afraid for me. Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They that I was gonna get hurt. Speaker 1: Okay, so, doing it meaning cleaning these lots up and-- Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: So, up to this point, it's just clean up, right? Speaker 2: I'm just cleaning. I'm just cleaning lots up and, you know, I was manicuring the area, you know. I had my little lawn mower out there and I was edging up the grass. And, and I just started out just putting some, you know, little things in these lots, you know. It was small things. Speaker 1: Like what? What kind of a small thing? Speaker 2: I would put a, a pedestal out there in the lots. It would be like the base, and then I would just put something simple on top of it. Like, I would put a toaster. And, the toaster had a shoe coming out of it. You know, I mean, here's this lot, and I cleaned it up, and cut the grass, and I edged the lot up, and it looks good. And, I put this piece out there and the folks are mad. Speaker 1: So, a toaster with a shoe coming out of it? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, I got it sitting on a pedestal and it's, and it looks good. It makes a difference. And, the folks are upset. They are outraged. I said, I don't believe this. Speaker 1: So, this is a-- Speaker 2: Then they got mad and said, "You can't use my trash can." So, I would put some of the debris in the neighbor's trash cans, and they wanted to fight. Speaker 1: Okay, so, the stuff that you cleaned up, they didn't want you to use their trash can to, to put the stuff in. Speaker 2: They couldn't see, I was helping them. The vacant lot for the most part was right next door to them. And, they got mad. They got outraged. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, you start with the first piece, a toast and a shoe. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did anybody try to remove it themselves? Speaker 2: Not at first. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, when did they start that? I mean, what, where did you progress (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I mean, what is the next step? Speaker 2: As it grew, you know, I, I began to drive around the area. And, I found old bicycles and, and wagons, and chairs, and tables. And, so, then I started assembling these things. And, so, it kind of grew. And, people--I would put up--I had this--I found some doors and I remember making this door sculpture piece and I put it in a lot. And, so, I would put it up, and I come back and they had, someone tore it down. So, every time I'd put it up, they would tear it down (laughter). And, I kept putting it up, and they would tear it down. And, I just kept doing it, and kept doing it, until the point they got tired of doing it. Yeah. Speaker 1: So, in the beginning were these objects just their natural colors? I mean, like a-- Speaker 2: It started off, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) toaster and shoe, regular shoe. Speaker 2: And, then I just start putting some paint on it, painting it up a little bit. I wanted to take it to another level. Story_ID: 485658 Speaker 1: So, you got a basically a sculpture garden started-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) starting here, right? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So, then you maintained it, manicured it yourself, huh? Speaker 2: Right. I was using my own money, my own equipment. Speaker 1: Found objects, right? Speaker 2: Found objects, and I was just going out there to--you know, here's a neighborhood, I grew up in this neighborhood and I just wanted to neighborhood to look halfway decent. Or, you know, to change the neighborhood because now you got, you got drugs in that area and, so, people, someone would move out. And, so, when they would move out then the drug dealers would move in. And, all of a sudden the house become a haven for people to go and hang out, and selling drugs, and getting high. And, then they would tear up the house, tear up the structure. Police come in and raid the house. And, when the cops would come, the cops come in there, they kick the door in, and kick the back doors in. And, so, owners would come, board the house up. People come take the sheets of plywood out. They would take the window out, the gutters out, and furnace out the house, and it started to go down. Speaker 1: Yeah, there are, you know, there are from what I've seen in Detroit [Michigan], it seem like there are, there are scavengers that go around and pick dwellings apart. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All the time. Especially, in this, on the east side here-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: --you see a lot of that going on here. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's not just local people doing it too. I wanna make that, I wanna make that clear. You know, you also got other folks is coming in outside the city that's also playing a part in helping to, to strip these houses; especially the bricks. The bricks, stained glass windows, and things of that nature. So, it's not only the local people. Sometimes folks come-- Speaker 1: Fireplaces-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --brass fixtures-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --chandeliers. Speaker 2: Can you get a whole, a lot of old historical houses around here and they're people who's coming from outside and they are also, they're part of it. I've seen it. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, we're talking specifically about mostly white people coming in here, right? And--- Speaker 2: That's, that--absolutely. Speaker 1: --and, doing that as well as some blacks. Speaker 2: Absolutely, I've seen it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, there's a market for these things, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. People want these old fireplaces and-- Speaker 2: Yes they do. And, the old brick and especially the stained glass windows. Speaker 1: Yeah, they say it's a difference between the old bricks and the new ones that are being made now. The old ones are better they say. Speaker 2: Right. Right. So, you see people coming in here and you see people hauling the stuff out of here. I've seen it. I was in a situation which one night and I happen to be looking for some stuff and there was some Caucasian folks who was dumping stuff in this alley. Speaker 1: Now, in dumping there's another issue too, right? Speaker 2: It's another issue. Speaker 1: The dumping of anything-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in the community over here. I mean, I've seen like piles of things as you driving around the east side of Detroit. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: If there's a lot and there's often a pile of stuff. Speaker 2: So, I've seen it. I've witnessed this. So, I've seen, I've seen a lot over the years. And, in seeing a lot over the years, it has made me do what I do. And, it has made me a fighter. Story_ID: 485659 Speaker 1: What happened with the shoes? I know that the first, I think the first article I ever read about Heidelberg [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan] was when I was living in Chicago [Illinois]. People were talking about a brother in Detroit [Michigan] who's got shoes hanging from trees. And, you know, "If you ever go Detroit, you ought to see it, you know, you ought to see these shoes." What, what (laughter), were you aware that that was the first, well, one of the first, I guess, publicity pieces I've ever hear about Heidelberg was about the shoes. What was the shoes about? What were the shoes about? Speaker 2: Well, the shoes, there were several stories that I heard about the shoes. It started with, it started with my [maternal] grandfather, Grandpa Mackey [Sam Mackey] who was born in 1897. And, my grandfather told me several stories. That was one story he shared with me that his, his, his brother was auctioned off as a slave and he never saw his brother again. And, then there was another story he told me, he, he was a young boy and he was walking through a field and he saw a person hanging from a tree. And, I said to my grandfather, I said, "Well, what did you actually see?" And, he said that he saw the person moving and swaying with the wind and he said, he saw the soles of his shoes. That's what he told me. Then, there was a group of homeless people who came over, they had no place to live and they was living in these boxes, cardboard boxes. It was over by the Jefferies Projects [Detroit, Michigan]. They had no place to go. So, they took over this vacant land and the city sent in the police and told the people they had to go. And, so, the people put up some resistance. And, the police came in there and they used force to move those people off of that land that was owned by the city. And, they came over and asked me could I talk about their plight? And, I said, "Well, what do you want me to say?" And, they said, "I don't know. Can you say something?" So, what came to me was to cover the whole street from corner to corner. And, I put six thousand shoes in the street. And, people was driving over 'em. People was laughing about it. And, the neighbors went crazy and the police came and, and all hell broke loose and then I, I was on trial. I was found guilty and had Dr. Robert Farris Thompson from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] to come testify for me. Speaker 1: About when did this happen? Now, had--were you well into the project by this time? Speaker 2: Oh, this was in the '90s [1990s]. This is-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is ninety-- Speaker 1: So, this well into the project? Speaker 2: This is '90 [1990], '91 [1991]. I mean, it's off and it's running because I'm going on the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], and I'm going on '20/20,' and primetime. I mean, it's, I mean it's jumping now. Story_ID: 485660 Speaker 1: All right. Now, l- let me go back a little bit before that then. I mean, so, you were cleaning the lots off. The--you started a little sculpture garden. I mean, how did it, just to, just kind of give us like a chronology of how this, how it got, you know, bigger and bigger and--? Speaker 2: Yeah, it kept growing. I, it started with the lots. And, then from the lots there was a house that was on Mt. Elliot [Street] and Heidelberg [Street], and it was a house and prostitutes was living in this house. And, I went down because they got to the point, they just, they just totally got outrageous with their behavior. And, they--you know, people was going down there, they was tricking with 'em. And, they was out there in, it--they just lost respect. And, I said, you know, "As soon as I get a chance I'm gonna transform that house." And, I remember the police went in there, I believe, and they raided the house. And, when they raided the house, I went down and I started covering the house with baby dolls. I put baby dolls all over the house. And, people called it, start calling the house the Baby Doll House. And so, from that, then I started doing the other houses in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Now, that's a huge house. We, I mean, it's often--I think we've even driven passed it at least three times since we've been in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 2: Well, that's the second one (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right on Mt. Elliott and-- Speaker 2: That's the second one. See-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There was one before that one. And, that house is called Party Animal [Party Animal House]. But, it was the Baby Doll House, and-- Speaker 1: Wait a minute, why, now, why did you decide to put--now, you, well you often use teddy bears, stuffed animals, baby dolls, and actually nail them to these houses. And, what gave you the idea to do that? And, what are you trying to do when you do that? Speaker 2: Well, in the case in the baby dolls, the baby dolls kind of spoke to me. And, the house boarders told me to put baby dolls on it. So, I'm standing back, looking at this house, studying this house, house is speaking to me and this house tells me to put baby dolls all over it. I didn't have any baby dolls. But, I put the word out, I was looking for baby dolls. Someone came over and said this lady died and she left her, had a baby doll collection. And, they gave me thousands of baby dolls to put on this house. The baby doll is a reflection of the nakedness of the people in the neighborhood. It was a, it was a reflection of our children growing up in the neighborhood that's being exposed to all of that. It was just, there was no respect. It was--people was not trying to hide themselves. They was not trying to cover up. They was just out with it. So, the baby dolls that I put on the house, they, some of 'em had no clothes on 'em. And, so, they was naked, and the people got upset and they said that I was promoting pornography and (laughter). And, so then the city went crazy and people start raising hell about that baby doll house. Then we had traffic jams up there on Mt. Elliott. People stopping, looking, taking pictures. Speaker 1: Well, what was the feedback? I mean, some people said they thought it was pornographic. Well, what did other, I mean, what was some of the other reactions to this house covered with naked baby dolls? Speaker 2: Some people thought it was just incredible. Here are these baby dolls and I had set 'em up in such a way that appeared that they was moving. Because I had 'em in different directions and I had 'em coming out of the windows. And, coming out of the door, the door of the house. And, standing on the porch. And, the house was just covered with baby dolls. And, so, it's like, here's this, this house that's covered with baby dolls. And, but, I was talking about the people that was once living there. You know, the, the prostitutes and the nakedness of the women that was in that house. I was just only reflecting what I saw, what came to me. So, I, so, I heard a lot of things, you know. And, one neighbor said that the baby doll house was gonna make his house catch, catch on fire. And, the baby doll house was magic. I heard that it was voodoo. So, people began to call me the voodoo man. Story_ID: 485661 Speaker 1: Well, it's certainly a powerful image when you see these, when you drive by one of the houses that you've treated with the paint, bright colored paint, often polka dots, different patterns that you usually don't see on a house. You see 'em covered with stuffed animals, different colors and stuff. And, people, you look at it, I think, it doesn't generate emotional reaction, you know. That is, I don't know how it's, it has something to do with innocence. There's a sentimentality, a love that comes out of you when you see this, you know what I mean. It's a, it's an experience like no other in a way, especially in surrounding us in, 'cause everybody's had a teddy bear I think, you're look at, you know, you hug this teddy bear you gonna be able (unclear) on a house, in this rough situate- you know, community. And, it, I think it makes people think about innocence and what's really going on out here. Speaker 2: But, also at the same time, you have people growing up--you-- Speaker 1: All right. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: There are people growing up in that area [Heidelberg Street neighborhood of Detroit, Michigan] who because of what's happening today, they don't have. There are kids growing up today who don't know what it means to have a present or a gift during Christmastime. I witnessed that. And, in my case, growing up we, my mom [Betty Solomon Guyton] was on welfare so we got Goodfellow [Old Newsboys' Goodfellow Fund of Detroit] boxes. There was times she could not afford to buy us things. There was times I had hand-me-down shoes. There was times I went to school and I had to put cardboard in the soles in my shoes to prevent my foot from getting wet, 'cause I didn't have shoes, no lights. I had one pair of pants and I would come home, I had a couple pair of pants, let me take that back; one, one. I had one pair that I would wear to school and take those off and put on my play clothes because we didn't have. She went to the secondhand store, rummage sale to buy for us. So, it's a way of taking what I didn't have and putting it out there to talk about it. There are times that a lot of craziness goes on in the household and we try to keep it inside. And, I wanted to take what was going on inside and show the world because there are other people that can relate to it. Story_ID: 485662 Speaker 1: Now you started doing this in '86 [1986], but okay, by 1990, what did Heidelberg [Heidelberg Street, Detroit, Michigan] look like? Speaker 2: Heidelberg was unbelievable. Nineteen ninety [1990], the whole world was coming. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Everybody. Speaker 1: Now, what was the first positive attention that you received? I mean, was it prior to 1990? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990], 19--1990 I did my first story with People magazine. And, then from People magazine it was Newsweek magazine, and then it just took off. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, it has not stopped, not stopped. We got a phone call yesterday from Paris [France]. It has not stopped. It's grown, it--so it's known all over the world. Story_ID: 485663 Speaker 1: Now, you know, stuffed animals and--are often used as a, as a way that people, I don't know if the Heidelberg [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan] started first or the people, or the, this, you were inspired by the people that put stuffed animals at the sight of a murder or a big tragic accident where someone's killed. Speaker 2: We started that. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Started; because I have, I was putting animals on the trees and all of sudden people began to create these shrines-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --all around the city; shrines. Speaker 1: Okay. So, it started here in Detroit [Michigan] where you, stuffed animals were used to commemorate the loss of, especially young people, to violence and so forth, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a similar situation where people--and, one that comes to my mind is that over on Max Street [ph.], there was a fire many, many years ago. And, I knew the family and the family and people asked me to come over there to do something in honor of these, it was five kids that got killed in a fire, a house fire. And, I went over there and I created a piece to, they asked me to make a statement, a comment about what took place there. And, so, I went over and created it. And, so, these shrines have just been popping up and people using these animals. I would say that, I think it has a lot to do with Heidelberg and my use of animals, stuff animals, and dolls, and stuff of that nature to go out there and to use it in a way where I'm talking about, I'm using as an art form to make a comment about something. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, yeah, just recently in Chicago [Illinois], there's a disaster at the E2 nightclub [Chicago, Illinois] that made national news where-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --people died-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --were basically crushed in a stampede to get out of this nightclub where the doors opened the wrong way. So, they-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --fell into the stairwell. Speaker 2: I heard about it. Speaker 1: The whole place was covered with teddy bears within a week. So, there're reverberations in what you do all over the country now, I guess, all over the world I imagine. I don't know. Story_ID: 485664 Speaker 1: But, I would have to say this here, what, what I do it's, it's not new. I mean, this is nothing new. The world itself is an evolution that never stops, and life repeats itself over and over, over and over, over and over. I mean, what I'm doing it's been done, many, many years ago, you know. As I sit here and I, and I talk to you, I mean, I think about the, the pyramids. I think about the Sphinx [Great Sphinx of Giza], I--how going out and just creating these sites. And, I think it all stems from creativity; this energy that never stops. When I die and leave this place, somebody's gonna do something else that's gonna be talked about, that's gonna have a powerful message, that's gonna be heard around the world. You know, the world itself, the universe, and the moon, and we've been told that it's all round. And, I use dots that's a circle that talks about life and how life repeats itself over and over. Speaker 2: Okay. So, there's cer- there's certain, there's a certain amount of symbology in what you're doing. I mean, the symbols mean something-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --to you. I mean, is there, is there a specific meaning for say, the teddy bear for you when you put that up? Or, you mentioned the dots. What are some of the other symbols and what do they mean? Speaker 1: Well, you know, on the project [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan] there's an artwork that's called the 'Noah's Ark.' It's a boat with all of these animals in it. It's a bible story that I heard growing up as a child, you know. And, taking that and playing with it into, turn that into an art form to show the world, to share with them my opinion of how I think it should be. So, here's stories. The shoes up in the tree. You know, my [maternal] grandfather [Sam Mackey] shared with me about this guy he saw that was hanging from a tree. Putting the shoes up in that tree. If our soles could, if those shoes could talk what would they say about the person that once wore those shoes? Where are those people? Story_ID: 485665 Speaker 1: What was the upshot of that trial where Robert Farris Thompson came to testify on your behalf. And, Oprah Winfrey gave it attention. What happened? Now, what did they charge you with? Speaker 2: They charged with littering, and malicious mischief. I was sentenced to community service. I was fined. But, it's not the first time I've been in court. 'Cause if you know anything the project [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan], I've been duking it out with the city for years. 'Cause city has been trying to say that art should look a certain way. Art is something that you put in an institution. You cannot put it here in a residential area. You got too many white people coming to see what you do. Speaker 1: (Laughter) These criticisms. Speaker 2: We gotta stop this. You got, they came over once and they wanted to count the traffic that was coming and so they put a counter out there. They was counting the traffic flow. We get 300,000 people a year to come. I've met people from close to a hundred counties. Speaker 1: I've been traveling on- all, all over the world. Our last project that we did, a film project, was with HBO. We won an Emmy Award for that documentary that came out. It's entitled, 'Come Unto Me: The Faces of Tyree Guyton.' I'm gonna be talking with a guy later on today about another film project. Speaker 2: Okay. Have you been asked to go to other neighborhoods in the country to do similar projects? Speaker 1: I've been asked, I'm in the process now of working on some kinks to go back to South America to do several projects in South America. I spent some, Jenenne [Jenenne Whitfield] and I, we been to South America twice working with them, connecting the product and sharing with people with philosophy of the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan]. Also, share with them our film. I was in Australia 2004, I did a big project there in Sydney, Australia with Aborigines in that country. Hopefully, this year, I'm gonna be going back to Australia to do some research and to working on other project with Aborigines in that country. Speaker 2: Okay. So, so, is it, so is, I guess, you're getting grant money, you were telling me the Joyce Foundation [Chicago, Illinois] gave you some money. But, this isn't the, this is just one drop in the bucket of a lot of different grants and support you've received since you started this. So, you're not, you're getting a lot of-- Story_ID: 485675 Speaker 1: Now, one of the surprising things you said, it's not really surprising but, you said earlier that you were criticized among--for many things--but one was bringing too many white people to the neighborhood [Heidelberg Street neighborhood of Detroit, Michigan] (laughter). Now, did this--? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --surprise you that white people were interested in what you were doing? Speaker 2: I was blown away. I never really thought about at first. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No you wrote the check yesterday. Speaker 2: It wasn't until they pointed it out to me that I had other folks coming, you know, that I--and to be specific, white people coming. Yeah, these folks also went as far as to tell, they told city council and they told the mayor and then the council had a problem with the city council. And, they went as far as to say, "Well, these white people like it and move it out there into their neighborhood." And, it became a, a big issue. And, what I was trying to do, and I had this one council person who said to me that, "I understand what you're doing." And, they even had a chance to talk to some of the neighbors and he was saying, "Why don't you guys put on your business hat and think of a way to extract what you need from these people that's coming over to see this art display." But, people couldn't, they couldn't see that. So, it was kind of funny, yeah, to hear those kind of comments. Story_ID: 485676 Speaker 1: What did--how did it get--well, I guess, just by being in the media, it reached the international audience. So people come here from all over the world to see this, that you (unclear) for, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah. Well, one, one thing lead to another and, you know, I mentioned earlier that it started off with--there was a local guy by the name of Peter Gorillavich [ph.] who worked for the Detroit Free Press, he wrote an article. And, then there was a lady who came here from People magazine, he had wrote this big article, and then there was Newsweek, and, and it just took off. And, then I found myself being invited to, to travel to New York [New York] and, and it just kept growing. And, it became this runaway train that was unstoppable. And, and, now, you know, looking back twenty years later, 'cause we just celebrated twenty years last year. If someone had've told me that I was gonna be spending twenty years working a project like this project [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan], I don't think I would've believe it at that time. And, it's like, I was asking myself, twenty years, and I guess when you're having fun or when you're doing something that you, that you like doing, twenty years can go past just like that (snaps fingers). Story_ID: 485677 Speaker 1: Now, when did you kind of realize and organize it as a business where it's a non-for-profit, it's a non-for-profit organization, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it is. It's a non-profit. Speaker 1: And, how did you organize it and when did you first organize it as such? Speaker 2: Well, I need to, I'm going to answer your question by, by setting the stage to, to answer your question. In 1991, the city demolished 85 percent of this project [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan]; 1991. Speaker 1: In '91 [1991]? Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 1: Okay. This is after the trial? Speaker 2: It was after the trial, the first trial. See, it's been-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Lots of trials, several trials (laughter). In 1991, the city demolished about 85 percent of it. In 1999, the city demolished the product again. And, that time they took away about 45 percent of it. But, in 1992, I started to put it back together. In 1993, I had this young lady that came over, this very sophisticated young lady that came over. She drove down the street and I thought she was being kind of cocky and it was Jenenne Whitfield. And, at that time she was working for the bank. And, she rolled her window down, I thought she was trying to be a smartass and she said, "What is all this shit?" You know (laughter). And, I told her to get out of the car, and I remember she asked me a question, she said, "Why would you put polka dots all over a house?" And, I gave it back to her and I said, "Why would a contractor paint a house one color?" Yeah. And, so, Jenenne came into the equation and she saw the importance of structuring this project to give it some legs and to give it some arms, so that it could take on shape and form and become what it is today, which is a very powerful organization. And, with her help and her skill and her ability, we have been able to set it up so that we're having our non-profit ID number. And, as you can see now, it's a business. So, we're running a business. But, it's, it's under her leadership that we was able to do this 'cause she had the ability to make it happen. Speaker 1: Okay. And, you all got together and are now married. Speaker 2: We did. We got together and we are husband and wrif- wife running a business. She keeps me in my place too. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: She's feisty. Speaker 1: So, she provided some organization capacity for-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --for the project? Speaker 2: She did. I mean we go-- Speaker 1: A lot of it, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, we go at it at times. We argue and fight but, but, you know, it's with her skills that we are able to do what we do now, you know, structuring this thing and setting up meetings like, setting up to bring you guys here and making this possible, so. She does all of that. Story_ID: 485678 Speaker 1: Now, how did the, how did the--Detroit's [Detroit, Michigan] had a black mayor for a long time and majority blacks on city council, how did the politicians treat you when you first started doing this was--Coleman Young was in office then, right? How did he, how did he react to the Heidelberg [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan] phenomenon? Speaker 2: Well, if you knew Coleman Young, Coleman Young was the kind of person he spoke what was on his mind. And, it was under his watch that the '91 [1991] demolition took place. And, I met Young, and Young knew about the project. But, he had to do that because he needed to shut-up some of the people in the neighborhood. They was bothering him and he was frustrated with the fact that they kept calling his office. And, the reason why we are able to, the reason why we was able to weather the storm is because of Mayor Young. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He said, I'm gonna tear it down. But, you know what you gotta do. You put on your business hats and you go ahead and do what you need to do. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he actually thought that, you know, it had potential, you know, he saw it as good, but he had to react to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --political pressure, you know. Speaker 2: See, going back I didn't understand that, that aspect of what it means to have a business or learning how to play the game. I didn't understand that. I didn't wanna do that. And, I remember there was a guy by the name of Bill McNeice [ph.], and Bill said to me one day, he said, "You're gonna have to learn to play this game that we call (gesture) politics." And, I said, "I don't wanna get involved in that stuff." He said, "Hey, you can't get around it." So, Young kind of set the platform, set the stage for me to kind of understand that and then bring Jenenne Whitfield who deals with a lot of politicians and those bureaucrats and folks downtown. And, being at it for twenty years, you kind of learn and understand what you need to do in order s- to survive. Story_ID: 485679 Speaker 1: Now, did you ever, have you ever reached a point where you, you did something like, say, six thousand shoes in the street, did you say, well, gee maybe I shouldn't've put six thousand of them in the street or something? Or, maybe that was an imposition on a neighbor? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I mean, you know, you gotta drive over the, and you know, and your neighbors must be saying, why me? Why do I have to drive over six thousand shoes? You know, if he had've done this someplace else maybe, you know, why us all the time? I mean, you ever have, feel well, maybe, maybe where I am imposing too much on my neighbors? Speaker 2: I thought about it, but at the same time I felt that my neighbors are imposing too much on me. Because at the same time they was sitting back and they was tolerating this, this craziness, this madness. You're gonna complain or you're gonna come at me, and then folks over here, right across the street from you, right in front of you selling drugs, and you say nothing. But, I said, "Come on, bring it on," because I gave them a reason to talk. They was, they was very low key, they kept it under the radar. And, in my case, I said, "I'm gonna bring you out of that box, and we're gonna have a dialogue." So, I get them a reason to call government where before they had no reason to call government. And, me, doing what I did gave them a reason to government. They became very vocal. I helped them. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is like shock treatment for the neighborhood (laughter). Speaker 2: They needed it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They needed it. And, they need those white people coming over; they need that. Story_ID: 485680 Speaker 1: Well what's been the most surprising aspect of this project [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan] other than art work itself? I mean, what's the most surprising thing? Speaker 2: There're so many stories. It's, it's so many (background noise). I was on a project one Saturday and a station wagon came down the street. It was full of people and it's--and the folks parked the station wagon. It was an old station wagon. It was white. And, they parked the station wagon, and I was standing there, and these folks got out of the station wagon and this lady was running up and down the street. She was tall, Caucasian, blonde, and I said, "Who in the hell is that lady?" And, she was running around the street and that. And, I thought she was crazy, you know, 'cause she didn't have any shoes on. And, I later found out it was Bea Arthur. Speaker 1: Oh, who played Maude [Maude Findlay] on television. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The actress. Speaker 2: So, I've met all of these actresses and actors and [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons' been over to visit, and Run-D.M.C., and it's just been unbelievable. And, then there was folk singer, Pete Seeger. I walked down the street with him over on Heidelberg [Street] and he told me that he made a song many years ago called, 'Little Boxes.' And, he talked about the people in my area, in that project, who are living in these little boxes afraid to come out. Story_ID: 485681 Speaker 1: What is there, what's your future plan for the project [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan] now? Speaker 2: The future is that I'm working on big project with Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan] and I'm gonna create a, I gonna create a sculpture work, which is gonna be this piece here ['Invisible Doors,' Tyree Guyton]. And, this piece here consist of doors. And, the doors are gonna be fabricated out of steel. And, it's gonna become a permanent piece at Wayne State University in conjunction with the celebration of Dr. Reid [Irvin D. Reid] who is the president of the university. And, it's also part of the, the Joyce award that I received. Speaker 1: I'm sorry, the what? The-- Speaker 2: The Joyce. Speaker 1: Joyce Foundation [Chicago, Illinois]. Okay. Speaker 2: The foundation. Speaker 1: Yeah. Right. Speaker 2: Who made it possible for me to create this sculpture work for the university. So, that's my next project and I'm gonna be flying to Los Angeles [California]. I'm gonna go out there and I'm, I'm gonna be hopefully if it goes right, I'm going to be doing a big project in Los Angeles. So, I'm gonna fly out there to, to talk to them about that project (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Have you had any collaboration with Watts Towers culture center [Watts Towers Arts Center] in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]? Speaker 2: Not at all. But, I've been out there and have seen the Watts Towers and I've talked to some of the folks in that area. And, and then I'm gonna be going to New York [New York] in about two weeks. I'm gonna be going to New York to work on a project, and to do a lecture, and to do a talk. There's so many things that's coming up. I got a book ['Connecting the Dots: Tyree Guyton's Heidelberg Project'] that's coming out with Wayne State Press [Wayne State University Press, Detroit, Michigan], I believe next month. Jenenne [Jenenne Whitfield] shaking her head, and saying that's not right. June the book is coming out. Speaker 1: Now, I heard there's a children's book out now. Speaker 2: There's a children's book that's out. Speaker 1: A course at Wayne State-- Speaker 2: A course at Wayne State University. Speaker 1: --being taught and titled, The Heidelberg--Social Action: The Heidelberg Project [ph.]. Speaker 2: That's correct. Yes. Speaker 1: Twenty-two interns coming this spring to help (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. We are working on it right now. A matter of fact, a couple of them has been here and knocking on the door, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Absolutely. It's, you know, it's unbelievable, you know, I look back at my life coming up and sitting here having this conversation with you today, I never thought it. I never would've dreamed that it was gonna end up the way that it's, you know, looking at what's happening today. There's no stopping it now. And, there's so many possibilities that are out there and I just wanna tap into 'em. I wanna open 'em up one at a time, open 'em up, unlock 'em, and let 'em happen. Story_ID: 485682 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. This is a completion interview, the second half of an interview that was begun March of 2007 [March 8, 2007]. And, we are still--tell me where the location is please. Speaker 2: We are at the Franklin-Wright Settlement [Franklin-Wright Settlements, Inc., Detroit, Michigan], which is where our office is located at-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: And, this is in, what s--? Speaker 2: Detroit, Michigan. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 485683 Speaker 1: You were talking about some of the things that you hope to do in the future, in, in March. And, some of those things have already come to pass. Let's talk about some of the things you talked about. One was about the South American project, the other is about Australia and working with the Aborigines. Tell me, what do you hope to accomplish working with a project like the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan] in Australia? Speaker 2: Well, a project like the Heidelberg Project in a city such as Sydney that is located in Australia, going over, I've been there three times and meeting with the Aborigines in that country, we're talking about people. People just like us. But taking that same energy that I created here to another place, another location, but its energy to create something in that country. It happened to people to work with me to help to create it. So, I'm excited about that. Story_ID: 485684 Speaker 1: You also said that your book would be coming out in June. June is here. Has the book-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --made its arrival? Speaker 2: Yeah. The book is coming out this week and the name of the book is 'Connecting the Dots: Tyree Guyton' [sic. 'Connecting the Dots: Tyree Guyton's Heidelberg Project'] so, yeah, the book is out. Speaker 1: And, what does the book entail? Speaker 2: Well, it's a twenty-year retrospect of the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan]. And, it consist of photographs of some of the artwork that's on Heidelberg [Street]. We invited different writers to also play a part in helping to create this book, such as Jenenne, Jenenne Whitfield. There's a young lady by the name of Aku Kadogo who also wrote for the book, and she lives in Australia. And, then there's John Beardsley from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So, extremes. Story_ID: 485685 Speaker 1: Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan] is another project that you were working on. Tell me about it. Speaker 2: Well, Wayne State University last year came to us and thought it'd be great to create a partnership. And, in creating that partnership, we had twenty-two student from Wayne State University that was working with us and we kind of divided them up. And, we had 'em working here in our office and I'm working with a sculpture student. I'm also working in the sculpture department over at Wayne State University. So, along with doing that, this project grew to the point now I'm being asked by the university to create a permanent sculpture work for the school, for the campus. Speaker 1: Okay. And, tell me about the sculpture. Speaker 2: Well, the name of the piece is called 'Invisible Doors' [Tyree Guyton] doors. And, this whole concept just blew my mind when I start studying and I've been writing about it, every day, these doors. And, we are in and out of doors every single day of our life. But, then I found myself wanting to go deeper, and I wanted to talk about the doors of our minds, and how do we open the right doors in the way that we think when it comes to life, finding those doors of opportunity that would take us from one place to the next. So, this whole concept about doors, that's just taking me to another level, so it's gonna be a door piece. Speaker 1: And, tell me about the, the structure of the, of the piece. What is it made out of and what, you know, materials did you use? Speaker 2: The piece is gonna be made out of steel. And, to be more specific, it's gonna be made out of a picarow [ph.] steel. The doors are gonna be kind of floating and twisted and, and we're gonna create this beautiful composition using primary colors. It's gonna be about fifteen, about thirteen feet height wise. It's gonna weigh, it's gonna weigh over a thousand pounds. And, as I sit here today talking about it, the fabricators, the engineers are fabricating the piece now as I speak. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that's gonna be a permanent fixture at Wayne State University? Speaker 2: It's gonna be a permanent piece at Wayne State University (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 485686 Speaker 1: You also teach a class, a social action class there? Speaker 2: I, yeah, I'm working in the (laughter), yeah, we was, yeah, I was working in that, yeah, they asked me to be part of that program. And, that led to me working in the, the foundry, or working with the sculpture students. These are also, honor students, so, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, tell me more about that. What is social action? I mean, that's the title of the course? Speaker 2: Yes. There is a course at Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] created that centered around the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan]. Me, creating the product, I wanted the students to study my method of, of art. And, dealing with social issues, dealing with government people, and just everyday people; and, how do you make it work. So, it was real, real interesting to have them to play a part in that. Speaker 1: Talking about your philosophy or the philosophy of the Heidelberg Project. Has the philosophy changed in the last twenty years? Speaker 2: No, the philosophy has not changed. I would have to say that I have changed somewhat. And, I'm at a point where I'm fine turning the philosophy now. I can--it's like second nature now. And, I understand it better now than before. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what do you think has happened to help you get to this point of better understanding? Speaker 2: I think it has a lot to do with time. Time will do two things. It'll grow you up or you'll stay the same, but time is gonna continue to move. So, in knowing that, I found myself wanting to grow up and open up my mind, my understanding to, to put more knowledge up in there, in my head. Speaker 1: So, what is it that you share with the student as far as that's concerned? Speaker 2: Well, here's a project that's located in an area that was h- really hit hard during that 1967 riots. And, getting the students to think outside of the box, I truly believe living in today's society that tradition and convention is not, it's not gonna work in today's world. So, how do you tap into those new possibilities? For me, my philosophy is to think outside of the box and to venture off into space, and to try something new. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what I'm telling the students. Story_ID: 485687 Speaker 1: Now, you were talking about the dots, and that's a big part of, of the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan]. Tell me about the dots or the circles. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That circle, those dots has gotten me in a lot of trouble over the years. But, it started way back. It started with my [maternal] grandfather, Grandpa Sam Mackey who loved jellybeans. My, me fighting with city government to keep the art project where it's at today, which is on Heidelberg Street. The city wanted to come over and to get rid of it, and we talked about a plan B, or a second phase. And, he loved jellybeans and, and what came to me was to use that same concept, jellybeans which reflects different shades of people in the world. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, this thing grew. So, we polka dotted a house and then I told the city that I was gonna polka dot the whole city if they came over and if they took down the project. So, they took down part of it. I started polk- this whole movement of polka dotting the city, and other people came out to play a part in it, and there are polka dots all over the city. But, for me it was a metaphor that, that helped me to understand life and how life repeats itself over and over. The world is round. Life, we travel in a circle, you know, we live to die and then we live again. It never stops. Here's a circle. I'm also inclined to believe that there are other planets, and it's a circle, round and around, never stopping. Story_ID: 485688 Speaker 1: What else do you want to share about the project [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan]? Thinking back over the last twenty years, what do you see, say in the next five years that you would like to happen for the project? Speaker 2: Well, (laughter), this project is so big now, it's a, it's a machine. And, it's kind of running me now. And, I've just learned to listen to it. Even today before I came here, I was out there just walking around listening to the project. And, after twenty-one years, I'm at a point now where I understand what it means to be an artist. You learn to listen and the work will tell you what to do, where to go. And, that's what I'm doing in my life. Along with that, I'm also writing. And, Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] is also, along with everything else that's happening, Wayne State is gonna do a film. So, that's a documentary that they're working on too that's gonna go along with this year. I'm gonna be with some filmmakers tomorrow and having them to follow me around the city. As I look back, and I go all the way back to the beginning of this project, and if I had to do it all over again, would I change anything? No. Ups and downs, the walls of life, the rain storms, all of it has made me the person that I am today. I'm so appreciative that I had a [maternal] grandfather [Sam Mackey] who gave me a paint brush at the age of nine and he said, "Paint the world. Learn to see the wind blow." And, at that time, I couldn't understand it. But, as I look back now today, it means that all things, in time, will reveal itself to you. And, that's where I'm at today. Taking a product and creating a project in the area that African American mortality rate is 55 percent. Seventy-five percent of the people are below the poverty level. And, giving some hope back to a community where government people said, or officials said, "Well, it's no hope." You gotta be able to see it. So, I wouldn't change a thing. I'm so happy that I decided to stay in there and to fight for what I believed in. Story_ID: 485689 Speaker 1: Because this information, your, your story is going to be available to the future generations, what would you want to say to the future generations? Speaker 2: You know, as I look at young people today in a world that is just, it's just crazy, through all of that craziness I believe what's important for young people to do is to find themselves. A lot times we find our chasing materialistic things and, and we realize that what we have been chasing for many is self. And, once you find self, and you make peace with self, then you can fly. And, then you can help to move this nation into the future. Story_ID: 485690 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I often said to people that when I leave this world, on my tombstone I want them to write, no regrets. And, living every day like this moment to the fullest. Learning to make me happy. So, no regrets. I did what I was put here to do and it's gonna live on. And, I think people are gonna be able to, to see it, and I think it's gonna speak for itself. That I created a medicine that will help to change people's paradigms. Story_ID: 485691 Speaker 1: Is there anything else about the project that you would like to tell us? Speaker 2: All I can say today concerning the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan] is, that it's growing. It's growing (laughter). It keeps me extremely busy and this pro- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you--I'm sorry, when you say it's growing, what do you mean, it's growing? Speaker 2: Well, what I mean by that is that there is no limitations to it, you know, and the city, city officials said, well, contain this project, con- stop it, control it. You can't control magic. You gotta let it be. Speaker 1: So, after all of these years, you are still fighting with the government about this project? Speaker 2: Yes. There are times we're still fighting. There is old residue from many, many years ago. There are some people who love the project and you have those who don't like it. And, my job is to try to find a balance. But, at the same time, in trying to find a balance, I keep moving. I keep moving it. It's gonna become a museum. It's gonna become a ghetto outdoor museum. Something totally unique, different, it's nothing like it--I've seen nothing in the world like it. So, it sets precedents for, for other cities and places to learn from. You know, what do you do with the ghetto? What do you do with an area that's been beat down? How do you change that? Speaker 1: Going from a time where there were abandoned buildings and opened fields where you started your project, now you're at the point, or are you at the point now where you could actually own these buildings or own these lots, so now, you know, you can make this, this outside museum? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me about that process and how that has happened for you. Speaker 2: Well, when I first started off, I had no structure. And, I needed people that could help me to structure the project and that's where Jenenne Whitfield comes into this equation. And, then we have our legal people and then we have our architects that we've been working with, the U of D Mercy [University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan], and also the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] that's been helping us to structure this project. So, over the years I've learned the importance of having structure. So, in having structure it makes it possible for us to go in there and to purchase the lots and to do what we need to do, and to get our permits, and to send the right people downtown to make it happen. Speaker 1: Okay. And, it makes it a lot easier for you to now to do whatever your artistic expression is in those particular areas. Is that right? Speaker 2: I would have to say, yes. It makes easier for me because, you know, trying to deal with all that other stuff for a long time I was crazy as hell there, you know, 'cause I was trying to deal with all of that other stuff and that's not my expertise. Speaker 1: So, so what are you fighting with the government or whoever does not approve of the project, what are you fighting about if you own this land and want to use it, you know, for art? Speaker 2: Well, the fight that I'm having today is not the fight that I had, that I had in the past-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because in the past the government came over and tore it down. We, we bring more to the table now because we on, own the lots. But, for a long time, government had said that art belongs in the institution of museum, you know, it needs walls and all this crazy stuff. Well, what I've said to them, the problem is that we have institutionalized everything and even people. That's the problem. And, so, trying to get government to understand that we're living in a different time today, and let's explore new possibilities. And, so, for some of them, it's hard for them to understand that because, you know, they see dollar bill signs and, and they like to be safe. And, I think that we live in a world where you can't be safe all the time. You gotta stand up and sometimes make a decision that most people might not understand. But, you understand that it can work for all people and not just for a few people. Story_ID: 485692 Speaker 1: So, five years from now, what do you expect to happen? Speaker 2: Well, I (laughter), I don't know, I might be living in Sydney [Australia] 'cause I love that country. I plan on writing a book. I plan on having a studio someplace in another country. I mean, I don't know, as I sit here, it's just so many possibilities because last year I had a chance to go to Paris [France] and I went to Venice [Italy]. I went to Amsterdam [the Netherlands], and I just fell in love with all of these possibilities, you know. And, people are saying, hey, why don't you come here and stay for a period of time? And, so, five years from today, who knows I might be in one of those countries working on a body of work-- Story_ID: 485693 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your family. I know you told us the story about how you met your wife [Jenenne Whitfield] and, you know, how she plays a huge part in this project [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan]. But, what about your sons today? Speaker 2: Well, (laughter), I have four sons and I have a daughter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Tell me their names. Speaker 2: We have Tyree, Jr. [Tyree Guyton, Jr.]; and we have Towan [Towan Guyton]; we have Omar [Omar Guyton]; and we have James [James Guyton]. And, then it's Tylisa [Tylisa Guyton]. (Laughter) I have James my third oldest son, he's incarcerated. I mean, Omar, he's incarcerated. James the youngest son, he's in school. He's gonna be a school teacher, educator. My oldest son is a, he has his own business. He's a contractor. And, then it's Towan who's a mechanic. And, Tylisa wants to go to law school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, extremes. Story_ID: 485694 Speaker 1: When it's all said and done, tell me how do you plan to keep this project [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan] alive after say, you're gone and--is there a transfer of the heart somewhere coming along or are you working on that so that this project will have somebody at the helms? I mean, I don't except you to leave here any time soon. Speaker 2: (Laughter) You never know. Speaker 1: (Laughter) But you know, so many times a wonderful project gets started and then when the person is gone, it just stops. Have you put into place some way to make sure that this project keeps going? Speaker 2: Well, that's one of the, something I wanna go back to, something I said earlier about structure. I say the importance of writing a will or getting that in place, because you never know. You know, life is so unpredictable. We can be sitting here now talking and leave out of here and be hit by a car or have a heart attack, it's unpredictable. I just try to live every day as, like it's my last. But, yeah, I do have a will that's in place and there are people who we are training to carry on, you know, if I'm not here. Young people we're working with, a team of young people, training them to be little docents and to have them to carry this project on because this project is gonna live on. I know it. It's not gonna stop. I might stop but this project is gonna live on. And, even if the city--you know, if the city took it away, which is not, it's not gonna happen, it's gonna live on, you know. This project has been documented and I met Oprah [Oprah Winfrey], been on her show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] and you know, been on the 'Hard Copy' and all of it, you know. Then, the films that has come off of HBO, the documentary and, and it's gonna live on, one way or another. Speaker 1: And, in, you have also won an Emmy [Emmy Award], Emmy, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Won an Emmy. Speaker 1: And, a mention at the Sundance [Sundance Film Festival]. Is that right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. I had a great time at the Sundance. And, so, the product has won nine awards. And, along with those nine awards, I won the Emmy Award. Story_ID: 485695 Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you like to tell us, either about your life or the project [Heidelberg Project, Detroit, Michigan]? Speaker 2: Yeah. There's something I'd like to, I'd like to share and I often share this with young kids when they come. Over on the project there's this tree and today this tree has taxis all over it. And, prior to me putting the taxi on this tree, the tree was covered with bicycles and I called that piece 'Non-Stop' [ph.]. You know, the bicycles because life is like, it's a non-stop journey. And, there was a bicycle that was on this tree and it was red. And, it had a basket on the handlebars. And, I love birds. I'm a person, I love birds. I love listening to 'em, and I love watching them. And, this bird build her nest in the basket which was attached to the handlebars. And, I would watch this bird go every day to look for food to take back and to feed her babies. And, she had three of 'em in there. And, the day came, and all of a sudden she just knew that they was ready to fly. And, she positioned them on the handlebars of the bicycle, all three of 'em. They're sitting up there and look so goofy and, and the mother bird knew that today is the day. And one by one, she took her wing, the left wing and she began to push those baby birds off. She did the first one, and she did the second one. And, when she got down to the last one, he put up some resistance. So, she flew away. And, she stayed for a period of time and then she came back. And, she tried it a second time and he put up some resistance, he wasn't ready. And, she took off again. And, she came back. And, that third time she pushed him off the handlebars and he was falling and right before he hit the ground, he caught himself or he got his balance, it came to him. And, he began to fly. And, at first he was kind of, it was kind of rocky for him and all of a sudden he began to level off and he really got into the swing of it. And, he took off. I see life the same way. And, when I'm talking with young people, when I'm talking to visitors when they come over the see the project, my job as an artist is to get up in people's heads and to help them to fly up here and to realize that we have this whole world that's waiting on us. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Well, I wanna thank you for taking the time to--because I know you're very busy--to complete this interview. And, just wanna say thank you from The HistoryMakers and that it's gonna make a great difference in the African American archives. Story_ID: 485703 Speaker 1: This photograph of myself is back in 1986 when I first started the project, and this house is called Fun House. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell us about this one, please. Who, when and where. Speaker 1: Well, this was the Heidelberg Project [Detroit, Michigan] and that the photograph that you're looking at is my [maternal] grandfather, Sam Mackey. We call him Sam. His real name is Sam Mackey but we call him Grandpa Sam Mackey. So, that's back in 1986. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a project called the Tire House. And, this project was located on a, on Ellery [Street] and Hunt Street. It was right across the street from a Detroit [Michigan] public school. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: This piece-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This piece is called the 'Last Supper' [ph.]. It's a table and it's hot chairs on top of it and the legs of the chair, they have shoes on them. And, this piece is located on the Heidelberg Project. It was created around 1988. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Go ahead. Speaker 1: This right here is another house. It's called Lost and Found [Lost and Found House]. It was located over in the project in that area on the street called Elba [Place]. Created around 1990, around 1989. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 1: This is a piece that was created around 1991, '92 [1992]. And, it's called the 'Rosa Parks Bus' ['Move to the Rear: Rosa Parks Bus'], and, it was bus that was located on Heidelberg Street. Speaker 2: This here is a flag piece, around 1992. It over on Heidelberg Street. It's part of the whole flag series. Speaker 1: The Shoe Tree. That's the story that my grandfather told me about lynching and this piece is also over on the project. Even today, it's still there. It started back in 19--1989. Speaker 2: And, this right here is a, the street itself; Heidelberg Street to be more specific. And, in this photograph you'll see houses and trees which are covered with artwork. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: This is the Heidelberg Project and it's during the winter season. We get a lot of snow here and so, this is the Heidelberg Project during the winter season. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: This is the, this piece is called the 'Oval Office.' It was created around 1989, 1990. And, it's a series of vacuum cleaners and they have gloves on 'em, the handles. Located on Heidelberg. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: This is part of the face series. A piece that was created around 1991. And it's over on Heidelberg, and it's in one, it's in one of the lots. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 2: This is an old photograph of myself back around 1989, 1987, and that's myself, my grandfather and my cousin on Heidelberg. Speaker 1: These are some old drinking fountains that was donated by this--from the city. And, I got these drinking fountains back in the early '80s [1980s]. They brought 'em over and donated them to the Heidelberg Project. Speaker 2: And, this is a door installation. When I started the project back in 1986, I came out and I created a door series. And, one of these doors, we're--this door series we're gonna take it down to Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan]. Speaker 1: And, this right here is the bus before we transformed the bus and made it very colorful. This is an old 1955 bus. Speaker 2: And, this is a photograph of the 1991 demolition, or 1992 when the city came over and demolished part of the project...