 Story_ID: 7573 Speaker 1: Your full name and spell it for me. Speaker 2: Okay. It's August 12, 19--I'm sorry, 2002. My name is Edward G. Gardner. "E-D-W-A-R-D" George, "G-A-R-D-N-E-R". Speaker 1: "G" what? Speaker 2: "G-A-R-D-N-E-R" Gardner. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you go by any other names? Speaker 2: Nope. Sometimes they call me Eddie, but generally, Edward. You know. Speaker 1: What about Mr. G? Speaker 2: Yeah. Sometimes they call me that. Yeah. Speaker 1: And your birthdate? Speaker 2: February 15th, 1925. Speaker 1: Okay. And birthplace? Speaker 2: Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: What side of the city were you born? Speaker 2: South Side. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) St. Luke's Hospital [now Rush-Presbyterian-St Luke's Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois]. Think it was St. Luke's. Story_ID: 7574 Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: Just regular. You know, soul food. Grits and eggs and bacon and very little red meat. Mostly chicken and fish. Speaker 1: And your favorite time of the year? Season of the year. Speaker 2: Probably spring and fall. Speaker 1: Favorite colors? Speaker 2: I guess probably green. Speaker 1: Deep or medium shade of green? Speaker 2: Medium. Nature types of green, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Where is your favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois] (laughing). Story_ID: 7575 Speaker 1: Now would you give me the names of your parents and--give me the names of your parents and spell them for me. Speaker 2: Okay. Eva Gardner. "E-V-A" Gardner "G-A-R-D-N-E-R". And my dad's name was Frank "F-R-A-N-K" Gardner "G-A-R-D-N-E-R". Speaker 1: And your sisters and brothers in order? Speaker 2: I just have one brother, Frank Gardner. Story_ID: 7576 Speaker 1: What is your favorite saying? Speaker 2: As far as business is concerned? Probably, "Don't no one monkey stop the show". Story_ID: 7577 Speaker 1: Think back a little bit and tell me what comes to mind when you think of your favorite sights, sounds, and smells of childhood? Speaker 2: Oh I guess probably shooting marbles in the alley. Speaker 1: Okay. That's--and what about sights. Is it just the whole marble thing or--? Speaker 2: Yeah. You know, as far as early childhood. And we spent a lot of time playing in the alleys and so forth, in the fields. We grew up out on 91st [Street] and Michigan. And that time it was primarily all fields and a few--very few houses. Speaker 1: And did you win a lot of marbles? Speaker 2: I had my can full. I had a coffee can full. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. What are your first memories as you go back when you were growing up in the Gardner household? What comes to mind? Speaker 2: Early, early period? Speaker 1: Early. Speaker 2: Well I can remember we used to live at 420 East 43rd [Street]. I guess I must have been about a year--year old. And I can remember looking up at--from--I was in the backyard--And looking up the--at the various porches on the various other buildings that we lived in. Second, third, fourth floor buildings. I can remember as a little boy seeing those floors up there from the backyard that we used to play in. Speaker 1: And what kind of playing--what kind of games do you remember playing? Speaker 2: Very little at that time, you know. Of course, once--when we got out at 91st we played football, baseball, basketball. Not basketball. Football and baseball primarily. Story_ID: 7578 Speaker 1: Can you individually describe your mother [Eva Gardner] and your father [Frank Gardner]? What kind of things come to mind? Speaker 2: Okay. My dad was a pretty exact type of person. Very structured. Very little no nonsense type of person dedicated to raising his family, earning a living--enough to take care of his family. My mother was very, very compassionate. Very personable--very loving person. And really was concerned about raising Frank [Gardner, Jr.] and I, you know. In an enjoyable type of neighborhood where we played and had a good time. But she really I think was the person we spent most of the intimate times with. At least I was and then, of course, my dad. He was just all business, as far as taking care of the household and providing the food and so forth, for the family. Speaker 1: Where were they from? Speaker 2: My dad was from Bessemer, Alabama. He moved up here with his family. I guess he was about maybe five or six years old. That probably was around maybe 1910, somewhere in that period of time. And my mother, she was from Chicago [Illinois]. But her background is she has relatives from Indiana. And also on her side there's the Indian side. She was--her grandfather and great-grandfather was part Blackfoot Indian from Oklahoma. Story_ID: 7579 Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about your grandparents? Where they're from. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. My great--not only my grandparents, but my great-grandmother. Ma Babe Speaker 1: Oh. Okay. Start with her. Speaker 2: She came from the south with my grandmother and my grandfather and, of course, my dad [Frank Gardner] and his brother. His brother's name is Bill [Gardner]. And I would say that she--I can see her now. She was this--interesting that you asked me that question. Because I like to tell this story. She, complexion-wise, she was not real fair. But she was a light, light I would say colored person at that time. They were called colored. She wore a house dress just like a cotton house dress. I could see her now. She'd always play the policy. And occasionally I would loan her a dime, so she could play a gig. And she could never win. But she'd say, "Don't worry I'm gonna pay you back when my ship comes in." But she--I think the risk part of my philosophy of living probably came from--We called her Ma Babe. That was my great-grandmother--came from her side, 'cause she was always playing the numbers. That was probably back in 1930, '31 [1931] or '32 [1932]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: How old were you when your great-grandmother died? Speaker 1: My great-grandmother died when [daughter] Terri [Gardner] was born. So that must have been about, I guess forty-four, forty-five years ago. And I must have been about thirty-one, thirty-two, something like that. Speaker 2: So, she lived a long time? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And she was born in Bessemer [Alabama] too? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Bessemer, Alabama. Yeah. Yeah. She was born with perhaps, and I'm sure her parents must have been--she was probably the product of rape at that time by non-blacks, you know. Because her daughter, which was my grandmother, was fair as any white person you have ever seen. She was fairer than my great-grandmother as far as complexion is concerned. And so she--I think Ma Babe must have been born about 18--maybe '60 [1860] or '70 [1870], you know. And Ma Georgie must have been born--Her name was Georgie Gardner. She must have been born, I guess, around 19--or 1880 or 1890. Somewhere around there. Yeah. Speaker 2: So she was--was she a free person or just--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. Yeah, both of them were free. Ma Babe was born around 1860 or '70 [1870] but she was a product of probably a white person who raped her and produced my grandmother. And my grandfather at that time who--he lived to be--I was in the service at that time. I guess it must have been--must been around 1944 or '45 [1945] when he passed. He came up. He was the head of the household at that time. My grandfather and my grandmother, my great-grandmother. And then some other friends came up from Bessemer at the same time. Alabama. So they ended--and then, of course, my father was born in Bessemer and his older brother Bill was born in Bessemer too. So they all came up here together. Around 19--oh I guess '05 [1905] or '06 [1906] or '07 [1907]. So around that period, when blacks were moving from the South. Early part of the period. Speaker 2: Your great-grandmother must have had some really good stories from time to time. Do you remember any of them? Speaker 1: No, she didn't--we didn't talk too much with her. She was busy working in her garden. And we loved just to, you know, go over and see she and, of course, my grandmother. But she was primarily a housekeeper. You know, helping my grandmother and so forth. My grandfather worked at Karpen's Furniture Company when he was up here in Chicago [Illinois]. And--as a laborer. And he got my dad a job there, as a laborer too. And my dad's top salary there was $19 a week. He asked for a raise and almost got fired. But he was dedicated too. At that time, we built our home out at 91st and Michigan [Avenue]. That's when Sears [Roebuck Corporation] was building homes. And so I think we were about the second or third home built say between 91st and 95th Street on Michigan Avenue. So at an early stage in--in their lives they were concerned that we moved away from the inner city--inner city which was 43rd [Street]. That's were we lived 420 East 43rd. And we moved out--I guess, I was about three or four years old. Or maybe two or three years old when we moved out to 91st and Michigan. Speaker 2: So that was like suburbia? Speaker 1: Yeah, it was really 'cause I think, at that time, the street cars stopped at about 63rd Street, you know. Yeah. Speaker 2: And your grandmother, did she have--you have a--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah, she was great. She was a good cook. Yeah. Whenever she had chitterlings, she would always invite me over 'cause I was the only one who eat chitterlings. And my dad wouldn't eat'em. My mother wouldn't eat'em, nor my bother. But I was crazy about chitterlings. She was a great cook. Yeah. Story_ID: 7580 Speaker 1: And do you remember any stories, from your parents, about life during the time when they were young or as you were growing up? Speaker 2: Not the stories that they told. And perhaps, as I said, my dad [Frank Gardner] did not communicate too much with us. He was primarily more concerned with seeing that we got a good education, taking care of us in the home and at school and so forth. And my mother [Eva Gardner] too, but my mother occasionally talked about her sister. She had I think three--two other sisters. And also it is interesting. She told me that when she was, I guess, about oh eleven or twelve years old that's when the flu epidemic hit Chicago [Illinois] and a lot of blacks died. And her mother and father both died. And her older sister had a white fellow who was her boyfriend. And that family took in my mother and her other sisters. And she lived with them. That was down in the--I guess around 18th [Street] or 19th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue] around that time. That was during the time, I guess when things were a little bit more civil as far as accepting different people. It was an Italian--yeah. No. Yeah, Italian family that took them in. And raise them until her auntie took them and cared for them out in Robbins, Illinois for a while. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your parents have an opportunity to get schooling? Speaker 2: I think my dad--I think he might have got a elementary school education and my mother no more than an elementary school education, yeah. Story_ID: 7581 Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories of your early years that you want to share with us? Something that stands out? Speaker 2: Well, you know, we were primarily, you know, raised in a beautiful home where a mother [Eva Gardner] and father [Frank Gardner] both loved us and cared for us and looked out for us. But we had very little as far as things of so-called value, clothes. We never had a bicycle and things like that. We got by, you know. And that was around the Depression period of time too. But I just see some kids in the--I say we may call the rough part of Chicago [Illinois] right now, out playing baseball and playing in the alleys and so forth. And I said, "Well they're having a great time. 'Cause we had a great--." I didn't know I was poor, you know. 'Cause I would go out in the mornings and we would play marbles. We'd do this, or we going to school. And we did pretty good in school, but none--the--I would say the monetary things were not a factor in our enjoyment of life, you know. We just and, of course, lived out in the fields. We'd go hunting snakes and so forth. But playing baseball in hot weather from morning to night, you know. We would just enjoy life that way. Speaker 1: Speaking of baseball the old Negro Leagues were popular back then. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Did you ever see any of those games? Speaker 2: Yeah. We went to see them at Comiskey Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Yeah. Speaker 1: What type of child were you growing up? Speaker 2: I was a little skinny fellow. Very, Very competitive. Always wanted to do the things my brother [Frank Gardner, Jr.] could do. 'Cause he was older than me and larger than me. And I liked to run with his friends and so forth. But I was always short and skinny. And I would compete though in all the games. Football games. Baseball games, you know. Story_ID: 7582 Speaker 1: When you were growing up, did you have any particular dreams or aspirations? Speaker 2: Not in particular. Really I didn't. Really I would just--I finished high school. [Christian] Fenger High School [Chicago, Illinois] at that time was only about--well my graduating class of about--around 1,500, there were three blacks. And I would say that after--as soon as I got out of school, which was in June, I went in the service in July. And that was World War II. And that was the first time I'd ever had a chance to leave home, you know. And I went over to [Fort] Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania, basic training. We were in the transportation corps, being taught to learn how to load and unload ships. One experience I had that I might wanna tell you about. A friend of ours--well Wilbur is dead now. Wilbur Tuggle. His brother is an attorney here in Chicago [Illinois]. I think he's still alive. But Wilbur died. And another fellow, we were in a theater in Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania, on the military base. What we wanted to see was not on our side and we went into a so-called white base area where white troops were. And so we got there kinda early. So we sat in about the fourth or fifth row. We were sitting there waiting for the movie to start. And all of a sudden a big MP [military police] about six foot five, came there with his club out and said, "If you don't get out of those seats, I'ma bust your head open." Now here I am a soldier now, in Pennsylvania, serving the country. And he said, "You don't sit in these seats. If you wanna sit, you sit up in the back balcony on the far side. That's where the black troops should sit." So that was my first really realization of discrimination. You know, I've had others since then. But I was a young kid of eighteen years old, enjoying going--happy to be in the service. Happy to serve our country. And to be treated like this, it was kind of a shock for me. But I learned later on that that's--was that time part of American life. Speaker 1: What went through your mind at the moment? Speaker 2: Well we first started to try to rebel, you know. And then he was serious, you know, this is a white MP. He was really gonna hit us. And so we decided to leave the theater. And we went to the manager of the theater. And he said, "Well, you know, the black troops they always sit over there. They sit up there, you know, when they come here." So it was accepted, but we didn't wanna accept it. But we got no help from the theater managers. And certainly the MP was in no mood to do anything but hit us in the head. Now here we were, soldiers like he was. You know, fighting for our country, you know. And he wanted to physically abuse us. So that stuck with me, and always has. And another experience I've had: I remember one time, we were--we were unloading ships out in I think it was probably off the coast of New--we were in the Philippines then. And we were pretty far out in the bay. And we saw an American battleship coming toward us. And all the sailors--well at that time, you know, blacks in the Navy were just mess--mess cooks and things like that and servants to the officers. So they started waving to us. And we were waving to them. And as the ship got closer and closer, we thought they were saying hello. And when it got closer they were calling us all kind of black niggers and monkeys and so forth. And so, you know, this was in about 1944, overseas now. I had been--now at that time I had been already in New Guinea and the Philippines. But that's the kind of treatment that many blacks were exposed to. You know. And because there were so few blacks on the--in the Navy and all these white people on the side of the ship calling us all kind of monkeys and baboons and so forth. And we were where we thought they were just friendly, you know, sailors. But nah. They were treating us like they treated us back in the States. Story_ID: 7583 Speaker 1: So how did you keep yourself from getting really angry with these--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh I think that made an impression on my life. And I think why probably I'm so competitive right now, because I haven't forgotten the treatment we have received for many, many years going back to when my great great-grandmother was raped in America. So I think when you see some of the things that I do or have done, perhaps behind this, I feel that I--I'm being sure we get our share of the American life that I was in the service for. The American life that was never really given to my great-grandmother and my grandfather, even my father [Frank Gardner]. 'Cause, you know, he started working at--finally when he left Karpen's [Furniture Company, Chicago, Illinois] he got a job at the U.S. Government as a electrician. And keeping in mind a highest--A grammar school education is all he had. And that was about 19--I guess in the early--late '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. He got a job at the U.S. Custom House and he rose to be their senior electrician there, with just a grammar school education. So I know the sacrifice he made to take care of his family, raised a good kid. And I just dedicated myself to always to try to compete. And also when it came to an opportunity to show that we can achieve as much as anybody else. We do. Like the program we're [Gardner Investment Partners, L.P.] in now, with the House of Kicks [Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. There's been no--to my knowledge--Afro-Americans building a family fun center of our magnitude in any city in the country. And we have done that now to the extent that our competitors are now trying to copy what we have done in the last four months. And they've been doing this for many, many years. They didn't think perhaps that we knew enough about the industry, to compete with them. And I think right now we excel as far as Chicago is concerned. Story_ID: 7584 Speaker 1: Your elementary, middle and high school, name them for me? Speaker 2: I went to at that time, Ryder Elementary School. That was at 91st [Street] and--93rd [Street] and State [Street]. There was three portables, by the way. Speaker 1: R-I-D-E-R? Speaker 2: R-Y-D-E-R". R-Y-. And then I went to Burnside which was a branch of [Christian] Fenger High School [Chicago, Illinois] over on 90--92nd [Street] I think near Cottage [Grove]. And then--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Can you Spell it. Speaker 2: Burnside, B-U-R-N-S-I-D-E. Burnside Elementary [School, Chicago, Illinois]. And then the second and third and fourth year, I went to Fenger High School. It's at 111th [Street] and Wallace [Street]. That's F-E-N-G-E-R Fenger High School. Speaker 1: So you went in the service right out of--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And then in school I was just an average student. I was--my brother [Frank Gardner, Jr.] was pretty smart. He was on the honor society and so forth. I was about a G student. And I did win a art scholarship in my last year to Ray-Vogue School of Art [Schaumburg, Illinois, now Illinois Institute of Art-Schaumburg] . After I came out of the service I spent three summers going to school for art to become a pro--a professional artist. Speaker 1: That's right. I was gonna ask you, how you got interested in art? When did your talent for art start? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh all the time, when I was a little kid I used to draw cartoons and so forth. I wasn't really good. There was a fellow named Ralph Benton. He was better than I. He could really draw. And Ralph had all kind of problems. I would check on him. He went into the drugs and everything else. He went downhill. But we were great friends in grammar school and high school. But he was just a talented artist. He could just look at something and there it is. You know? Speaker 1: But you got a scholarship so--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: And to Ray-Vogue? Speaker 2: Ray-Vogue School of Art. Yeah. Speaker 1: And you finished? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. I did oil paintings, line drawings and so forth. Speaker 1: And what about that painting you have at home. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Which one? My nude. Speaker 1: Yeah. The one--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. You know someone stole my nude painting. Speaker 1: They stole it? Speaker 2: Yeah. Or it's been misplaced. Anyway, I can't find it. And that was my favorite. I did that with a pallet knife. And--but I'm gonna have to do another one. But I really enjoyed doing, you know, painting, line drawings, oil paintings, clay. Worked in clay a lot too. Story_ID: 7585 Speaker 1: Did you teach art? Speaker 2: In elementary school. Yeah, when I first started teaching. Yeah, when I finished [Chicago] Teacher's College [Chicago, Illinois, now Chicago State University]. I spent a little time--most of the time when I was in the school system I spent as an assistant principal at Beethoven [Elementary School] and at Altgeld Gardens [Chicago, Illinois] and Carver [Primary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: So you went from Ray-Vogue [School of Art, Schaumburg, Illinois, now Illinois Intitute of Art-Schaumburg] into Teacher's College into teaching? Speaker 2: Well when I was at Ray-Vogue, I just did that in the summer. And see I was in Teacher's College at the time. I came out of service. I think I spent a year--well a semester at Wilson Junior College [Chicago, Illinois, now Kennedy-King College]. And then I went into Chicago Teacher's College. And I spent four years there. And I got a master's degree, at the University of Chicago working--going to school primarily in the summers' 'til I built up my hours and then I'd do sometime--after school. But mostly I would do that in the summer. Speaker 1: What did you like most about teaching? Speaker 2: I would say working with youngsters from public housing projects at both Robert Taylor [Homes, Chicago, Illinois] which is Beethoven and also Carver's in major housing projects complexes. And I just enjoyed working with the youngers and the families and the mothers. They were trying to raise kids the best they could by themselves. And the experience at Carver was great. We had great mothers out there who did a great job. And some fathers in raising their kids. Story_ID: 7586 Speaker 1: In your years--you were a young man when Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] was really happening. Do you have any--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Bronzeville--I guess are you talking about in the 19--if I can place this period of time, in the 19--early '30s [1930s] and probably early '40s [1940s]. Yeah. 'Cause we'd go to the Regal Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] and the Met [Metropolitan] Theater on 47th Street. Owl theater [Chicago, Illinois], you know. Speaker 1: Hold it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: We're gonna change tapes. And I want you to tell me a little bit about the Bronzeville. Speaker 2: You've got two more minutes. Speaker 1: Oh two more minutes, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, you know, I can recall how we would go to the Regal often to see great bands like Duke Ellington, you know. It was just a great experience to see the ladies come out with big beautiful pastel gowns and so forth. And they would do shows all day long, you know. You see a movie and you'll see a concert and with great musicians, great bands. And I really enjoyed that. As far as spending more time, because once we moved out south to 91st [Street] and Michigan [Avenue], we didn't get to that area--that part of the inner city that often. Speaker 1: But when you were like--you were an adult--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) When I was an adult. Yeah. Speaker 1: Later. Did you frequent that area? Speaker 2: Somewhat, somewhat. I was primarily in school or in the service. And I went from school right into the military. So that was about three years. And I was twenty-one years old when I came out. And went to school for four years. After that we got married and started raising a family and trying to make a living. Speaker 1: Did you go to Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Went to Club DeLisa several times. Story_ID: 7587 Speaker 1: There was Sadie P. Davis. And she was just a dynamic person who concerned. This was at Ryder [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Ryder branch concerned with the youngster there helping them--helping us grow and learn as much as she could. And then we had Mrs. Hutchinson. She was a very helpful person. And they were--they were the black teachers all--well I think I had one gym teacher that came from the main branch of Ryder to teach us physical ed who was white. Everybody else was black. And we had portables with just a walkway between the buildings, you know. Wooden planks to walk on between the buildings. And we had three or four grades in each of the--each building. Speaker 2: And when you got to high school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Well both of those were big schools. You know, [Christian] Fenger [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and even Burnside [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] which was an elementary school and high school at that time. But it was a large school. And, of course, Fenger was just as it is right now. Real large school. Speaker 2: Did any of the teachers impress you there? Speaker 1: I would say one. And this was at Burnside. Her name was Miss Bailey. And she was telling the class one time, "Well, you know, that really only Americans are blacks and Indians." And she told the class which was about 95 percent white. And I guess a lot of the white kids couldn't understand what she was talking about. But she said, "These are the only real Americans. The Indians, the Native American Indians and black people." So that was interesting. I remember that. Speaker 2: Okay, so you went into the service out of Fenger? You came back and you did your Ray-Vogue [School of Art, Schaumburg, Illinois, now Art Institute of Illinois-Schaumburg]. You did--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well yeah. I came back and went into Wilson [Junior College, Chicago, Illinois, now Kennedy-King College] for a while. I think a year. And then I went to Chicago Teacher's College [now Chicago State University]. And I went right into, you know, trying to take care of a family, you know. Story_ID: 7588 Speaker 1: That brings us to how did you meet? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We met at--she [wife Betti Ann Gardner] was going--attending Wilson Junior College [now Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] at that time. I think I had just started in Chicago Teacher's College [now Chicago State University]. And we became friends and we went on dates together and so forth. And her mother worked at Shoop [Math-Sci Technical Elementary Academy, Chicago, Illinois]. When I was out at Shoop Elementary School as a practice teacher. So I thing that kinda helped me (chuckling) get close to Betti. 'Cause I knew her mother. You know? Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you have four kids--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: Adult kids now. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And I notice that you bring a lot of the sense of family to your family life. You want to--Wwas this a conscious effect or you was just going on automatic pilot? Speaker 2: Well I was--well I think when Betti and I first got married we--First of all we bought our lot out there at 91st [Street] and Michigan [Avenue]. There was a vacant lot there. And we weren't even married then. We bought that lot for something like $1,500. 'Cause we were gonna build our house. We were thinking at that time. And that's when we got married in 1950. So that must've been about the time we started saving for a lot. And then we got married. And then I think we lived with my mother [Eva Gardner] and father [Frank Gardner] for maybe a year, year and a half. And then we--we started building our home and--the same place where it is right now. It's a little large. 'Cause we added a section on to it. But we've been in that block since I was two or three years old. Speaker 1: Hmm. That's amazing. So what is--that kind of sense of stability is like-? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well because I guess, you know. 'Cause was--that's where we were raised, you know, as two boys growing up with a family. A mother and father who had done a good job. Very good job in raising children and were dedicated to making life good for us with a very, very small income. Story_ID: 7589 Speaker 1: But material things were not that important to us, you know. I think we--because we were--we realize that you had to achieve to be successful in life in America. So we were always trying to do something. Even when I was a youngster, I was selling 'Chicago Defender' and 'Pittsburgh Courier'. In fact my brother [Frank Gardner, Jr.] started selling them first. And they told me I was too young and too small to be selling papers. And finally they got the point they--I worried them. So they finally let me start selling the 'Defender'. And I got so I had a bigger route than my brother had. You know. So I just liked dealing with people and selling. I went all the way over on LaSalle Street, far west. And I just enjoyed meeting people, working with people and enjoying the beginning phase of learning what business was about. You know. Speaker 2: Okay, that's interesting. Does Frank live near you? Did he? Speaker 1: Frank lives at 83rd [Street] and Indiana [Avenue]. Little bit different personality than I. I would say he was very concerned with success in school. He did well in school. He also attended Chicago Teacher's College [now Chicago State University]. And I was--I was following his example to become a teacher too. Even though, you know, I didn't know if that's what I really wanted to do. But it was a livelihood. It took care of my family. And then, of course, the concept of becoming a businessman must've always been in back of my mind. That's why I started working for a beauty supply company part-time in order to supplement my teacher's income. 'Cause we only made--My top salary with my two degrees--my top salary was $10,000 a year. And I knew I couldn't raise four kids properly with that kind of salary. So I had a part-time job selling beauty supplies in beauty shops. And the same thing. I went all over the city. Knocked on doors, not only in Chicago, but in every major city in the country trying to get Soft Sheen started. Speaker 2: It was almost akin to your newspaper days. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. And I was just naive enough to feel that we could compete with Johnson's Products [Company] and Revlon at that time, and anybody. You know. And we had very little--almost no money. But we had a lot of guts. A lot of drive. And we produced our own products initially. We manufactured our Soft Sheen hair and scalp conditioner and our pressing oil and so forth. And it got to the point where one summer [wife] Betti [Ann Gardner] and I realized that, you know, that I've gotta make a decision. Either go back to school or doing this full-time. But I was making more money part-time selling hair care products than I was as a teacher. So we just decided one summer that we were gonna walk away from that job that I had for fifteen years. And friends were telling my brother, "has your brother lost his mind? You mean he walked away from that job as an assistant principal to start selling hair care products up and down the streets of Chicago. And that dirty jacket on, that cardboard box under his arm"." And so, you know, a lot of folks thought that really, I had made a major mistake in my life to walk away from my successful secure job as a school teacher. Story_ID: 7590 Speaker 1: And what was going through your mind, other than you wanted to make more money to continue to take care of your family? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I--I just enjoyed life. I could always see successes, you know. When you're working a beauty route, you said, "Okay. I've covered all the shops on 47th Street [Chicago, Illinois]. Now the blacks are moving out further--79th Street." So as the beauty shops built up out there, I got a new group of customers. I could go out there. They had recommended for me to come out to their shop on 79th Street or on 75th Street. And it just kept growing and growing. And so I felt one day, "Look I think I can make one of these products." Especially something as simple as a pressing oil and hair and scalp conditioner. So I just went down in the basement and started playing with some petroleum and curling wax and colors and so forth. And I said, "Well this is a good looking product." And I bought myself some glass jars. Glass jars was about five inches long--it was so long you couldn't even get your fingers down in the bottle. That shows how little I knew about marketing and so forth. So I told one of my beauticians that I was selling hair care products. She said--I told her, "Look I got a new product. I'm gonna bring it to you next week." She said, "Okay, bring it by. I'll try it." And I took it by her shop. And she said, "I'll tell you next week what I think about it." And I took that by her shop. And I just so proud that I put this product in and screwed the top on it. And had a paper label on it. And I got back to her shop. She was--her name was Penny Morris, 229 East 50th [Street]. She said, "Mr. Gardner, where ever you got that product from, don't ever bring it back here again." It was just that bad. You know. Of course, being a businessman that didn't stop me one bit. I went back in the basement and started putting my pot back on again and started taking some wax out and doing a lot things to it. And finally she says, oh she says, "Just like it is. Don't bother it. Leave it just like it is." And Betti [Ann Gardner] wrote down the formulation and so forth. So that's how we first started with our product of Soft Sheen Hair and Scalp Conditioner. Then we got enough nerve one day to go to Walgreens. You know how big Walgreens is. And to try to sell it to Walgreens. And at that time, Johnson's [Products Company] was selling tons of products. He was--Ultra Sheen was so big. And--but the buyer there was a white fellow named Mr. Blaney. And he was tough. And he won't buy nothing from no body unless you're really good. So I got an appointment to see Mr. Blaney. And I went in there and showed him the hair care product and so forth. And I talked to him and talked to him. He said, "Why should I buy your product? You explain why should I? You got a paper label on, I never heard of before. Why should I buy this product?" I kept on talking. He turned around and told his secretary, "Give me one of those new order forms." And that was the thrill of my life for him to give us our first order in Walgreens. And we--I remember we had a little dog. And all the kids and Betti we backed up into the warehouse out in Melrose Park [Illinois]--to the Walgreens warehouse. And that warehouse, the doors were about, I guess a good half a block long. Warehouse doors. And we had a Hillman Husky, which I paid $100 for. And it just barely made it out there. And he gave us an order for, I think it was twelve dozen. And we only had--I think we had four dozens in a box. So we only had four boxes to deliver. We went out there and to deliver our product and the warehouse fellow threw the door open. And he saw this little bitty truck out there and all these kids. And he threw his skid down on the ground. And we put these three boxes on the skid. He said, "Is that it?" I said, "Yeah oh yeah that's it, you know." Just--he thought I got a truckload order or something, you know. But yeah, that was the thrill of successes. No matter how small they were, we appreciated that. We worked hard to get that and, of course, I know one time, I was at an affair. And Mr. Walgreens was there. And I told him that story. And he really enjoyed hearing about how really, how one of his buyers gave a small black company an opportunity. And I guess it must have been seven or eight years later. We were twice the size of Johnson's Products Company. So yeah, we--we were determined to be successful in everything that we tried to do in the hair care business. And, of course, we found a lot of lovely people who helped us. And my sons were very important Guy, Tracy and Gary. Of course, [daughter] Terri was involved with Brainstorm Advertising Agency. They just did a marvelous job. They were cheap. Have--we didn't have to pay 'em much. Very little. 'Cause we didn't have any money to pay 'em. But they enjoyed working with the company and seeing the successes that we had. And they all wanted to work in the company. Sometimes youngsters now of successful families try to shy away from what their parents were achieving. But all of our kids wanted to spend time working in the business. We were fortunate. Story_ID: 7591 Speaker 1: You had a phenomenal period of growth, and growth can be very high-pressure and it can strain things. Do you have any stories of how you dealt--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I think--I think we were--we were. Because I had worked all over the country. I went into every major city in the country selling just Soft Sheen Products, hair and scalp pressing oil and conditioner. We had a product called Five Minute Fast Set, which was our first entree into areas other than the petroleum-based products. And--but again I went into beauty shops up in Brooklyn [New York], L.A. [Los Angeles, California], New Jersey. You name it, all over the country, you know, selling products. And I was the main one doing the selling and manufacturing, doing it until [son] Gary [Gardner] was able to take over doing that. But we were able to grow--put our foot in the door of every major city in the country with our name. Soft Sheen Product was known. People liked the product and they were buying it. Not the quantity they were buying Johnson Products [Company], or Ultra Sheen. But along came a fellow name Willie Morrow. He produced, I think is the first curl product. He was from California. And we saw that at one of the shows out in I think it was in Dallas, Texas. We were in all the trade shows across the country, exhibiting and promoting our product. So at that time, I told one of my technician, "I think we can make this product." So what we did--at that time Willie's product was good, but he didn't have the market distribution. We were in all the cities countrywide. So we start stirring-up and making what we felt was a better relaxer--cream relaxer. And it was called Care Free Curl. Gary named it that. And we did a pretty good job with producing it. It worked. We had models here in Chicago we tried it on. And then I was trying to get into a big distributor in Detroit [Michigan] for a long time. And he really wouldn't give us much of a chance. You know? And finally there was a big trade show in Detroit. And he said--oh he wouldn't take our Care Free Curl. So I told [son] Guy [Gardner]--Guy and I loaded up a truckload of Care Free Curl and went to the show in Detroit. And we demonstrated our Care Free Curl relaxer. And we were the star of the show. And the distributor who wouldn't buy our product--which was the biggest in Detroit at that time--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Was that Melvin Jenson? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, Mel Jenson. And he saw--he saw the results we were getting from the customers there. And what really, I think, clinched it, after we got through selling almost the whole truckload--Guy and I sold a whole truckload of merchandise with no distributor there, but all cash. That we sold the merchandise. So after the show was over, we went by his place and gave him all the money for all the sales we had and took an order for what we sold and a future work, and we sold all the merchandise. That really impressed him. So he then became one of our major distributor. I think. Then, of course, all over the country we had Care Free Curl became the most successful, I think curl product at that time. Primarily due to Gary's good marketing scheme and [daughter] Terri [Gardner]'s advertising and hard work and so forth. That we did in all the major publications and so forth. Speaker 1: Did you have a cosmetic chemist develop the formula--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Or you actually did it? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No. Gary. Gary worked with a chemist in developing. Made our--our curl was nicer, I think, than most of them out at that time. And Johnson was a leading industry. He didn't think the curl was gonna be a winner. And so he really didn't try to produce a curl product. And when he woke up, it was too late. We had had the national market at that time. So and then, we just never looked back after Care Free Curl. Story_ID: 7592 Speaker 1: So the strength of dealing with phenomenal growth [of Soft Sheen Products] is the family operated as a cohesive unit. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah, the family they did everything. Plus, you know we hired people at that time. We had chemists. We had sales managers. We had all the divisions that were needed to build a successful company. We covered those bases. And some of them were experienced people from other companies we got. Some were folks who we had to train. We had people who would demonstrate our products in trade shows throughout the country. We had technical staff in-house to help develop and improve on the products. We then produced other products to seg--to supplement the relaxer. Like our conditioners and our shampoos and so forth. We had a whole complete line. Speaker 1: What kind of problems did you run into as you came out that period--as the growth started to moderate and you had to get acclimated to doing another level of business? Speaker 2: Well I would say, we was always probably maintained the top level in the ethnic hair care industry after we came out with the Care Free Curl. The business at that time became very competitive. A lot of folks started producing relaxers and so forth. But we were able to maintain our majority share of the market. And, of course, the bigger we got, of course, you had to put out more money for advertising. Hire more people and so forth. And then when it came to the stage where I think my children kinda felt--at least I would say--And by the way, I forgot about [son] Guy [Gardner]. All the manufacturing that we did was done primarily under Guy's leadership. At that time, he was twelve, thirteen years old. He was buying all of our machines. Repairing all of our big machines and so forth. He took after my dad [Frank Gardner]. My dad was very mechanical and so forth. And Guy was able to fix any machine. And so he bought the machines. He repaired them. He taught people how to take care of them. And even [son] Gary [Gardner]--when Gary was president of Soft Sheen, I think he was only twenty-one, twenty-two years old. Something like that. And [daughter] Terri [Gardner], of course, she did a marvelous job with Brainstorm Advertising [Company] and really putting the product out on the market nationwide as far as visual was concerned. Speaker 1: So you were on top of the curve as the trend moved from the curly look into the relaxer. Speaker 2: Yeah. And then we came out with relaxer line--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) How did you get--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The Optimum line. You know, we felt we needed a good relaxer. And we worked at that. And then we got a good relaxer too. You know. And again with the research at that time, we had a research department who developed new products and so forth. And we had our Optimum relaxer and so forth. And that is still one of the top relaxers out there. Speaker 1: And so now this period of the company from zero to sixty. What do you think were the most significant events in the life of the family and the business? Speaker 2: Well as I said before, you know, the development and the entry of the curl where blacks started putting the curl back into their hair. In a larger concept versus a little tight small curl. And now, of course, it's almost coming back again. They're doing the tight curl with all the African styles and so forth. And black women spend so much money on their hair. They can do so many things with their hair to beautify themselves, to make them more attractive, to be creative and so forth. So I think hair care industry is just very fascinating field. And I would say that the reason why L'Oreal decided to select our company is 'cause they wanted to buy was because, we were the leaders in the industry. And they felt they wanted to go with the best. And that's why they're willing to put the dollars into a top line. Story_ID: 7593 Speaker 1: L'Oreal just--they bought Carson's [Products] or something? Speaker 2: They bought Carson's. I know who they bought. They bought Carson's before they bought Soft Sheen [Products], I know. And they just wanted to really do what we could not do worldwide as far as expanding research and development for curly hair throughout the world. Whereas the white girls have plenty of opportunities and research being done there. But the curly look, which is really, when you figure the mid and central American, South America and Asia--now the Asians. The Japanese are getting a curl in their hair and so forth. So they were wise enough to realize with their dominance in the industry, their know how, their big bucks, being a multi-billion dollar corporation, they could put the money into really expand ethnic hair. They're building a research center [L'Oreal Institute for Ethnic Hair and Skin Research] starting next--next year here in Chicago [Illinois]. That's gonna be the state of art as far as curly hair is concerned. Speaker 1: Can you trace for us the process from the time they approached you to ask about purchasing Soft Sheen until you actually closed? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I would say I had very little to do with that. Most of that was being done by I would say [son] Gary [Gardner] and primarily [daughter] Terri [Gardner]. Probably Terri and [son] Tracy [Gardner]. Tracy did a tremendous--he's my youngest son. Did a wonderful job in negotiating with L'Oreal to get a good deal. And, of course, L'Oreal said they would not buy the company unless Terri stayed on. And she agreed to stay on three years as president of John--Soft Sheen Products Company. And that I would say was a good business deal that Tracy put together. And because he--he has a chemical engineer degree from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. He also had a lot of R&D, research and development experience behind him. Plus he--his personality, Tracy, I would say, perhaps not as creative as Gary. Gary was very creative. You know. And Terri was also. But Tracy was more of a Northwestern-trained business person, you know. And he knew that area well. And he was able to deal with the folks from L'Oreal and get a good package for us. Story_ID: 7594 Speaker 1: That's great. And the whole family agreed it was time [to sell Soft Sheen Products to L'Oreal]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. They kinda wanted to do their own thing. You know. They had done that for thirty something years. You know. [song] Guy [Gardner], who is now building this major condominium on 10th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue]. And [son] Gary [Gardner] has got his hair care business. And [daughter] Terri [Gardner] did what she wanted to do as far as hair care is concerned. Now she wants to I think take care of raising her family and getting herself a child. She wants to adopt a child. And [son] Tracy [Gardner] is just gonna become a father pretty soon. His wife is expecting. So, you know, I cannot, you know, forget all the help that [wife] Betti [Ann Gardner] did. Not only was she taking care of raising those four kids by herself, but she also took care of ordering all the products, paying the people, helping me with sales and so forth. It was a family who had to work together and make sacrifices. I think she got her first check after working for Soft Sheen for sixteen years before she got her first check. So those are some of the things I would say were the family were to--they were together. And they weren't always agreeing. Now don't think that one was a pushover. And there were--there were some conflicts and some difference of opinion. But they were, as a say a team very successful in building the hair care business. Speaker 1: Is there anything about the development phase business-wise and as the family related to the business that I didn't ask you that I probably should have? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I would say with any family, there has to be a time when someone's gotta be in charge, you know. And I would say when I decided that Gary was ready to become president, you know, there was no disagreement. I mean everybody felt that he was capable of doing it. You know. And he was my right hand the whole time. When I was out of time selling, he was at Soft Sheen in Chicago [Illinois] manufacturing product, dealing with salesmen, dealing with customers and so forth. So it was no hesitation in doing that. And he wanted to do it to. Speaker 1: And the same when Terri took over? Speaker 2: Yeah, well Terri, I think she got her degree--I know she got her degree from IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] in photography. So she really was just set to go into doing advertisement. And she started Brainstorm Advertisement Agency, which was off campus. It was downtown here. Story_ID: 7595 Speaker 1: And she [daughter Terri Gardner] produced not only good hair care products, but a lot of the things we did in the realm of being involved with some of the problems in Chicago [Illinois] as far as fairness and politics and school and so forth. So she was responsible for this phrase, "Come Alive October 5." Her agency put that together. Did a tremendous marketing job to help Harold Washington to become mayor of the city of Chicago. Plus, you know, they were willing to put the dollars up too. You know. People did not know who was paying for all those advertisement dollars. Until one day Marty Faye who knew we were paying for it, you know, he said, "Now I'm gonna say who is paying for this." We didn't want at that time to tell we were doing it just to promote Soft Sheen [Products]. So we never told anybody. We just ran those ads one right behind the other. When the mayor woke up, it too late then because the black community was on a march. And when he said, "Come Alive October 5." They knew what that meant. You know. So they all came out and voted. But that was the project that Terri was primarily behind. And [son] Gary [Gardner] too. Speaker 2: And your other big community thing--two minutes? In this two minutes--Black-on-Black Love. Speaker 1: We started that when Margaret, one of our salesperson was shot by a young man who after robbing her for a few dollars, he ended up shooting her on top of it. And we got involved. And I think we wrote that letter, a full page in the ['Chicago] Sun-Times' saying black on black crime must stop. You know. And we cited some of the things we were trying to do. And we found that--again Terri was behind that drive to really get our community to start thinking of love and respecting one another. And Frances Gutter [Wright] became president of Black on Black Love at that time. And she is--still is director. And have been doing a good job. We have a program called My Sister's Keeper, that's involved with keeping the women out of jail once they leave. Not going back into the prison again. And those are some of the things that I think we're very, very proud of as some of the things that Soft Sheen was responsible for beside just making thousands and thousands of jobs for folks throughout the world. 'Cause you know, Soft Sheen was sold in England. And it was sold in South Africa. We sold in the Caribbean. We sold in every major country in the world. And provide training and jobs for black folks throughout the world and we're very proud of that. But I think some of the things we've done here in city of Chicago, we're most proud. Because it had a direct effect on our daily activities. And we just felt it necessary for Chicagoans to realize they could elect a black mayor. And Harold was such a great candidate. And we were willing to put the dollars out for that. Story_ID: 7596 Speaker 1: Here you're drawing at Ray-Vogue [School of Art, Schaumburg, Illinois, now Art Institute of Illinois-Schaumburg] you're a teacher. But teachers don't necessarily become good businesspeople. And you know, that seemed to me--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, I was just wondering how that occurred? And then the other thing that's, you know, curious to me--because I look--I know that you say, you know, John Johnson. Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay, the role models that really I tried to emulate, such as John [H.] Johnson, George Johnson. Particularly George Johnson [of Johnson Products Company] at the hair care field. He had--was so professional in his manner of doing the research, developing good products, packaging real extremely well. Advertising in a first class manner just like any major non-African American company had never done before. You know. And I was just naive enough to say, "Well if he can do it, I can do it too." You know. And that's always been, I think probably what has been my success in building. Because I felt that anything anybody else can do, I can do too. An example of House of Kicks [Inc.]. I'll go into that a little later on. But he just, I think, you know, his staff. His crew. When you go to a grade show, you see his beautiful booth and so forth. And his technicians, how well they presented their product. You know, just motivated and encouraged us to try to do the same thing. And he was always, you know, a gentlemen and a person who was a competitor, you know. But he never did anything at all to try to stop anyone's growth. More or less. And he just encouraged everybody to continue do a good job in the ethnic hair care field. And we felt that people like John Johnson and 'Ebony' magazine they did a marvelous job for the periodical business. And they just--and all of these things kinda came together that enable us to awaken the black community to the beauty of their hair and number of creative things that could be done with their hair that they never realized before. Other than just straightening, as Madame C. J. Walker had done. But as you see now, the black woman spends more money on their hair than white people do. And, they get better results. You know. Now the white girl is trying to put the curls in their hair. They try everything they see us do. You know. And our hair, because of the strength of it has just been able to do a lot of beautiful things that just enhance the beauty field of the black woman. And men too. 'Cause the fellows are getting their hair done all kind of things too. But--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Did you ever have like any one-on-ones conversa--business related with John Johnson--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah with--not John Johnson but--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) With George Johnson. Speaker 1: George Johnson. We were in--we had an organization of black manufacturers of ethnic hair care products. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Really. Speaker 1: And we met, you know, at least four or five times a year. And we shared thoughts and ideas and so forth. And that organization is still existing. But it's not too--So many of the companies now have been bought out by major white companies. But that organization does still exist. Story_ID: 7597 Speaker 1: Lets talk about the hair care--black hair care industry, generally since it does seem like everything of any consequence has been bought by the--. Speaker 2: I think Luster Products is probably one of the major companies that still is black-owned and operated. Two or three others and Freddie Luster's Jr. Not Freddie Luster, Jr. His son's name is Jory. Jory Luster. He is the president. He's doing a great job at that company now too. Speaker 1: Is that a real problem for us? Do we feel like we're losing ground by not owning this--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously). I would say some people do. And my thought is that there's just so many areas of the American free enterprise system that we spend billions of dollars in and we're not involved in those industries. That's why again we started the House of Kicks [Inc.]. That's a multi-million dollar--if not a billion dollar industry which we are primarily those who spend money on. But have not been able to get any kind of control of really running that type of business. But there's just so many businesses that we're getting into. And we're doing what we should've done. We're learning many times by working for major white corporations and we're taking that know-how and building our own businesses. So I think we're just spurring it off as we should. We gain the dollars but don't get stuck in one segment of American industry alone and feel that's the end of it. Because America is a great country. The free enterprise system is the best. And you see the opportunity for anyone to almost do anything as far as American free enterprise system is concerned with a desire. And finding a niche or need for the product and really developing and growing in it. Speaker 1: So then this is an evolution if you will--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh sure. Speaker 1: For black businesses. Speaker 2: Yeah. Its just a stage we're going through. Just like, you know, we used the hair care as a stepping stone to go into other industries. Now you see blacks and the offsprings of those people who got their start in hair care in a barbershop. They're now doing other things now. Because they see the opportunity in businesses. Where as the folks who come in here from foreign countries they see the opportunities right away that America provides for them that they didn't have in their own countries. So we are just now beginning to awaken to the fact that this system is for us to take advantage of too. Because in many cases, perhaps one of the first things, our customers or--I don't wanna call them our customers. But our friends who come in the House of Kicks when they see this big beautiful family fun center, they wanna know, "Is it owned by blacks?" And they're surprised when they find out it is. You know. And we get so many compliments daily. Because we have brought this to our youngsters to enjoy this phase of their life. When you go in there and see them enjoying themselves. And mothers in there and father in there with--interfacing with their kids perhaps for--in a way that they never could before. At home their probably watching television or their dealing with other adults. But when they go in the House of Kicks they're interfaced with that son or their daughter in an environment that that child is happy in. And they see their child enjoying it so much, they become happy in that environment too. They began to relate to their child in different ways that they couldn't do at home. Story_ID: 7598 Speaker 1: Okay, compare for me, if you will--set up for me the black hair care industry when you started and what it is today. And again, set Soft Sheen [Products] in the industry back then and the start of it. And what do you think, if you were starting a Soft Sheen today, what do you think would be different? Or would you get that chance to start like you started? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. Not like I started. 'Cause we had just about no money. You know. We got our first SBA [Small Business Administration] loan for $65,000. And I think our second one might have been about $120,000. And we were able to do so much with so little money at that time. And the competition wasn't as keen as it is now. Not only do you have strong black companies who know how to produce and manufacture and sell products, but you just have now the big, big giants like the Revlons and L'Oreal in the industry that you have to compete with. Those conditions today would be much more difficult to start a hair care company. But you don't have to. Because there's so many other avenues of business opportunities for the black person today in America. Speaker 1: When you made the alliance with Mizani it was--how did you set that up? That was a good business. Speaker 2: Mizani. Well that was one of our relaxer lines that [son] Gary [Gardner] developed and started--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Gary did, oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And that's just another--another thing he--I tell you he was very creative. Not only in producing good products, but also in knowing how to market and advertising. You know, the ads that we had were the most beautiful ads you could see. You know. And it was--you know, we were able--we just kept pouring our money back into the business. You know. And that helped us big. Because we started with just about no money. You know. And you can't start a hair care--you can start a hair care business today. But you'll be limited in how far you're going to go. But to--. Speaker 1: Well, with so many of the frontiers have already been taken care of. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) As far as hair care. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. But that's just one segment of cosmetic industry. You know. And I think L'Oreal is going to develop and do research in the cosmetic phase of--not only the cosmetic the hair care phase of every thought that can be realized as far as beautifying the black woman is concerned. And they've got the billions of dollars to do it with. Speaker 1: Right. What is--what is the dollar value of the hair care industry today and the dollar value when you started? Speaker 2: Oh I don't--I have no idea what it is today. And I really can't recall what it was when we got started. But I would say that it's a multi, multi-million if not billion dollar industry. And the black woman is just spending a lot of money on her hair. Speaker 1: Do you think something like the braids and things are gonna eventually move the relaxer even, you know, off the--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No I don't think so. Because, you know, not only do they--they use chemicals on doing all those twists and so forth, that they put in the hair today. The black person that goes to a beauty shop today she spend a lot of money. And those braids and twists and so forth, that takes a long time to do. It's very costly. And there're products that are being developed by all the hair care companies now to make that job easier for the beautician. To get different looks that they couldn't do when they first came out with the braids. You know. So they're just again being creative as we are. You know. Story_ID: 7599 Speaker 1: Fast forward to today and the House of Kicks [Inc.]. Tell me how that really came into being? From the idea to the actual construction. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well I think the idea really came about from [son] Guy [Gardner]. He was working with a--for people in Phoenix, Arizona trying to put together a family fun center there in Phoenix. This was a white fellow who was in the industry. And he and Guy were gonna get together. And then finally it reached a point where Guy found out his partner didn't have the money to do it. So that kinda fell through. But then it gave me the idea when I--when L'Oreal bought out Soft Sheen [Products], I--[wife] Betti [Ann Gardner] and I both got to become the owners of that piece of land and building at 95th [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue]. It was an all-metal building that Guy used to use to make his bottles in. So what we did--I felt well why not start with about 54,000 square feet on one section and about 34,000 square feet on the other section. We took that large section and decided to build a family fun center. And I went to Dallas, Texas the first time to a worldwide family fun center show. And, of course, I only saw one fellow I thought was black, beside me that was there in Dallas, Texas. And it must've been tens and hundreds of thousands of people at that show in Dallas, Texas from all over the world. And I finally started talking to this fellow. And found it he really was from Denmark where he worked for the park district. He wasn't even black as far as Americans were concerned. So I walked throughout that whole show. And I made up my mind then that I was gonna go in that business. And I bought our first product there. We had a--they had a display of what they call a soft play where the youngsters climb all up a thing and go through rides and so forth. And I just bought the whole unit off the floor. And I don't think the fellow realized I was gonna buy it. You know. I said, "No, I want the whole thing." You know. And he knew I wasn't in the business. He knew I hadn't had no knowledge of the industry. But I thought that was a start. You know. I buy that--I bought that. And then I had it shipped to Chicago [Illinois]. And we put it in storage for about a good two years before we actually finished restoring the building itself. And then I went to shows in Atlanta [Georgia]. Bought some equipment there. Rides there. I went to a show in Miami [Florida] and began to really do the research as far as the Chicago area is concerned. As far as family fun centers were concerned. And the biggest one is one called Odyssey [Fun World]. And that's out in Tinley Park [Illinois]. And I visited them a number of times. And I saw there it was about I would say 75 percent of their customers were Afro-Americans from Chicago. And I said, "Now this doesn't make sense. Here we are spending all these dollars out there in Tinley Park to be part of their family fun center. Why don't we have one in the inner city?" So that's when we really began to go full force with building the plant really. And that was a big job. We spent a good two years in tearing the exterior down. Putting a new roof on, new air conditioning system, electrical system, heating system, buying more rides. We have six major rides now, 140 video and redemption games. We have six--seven birthday party rooms. We have, I think, one of the largest roller coasters in the inner city in the nation. And our family fun center is second class to none as far as suburbs or inner city is concerned. And people are surprised when they come in there and see it's a state of the art. Of course, you know, we're still learning. This is our fourth or fifth month. And our customers are helping us grow. Something they don't like, they come and tell us. You know. And we accept that. 'Cause we're learning too. Speaker 1: How did you find personnel? African American personnel? To do what the--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well again, I took--Shondas Smoot (ph.) is our general manager. You know Shondas? Yeah, our general manager. He formerly worked at Soft Sheen Products Company in the collection department. And I always thought he would be a good person to be general manager. So I went after him. And it took him two or three months before he was actually free to leave Soft Sheen. But when he did, we hired him right away. He's our general manager. And then we interviewed people. And began to pull together a nucleus of managers of about--maybe about four or five managers now. And we rapidly taught the industry. And they've done a great job. And, of course, we hired about seventy-five youngsters who maintain and manage the rides and games and so forth, and the birthday party rooms and so forth. So here again where these youngsters who are now repairing--have the technical know-how and they learned it. Some of them we stole from other competitors too, by the way. But they're learning how to repair the computer operated games and rides and so forth. Doing a main job--major job in doing that. If you had asked two years ago were black folks doing that? We had to say no. But the millions of dollars that I put into that family fun center is not only providing the training for a new industry but it's giving, I think, our community such a lift to feel that some of us have felt strong enough to provide this type of entertainment for our youngsters. And with you figure the thousand we have in there, I would say on a monthly basis we probably are putting--I am not sure of the count. But I imagine we're probably putting oh, a good thirty or forty if not fifty thousand people went through that a month. And they are just ecstatic about having it in their community. And you see the children dragging their parents in. Parents enjoying being there with the children. That pays off (snapping fingers) tenfold. And then financially we're very--doing pretty good of staying above the water. Not making a lot of money. But we're make--we're profitable. And we're growing. Adding more things to our program. Trying more to satisfy our customers. Because, you know, we can be very critical of one another. First thing they will complain about us more than they will about the man out there in Tinley Park. But which is good, as far as I'm concerned. 'Cause it's making us stronger. Story_ID: 7600 Speaker 1: So the idea [House of Kicks, Inc.] came about say 1998? Maybe early '99 [1999]. It actually opened in 2002. And in that period you weathered a few protests? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Why were people protesting? Speaker 2: Well a number of--primarily I would say some of the older people who lived in that community [Chicago, Illinois], between I would say, 95th [Street] and 98th Street. Say between State [Street] and Stony Island [Avenue]. Some of the people felt that it was gonna bring undesirables into the community. It was gonna give them major traffic problems. It was gonna give them parking problems and so forth. And what we did, we worked with that element in the community that was in favor of it. And we held meeting right there in the building showing them the products we were trying to do and so forth. And so we won enough of them over to get the alderwoman at that time, who is now deceased, to support us. And once she became-came aboard and started supporting the House of Kicks, the community wanted--the majority of the community wanted it. But it doesn't mean that everybody is still happy. If we have a tin can out on our lawn, we will get a call from the alderman saying somebody reported us that there's a tin can out on our lawn. 'Cause there's some people who still don't want it. And when you come in there and see--nobody's parking. These people live--the nearest home is about a block and a half from 95th Street. Okay. So but we weathered that storm. And we were able to continue to build. And finally four and a half months ago we opened up. Story_ID: 7601 Speaker 1: So the family fun centers, what size industry is that these days? Speaker 2: Oh! Millions and billions of dollars worldwide. You know--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Why is it the Disney thing [Disney Quest, Chicago, Illinois] didn't work downtown? Speaker 2: Well again--I told my wife [Betti Ann Gardner]. She didn't agree. I said, "We'll be here when Disney is not here." (Laughing) And sure enough Disney closed down and we're [House of Kicks, Inc.] still growing strong. Well, they made some mistakes. You know. You don't put a business that depends upon number of people to support it in downtown Chicago and depend primarily on vacationers to support it. We felt that our market was the--particularly inner-city community. 'Cause today we have Latinos coming. We have Chinese coming. We have whites coming. And, of course, the majority of them are black. But we knew the black community's under-serviced. You know. As far as entertainment is concerned. And the ability to--to in your own neighbor have a birthday party. You can invite your friends there and have a nice restaurant, like we have there right now. So, you know, we did the research. And I guess because of my background with Soft Sheen [Products] that you find a need. And then you try to supply that need. You know. And build up a team of people who can do it. You know. I'm not there a good 60, 70 percent of the time and it's well run. Speaker 1: Okay. How different is it marketing the fun center as oppose to marketing hair care? Speaker 2: I would say the fun center a lot of that is more direct. Where you're dealing--you're trying to satisfy a customer. When a customer comes for a birthday party, and things don't go well. And she's unhappy. That's a negative. I don't care how much advertisement you do, you gotta find out what you're doing in your own place to make her happy. If she's unhappy, you've gotta correct the situation right away. And so you're--you have to have people who know how to deal with a customer on the basis of one-to-one. But I would say 90, 95 percent of the people there are just so happy when they come there. Because they've been treated so well. We have off-duty policemen there full-time. When you come in, we wand everybody who comes in. You're not bringing anything that gonna harm anybody. You can't bring a screwdriver in there, or we gonna put you out. You know. So they feel safe in their. It's clean, it's orderly. The biggest problem we have is the kids get so excited when they get in there. They just wanna start running. We have to slow them down. You know. But they--they're just happy when they come in there. And our success is when we see them dragging their parents in and crying on the way out. 'Cause they don't wanna leave. And their parents are trying to explain to them why they have to leave. Probably because they spent enough money already. But the kid doesn't wanna leave. You know. So--and then we have teenagers there. We have the so-called gang bangers. You try to come in there with your scarf on your head. You can't get in. Take the scarf off your head. And they understand. They follow that. You know. Any employees who wanna walk around with their hat--pants dragging down. They don't get employed. Thank you. Go and get a belt on your pants and then come in and apply for a job. So there are many things that we try to do there to teach youngsters how to be first-time job successful. And many of them this is their first-time job for them. They're seventeen, eighteen years old. They're still in high school in many cases. But we give them the opportunity for that first job. Speaker 1: And how--how do you--is it like Disney where it's one fee get you in for a x amount of time? Speaker 2: No. We have--you don't pay anything to get in. You just buy a debit card. And with that debit card you put points on it. If you wanna spend $20, you get so many points for $20. And you ride so many rides with it. You play so many games with it. And when your card is used up, then you go in and charge your card up again. And then we do have another where you get a wrist band. Where you get on for a two hour period of time. You can ride any ride you want. Play any games you want for a two hour period of time. Story_ID: 7602 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about overall, now you've been through three careers. Right? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And blessedly one family and three careers. What among these things has influenced you most and why? Speaker 2: I would say the--the development--the continued development of faith and confidence in my ability to be successful in the business world. And going into different areas of business that I've never been in before. To me there's a certain thrill in that. You know. Speaker 1: And you may have a certain adventurous bent that also? Speaker 2: And then getting back to, you know, I'm competitive. You know. And I still feel that probably deep in my psyche there's this feeling that for as a black American that I have an opportunity to show that we can achieve success in America. In particularly in areas that we have not been in before. You know. Like I remember one time I was on the board--I'm on DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois]'s board [of trustees]. And we had a meeting at Sears-Roebuck and Company. And I attended the meeting there one day. And a young lady asked--at the desk asked, "Are you delivering something?". I said, "no, I'm from DePaul. I'm on the board." But she just couldn't imagine that I'm going up to the top floor of Sears Tower [Chicago, Illinois], invited by the chairman of Sears Roebuck, is going to be attending a board meeting. You know. But, you know, when you get slapped in the face by those kind of things constantly--it's that, you know, people have a place and a position for black American that they're supposed to stay in. That's that slot. They're not supposed to go above that. And you always thought that, you know, there are limitations. And I say, "I have no limitations." You know. Story_ID: 7603 Speaker 1: And you probably maybe more than most of our--most successful businessmen and women have been a true philanthropist. And you pick the kinds of things to support. That really try to support individuals or support a way of being in the African American community how did you--how did your philanthropic approach--. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well we always try to be where we feel we can be successful. And we've been in many areas we've not been successful in. And, you know, and try to help people. I remember one fellow we loaned ten thousand dollars to and helped in his business, and he blamed me for not loaning him more money. You know. "You should have given me more money. I could have been successful." You know. Didn't pay me one penny back. You know. But I--we've had some rebuffs, you know. But in most cases, as far as the female inmates, you go to the prisons and seeing the black woman in there who is a mother of children. And children now who are growing up without their mother. In many cases without their father. But now the mother is incarcerated too. And primarily because of narcotic business and so forth. Or a lack of self-control and getting involved with violence. But when you see them, the backbone--they've always been the backbone of black America, is the black woman. You feel that they are beginning to be lost. And you just felt there's something you should do. That's really how we got started in the Black on Black Love business. And particular, My Sister's Keeper area. Where we see those women come out. And they're getting themselves up. They're going to school, they're getting jobs, they're getting degrees. Frances [Gutter-Wright] has worked with them consistently to be sure that they're off drugs and they stay off drugs. Instead of having the pimp meet them when they leave the jail, then she meets them out with programs to help them turn their lives around. So, you know, you just feel they're certain things you want to do and you do. And to the best of your ability, sometimes you made a mistake in supporting a program that wasn't worth it. But that's part of the pluses and minuses. You know. Speaker 1: You've been remarkably successful in being a hands-on philanthropist. Meaning people feel comfortable in approaching you with respect. But most certainly comfortable in approaching you. How did you maintain that kind of presence? Speaker 2: Well I think all because--you know, I've always lived very close to our community. You know. Whether we were shooting marbles in the alley or playing football or, you know, doing other things that we have done always within our community. It's been easy for us to relate to one another. Starting the hair care business [Soft Sheen Products] and the beauticians who were so kind to us, let us in the beauty shops, when I would leave the school system at eight, nine, ten o'clock at night and buying my hair care products. They didn't have to do this, you know. Story_ID: 7604 Speaker 1: Actually the Civil Rights Movement was smoking at the same time that Soft Sheen [Products] was developing its success. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Soft Sheen was developing its success. Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I would say, you know--I think his name is Robinson. I can't think of his first name, now. He came to [son] Gary [Gardner] and told Gary that Harold Washington would be a good candidate to become mayor of the city of Chicago. But Harold won't run unless we can assure him with so many thousands of registered voters. And so that's when Gary got the idea well let's put together a marketing promotion program to let the people know that they have to register. You know, come out and register to vote. And so registration day was October 5. And Brainstorm [Advertising Agency] with [daughter] Terri [Gardner]'s help and Gary's help built the theme around, Come Alive October 5, and Chicagoans felt so good about that they just rallied around that. And they came out. And not only did they registered, they voted. You know. Speaker 1: Didn't you participate one of--? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was more or less involved in the street work. I would go to the community meetings and so forth. And I worked in the campaign itself with Bill Berry and many others to help that program become successful. Story_ID: 7605 Speaker 1: What are your concerns for the African-American community? Speaker 2: That we stop destroying one another. That's our biggest problem--self destruction. You know. And so too often we lack self-control, you know, in situations where we lose our temper. And now we strike out with the means of destroying a life. And we do that so readily. Story_ID: 7606 Speaker 1: The one thing we didn't--I didn't ask you about was how did the [New] Regal [Theatre Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] really come to be? Speaker 2: Well again it was, you know, that Dempsey Travis owned that building. And he first talked to my wife [Betti Ann Gardner] about the possibility of buying--selling that theater to us. And we could rehab it. And, of course, we did that. And we spent a lot of money there, Adele. In restoring that theater to this state of art it is right now. It's one of the most beautiful theaters in the country, built by John Eberson in 1923, along with Fox Theatre in Atlanta [Georgia]. And also St. Louis. It's one of the few beautiful old theaters in the world. But again, it was to bring art and entertainment into the inner city. It certainly is not a money maker. It is a very, very difficult business to run now because you have so many larger venues downtown where producers and promoters will go to where they can get a larger gate than they can to a 2,000 seat Regal Theatre. So it really to me at this time we need to rethink what can be done to make that a successful part of our life--as far as Afro-Americans are concerned. Because you can measure a part of the success of the society by their ability to appreciate the arts. And as far as I'm concerned, that theater with all of its physical capabilities, has not been as productive as I think it can. Speaker 1: What do you think is the reason? Speaker 2: Well again, as I have mentioned, you have to have I think a producing theater where you have a staff who produces, writes plays and scripts and so forth. And is strong enough to maintain the cost of developing artists and putting together a production staff, and put on plays. As I say you probably should--probably plan on putting on at least ten or twelve major works a year in order to keep it alive and well. Speaker 1: That's tremendously expensive. Speaker 2: It is. Very expensive. And I just read--heard last night the Chicago Theatre [Chicago, Illinois] is having a tough time financially. Speaker 1: It--but it's certainly brought a vitality to that corner of the city. Speaker 2: Yeah. People are crazy about it. They think we're doing well. They don't know how much it cost to keep it open. You know. It's not making its expenses. Our cover is expensive. Speaker 1: Did it--did the general public ever get their hands around the fact that it's a non-profit organization? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I don't think they realize that. I think some of the smaller theaters they realize are non-for-profit. You know. But the Regal is such a large theater and such a beautiful theater. It's just a whole new theater industry in Chicago. if they were all together, they could really support a Regal Theatre. Now you've got--you've got Jackie Taylor doing a good job at her theater [Black Ensemble Theater, Chicago, Illinois]. You've got twenty other smaller theaters, you know. But there's no major venue. Say like you have in Washington D.C. I can't think of that theater there. But that's really supported and--by the black theater-goer. You know. You don't wanna start having movies there. It is really a venue for stage production. You know. Story_ID: 7607 Speaker 1: What would you personally like to be remembered for? Speaker 2: I would say as someone who had the confidence to do the things that America, presents for all Americans to be able to achieve in this country. And be able to work hard at doing the things that must be done to be successful in many areas of the free enterprise system in America to become successful. Speaker 1: And that would translate into what kind of legacy for you? Speaker 2: You mean like a one sentence legacy? I would say a person who has a love for people, a love for his family, a lot of faith and confidence in his ability to be successful. Story_ID: 7608 Speaker 1: Just tell me your thoughts on a project--like a HistoryMakers project. Speaker 2: My thought about it? Well I think there is certainly a need for it. You know, when you go back and say there's many things that have not been documented regarding your--I often go back and think about the experiences that my great-grandmother had to go through as a young girl, growing up in Bessemer, Alabama. And how--somehow, she survived that. And even my grandfather who really had to leave Bessemer, Alabama fast. They probably told him he had to leave town, because he was either being uppity or being too smart or being too successful. Things that they had to go--even my dad [Frank Gardner] who I can relate to real well. You know, who kept his mouth closed and probably knew that there were things that he could not motivate his children to achieve. But somehow he was motivating them to achieve through means that he did not know he was motivating them to do. He was motivating us to be a good citizens. Motivating us to be responsible people and motivating to love other people and respect other people. And these are the criterias that were essentials I think to make my brother and I, you know, successful in life. And other people who have been successful had these same type of motivations. And they were not based upon materials or financial means. Speaker 1: Now--this just came to me. You know, over time when you read about our history, and how we got here, and what we've gone through. It creates--well for me--and I just would like correction and I just would like your opinion. It creates--sometimes it creates an anger and a frustration that's really kind of hard to carry. And I'm wondering as a black male out in the world every day, especially back there when the racism was much more overt than it is today. It's not less damaging. But it's not as overt as it was. How--how do you settle with that? Does it kind of keep you (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well I think really toda, you know, a person who's gone through all the period of time say in the 1920s and '30s [1930s], when I can remember. You know, recognize that I was a black American to the present time. That my dad was--and my mother [Eva Gardner]--they were able to give us such a--just a nice environment to grow up in. We were able to feel there was nothing we couldn't do. There's nobody any better than we were. You know. And I think that has helped me to, you know, be tolerant of other people. even those who you know, I know--'Cause many times when I was on--very active in Chicago United--You know, I was co-chair of Chicago United. You know, I locked horns with some of those big major corporate heads. You know. Some of the things I told them I know they didn't like. You know. But I told them that because I fell that was what they should hear as far as our community was concerned. But I don't--I don't feel I'm any lesser or any better than anybody else. I feel I'm able to, you know, get my share of what's owed to me in this world. And contribute as much as I possibly can to this world to make life better for a lot of people. Speaker 1: So it was the buffering from your parents and the household--they--and the environment they shaped for you and helped you. Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah. And I think many successful blacks have had this type of training and experience. Whether their parents realize it or not. But they gave them the foundation. You know. Like this young lady [Candace Matthews] who's now president of Soft Sheen-Carson [Products]. She was one of was it thirteen children. She was the youngest of thirteen children. Do you think her parents were realizing that she was--they were producing a corporate head who was gonna run one of the largest corporations in the world? You know. But they did all those things that were essentials. You know. And so often you have people who have had so much of the material things to do things with, did not do those basic things in life that are essential to developing the character traits for success...