 Story_ID: 641126 Speaker 1: So my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer; and David Williams, your husband, is an observer for this part. And I'd like to start out by asking you to state your name and spell it for us and, and then if you could give your date of birth? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Michelle Gadsden-Williams, M-I-C-H-E-L-L-E, G-A-D-S-D-E-N hyphen W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S born May 21st, 1969. Speaker 1: Okay. And today's date? Speaker 2: July 13th, 2013 Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: Somerset, New Jersey, Somerset County. Speaker 1: So I want to--we start out--and your occupation, sorry. Speaker 2: Managing director and global head of diversity for Credit Suisse Securities, LLC [Credit Suisse Group AG]. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's your title but you would say corporate diversity officer, or (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chief diversity officer, yeah. Story_ID: 641127 Speaker 1: We have five People magazine-ish questions we ask everyone. I'd like to know what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: So many, my favorite food--that's an interesting one--is pizza (laughter). Speaker 1: A favorite--favorite time of year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is the summertime. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Brown. Speaker 1: A favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: Europe. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: To whom much is given, much is required [Luke 12:48]. Story_ID: 641128 Speaker 1: So I want to ask--first of all, we like to explore people's family backgrounds. So can you tell me about your father's side and you can you give his name and tell us about what you know about his growing up and his family? Speaker 2: My father's name is Herbert Gadsden, Jr., born February 14th, 1940 in Beaufort County, South Carolina. He is one of eight children, seven are still living. Let's see? My father was very athletic growing up. He enjoyed the outdoors; he enjoyed spending time in the garden. My grandfather [Herbert Gadsden, Sr.] owned his own construction company so he spent a lot of time working very closely with my grandfather in building his business. So he's an outdoorsman. He enjoys fishing, gardening, and spending time with family and friends, family is very important to him. He spent time in the U.S. Army. He went overseas to Germany long before I was born and before he met my mother [Anna Grant Gadsden]. So he is a retired soldier before he entered the corporate arena when he moved to New Jersey in the 1960s. You know, just very adventurous, very smart, he was at the top of his class at St. Helena High School in Beaufort County, South Carolina [St. Helena Island, South Carolina]. Very inquisitive but also very shy is how he would probably describe himself. But he enjoys people, he enjoys meeting different kinds of people, he enjoys learning new things, he's quite the intellect, he enjoys The History Channel [History] and learning new things and meeting interesting people and really exposing himself to individuals who have something to share, something to add value to a conversation. So I'd say he's really quite the conversationalist but a minimalist at the same time. Once you engage him in conversation, he has a lot to say if he is well versed on the topic but he's also an excellent listener. Whereby he just enjoys having just a meaningful conversation with people where he can learn something new. Speaker 1: So what did he say about his growing up, Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams]? Speaker 2: I'd say he describes his childhood as just one of--like most of the African Americans that lived during that time, of humble beginnings. I wouldn't say poor that's not how I would describe our family or at least my grandparents at that time. Very well educated. Education meant everything and still does to my family. He, he--family means everything to him, he talks a lot even today about the importance of family and remembering your roots and remembering where you come from and remembering our elders and what they sacrificed so that we could see a better life. So family he talks about a lot. His brothers and sisters are very important to him. He spends a lot of time with them as well. I have one living grandparent on my father's side and that's my grandmother [Elizabeth Polite Gadsden], she will be ninety-six in September and he adores his mother--absolutely adores her. As a matter of fact, my parents just relocated to Charlotte, North Carolina so that he could be closer to her in her final years on this earth. So family means everything to him, including his children. Story_ID: 641129 Speaker 1: So what about--you know Beaufort [Beaufort County, South Carolina] is the heart of sort of Gullah, Geechee culture (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yes. Speaker 1: So can you tell me about that, that and what you've learned from your father [Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] as relates to that? Speaker 2: Our culture of the Sea Islands of South Carolina and our language of Gullah and Geechee is what we call our people is, is of paramount importance to my father. He made sure that his children, I have two sisters [Monique Gardner-Witherspoon and Alicia Gadsden], he made sure that we learned a lot about that. He took the time to teach us the background, the history, the language, where we come from and making sure that we did not lose sight of any of that. Although my parents migrated to the North, they made sure that their children had exposure to that culture and just to kind of give you a sense of what that culture is like, and what our language and our heritage is, is all about. The culture is, is like this: during slavery times the slaves would almost make up their own language so that the slave masters wouldn't hear their conversations so that they would not impose punishment on themselves. So it's almost as if they made up their own language that was a combination of an African language that came from slavery times and broken English so it's a combination of the two. So this became what we call as Gullah and there are still a lot of individuals who speak the language fully today even those who are not African American who live in the Sea Islands of South Carolina. They've also picked up the language and the dialect but my grandmothers both spoke the language fluently. My maternal grandmother [Rosalee Grant] that's all that she knew and she spoke that in the household. So she moved from the South to the North and she raised my sisters and I while my parents were young and they were working. That's what she spoke to us so that was almost my first language. Speaker 1: So give me an example. Speaker 2: So for example if I said the three of us are going to the store, it would be, "The three of we, we go to the store." So it's almost like broken English with a dialect--a very southern dialect and there are books written in the language as well and we also have an annual event whereby everyone who were either born in the Sea Islands or who were raised somewhere in the area, we have what you call the Gullah Festival [Original Gullah Festival]. So it's just a weeklong celebration of our heritage, our history and it's, it's world renowned. We have people coming from all over the United States to learn more about our culture and our language, so. Speaker 1: And in many ways when you think about it there aren't a lot of instances of that, you know, where things were so preserved really in that way and sort of handed down. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That part, I'm talking about the language and as close to, you know, the African-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --ancestry-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --as that. Story_ID: 641130 Speaker 1: So what is your father [Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] saying about--you know what is your grandmother on, you know, his mother saying about--did she, did she talk about how far back, do you know how far back your family goes? Or, or knowledge of your family goes? On your father's side? Speaker 2: Well, there is limited knowledge about what happened post slavery times. My grandmother is African American and Native American, her father was a Native American chief, Cherokee eastern band [Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians]. Her maiden name is Polite, her name is Elizabeth so she's Elizabeth Polite Gadsden and she grew up near a reservation. So there's not a lot of history, there's not a lot of documentation that is left from her time. She'll be ninety-six in September so there's not a lot. We had to, we just found her birth certificate maybe thirty years ago. So there's not a lot of documentation from her time, from her birth to, to present day. So, from the stories that she shared with us over the years, she like my father, family means everything. She got married to my grandfather [Herbert Gadsden, Sr.] when she was sixteen years old, that's all--and she has an eighth grade education. So there's not a lot of documentation at all but we're a proud people. She's a very proud woman, a very strong woman although she stands 4'9"; she's a very strong willed woman. Very passionate about who she is, very steadfast in terms of what she does and education means everything and that's what I heard growing up consistently. If there's nothing else that your family can give you education is that something. So that's, yeah that's probably I would say what's been most important to her, for her grandchildren even, that there have been a lot of sacrifices for us. There is no excuse for you not to do well. Story_ID: 641131 Speaker 1: So now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --let's talk about your mother. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Her name? Maid- Speaker 2: My mother's name is Anna Lee Grant Gadsden [Anna Grant Gadsden]. Speaker 1: Grant. So she was a Grant before--? Speaker 2: She was a Grant. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me about her, where she's from and her background and how far back you go on that side? Speaker 2: My mother's from Beaufort County, South Carolina as well. She and my father [Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] grew up near similar areas near each other in the same town. Although my father is eight years older the families knew of each other. Speaker 1: And so what do you know about her background? Speaker 2: Similar background to my father. Since everyone was on the same Sea Islands, similar background. Her family also came from Sierra Leone at least that's what we're tracing our history back to, Native American roots as well. Not a lot of history though that's documented. Speaker 1: Okay. So do you know your grandparents on that side? Speaker 2: I do, my maternal grandmother's name is Rosalee Grant, she's now deceased; and her husband, his name was Mannie Grant, Jr. Story_ID: 641132 Speaker 1: Tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up? Speaker 2: Wow, my earliest memory of growing up is my parents [Anna Grant Gadsden and Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] used to host a lot of functions at our home where family and extended family would come over to our home in Edison, New Jersey which is where I grew up. So I just have fond memories of just a lot of people being in the house; a lot of cousins and relatives coming from South Carolina particularly around the holiday season, Christmas and New Year's, and--so I'd say that's probably my, my, my fondest memory. Story_ID: 641133 Speaker 1: And how many kids in the family, you have two others, correct (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have two sisters. Speaker 1: Right, and you're a twin? Speaker 2: I am an identical twin, yes. Speaker 1: Twin. Okay. So your sisters' names? Speaker 2: My twin sister's name is Dr. Monique Gardner-Witherspoon and my youngest sister Alicia, her name is Alicia Renee Gadsden [Alicia Gadsden]. Speaker 1: And so describe--I would like to know a sense of the household. You know, your--you said your father [Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] was in the service and then he entered Corporate America. So I'm wondering what, you know, what position and then, you know, what company and then I'm just wanting to understand what was the family structure and the twins--I assume the twins are older. First there are twins and then there's a sister, okay. Speaker 2: Yes my twin sister and I are eleven years older than Alicia, we have no brothers. My father he entered Corporate America--I'm not sure if that was his intent. Initially he wanted to pursue a career in engineering. He also talked about pursuing a career in architecture. My father is very smart in terms of math and science. So he's the STEM guy, he's the science, technology and engineering and math guy. He enjoyed math very much and he's highly skilled at it. So his intent was to pursue a career in that area. Once he left the [U.S.] Army, I think his career took a different path. He decided not to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] where he received a scholarship; he decided to move to New Jersey where his oldest sister, Agnes [Agnes Gadsden Fennell] was living. So he moved in with her just to get started, just to get his feet on the ground and to figure out what he wanted to do. He started working for a number of different companies, just odd jobs here and there at different construction companies and things like that. He then worked for a company called Palnut [The Palnut Company, Mountainside, New Jersey] where he started on the shop room floor. This is a company that manufactured different parts for cars and nuts and bolts and things like that. So that was as close to engineering as he was going to get and he pursued an opportunity at that company and he stayed there for almost forty years. He, over time, transitioned into positions of increased responsibility. So he then left the shop room floor after probably eight, nine years or less and then he received an office job where he became a manager. And then by the time he, he retired, he was materials control manager which was senior leadership at that time, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 2: He was the only African American senior leader in the entire company at that time with the exception of one other individual who was head of HR [human resources]. Speaker 1: And where was this, in, in? Speaker 2: In New Jersey, Mountainside, New Jersey (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mountainside, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 641134 Speaker 1: So you're familiar with New Jersey. This is really sort of home in some (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is home; this is where I was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, so I want to, what I'm trying now to understand is the family structure and what if you could sort of--well, let's go to your, your block that you were raised on. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now what is the name of the street or the address for that? Speaker 2: 218 Nicholson Avenue, Edison, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. And can you describe that block? Speaker 2: It was--Edison at that time was extremely rural. It was country for the most part. My parents [Anna Grant Gadsden and Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] were both from South Carolina and they said that once they moved to New Jersey--once they got married and they settled in Elizabeth [New Jersey], they had an apartment. Once they had children they said, "Okay we want to raise our children similar to a country lifestyle, similar to what they were used to growing up [in Beaufort County, South Carolina]." So they then transitioned to Edison which at that time was a lot of horses and it was literally cow country at the time. So the area where our house was and still is, it's, it's rural, a lot of farmland, a lot of woods, wooded areas. My father loves to garden so we had a garden in the back. It was a bi-level--yes a bi-level type of home with one garage, three bedrooms, two upstairs, one downstairs, two bathrooms, living room, dining room, foyer, rec room [recreation room], garage. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So when--but are you--so is it rural, so there's really no block? Speaker 1: There's no block. Speaker 2: There's no block. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's just homes, individualized homes on a street-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --with a lot of trees and wooded areas. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 641135 Speaker 1: So what is your household structure like; and you know, could you give me a day in the life of? Speaker 2: A day in the life of. My father [Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] was an early riser so he would be up by five, out of the house by six a.m. My mother [Anna Grant Gadsden] worked nights at General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] so she was home in the morning and usually there in the afternoons by the time my sisters [Monique Gardner-Witherspoon and Alicia Gadsden] and I came home from school. She was on her way out the door leaving for the nighttime shift. And my [maternal] grandmother [Rosalee Grant] also lived with us when we were very young. She took care of us while my parents worked-- Speaker 1: Okay, see-- Speaker 2: --and my mother's youngest sister was also there. Speaker 1: So you had extended family. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So even though your mother and father worked, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. You're having your aunt and you're having your grandmother there to help (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes my aunt was thirteen or fourteen at the time when sh- they moved in with us and you know, we were newborns at the time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So we did have extended family. Story_ID: 641136 Speaker 1: Can you share some, either descriptions of holidays or, you know, I--let, let me do it this way: tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: Well usually every major holiday, Christmas, Easter and the summers we went to South Carolina. My--that was my parents' [Anna Grant Gadsden and Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] way of allowing their children to not lose sight of their culture and their heritage. So every Christmas, my father would allow us to leave school a little bit early before the holiday season maybe two or three days before Christmas. We would pile into the car and we would drive down 95 [Interstate 95] to South Carolina. So my memories of sights and sounds and all that was my [paternal] grandmother lived on a very sandy road that wasn't even paved at the time. So I remember a lot of sand, a fire--like a wood burning stove that she had in her kitchen. So you had this amber scent of wood burning that just was pervasive throughout the house. The house usually was very, very warm because of the wood burning stove. My grandmother and my aunts are exceptional cooks. So there was always something being, something cooking on the stove anytime you walked in. In the mornings if it wasn't a pot of grits or fish or something in the oven, a pie or something. I mean, there was always food, plentiful all the time. A lot of family, neighbors in and out of the house, coming by to provide Christmas greetings and all those kinds of things or just to visit if we were in town. So I remember--I have very fond memories of the holiday season--of any holiday because we typically would go to South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there, when you think of sounds, I know there--what sounds are you hearing? Speaker 2: Not a lot of sounds because my grandparents [Elizabeth Polite Gadsden and Herbert Gadsden, Sr.] lived--there were several acres where their house was so very rarely did you even see a car drive by or hear a car drive by. You might see headlights every now and again driving by on the main road but that was about it. Sights aside from the sandy roads their house was lined by a fence and my aunt had her home on the same property because they were on several acres, just about maybe four hundred yards across the, across the yard. So we would go between homes--we would walk between homes. It was very dark--pitch black at night. There were no street lights of any kind. So my sister and I we use to be afraid or scared to walk from one house to the other after dark because you couldn't see anything, and there could be bears and anything else out there but that's what I recall. Speaker 1: So you, it sounds like a wholesome, you know, not even small town but rural environment. You know, but in the North. Now what is the, the, the socioeconomic breakdown of where you're from? Speaker 2: Of Edison [New Jersey]? Speaker 1: Yes of Edison. Speaker 2: Edison was middle class and at that time some would even say upper middle class. There weren't many blacks at the time who lived in Edison. In our area or our street [Nicholson Avenue], there were several blacks who lived on the block but these were entrepreneurs, these were individuals who had wealth to a degree. Who didn't have just jobs, they had careers. I remember my neighbor across the street, they had an electric car garage door opener and back in the '70s [1970s] not many people had that so that was almost like a luxury. They also had I remember a pony for their son when he had birthday parties. So the, these were individuals of, of some means for back then. Story_ID: 641137 Speaker 1: Let's talk about schools. So-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --where are you going? So you're a twin. Speaker 2: I am. Speaker 1: You're the, you're the oldest. Speaker 2: I'm the youngest. Speaker 1: Youngest. Speaker 2: Three minutes younger. Speaker 1: Oh you're the--okay, but the two of you are the oldest and then you've got-- Speaker 2: A younger sister [Alicia Gadsden], yeah. That's right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A younger sister, so okay. So how, how are you navigating sort of this, as twins and like--yeah, what is--so you both have the same earliest memory or no? Speaker 2: I would say our memories are similar but we had different interests also. We had like friends but we also had different friends as well. So although you are twins, you're not identical in terms of your personality and who you might decide to befriend here and there. Monique's [Monique Gardner-Witherspoon] a little bit of an introvert whereas I'm more of an extravert. So we have our distinct personalities as well. So she might have different memories than I have but in terms of family, I would say they are very much the same. Speaker 1: And so where are you going in school, where do you attend school? Speaker 2: Grade school? Speaker 1: Yes Speaker 2: We started off at James Madison Primary School in Edison [New Jersey]-- Speaker 1: In Edison. Speaker 2: --and it's probably not even a mile from the house. We took a bus; a yellow bus with the other children in the neighborhood and it picked us up maybe not even, maybe a mile from the house. So we had to walk a little ways to get to the bus stop where the bus picked us up. We took the school bus and the school bus dropped us off in front of the school and that was from kindergarten all the way through twelfth grade. Speaker 1: So you went, so it was that one school you went to? Speaker 2: It's several, it was schools in Edison's school system [Edison Township Public Schools] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so give me the names of the schools. Speaker 2: So I started off at James Madison Primary School, I then went to James Madison Intermediate School [Edison, New Jersey], I then went to John Adams Junior High School [John Adams Middle School, Edison, New Jersey]; and then I graduated from John P. Stevens High School [Edison, New Jersey]. Story_ID: 641138 Speaker 1: So what is the young Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams] like? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The young Michelle is curious, talkative, I'd say aggressive in terms of how she, how she pursues things. She gets her mind fixated on something and she won't let it go until it materializes. Wow. Loves people has a lot of friends, more friends than she needs, a little gregarious here and there, a sense of humor, likes to experience things--different kinds of things, adventurous, has big dreams. Despite the fact that she is-- Speaker 1: You mean you? Speaker 2: Yes I was talking in third person, despite the fact that she-- Speaker 1: I. Speaker 2: I, okay--despite the fact that I was an extrovert, self-esteem was, was there but th- she had some issues here and there, I'd say. She, she, she wrestled with a few things, I guess like most young girls do. Story_ID: 641139 Speaker 1: Were you an internal person? You know, were you--I mean, 'cause you say you were gregarious-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you were more extroverted than your sister [Gadsden-Williams' twin sister, Monique Gardner-Witherspoon] but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, what are the--because we're formed often, you know, young and both parents [Anna Grant Gadsden and Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] are working. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You do have a support structure. What role does church play in your life? Speaker 2: Although my, my grandfather--my paternal grandfather [Herbert Gadsden, Sr.] was a reverend and he and my grandmother [Elizabeth Polite Gadsden] had their own church and she was the first lady and he was--my father never pressed us or forced us to go to church every single Sunday in our home in New Jersey [Edison, New Jersey], he never did. We would go on the major holidays, Easter, Christmas maybe New Year's, but we never went every single Sunday. And my father--I would ask him, "Grandma and granddaddy go to church just about every day. Why, you know, why is there such a disparity here?" I think he, he, his rationale was he was forced to go every single Sunday and he just did not want to impose that on his children. He wanted us to make up our own mind in terms of how we wanted to worship. So he never pressed us to do it. That's not to say though that we were not a religious family because we certainly are Christians. We certainly believe in a higher power. We're just not the family that is sitting in church in the front pew every single Sunday. Story_ID: 641140 Speaker 1: So what are your interests as a young person, and how are you doing in school? Speaker 2: My interests--I played several instruments. I, I--I've had a fondness for music very early on. So I, my first instrument that I played was the violin. I tried that. I played the clarinet, I played the flute, I played the piano. So I was very--I liked diversity of do- of trying different things. As a student the type of-- Story_ID: 641141 Speaker 1: What type of student I was? Speaker 2: Yeah what type of student? Speaker 1: Yeah. I'd say, (laughter) I would describe--mediocre. I didn't do as well as could have or should have. I was your typical young girl who was interested in everything else other than getting good grades all the time. I was, I was not a bad student at all. I just did not put forth the effort to be the best student I could have been and that's because I had other interests. Speaker 2: So what were they? Speaker 1: I ran track, I was a gymnast, I was very, I was very much into sports. I loved action sports so I was on the track team, I ran cross country, just involved in everything, different types of clubs, had a lot of friends. Speaker 2: What, what kind of clubs? Speaker 1: Anything that had to do with running track. The running club-- So, so you competed? Speaker 2: I did in high school [John P. Stevens High School, Edison, New Jersey]. I had a full scholarship when I graduated from high school. Speaker 1: And a full scholarship to? Speaker 2: To Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], to several schools. My twin sister [Monique Gardner-Witherspoon] and I ran with--there were a group of us that ran together and we all had scholarships. So I was more of an athlete than a scholar. Speaker 1: And so how were you showing promise then--is that something that you wanted to pursue professionally or that you liked, you know, you liked as sort of an avocation or something that people do when they are young? Speaker 2: Sports, I liked it because it did a couple of things for me. It allowed us to be even more social and meeting other kids. There were very few children of color in my school system [Edison Township Public Schools]. As a matter of fact when I graduated from high school there were only eight black students who graduated from that high school at that time ever. That was the largest number of black kids who graduated from that school, so. Speaker 1: So you're eight out of what number? Speaker 2: Six hundred and thirty-four. Speaker 1: In a class? Speaker 2: In a graduating class, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, that's--okay. Story_ID: 641142 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you grew up primarily in a white environment. Speaker 2: Yes I did. It was a primarily Jewish and Italian community. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what about things like boys and dating and things like that? How are you handling those things? Speaker 2: Well given my southern strict upbringing, my parents [Anna Grant Gadsden and Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] did not allow us to really date until we were teenagers. I could not car date until I was seventeen, of course you had friends and you call yourself having a boyfriend but it really wasn't a boyfriend. It was more of a friend who would come over the house with a group of other friends. So we really weren't allowed to date until seventeen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did go to the proms, I did go to dances and parties but I had to be home at a certain time. I had a curfew Speaker 1: But who were you going--were you doing any interracial dating, or were you? Speaker 2: I dated--in high school [John P. Stevens High School, Edison, New Jersey] I dated primarily black young men. In college [Kean College of New Jersey; Kean University, Union, New Jersey], I had an interracial dating relationship (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay. Story_ID: 641143 Speaker 1: How are you maturing, and what things are affecting you as a teenager; and how much are you aware because really you're, you know, you're growing up in the 1970s and '80s [1980s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventies [1970s] and '80s [1980s], yeah. Seventies [1970s] and '80s [1980s], yeah. Speaker 1: You're young. You are a baby; you are one of our younger ones. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'd say--what was-- Speaker 1: Well I mean because that, look at what's happening, you know. People of my generation, I'm a little older than you so we're, we're remembering when you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died and so that's--you're at the latter end of the '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --but you're five years old, you know, in the 1970s. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, so during those times you know, I don't know what the '70s [1970s] were representing except in Corporate America that's the beginning of blacks in Corporate America and you sort of see that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But kids don't become aware until maybe sort of their teen years unless there are discussions around the dinner table. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So I guess what I'm trying to--and in the '80s [1980s] we're in Reaganomics-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --and high interest rates, things like that. But what are you hearing, what are you learning or if, if your interest is in sports and running and track and field, who were your idols? I'm just trying to-- Speaker 2: Who were my idols? My idols at that time you know, like everyone else the Muhammad Alis of the world, Althea Gibson, you know, all of the black figures, Jackie Robinson. As a matter of fact, I sit on the board of the Jackie Robinson Foundation [New York, New York] and that's because he was my personal hero from the time I was a young girl until present day. So those types of role models were talked about in our household. Even in the community although I was raised in a predominantly Caucasian community [Edison, New Jersey], the few African Americans that were there were role models. These were entrepreneurs who ran their own businesses and companies, who graduated from top tier universities. Speaker 1: Would we know any of them? Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: These are local individuals who did well but I don't think they are well known outside of where we live. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, individuals who came from very humble beginnings and made something out of nothing and were very proud about that. So even in the community we have role models. We had people who worked hard and talked about the, if you worked hard what would happen, what good would happen and the possibilities. These are individuals who would take us on vacation to places that most black kids never went to or didn't, couldn't afford to go to. So I'd say we've had role models in the community, outside the community. So it wasn't that we would look on TV only and see someone that would be a, a representation of what good or great looked like. We had that around us quite a bit. Story_ID: 641144 Speaker 1: So when it comes to college-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you had said I think earlier that there were, when I was asking you--I can't remember how you expressed it, you know, but what you really thought of as a young person. You know, what was sort of inside of you? I can't remember what you said but how was the decision about you know, where you were going to go to college? Speaker 2: Well, my parents [Anna Grant Gadsden and Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] allowed me to make my own decision in terms of where I wanted to go. As long as I was going somewhere that was the deal. They said, "You can choose any university you want, choose your own major, we're not going to decide that for you, just you are going to college." So I had a lot of interests and because I had a lot of interests and because my parents allowed me to make my own decision, I was a little, I would say, all over the place. I wanted to--I loved fashion so I wanted to go to fashion school or I enjoyed sports but I wanted to run track somewhere. So I was a little all over the place because I had no one really steering me into okay, "You'll become a lawyer, you will become a doctor," and because I was young trying to make a grown up decision, I decided because I enjoyed fashion that I was going to go to the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York City [New York, New York]. Although my parents had a raised eyebrow about it, they said, "If that's what you want to do as long as it's a university do that." And I did that my first year I went to State University of New York [State University of New York System], Fashion Institute of Technology because Calvin Klein went there and all these wonderful designers went there. Speaker 1: So that's known as FIT right? Speaker 2: FIT, yeah and I went there in 1987 and I was there probably one semester and I was unfortunately--I was mugged on the street and I was beaten up pretty badly and I decided not to return. So I applied to Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and a few other local schools in New Jersey and the only school that would allow me to transfer midyear was Kean College [Kean College of New Jersey, Union, New Jersey]. Rutgers said, "Oh you'll have to wait until the next fall," and I did not want to sit out a semester. So I decided to go to Kean University or now it's called the university, at that time it was called Kean College and that's where I graduated. I stayed there for three years and I graduated with my bachelor's [degree]. Speaker 1: So did they ever find out who attacked you? Speaker 2: No unfortunately they never did. He took my coat and my pocketbook, and everything--money and everything I had and a Good Samaritan gave me a couple of dollars to put me back on the train to New Jersey and I made it back safely but they never found out who it was. Speaker 1: So you, you, you choose and it's called Kean-- Speaker 2: Kean (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even though it's--okay, even it's K-E-A-N. Speaker 2: K-E-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 641145 Speaker 1: So you said there that there were two teachers that influenced you: Bailey Baker and Christopher Lynch, is that true (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well Bailey Baker more specifically. Christopher Lynch I met later on years after I graduated but Bailey Baker was an African American Ph.D. professor who, he taught a class called the art of persuasion and another class that was called effective communication. I took both of those courses with him and he told me at that time, he said, "Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams] you're exceptionally bright, you're very talented but you need to step into your power. You're not giving all of yourself, there's some trepidation, there's something that's holding you back from being everything you need to be. In order to be powerful, step into your power." I'll never forget that conversation and he was also my advisor while I was in school and telling me which courses I should take and all of that. He was a scary individual because he was this very tall African American gentleman, just very smart and he would embarrass you in class if you weren't prepared and all of that. And I--there were a couple of times where he would embarrass me in class if I didn't do what I was supposed to do or if I didn't do something right or if I was presenting information. He was very stern and he would make an example out of you if you didn't do what you were supposed to do. But I thanked him for that because I think that he saw something in me that I didn't see in myself and that was the, I had a lack of confidence although I enjoyed public speaking and all of those kinds of things. He saw the (gesture) cellophane type of shield that I had and this persona I was giving off that really wasn't the authentic me. And he said, "Michelle," he said, "you've got to step into your power." He said, "You are not being and giving everything that you are as a person." Speaker 1: So did that resonate with you? Speaker 2: It did at that time and twenty years--actually it was more like twenty-five years after I graduated, I went back to the university [Kean College of New Jersey; Kean University, Union, New Jersey] to visit with him and he and I had a conversation about it. As a matter of fact, his teachings and his conversations with me resonated with me so much that when I received the Maya Way Award from Dr. Maya Angelou [HistoryMaker Maya Angelou], I invited him to go down to Washington, D.C. while I accepted the award and I thanked him in front of all of those people because he really had quite an impact on me as a person and shaping me in terms of who I was going to be and how I was going to show up places, particularly in the boardroom. Story_ID: 641146 Speaker 1: So when you, you spend the, the three years there (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I graduated early, yeah. Speaker 1: You graduate early? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then, when is your first position then; and what are you doing during summers? Speaker 2: During summers I worked. Speaker 1: Okay where are you working? Speaker 2: At what used to be called Bamberger's [L. Bamberger and Company] is now called Macy's [Macy's, Inc.]. I worked behind the makeup counter, Fashion Fair cosmetics, I sold makeup. I enjoyed wearing it and I sold enough lipsticks to pay for 50 percent of my education (laughter) 'cause I wanted a car and I want all these nice things and my father [Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] said, "That's great but you're going have to earn it and work for it. I'll pay for half of your education if you pay for the other half," and I said, "Terrific," so. Speaker 1: And so you do that and then what are your job prospects 'cause when you're graduating [from Kean College of New Jersey; Kean University, Union, New Jersey]--- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --let's see, you're graduating in, it is 1991, is that it? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990]. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990] okay so what is your first job then? Speaker 2: First job out of college--now there were no jobs at that time. I remember applying-- Speaker 1: Because of the recession. The recession-- Speaker 2: The economy, right, the economy was horrendous at the time. So my first job was--no I continued working at Bamberger's, it then transitioned into Macy's they were bought out by the same company by Federation [sic.] and I worked there full time until I landed my first real job. Speaker 1: You mean Federated Stores [Federated Department Stores, Inc.; Macy's, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Federated Stores, yeah so I transitioned from part time to full time and I worked there and was--I applied to their management training program and I went through their training program and I was then the junior manager of the men's fragrance department and that's where I started. So I was in retail for a few years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then that led to what? Speaker 2: That then led to my first corporate job at Phillips-Van Heusen [Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation; PVH Corp.] in Bridgewater, New Jersey which was the corporate arm of the IZOD brand, the Gant brand and all of that. Speaker 1: So that's retail still then. Speaker 2: Yeah. Not really, that's the corporate side (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) corporate side, I'm sorry but it was still in (unclear). Speaker 2: In the fashion industry. Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: In the fashion industry okay so you began in fashion, okay. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: And then, so what are you learning about yourself and about that industry and what is your position there? Speaker 2: My position there was like a customer service administrator and essentially I was taking orders from their corporate stores--from the retail stores, entering them into the database system and making sure that the goods made it from warehouse to the stores and that's essentially what I did for three years. Speaker 1: Okay, and then--so that's like 1993 or '94 [1994], right? Or '95 [1995], maybe? Speaker 2: About that, probably '93 [1993], '94 [1994] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause you transferred--right. Speaker 2: I did, yeah. Speaker 1: And so then what do you do at that point? Speaker 2: Well I learned a lot in that position. I learned what I didn't want to do which was retail to a degree but I what I did want to do was marketing because that job had a lot to do with marketing. How do you target a particular product to a certain market segment, and all of that. So I was learning a lot of different things while in the role while I was there. Story_ID: 641147 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was saying then, what do you, what are you doing from that point because I'm trying--you know, so you're really describing early entry-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --into the corporate world-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and then, but I'm wondering how, what do you do after those three years there [Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation; PVH Corp.]? Speaker 2: After those three years I then left that company and worked for another company called Wakefern Food Corporation [Keasbey, New Jersey] which is the corporate arm of the ShopRite supermarket chain. So how I was able to transition there, I had a friend that I went to college with [at Kean College of New Jersey; Kean University, Union, New Jersey] who worked in human resources and she told me about this wonderful management training opportunity that they were looking for diverse candidates to be part of that training program and that I would be perfect for it and that I should apply. So I submitted my resume, went through about six interviews and then I was--I then entered into their program. Speaker 1: Okay so you this is when, so you go from fashion to food. Speaker 2: Basically, yes Speaker 1: Right, okay. So in the position there is (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Leadership training. It was a training--management training program. Speaker 1: Okay so what was it designed to do and do you know--now that you're in the position you're in, a lot of these programs as it relates to you know, how do you increase the pipeline you know, 'cause what would have been the predecessor to what you did were, you know in the '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s] it was the Urban League [National Urban League] that was giving people--that were getting African Americans into corporate jobs. So you're, you entered this training program-- Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: --and what, what is the training program designed to sort of do? Speaker 2: The training program was designed to prepare young talent for positions of increased responsibility. So you would go through eighteen months of transitioning to different roles, different departments. So you would from procurement to accounting to marketing to distributions (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And spending how long in each one? Speaker 2: Three months to four months Speaker 1: Okay. So what do you, which one resonated with you? Speaker 2: Human resources, human resources. I enjoyed--it appeased a couple of things. One of the things I had to work on was strategic planning which had a marketing aspect to it but it also had a human capital aspect of it. So it was satisfying both sides of my brain and the things that I wanted to do and I loved it and also the gentleman who was head of HR, the vice president of human resources from Wakefern, Ernie Bell, I walked into his office one day and asked him if he would become my mentor and he said yes. He was so stunned that I had the moxie to do it as a young talent. He said, "Wow I've never had someone just walk into my office and ask me if I would become their mentor." He said, "I like that." He said, "Of course I will do it." And he became my mentor and after my eighteen months was up (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But describe him. Speaker 2: He is a very distinguished gentleman from Memphis, Tennessee, southern accent, you know, he-- Speaker 1: African American? Speaker 2: African American (unclear). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his role or position there? Speaker 2: He was vice president of HR for the entire company. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. Speaker 2: For the entire company. Speaker 1: How long had he had that position? Speaker 2: Two years? He had transitioned to the company from GE [General Electric]. He worked there for many years. Very distinguished, very eloquent in terms of how he came across. He was the only African American who sat on the executive committee of the company. Very well liked, very well respected amongst everyone not just the African Americans who worked for the company but everyone. Very smart, no nonsense but I think he was a very warm individual who enjoyed working with young talent. Anyone who he saw had some ounce of talent that he could cultivate, he would work with you. Speaker 1: So what did he teach you and what did you learn during that time and how were you promoted? So those are-- Speaker 2: Well he taught me a couple of things. He taught me the art of negotiation. So what I mean by that is he would allow me to sit on some of his senior, his leadership team meetings and when they were at the table negotiating with the unions and such, he would allow me to sit through that process. And so they would barter and banter back and forth about wages or benefits or whatever it was. He would allow me to sit through it as a learning opportunity. So that was a learning opportunity but just in general just how he would wrap his arms around just talent in general and just help you to realize your own potential. He would, he would tell you the best things about you but he would also point out the worst and say, "Okay you need to work on this. Here is an opportunity; here is where I'm going to help you." So he really did a lot for me in terms of grooming me to understand who I was, gave me a lot of things to think about in terms of self-awareness and he also pointed out things that I thought I did well and I really didn't do it so well. So I think he, he was almost like the moral compass, if you will. He told you things that your, your maybe your family wouldn't tell you. Speaker 1: And, and what, what did he--so you stayed there in that position how long? Speaker 2: Six years. Story_ID: 641148 Speaker 1: And by the time you leave what is your position (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well once I graduated from the Leaders in Training program, he offered me a role in his function in HR [human resources]. I could have gone anywhere else in the organization and I told him that I wanted to work for him and no one else. So I was a HR administrator once I graduated. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I then talked to him about diversity as an opportunity that I think that most companies who want to really distinguish themselves and differentiate themselves that they do this affirmative action diversity work really well and that we should consider having such a function within the company. He said to me, "Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams] if you can create a business case that makes sense for this company maybe you can create a new job for yourself." And I said, "Okay," so I went to IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and visited with Ted Childs [HistoryMaker Ted Childs, Jr.] and I went to PepsiCo and I visited with the head of diversity there. I went to Texaco [Texaco, Inc.] and I visited with Ed Gadsden [Edward N. Gadsden, Jr.] who is a distant cousin. So I made my way around to different companies doing some investigative reporting, so to speak, to really build a case for my company. Long story short, I built the business case. Ernie [Ernie Bell] helped me to package the presentation that I was going--he was going to allow me to present to the executive committee. I presented that information to the committee and I was able to create a job for myself once they said yes this is what we want to do. They then--Ernie said to me, "So Michelle do you want the job?" And I said, "Absolutely, yes." So that's when I entered into the diversity arena. Speaker 1: Okay. So what did you learn about those other programs and you know, you mentioned Ted Childs-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and he's very well known in the corporate community. I saw that you count him as one of your mentors. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So what are you learning when you're seeing these different programs and did you see things--one what you're learning; and two did you see things that you thought were not good programs? Speaker 2: Well, being a novice at the time, not necessarily understanding or knowing what good was. When I met with Ted what I saw was the power of the human condition, the power of influencing an organization that did well without diversity practice that then embraced it and then turned the corner and did even better. I, I think that IBM at that time was one of the frontrunners in the diversity space. So that was one of my first interviews, so to speak. So everyone else had similar types of programs but not to the degree to which what IBM was doing. So I saw, from my perspective not understanding what good looked like, it looked like everyone else was doing well at it. These were companies that were clients of Wakefern [Wakefern Food Corporation, Keasbey, New Jersey]; we used their products. So I said if our clients are using them in doing this (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then we should do something like this. Speaker 2: Then we should do something like this. Speaker 1: So how long did it take to get the diversity program? Speaker 2: Six months. Speaker 1: Okay, and so what did you accomplish with the program and how much of a pipeline were you able to initiate? Speaker 2: Well given that we were so embryonic at it, init- what we wanted to address first was increasing diverse representation in the company. So we wanted to hire diverse individuals so that's one of the things that we did first. So in I'd say the first year, we were able to increase our pipeline, I'd say maybe by 6 percent and we utilized that Leaders in Training programs as a pipeline to do that. So children, not children--students out of university were able to recruit individuals of diverse profiling utilizing that as an entree into the company. So we were able to leverage that program to bring in diverse individuals. Story_ID: 641149 Speaker 1: So what happens after six years then? Speaker 2: Ernie [Ernie Bell] and I were having one of our mentor sessions and he said to me, "Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams], you're doing great, you're doing exceptionally well, you presented in the boardroom." I had my first boardroom presentation at the age of twenty-seven and he helped me to create executive briefings and all of that. He said, "Michelle you're doing exceptionally well but I'm only forty-seven and there's not a lot of opportunity here in this company. I think you need to consider going to a much larger organization where the opportunities are plentiful. They're just not here." He said, "You have a lot of potential but it's not going to happen here. I'm going to be here so you can't have my job today or tomorrow. You need to look at a much larger company." So I took his feedback to heart and I started looking externally at other opportunities. Speaker 1: And so what opportunities did you find? Speaker 2: Merck and Company [Merck and Co., Inc.]. Speaker 1: So this is what year? Speaker 2: This was two thousand--what, 1999 or 2000-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but around that time, yes. Speaker 1: And so this is, Merck is much larger company? Speaker 2: Yes Speaker 1: And this is--now this is your third industry. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. And so you're coming into a major pharmaceutical company. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And so what, what--and you're coming into the HR [human resources] or the diversity space. What are you coming into? Speaker 2: The HR and diversity space. Speaker 1: 'Cause sometimes in companies they are combined and sometimes they are not. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Are they always combined? Speaker 2: In just about all the companies I've worked in, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So had someone preceded you in the position, Michelle? Speaker 2: At Merck, yes. Speaker 1: And their name? Speaker 2: My predecessor, I don't know who that was. It was fairly midlevel management, it wasn't--I don't recall the name of the individual. Speaker 1: Okay so in 1999 or 2000 you enter into, into Merck so what do you find and what is the opportunity that's presented? Speaker 2: I find--well it is a much larger organization. Wakefern [Wakefern Food Corporation, Keasbey, New Jersey], it's more retail oriented so, so I went from a retail type of an environment that was a lot less formal to a very, very formal corporate environment where blue, black and navy suits all over the place and Ivy League students walking all over the place and it's all about hierarchy and understanding unwritten rules and all of that. So the learning curve was pretty steep because I didn't come from that environment. I did not grow up in that environment. So I'd say for me it was a little tougher than some of the other individuals who were at the same level coming from other places because they may have had more exposure to that type of an environment whereas I didn't. So, you know, just understanding the rules of engagement and understanding how an organization of that size--how it operated and how to influence and how to package things a little bit differently, how to facilitate meetings differently. So the learning curve was steep but (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So steep meaning how long did it take you? Speaker 2: I'd say it took me, I learn pretty quick. Well you had to because it was either that or termination if you didn't get it right. So I'd say a couple of months. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I worked for a black woman. Her name was Angela Knight and she was a director of university relations and she was wonderful and she took me under her wing and she said, "I'm going to show you everything that I know in order to survive in this type of an environment." She came from Chevron [Chevron Corporation] and she moved from San Francisco [California] to New Jersey. So she didn't know New Jersey so she was asking me for help in understanding New Jersey and I was asking for her help in helping me to navigate through this huge mammoth of an organization. Speaker 1: Okay. So who are the key people at Merck--African Americans (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) African, African Americans? Speaker 1: And who is the CEO at this point? Speaker 2: Ray Gilmartin [Raymond V. Gilmartin] was the CEO; Ken Frazier [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier] was the head lawyer at the time. Speaker 1: Was he general counsel? Okay. Speaker 2: He was--he may not have been the general counsel then but close. There was a young woman by the name of Pamela Simpkins; she was in the CFO organization. Not many, I mean, there were several but not many. There were a couple on the research and development side but not very senior, but I'd say smatterings here and there of senior level black individuals. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 641150 Speaker 1: You're married already at this point, right? Speaker 2: Yes I got married in '96 [1996]. Speaker 1: Okay so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) While at Wakefern [Wakefern Food Corporation, Keasbey, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay so-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --can you tell us about your husband, David [David Williams] and how you met? Speaker 2: Yes I met my husband David in December of 1992--sorry 1991. Story_ID: 641151 Speaker 1: I met my husband David [David Williams] in December of 1991. I had just graduated from college [Kean College of New Jersey; Kean University, Union, New Jersey]; trying to figure out what my life was going to be like, what I was going to do. And my mother [Anna Grant Gadsden] was planning to visit with a client at AT&T [AT&T Inc.] in Basking Ridge, New Jersey one Tuesday afternoon and she asked me to join her and I said, "No I'm not really interested in going to AT&T. You go do it alone." She said, "No just come with me, it will be fun." So I acquiesced and I went with her. And we walked into the building, it's a mammoth of a lobby so I said, "I'll sit here and wait for you go visit your client, I'll just sit here." So I'm sitting waiting for her in the lobby and I see this gentleman walking back and forth. He walked by a couple of times, it wasn't David. It was a friend of his. So he walked by two or three times and I said, wow this is interesting that this guy keeps walking back and forth. So finally he comes over and he says you know, "You look like a nice girl," he said, "are you single?" I said, "Yes," and he had a wedding ring on so I said, is this married man trying to pick me up? He says, "No, no I'm not trying to pick you up at all but I have a very nice friend that I think you'd be interested in meeting." And I said, "No I'm not really interested in meeting anybody." I had just broken up with a gentleman I was dating for a little while. He said, "He's a nice guy, trust me." So I then said, "Okay here's my telephone number, if you want to give it to him, tell him to give me a call." And David called three days later. So we were on the phone just getting to know each other. We were on the phone overnight, all night long just talking. Where did you go to school? What are you doing? What's your family like? And just getting to know each other really well. We decided to meet for a date later that week and we met at the Olive Garden in Springfield, New Jersey about seven o'clock in the evening after work. So he walks in before I do, he describes himself really well and he told me he drove a red Audi. So I saw the red Audi pull up and I see him walk inside the building and he was very cute and I said, okay now I can go in because I wasn't sure what he was going to look like. So I walked into the building and I pretended I didn't see him and he introduced himself to me and we were seated at our table and we just talked about a lot of different things. We had a lot in common and to make a long story short, we've been together ever since. I mean, after that one date, we were dating and we got engaged a year and a half later and we got married a few years later in 1996, September 30th. So-- Speaker 2: So, and you're still really early in your corporate (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very early, very early. Speaker 2: But he was later in his (unclear). Speaker 1: He was later; David had been working for AT&T right out of high school. So he had a lot more years of experience in a corporate setting than I did. That was quite helpful to me because although I had a father [Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] who worked in Corporate America, he never worked for a company of that size and magnitude. So David would help me and coach me along to say, "Okay, this is how you do things and this is how you write a briefing, this is how you do your resume so that it's appealing." So it--that was quite helpful to me. Story_ID: 641152 Speaker 1: Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams], so at Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.] so you were presenting the structure of you know, who was where you know, 'cause you said there was Ken Frazier [HistoryMaker Kenneth C. Frazier]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and there was--you, did you say there was an African woman, there was an African American woman who had preceded you in the position or who you reported to? Speaker 2: Who I reported to, Angela Knight, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Angela Knight that's right. I've heard her name and so what, what is your mandate at that point and what is Merck trying to do? Speaker 2: At that time I worked in the staffing organization and we were part of the university relations group. So my mandate was to design programs, build and cultivate relationships with academic institutions that had individuals of diverse profiles. So Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I mean, so that was my job was to introduce Merck to these universities, cultivate and foster a relationship with them and entice them to send their students to us for hire. We had a massive internship program every year. We would bring in anywhere between five hundred and a thousand students every summer. So we just combed all the top tier campuses throughout the year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]? Speaker 2: Of the HBCUs and of course the more traditional universities but for the diversity effort we needed to get to the Spelmans and Morehouses and all of that. Comb the campuses, get the best and brightest and bring them to Merck to work in the labs, in the engineering areas, and the more nontraditional functions. Speaker 1: So you were looking at STEM [science, technology, engineering and mathematics], too? Speaker 2: We were, we were--we also out at the high school levels going to inner cities to talk about introducing STEM careers to students at that time. That was when STEM wasn't even STEM; it was very introductory at that point. We just wanted to talk about science and math and how it's fun and you can have a career and all of those kinds of things. Speaker 1: And so what did that--how many of those summer, summer interns were coming into the organization? Speaker 2: That was black (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As new hires, yes. Speaker 2: I would say that were black, I'd say maybe 100--wasn't many. Speaker 1: Okay. So what was the retention rate? Were you tracking things like that? Speaker 2: We were tracking--I don't recall retention rate at this point but it was fairly good. At that time Merck was (air quotes) mother Merck. Everyone wanted to work there. Their stock price was two hundred dollars plus dollars per share. It was really the place to work. They were really the employer of choice and that's one of the reasons why I decided to apply there because they are one of the largest employers in the State of New Jersey. Speaker 1: Plus they have--I mean Ken Frazier is there and he's making a name for himself. Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 1: With these mega lawsuits and plus you had--what was the chemical (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Vioxx the anti-inflammatory pain medication and I was there just before that whole thing broke. But Merck was one of the top tier pharma companies [pharmaceutical companies] in the world at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. And so you stayed there how long? Speaker 2: I was there for six years. Speaker 1: So what is your progression? Speaker 2: Jobs of increased responsibility. So I went from university relations to I became a manager in designing programs for some of the minority based organizations like the Society for Hispanic Professional Engineers and Black MBA [National Black MBA Association] and Hispanic MBA [National Society of Hispanic MBAs]. So I was elevated from the collegial or the collegiate university programs to professional organizations, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and all of those kinds of things. Speaker 1: Okay. And what are you learning about how to do recruitment with those organizations, outreach and do you feel that you were successful in that and-- Speaker 2: I learned that an organization should not be so arrogant to think that they are truly the employer of choice for every individual. I think that, we as a company, would go onto these campuses and assume that everybody--who wouldn't want to work for us. So it was almost like this real arrogance of why would they turn us down and if they turned us down, we don't need them anyway. I think instead of doing that, I think what would have been helpful is if we promoted more awareness about the organization and the careers and showing the role models like Ken and Pamela Simpkins and other folks who did exceedingly well there. So I think that what I've learned is we can't be so arrogant to think that everybody knows who you are and what you do and all of that. Because everybody may not want a career in the pharma industry. You're going to have to sometimes sell the opportunity to people particularly African Americans because at that time there were not a lot who saw themselves as having a meaningful career in pharma; it just didn't exist. Now I think that's changed, but at that time, not really. Story_ID: 641153 Speaker 1: So why do you then leave to join Novartis [Novartis Pharmaceuticals AG]? Speaker 2: Well that--I, Vioxx, the whole Vioxx debacle then broke. We were going through massive reductions in terms of head count and the function that I worked on was going to be hit. So before that happened, I decided to pursue opportunities in other places. I received a call from an executive search firm who said, "Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams], we've heard about you and what you've done at Merck [Merck and Co., Inc.]. There's another pharma company [pharmaceutical company] that wants to have a conversation with you. Are you interested?" And I said, "Sure." I said, "Who is it?" And they said, "It's Novartis, right down the street in East Hanover, New Jersey." So I had conversations with them, multiple interviews and such and they offered me an opportunity to become the director of diversity. I came as the director of diversity reporting into Debbie Freire who was the vice president of diversity. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And at this point is Alex Craher [ph.]--is he chairman of the Novartis--oh no Dan, Daniel Vasella. Speaker 2: Dan Vasella was chairman. Speaker 1: Was chairman, okay, okay. And so, how was Novartis versus Merck? I mean, what, what--how comparable companies are they in--? Speaker 2: In terms of size, very much comparable, two hundred thousand people each. The biggest difference was Novartis is Swiss based versus Merck which was an American company. Speaker 1: So you, you graduated--so you also--so, explain do you go in as vice president of global diversity or is that what you grow in? Speaker 2: That's what I grew in to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I entered as the director of diversity and was then promoted after about a year and a half to the executive director of diversity and after a year vice president and global head of diversity. Speaker 1: Okay so what does that mean? Speaker 2: That meant that I went from working for someone who designed the programs coming in the door but they also told me at the time that they were grooming me to become the eventual head of the diversity function. So I went from leading diversity in the Americas only to then becoming the global head of diversity for the entire global organization of 227,000 people at that time. Speaker 1: So that's quite a, that's quite a leap. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So how do you take charge of that? Speaker 2: Well I had Ted Childs [HistoryMaker Ted Childs, Jr.] was my mentor so that helped. But I also over the years through Wakefern [Wakefern Food Corporation, Keasbey, New Jersey], through my opportunities at Merck, through enjoying the diversity practice and understanding that I was becoming pretty good at change management and influencing leadership that I enjoyed not only having an impact on the people in the organization but also on the business side of things. I had some proof points to substantiate a lot of the work that I was doing and people were taking notice of that. So I felt comfortable in assuming the leadership roles in such a short period of time because one would argue that I was promoted relatively quickly at Novartis. Dan Vasella himself asked me to take on the role and how often is it that a chairman will hand select you for these types of opportunities? And he also mentored me while I was there. And to be mentored by the Dan Vasella was just the pinnacle of my career. Story_ID: 641154 Speaker 1: So what are you learning from him? Speaker 2: What did we learn from each other is, is the even greater question. What I learned from him is he's a brilliant business mind. He knows how to run a company. He's a medical physician by background and training but just exceptionally intelligent and he just knew how to--he seized opportunity in a way that I've never seen before. He took calculated risks, he would admit to his mistakes but he just knew how to run that company well. A lot of people feared him. He had a leadership style that was intimidating and a lot of people when they saw him enter the elevator, they would just walk right off. He would ask you a question if you were in the elevator with him, he would say, "What does this medication do in the ontological therapeutic franchise?" And if you didn't have the answer you would be fired on the spot. Because his perspective was that you know, if you're going to work for this company and if you call yourself a leader, you better know something about every single medication that we make in this firm. He was very, very serious about that. So a lot of people feared him. I, I wouldn't say I feared him, I think that I respected him in a way that I saw fit. I'm not easily intimidated by some of the folks that I worked for. There was another leader that I worked for while at Novartis [Novartis Pharmaceuticals AG], Thomas Ebeling who I still speak to, to this day and he's now CEO of one of the largest television networks [ProSiebenSat. 1 Media SE] in Europe. Thomas was similar to Dan [Daniel Vasella]. Thomas was German; Dan is Swiss so they had that very Germanic hard core leadership style. I prefer not to have that hard core leadership style. I believe in treating people the way in which you would want to be treated. But what I've learned from both of these gentlemen is that intelligence is the true differentiator and excellence is the true differentiator and if you can master those two things then you will be successful. Now the tactics in which they led their team, I certainly--it leaves a lot to be desired. But I think that they were just stellar, stellar business leaders; and one of the best I've ever worked for in my entire career. Story_ID: 641155 Speaker 1: So do you have a budget? Speaker 2: Current- (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean--no, did you have a budget? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay and how large was your budget? Speaker 2: Globally at that time, I want to say thirteen million [dollars]. Speaker 1: And so what was your mandate then, and what did you accomplish because in some of the diversity positions, there's no budget, you know, in some of the companies? The question is what is your challenge to do, what does the company want to do, how do you define diversity? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So can you, can you answer some of those? Speaker 2: Yeah I'd say in terms of the mandate, this is a company--Novartis [Novartis Pharmaceuticals AG] was a company that had diversity practice in place for I'd say about ten years before I got there, ten, thirteen years before I got there. The sole focus was on women primarily and I think that for the people of color and anyone else who had another dimension of diversity in their profile they felt completely alienated, disregarded, disrespected because the women were ascending in the organization and everyone else was getting what was left over. So we needed to change that model and change it pretty quickly because we were losing people of color in droves. And so the mandate was if we could somehow problem solve around the representation of diverse talent in the company, not just gender diversity but all dimensions of diversity and if we could also unravel the issue around retention and not allowing these people to just walk out the door and feel like they can go to a competitor and have a fruitful career. If we could change those two things and do something about that then we would have been able to put the stake in the ground and declare victory. We were able to get underneath a lot of that. I had a very large organization. At the time I had eight direct reports and these were leaders of diversity in various parts of the world and I had on 117 diversity champions. What that means is these are business leaders that we've identified. Different places around the world; they were housed, very senior leaders who were respected by the employees. We gave them diversity responsibilities within that particular area or that particular country. So I was able to influence diversity practice in just about every single country where we did business and they took it seriously because the business leaders owned it and understood it and were trying to make a difference based on the overarching strategy that I put in place. So over the course of eight years when I was there, we were able to make some meaningful change. We were able to increase women in leadership from when I entered it was probably 8 percent, when I left we were almost at 32 percent in women; people of color, similar types of metrics. So we really were able to turn corners. I also designed some very targeted and specific learning and development programs for women and for people of color. So we were turning the corner on the diversity front. Now that's not to say that we were perfect in any way. We certainly had our challenges but I'd say that at the time we had the attention of the business leaders. People were taking it seriously. We had the backing of Dan Vasella [Daniel Vasella], we had the backing of Thomas Ebeling and I was presenting to the executive committee and the boar- I was meeting board members about diversity. So I was doing exceedingly well-- Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in my role there. Story_ID: 641156 Speaker 1: Or were you recruited away? (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So how, how does that happen? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: So, I mean you stayed with the Swiss company but you, you--why, why would you leave when you're on that track? Speaker 2: Well I at that time, David [David Williams] and I were living in Switzerland and I wasn't sure if we were going to stay and become Swiss citizens, if I were coming back to the United States. An executive search firm called and asked me if I would be interested in talking to a Swiss firm who knew who I was, who knew the work that I'd done, respected the work and they wanted to do something similar and they wanted to take me to lunch. And I said, "Well who is it?" And they said, "Credit Suisse [Credit Suisse Group AG]." Credit Suisse, my boss [Daniel Vasella] sat on the board of Credit Suisse and I knew that I wanted to make a change. Either I was going to stay at Novartis [Novartis Pharmaceuticals AG] or I was going--if I stayed I would have to live in Switzerland until retirement and I wasn't sure if I wanted to do that. I was missing my family here and I said to David, my husband, "Maybe we should consider going back to the U.S. I don't know what's going to happen here. The company's going through some tumultuous times; we need to make a decision whether or not we're going to stay here and become Swiss citizens or if we're going back to the U.S." I had lunch with Credit Suisse just to get a sense of what their opportunity was and I, I really liked what I heard. I've always had some trepidation about finance. I'm not great in terms of math, it's been one of my--probably my weakest areas of development. I can't say I'm horrible at it but I'm not very good at it although I manage millions of dollars every year, I'm just not very good at finance at least from that context. I've always pursued opportunities where there would be something for me to learn and to grow from. So here it was a Wall Street firm was asking me if I would be so kind enough to consider taking on their chief diversity officer role that they wanted someone with my skill even though I didn't have the background. I said to them look I'm not--I don't like finance, I don't even know if I would do well in this opportunity and they said you don't need to know finance. You just need to know your practice; we will supply you with everything else. We will support you with everything else. So this was an opportunity for me to after two years if I said yes to them and to work for them, I could go back to the United States. So it did a couple of things for me. Here is another Swiss company, I do speak German, there's another company that would allow me to do the work that I love, to learn a new skill that I was shying away from for many years. I was able to work for someone who I respected, Pamela Thomas-Graham who I knew from a distance she and her husband [Lawrence Otis Graham]. I knew of them and she is an incredible leader and had an impeccable reputation. I said here at this stage of my career, this could be my swan song. I've done diversity work in two major pharma companies [pharmaceutical company] and to end my career on Wall Street and to do the work that I love and make a difference on Wall Street, why would I say no to that. So I said yes when they offered the opportunity to me after thirty-six interviews, a meeting with their board member, a psychological assessment, I said yes. Speaker 1: Thirty-six interviews? Speaker 2: Thirty-six interviews. Story_ID: 641157 Speaker 1: What had they been doing in the diversity space? Speaker 2: Not a lot, just the traditional type of work. They had employee research groups who were putting on these events around theme months like Black History Month and Women's History Month. They were doing a lot in the GLBT [gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender] community. They were doing a lot for women but for everyone else, not a whole lot going on. So they really wanted to turn the corner, they really wanted to go from good to great and they asked me if I would help them and I said yes. Speaker 1: So you're in human resources. Speaker 2: I am in human resources. Speaker 1: Okay so what is the structure and how does it differ from what you did before and what have you been able to do in the two years and what are your plans? Speaker 2: In terms of the structure, I work in the talent branding and communications division [at Credit Suisse Group AG], which is led by Pamela Thomas-Graham. So HR is part of the talent umbrella within TB&C [Talent, Branding and Centre of Excellence]. I sit on the human resources management committee which is the leadership committee for HR and I report to the head of talent development and strategy. I have a fairly small organization. I have in total there's thirteen of us globally who work in the diversity function. We are a forty-eight thousand person organization and we are in about thirty-six countries around the world. So it's a far cry from what I came from [at Novartis Pharmaceuticals AG]. A two hundred thousand person organization in two hundred countries versus forty-eight thousand in thirty-six. So for me less can be more because it's a very--it's a smaller organization where you can have more intimate conversations and dialogue and make the kind of impact that you want to make in a shorter amount of time because you're not travelling around the world fifteen times in order to meet everyone and to meet the leadership team and thus and so. So in terms of what I've been able to do are several things. To design the diversity 2.0 strategy, so they've done great work up until the time that I entered. It's now time to start thinking about diversity in the context of the business because we're talking about a Wall Street firm. These guys have been successful without diversity all these years, so why now? So it's starting from having that conversation, why they need to embrace it. The clients are asking about it. I spend a lot of my time speaking to clients and asking their questions. They want to know, "So what are you doing on the diversity front?" So the bankers will bring me in to talk about that. You know, I just think that this is a firm who's starting to understand that if they don't do it what is the consequence, that they won't be competitive. So I think they are starting to understand that a lot better and they are also starting to wrap their arms around the true business case in understanding, look if you don't treat your talent well, if you're not inclusive, if you have any unconscious bias in your decision making around promotions and hiring and all that, no one is going to work here. There are too many other firms out on the street--Wall Street and people have too many choices so we've got to do something different. So I think that they are starting to understand that a lot better. Speaker 1: So what is your budget and what are your plans then? So you talked about the need. Speaker 2: Yeah Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Budget--total budget I'd say it's minimal--six million [dollars]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And that includes salaries and all the operating costs and all of that to run it. Story_ID: 641158 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what are your plans? Speaker 2: My plans are to continue to promote awareness around diversity 2.0. Make my rounds around the organization [Credit Suisse Group AG]. I've been working and living in Switzerland for the past two years so a lot of folks don't know who I am yet in certain pockets in the organization. So I've been spending a good portion of my time getting to know people, getting to know the leadership, showing up, presenting the different strategy to different leadership teams around the world. So I've been spending a lot of my time just gripping and grinning and getting to know people allowing them to have access to the strategy. Talking about why the strategies are important and why it's going to allow them to build their business in a way that's going to be constructive for them. That this is not an opportunity for them to just hire women or people of color because I think there's a lot of that type of skepticism that still exists. But rather see it as a unique business opportunity that's going to allow them to be truly competitive. Story_ID: 641159 Speaker 1: And do you have--so you're still--I still say you've got a lot of years left, right? Speaker 2: I think I do. Speaker 1: And so what, what do you want to have as your mark on Corporate America? Speaker 2: I've always said in every single company that I enter or that I work for, I want to leave it in better condition than when I entered. And what that feels like, I'm not sure but in every company I've ever left, I've left my mark in some way. Either I've allowed them to--there's been either awards won that they never had before, there's been programs and things that have been created that were new and unique and it's really game changing for that organization. I've always said anywhere I've ever entered an organization, I really want to leave it in a, in a better state than when I entered it. And to me that's what success means. Story_ID: 641160 Speaker 1: Before we get to that part-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --I have one question about diversity and its role in Corporate America. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, especially at a time when affirmative action-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --has been, you know, repealed and what, what you feel the, you know, its viability is going forward as a business model and then the role of a person like Luke Visconti who you know in diversity and what you see the potential and the challenges. Speaker 2: So just so I understand the question, so are you asking where this diversity work is going, given the-- Speaker 1: Yes Speaker 2: Okay. I'd say the diversity work in general has evolved over time. It's changed quite a bit even since I entered a while ago. It's gone from this conversation about just being the right thing to do and the nice thing to do to a real critical business imperative. So that to me is where I've always wanted it to be. So this work is now for me extremely exciting. I think that though it's starting to become as a field--it's starting to become a little bit, I wouldn't say stale but I haven't seen anything really new coming out of the diversity practice. We're still talking about addressing the same kinds of things from representation to attrition and all of those kinds of things. So I think that there needs to be this reinvigoration of the practice. So what do we really mean and how does this really impact business and how do you get from good to great? We're not having those discussions at least not in recent years. Now I've been gone for the past seven years outside of the United States. I'm now back. But even still we're not having the same level of rigor and robust discussions around this work that we once had. I'm not sure why that is and I think a lot of us are asking ourselves that question. What I see happening now is the diversity function is now starting to be integrated into talent, management. So it's now being morphed into something else other than a stand alone function. A lot of companies are starting to kind of envelope it into HR [human resources]. It's being buried to an extent. Some people are just calling it leadership and inclusion. So we've gone from affirmative action and having those conversations to diversity--it was diversity and inclusion and now a lot of folks are just calling it inclusion. So it's evolved and I'm not quite sure where this work will--or what it will evolve into. Luke Visconti and individuals like that, I give them a lot of credit because they've seen the evolution, they've been through it and these are the folks who are in the trenches really wanting to do something meaningful. I think they are also asking themselves the same questions to be honest with you. Employee resource groups, you know, what's going to happen with that, what more can we do? Having the conversation with white males where they don't feel threatened by this. You know, where are we going with that? So it's still the same types of conversations from I'd say almost ten years ago. Story_ID: 641161 Speaker 1: So where do African Americans fit because diversity has, you know, used to be black and white then, you know, but it is--I won't say it w- used to be just black and white, but there was at one point it was more black and white. Now it's all kinds of groups including gay and lesbian and transsexuals, I mean it includes everything and the handicapped, the disabled, Native American, Asian. So where does the African American community fit because in many ways it was the African American community that started this? Speaker 2: Yes, that's right. I still think that we are the frontrunners in all of this. At one point I thought that women were gaining a lot of ground and African Americans were almost losing some ground in this discussion about diversity. I don't think that's the case. I still think that African Americans--we are still leading the dialogue. I think we're still leading this discussion in a very meaningful way. Given the fact that we have an African American president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and several African American CEOs like [HistoryMaker] Ursula Burns and a few others, I still think that we're still leading the discussion and a meaningful one. Not sure where it's going though with African Americans, I'm not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, but you--If you look at the numbers you started at the HBC [historically black colleges and universities (HBCU)]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Those numbers are hurting. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Education--educational black males the ones that you--even if you look at business schools and there is a new black description of black and that is non--those with non slave ancestry meaning African born or other born blacks. So how are those--these sorts of nuances really affecting the black community that you would feel positive about its--? Speaker 2: Well I think there are several examples of African Americans who have ascended in a lot of these organizations. I think we now have more African American CEOs than before at least by the statistics I recently read. Now that's not to say that we, we can declare victory in any way. I still think though, to your point, that there're still a lot of opportunity for us to do more despite just having the conversation. I know the National Urban League, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--this is a constant conversation but I still think there is still more that we can do. What that something is, I think we're already doing it. I think we have specific programs targeted to our youth. We have--a lot of us are going out mentoring a lot of talented individuals and bringing them in. A lot of us are being asked to go on campuses and taking time out of our schedules to be the face of the organization on campuses. So I think we're doing our part. We can always do more, but I think we're doing as much as we can to be honest with you. Story_ID: 641162 Speaker 1: You know, we had talked just a little bit about your, you know, having lupus. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, and so when did that occur and how did that affect your rise through Corporate America? And, and 'cause that's a, you know, that's a disease that affects people in the African American community, not exclusively but (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. I was diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus in July of 2006. According to my doctor, I probably had the disease long before that but that's when I received the actual diagnosis. It was impacting me in a number of different ways. I, for a number of years, was receiving all kinds of signals. I had swelling in my joints, in my fingers, in my elbows, in my knees and in my ankles. I would have these unexplained fevers that were off and on. These unexplained headaches and I never had headaches before but all of sudden I started having these headaches. I started losing my hair at one point and no real explanation around that. I went into the hospital to have surgery, I believe it was in 2006--it was in 2006, and my sed rate level--sed rate inflammation levels the anesthesiologist was looking at my chart and said, "Your inflammation levels are really high. Do you have autoimmune illness?" And I said, "No," at the time I wasn't aware. He said, "Let's get this checked after your surgery," so I said, "Okay." So I had a full workup afterwards and that's when they determined that I had SLE. My life has been forever changed since then because lupus is a very serious illness if it is not treated and if you don't take care of yourself. So I at the time had decided that I was no longer going to be commuting to Switzerland which I had been at that time. I was here in New Jersey with my husband [David Williams] and commuting to Switzerland every other week and I did that for about a year. I was probably not eating as healthy as I could have been at that time and I was just running myself ragged and making excuses for why my ankles were swelling, "Oh I'm just getting older," or, "I'm on a plane," or whatever the case was. So I was explaining it all away instead of doing the right thing and seeing a doctor. Once I received the diagnosis, I then decided that I was going to re-prioritize my life and the way in which I lived. That my health was more important than anything else, that I was not going to commute to Switzerland, that I was going to try to stay off the plane as much as possible and to minimize my stress where possible because it was a life or death situation. If I were on a plane, I had a pre-disposition to blood clots and that can happen to any one of us and that can be deadly. So I just decided at that time to seek the help of a lifestyle coach who was going to help me get my life back in order at least to some normalcy because I was really running myself ragged. That was in 2006. I have been in remission for the past four years. Now, I still have bouts of swelling here and there but it's not like it once was. My husband can tell you we would spend probably every other weekend in someone's emergency room because I had a complication or a problem or swelling or a lupus flair or something that would happen as a result of my illness when I really wasn't taking care of myself. Since I've sought the help of my life coach, I've been in remission but I'm forty-four years old now and I have since re-prioritized everything from my career to the things that are most important to me. I put my career ahead of everything else and now that's secondary to everything that I have that is important to me right now, myself being one, my family, my husband and I really would like to retire early. I've worked--I've been working since I was fifteen years old either part-time or some form of employment, I've been working a long time. And lupus will, if it's not treated, will shorten your lifespan. So I would like to spend the rest of my years helping the next generation of leaders get to where they want to be. I would love to retire at fifty or fifty-five at the very latest but I would love to write books. I want to do other things. I want to enjoy my senior years and whatever time I have left but that certainly was an eye opening experience for me, 2006 July, I'll never forget it. I just think for anyone that I know and people that I have exposure to and access to, I tell them the same thing is to put yourself first. I was a healthy, virile woman until then and I'm still to a degree in mourning about my good health because if you don't have your health what do you have. You can't help anyone else, you can't do anything else. So it's paramount, it's critically, critically important to me that I maintain my, my, my good health and to repri- I've shifted. I've re-prioritized everything. Story_ID: 641163 Speaker 1: What's the role your husband [David Williams] played? Speaker 2: My husband has really been incredibly supportive throughout all of, not just the illness part, but my entire career. Anytime I had these dreams and aspirations to be bigger, better, bolder, faster whatever that was, he always said, "Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams], you can do it. If there's anyone who is going to get that job, I know it's going to be you." So he's been my biggest fan from day one and he sacrificed his own career [with AT&T Inc.] so that I could assume my career aspirations and I don't know many people who would do that. So he's been incredibly selfless, he's been incredibly supportive and even throughout my illness and all these hospital stays, I've had ten surgeries in ten years, he's been there by my side. So he's been really just a wonderful human being throughout it all. Speaker 1: So the surgeries were related to lupus [systemic lupus erythematosus]? Speaker 2: Some of it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now that, after I had my diagnosis some of it was, yes, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see, that's nice. So, I--I think we should break and bring him on then. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 641164 Speaker 1: (DAVID WILLIAMS): David Jamal Williams [David Williams], D-A-V-I-D, J-A-M-A-L, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S Speaker 2: Okay and today's date? Speaker 1: (DAVID WILLIAMS): July 13th, 2013. Speaker 2: Okay, and we have been interviewing your wife [HistoryMaker] Michelle Gadsden-Williams and this is unusual for us what we're about to do because--but what we were told is that we could not interview Michelle and not interview David, that they were two sides of a coin. So I want you just to tell us how you met and you know, you've been in Corporate America too. You are retired so if you could sort of tell that story. Speaker 1: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Okay yeah, we met about seventeen--it will be seventeen years ago, we've actually been married for seventeen so it's been a little bit longer than that that we met. Michelle was going to my office, office building [at AT&T Inc.] with her mother [Anna Grant Gadsden]. Her mother was a vendor and my office building that day and I actually wasn't in town at all. I was away on business but a good friend of mine ended up seeing her. Rumor has it she wasn't really happy about being there that day, she had other plans but her mother said, "Come on along, come with me today." I'm glad she did, I'm really glad she did because when my friend met her, he just struck up a conversation and said you know, "How are you doing, what's going on?" She said, "I'm here with my mom," and they just kind of hit it off. He said, "Are you seeing anyone?" And she said, "No." He said, "You know, I have someone that you might be interested in meeting," and at the time I was actually looking for a girlfriend. You know, he gave her my number and she ended up calling me shortly after and as soon as I came back business, we set up a date, we met at Olive Garden [in Springfield, New Jersey], I'll never forget. Just a blind date, she was in the car actually; she waited for me to come in (laughter) before she--to see me. I remember that we just hit it off that night, we ate and then we got in the car and we drove. What was really interesting about our conversation was she was saying everything that I was feeling or I had in my head at the time. So it was quite interesting just being in a serious relationship, just talking about aspirations, goals, being able to travel, being focused on work all of those things. And you know, I was looking for someone like that with those values. And, you know, from that time on we hit it off; and we've been together ever since. Story_ID: 641165 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your background and your family background and where you're from. Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Um-hm. I grew up in Essex County in East Orange [New Jersey], with my mother [Jeanette Williams], grandmother, father and I have an older sister--six years older, and my aunt. So when we grow up we have a pretty good strong household. Modest home, modest income, my mother is the educator; she's been a schoolteacher for as long as I've been alive. My aunt as well also an art teacher in East Orange and my sister is a nurse, so--and my grandmother who is also a very important matriarch in the family, she worked for the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]. She was a tax consultant--specialized tax preparer. You know, and we, we--and my father at the time was there in the household but he was a much older man. So we all had a good relationship. They--my mother felt it was important that she send me to private schools. Schools with smaller classroom sizes to get that specialized attention. So I grew up going through private schools. She felt that it was important that I get exposure to different types of sports and activities. So I grew up actually playing tennis, introduced to tennis at six years old, I ski. These were the circles I travelled in so the children that I went to school with did these things and these were the things that I did as well. I took up golf later on in life. I started with lessons there but I actually came back to golf and now I'm an avid golfer. At that time it wasn't a bad life. They focused on education; they made sure we, we got a good education, we stayed in school. At that time also a very good community, good friends and, and, and everything, so. Story_ID: 641166 Speaker 1: So you, you had worked at AT&T [AT&T Inc.] for-- Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Um-hm. Speaker 1: --how many years before you met Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams]? Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): I was at AT&T--I, well I started in '88 [1988] so I was actually one year out of high school when I started and I met Michelle actually in 1990 a few years later it was in December. So I started in customer service, entry level position at AT&T and worked my way up. I finished AT&T in 2007, I took an early retirement package and I was a, a product manager. I managed their business--local service business for business customers. Story_ID: 641167 Speaker 1: What does Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams] mean--so Michelle got diagnosed with lupus [systemic lupus erythematosus] but I, I think more she talks about you being so significant to her rise in Corporate America? What does she mean by that? Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): That's very kind and very gracious of her. I believe that the support that I give her because I want to see her succeed. You know, I love to see her smile. I don't know if you noticed but Michelle has got a great sense of humor and if I can keep her smiling and in a good frame of mind, I feel like I'm doing her job. When she got the news about the lupus, I think it was devastating to both of us and the entire family. Not sure what impact that would have long term. You know, you hear these frightening stories about it attacking your major organs and things like that. So it took us back but when I think about Michelle, I really have to say it's a purpose driven life. From the time that we met, again talking about her goals and aspirations and what she wanted to do, to seeing her drive to Pennsylvania to get her master's degree at U Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Just taking on all of the hard assignments at work, volunteering to do the hard jobs, to travel, to go global, to do all of those things and to see her rise. You know, I'm really in awe of the way that she's lived her life, worked through this bad news because that, that could really stop a lot of people. You get that news, you stop exercising, you kind of clam up. But she seems to take it in stride and continue to do more, to want more, to be better and it's really amazing to see that. Again my role is just to insure that she has that surrounding that allows her to flourish. Speaker 1: So what do you mean by that? So what things do you help with and do and support? Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): I try and manage all the households. So making sure that anything that comes to the house, she doesn't have to deal with. If we're doing bills, if we're doing taxes, if we're doing you know, travel planning, estate planning, whatever, I try to take care of the family aspect also with managing relatives if necessary. If there are lots of calls coming in for whatever reason, you know, I'd like to be the first person they go to because I know she needs to stay focused on doing what she has to do. I make sure that simple things, cars are in shape, you know, she's safe, she can get back and forth to work. We had a problem with her car, with her tire going flat, I want to make sure that's taken care of so she doesn't have to worry about those things. It's important for me to intervene where I see it's necessary so she can focus and do what she has to do. Speaker 1: Okay. And so was this role what you always envisioned or was this, this a role that you assumed after early retirement. Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): I think this is more of a role that I assumed by seeing her take on these challenges by wanting to go global [with Novartis Pharmaceuticals AG] for a move to Switzerland. So I was doing it as a husband when we got married but it was a kind of shared responsibility and we supported each other a little bit differently as we were both executives at the time. But after, when I took early retirement [from AT&T Inc.] and we moved abroad, my role kind of transitioned so I could focus more on her and seeing that she achieved her goals. My goals in corporate changed to per- more personal goals as opposed to professional. So that was, that was--I think it worked out that way, it worked very well. Story_ID: 641168 Speaker 1: So what were your goals then? Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): My goals originally again was to ascend in Corporate America as well (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then how did they change to corporate? Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): And then that changed when we, when we moved abroad [to Switzerland]. So then I started taking a look back at myself. Where can I improve areas myself? I finished my degree, when I was overseas I wrote a book--a children's book that I'm very proud of and I want to see developed into a series. Again my focus more or less became on Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams]. I started working over there as well because it almost didn't feel right. I didn't want to stay out of corporate too because I had never been used to that. So the first thing I did after I finished the book and I quote, unquote, decompressed from my corporate job [at AT&T Inc.] was after I did that, was I started looking for another corporate job. That was good because I wanted that global experience myself. I wanted to see what it was like to work with people who are different from you--very different from Americans. To see their ways of working, to see their business approach, to understand what their backgrounds were and how they attack problems strategically and things like that and that was very helpful for me. I'm glad I got that global experience. I worked for a agri- a chemical company while I was there. And yeah, so I'm able to share with people how they do things and how their processes work and what's different and, in corporate life from there versus here. Story_ID: 641169 Speaker 1: Now you're back here though and so how, how, how--because that's a lot of change, you know. Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Um-hm. Speaker 1: So how are you going--how do you see your marriage [to HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams] manifesting and your continued support of her manifesting and your continued creation of your own career? Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): So I still see my role as being very important doing those other things and handling those peripheral activities but I also see with the type of work she's doing, I have a role, too. To be up at the plate, to support her, to travel with her because she requires more travel here in the United States to go global and she's more on a client, extremely high client focus type of role. So if she's out late, meaning clients and doing things like that, if it's appropriate, I see myself being there with her on those late nights to meet the people that she has to work with and introduce to, introduce the company [Credit Suisse Group AG]. So I think it's important that I be there as her partner and assistant, in some respects, as well as the spouse. As far as I'm concerned my role--continuing my personal ambitions and goals, I'm going to do that, I'm going to save time in a day to continue developing my book series and continue writing and you know, get out there and help children. Play golf, become involved with golf and things like that. So it's a formula that's working for us. In confidence, I told a friend of mine, I said you know I'm not sure about working now. I've said, "I've been looking, I've had an interest in looking just to see what's out there but I'm not getting any hits." And he said, "You know you're supposed to be doing what you're doing, continuing supporting her." He said, "Do what brings pleasure to you at this point and develop what you've always wanted to personally because that's the formula that's keeping you two you know, grounded and able to achieve the things that we've been able to achieve and accomplish." Speaker 1: Now isn't that a new male? Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): It is. I think it is. Speaker 1: So how, do people look at you quizzically sometimes or the couple quizzically because this is much talked about in today's society. Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Yes. Speaker 1: There's been a switching of roles and it's somewhat of a new paradigm, maybe it's a new paradigm. Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): I think it is and I think that people need to understand that the role is just as important. Now I actually have a lot of respect for those traditional women in roles like that in the household. We don't have any children but there's still a lot of other stuff to manage and you have to schedule things and you have to make sure you show up and do a lot of different things. So I do tell people that it is a different role but if you're man enough to accept it and to step to the plate, it's rewarding for everyone. Speaker 1: So how do you feel your marriage has grown closer? Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Our marriage has grown closer, you know, by the fact that we do a lot--we've always done a lot of things together. We would always sit down to dinner, visit family on the weekends. But just by being away, living in another country, getting to know another culture together, travelling abroad on vacation and experiencing new and dynamic things that we have, it's brought us closer. We also share these experiences quite a bit with our family. So it's actually brought the entire family together. We are able to do a lot more to support our family and to let them see the things we've seen. We had eighteen of our family members in Provence, France last year and many of them it was their first time to Europe, first time out of the country and they absolutely loved it. They said, "We had no idea this is what you guys were doing and how you liked it and appreciate it." So it just being able to int- introduce people, open new doors to people who haven't had that experience has also brought us close together. And it's a common goal for us to be able to do that. Story_ID: 641170 Speaker 1: So what, what, what else would you like to say? Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Well, I'd really like to know, to let Michelle [HistoryMaker Michelle Gadsden-Williams] know and the audience how hard she works at what she does. Managing the lupus [systemic lupus erythematosus], wanting to be better to make sure that in her work, this is the most important thing that everyone has equal footing. They actually have a level playing field and to be able to become the best person they can be in their roles as people and then to be able to pay it back--to pay it forward. I think that's what--I see the benefits of her work, it's tough work, it's extremely difficult work. You know, there have been days when she's just like, "I don't know how I can continue," but yet she does. The next day is a brand new day. And, you know, being able to help her talk through those things--those issues to get it out there is very important to me because she has a lot of work to do left. Speaker 1: And so what you're essentially addressing in many ways is that in order to be successful in Corporate America, it almost takes two people working together. Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): I think it does. Speaker 1: There has to be or someone has to have, if they're single, a tremendous support system. Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Absolutely I think a support system if it's not a spouse, it's a family member, it's a friend, it's a pet sometimes because you need somebody there to support you, however you need it. So it's that emotional aspect and we as humans strive for and I think it's important that we be there for them. Speaker 1: Okay, well thanks, David [Gadsden-Williams' husband, David Williams]. Story_ID: 641171 Speaker 1: This is my maternal grandfather, Mannie Grant, Sr. [sic. Mannie Grant, Jr.] when he was about thirty-four years old in South Carolina, as you can see having a good time taking photos, just leisurely, casually on the weekends. Speaker 2: What year about is that? Do you know? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: And this is my maternal grandmother, Rosalee Grant. She was probably about the same age in her early thirties in South Carolina just having a nice time taking casual photos on the weekend. Speaker 1: This is a photo of me around the holiday season at my parents' home at 218 Nicholson Avenue [Edison, New Jersey]. I don't remember what else is behind that photo. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It looks like it was Christmas. Speaker 1: Yeah from the holidays, yeah. Speaker 2: And that's a Christmas tree. Dates are important. Speaker 1: Dates, okay. Speaker 2: This is my wedding day, September 30th, 1996 and this is my maternal grandmother, Rosalee Grant. She helped me to buy my wedding gown for my wedding. That was her contribution as the grandmother of the bride and this is one of my favorite moments with her before she passed away. Speaker 1: These are my [paternal] grandparents, Reverend Herbert Gadsden, Sr. and Elizabeth Polite Gadsden at their anniversary. They were married well over sixty years before--they were married sixty years and they were celebrating their sixtieth wedding anniversary at this particular occasion--or on this particular occasion. Speaker 2: And this is my grandmother, Elizabeth Polite Gadsden at the podium speaking as she always eloquently does celebrating an occasion, I don't recall the exact occasion but she was a woman of not very few words but just eloquent in her speech. Speaker 1: This is my wedding day with my handsome husband, David Jamal Williams [David Williams], and we're taking photos after the ceremony just in front of the, the circular statue there and it means endless love. We were married in Hamilton, Bermuda. Speaker 2: David, was this on our honeymoon? Speaker 1: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Yeah (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, okay. This is a photo of David and I near the Spanish Steps while on our honeymoon in Rome, Italy just having a nice time just being out and about. The weather was just glorious and we were just taking a leisurely walk and a nice couple took a nice photo of us near the Spanish stairs. Speaker 1: This is our engagement photo when we became engaged in 1993 in--David, what park was that, do you remember? Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): No. It was Woodfield. Speaker 1: No, it was Westfield. Yes, it was Westfield. A park in Westfield, New Jersey. Where we were taking photos so that we could announce our engagement to friends and family. Speaker 2: Year? Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-one [1991]. Speaker 2: Another photo of the family right after our wedding ceremony in Hamilton, Bermuda near the water. There was a hurricane that just went by and we finally had an opportunity to take photos with no rain but high humidity with my mother-in-law Jeanette L. Williams [Jeanette Williams], David, myself and my parents Herbert [Herbert Gadsden, Jr.] and Anna Gadsden [Anna Grant Gadsden]. Speaker 1: My twin sister and I were cheerleaders. We enjoyed being part of the shamrocks cheerleading team and this was the first year when we were cheerleaders that you so a lot of fun. Speaker 2: Oh did you say her name there? Speaker 1: No, my twin sister, Monique--my twin sister, Dr. Monique Gardner-Witherspoon. She'll appreciate that. Speaker 2: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Yeah. Speaker 1: She would. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: This was a wonderful opportunity in 2008 where I had an opportunity to meet Oprah Winfrey and I brought several of my colleagues from Novartis [Novartis Pharmaceuticals AG] along with me for the occasion and as you can see, we were having a wonderful time here. Speaker 2: And this is at Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina]? Speaker 1: It was a Bennett College event sponsored by Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole]. Speaker 2: Were you a sponsor or (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes Speaker 2: Okay. With what company, is that Novartis? Speaker 1: Novartis, yes. This is my nephew Cameron [ph.] when he was about three years old. This is my parents' only grandchild and he is--we call him the lone ranger but he certainly is the light of all of our lives. Speaker 2: Do you know what year that was taken? Speaker 1: He was born in--it was 2003. This is the year 1980, Alicia was an infant and we were taking a family photo. Monique and I had just returned from a summer of camp and spending time with friends in Los Angeles [California] and as you can see we have quite the tan. But that was a great time and we were happy to see Alicia who was a baby at the time and we were together right after the summer vacation. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: I was seven years old in this photo. This is my annual yearly photo while in primary school [James Madison Primary School, Edison, New Jersey]. I didn't like my pigtails so I pinned them up despite my mother's suggestion. But I like the photo nevertheless. She knew it. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: This is my parents' wedding day. My parents are on the center, followed by my aunt- Speaker 2: Can you go from (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, from right to left? Okay, okay. This is my parents' wedding day. On the left is my Uncle Ernest [ph.], I'm not sure who the gentleman is in the middle there but the two short people are my parents Herbert and Anna Gadsden. In the middle to the right in the blue gown are my Aunt Pat [ph.] and my Aunt Rose [ph.]. Speaker 2: Year? Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966] in Elizabeth, New Jersey. Speaker 2: This is my baby sister, Alicia Renee Gadsden [Alicia Gadsden]. She was not even quite a year old, she was probably about eight months old in this photo, 1990--I'm sorry 1980. Speaker 1: This is my photo of my twin sister and I and my mom holding us and my father was taking the photo. This was at a cousin's house in Elizabeth, New Jersey during the winter months. Speaker 2: What year? Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 2: This is a photo of my grandfather, I don't recall the year but he always was very well dressed, very dapper gentleman and it must be near their home in South Carolina and that was one of his favorite vehicles. Speaker 1: Can you give his name again? Speaker 2: Reverend Herbert Gadsden, Sr. This was my twin sister and I first birthday party and that's my cousin Gerald [ph.] in the middle and my parents in the background. Speaker 1: This is a photo of David and I on our honeymoon in Italy at the Excelsior Hotel [Westin Excelsior Rome] in Rome, Italy, the year was 1996. Story_ID: 641172 Speaker 1: This is on my wedding day, I'm leaving the hotel and on my way to the altar to meet David [David Williams] and the rest of the guests. My twin sister on the right. My pa- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her name? Speaker 1: Monique, Dr. Monique Gardner-Witherspoon, my parents Herbert and Anna Gadsden [Anna Grant Gadsden] in the background and my youngest sister Alicia to the left. Speaker 2: Alicia Gadsden. Speaker 1: Alicia Gadsden. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: And this is my handsome father, Herbert Gadsden, Jr. while he was in the [U.S.] Army. He must have been at least twenty-three years old when this photo was taken while he was in Germany. Speaker 2: This is a recent photo of David and I at a fundraiser for the See Forever Foundation [Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: How do you spell the See Forever Foundation? Speaker 2: S-E-E Forever Foundation and this event was taking place at the residence of the-- Speaker 1: (DAVID WILLIAMS): Kuwait diplomat (unclear). Speaker 2: The dip- the Kuwait diplomat in Washington, D.C. And we were honoring President Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton]. Speaker 1: Okay but 2013. Speaker 2: Two thousand twelve [2012]. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was September of 2012, yeah that was recent. Speaker 1: This is my college graduation photo from Kean College [Kean College of New Jersey; Kean University, Union, New Jersey]. This was taken in the spring of 1990. Speaker 2: I'm the baby on the right so if you want to zero in on that or if you want to have both of us. I asked my parents which one was which. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): On the right? This is you? Speaker 2: Let's do this one, I like this one, that's more my personality so I like that one (laughter). This is a photo of my twin sister and I when we were three months old. I'm the baby on the right smiling with all the dimples and my twin sister, Dr. Monique Witherspoon on the left, 1969. Speaker 1: This is a photo of my parents at a gala and this was in 1972, I'm not sure where. I don't know that, I don't know all the details. Speaker 2: Okay, but you have to give their names again. Speaker 1: Herbert and Anna Gadsden. Speaker 2: This is my mother's high school photo. My mother's name is Anna Lee Gadsden and this was taken in 1966. Speaker 1: This is a photo of my twin sister Dr. Monique Gardner-Witherspoon and I. I am on the bottom and we were four years old during this photo so that was 1972. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: This is a photo of my family, my parents Herbert Gadsden, Jr., my mother Anna Lee Gadsden, my twin sister Dr. Monique Witherspoon and I at the top; and my youngest sister Alicia Renee Gadsden on the bottom. This was in 1985...