 Story_ID: 28995 Speaker 1: We're just going to start the interview by slating and I would like to say I am Regina Williams. I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer and we're here on behalf of The HistoryMakers. We just want to ask if you would first of all state your name including your middle and last name and then spell them for me please. Speaker 2: All right. Okay my name is Ralph Alexander Gardner-Chavis. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's R-A-L-P-H A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R G-A-R-D-N-E-R hyphen C-H-A-V-I-S. Speaker 1: All right. And can you tell me please your date of birth and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: I was born on December 3rd, 1922, in Babies and Children's Hospital of University Hospital of Cleveland, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the 19th of March, the year 2-0-0-4. Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of this interview with the address? Speaker 2: This is at Cleveland State University in one of the lecture halls and the address is 2121 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44115. Speaker 1: All right. And would you please state your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a retired chemist and a retired professor. Speaker 1: Okay. And I believe we have the title, official title professor emeritus? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. I'm actually associate professor emeritus. Speaker 1: Okay. So you still work on campus--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the laboratory from time to time? Alright. Story_ID: 28996 Speaker 1: The next set of questions we refer to as being "People Magazinish" type questions and we start by asking if you would please tell us your favorite food? Speaker 2: Lobster, Maine lobster. Speaker 1: All right, and your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Possibly blue, slightly. Speaker 1: Okay, slightly blue. Well you wear it well. Speaker 2: Yeah well thank you. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well it used to be my grandfather's [Alex Hicks] farm when I was little. That was my favorite vacation place. I guess if I went anywhere it would be to, probably I would like to go to San Francisco [California]. It's a nice place. Speaker 1: Okay, and finally do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Latin) Non carborundum illegitimi, which means don't let the bastards grind you down. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you for sharing that with us. Speaker 2: My favorite. Story_ID: 28997 Speaker 1: All right. In this next section we would like to spend some time talking about your family background and so I'd like to start this section by asking if you could please tell me about your mother? What was her name, where was she born and where did she grow up? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Vivian Elizabeth Hicks, was her maiden name and she was born in Columbia, Missouri in 1899, and that's where she grew up. She attended the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign] and that's where she met my father [Chavis Gardner]. And I guess that's it. Is that it? Speaker 1: A little bit, certainly more questions to come. Speaker 2: More than one, okay. Speaker 1: But I wonder did she share any special stories with you about her childhood in Missouri? Speaker 2: Oh there were many, many stories. Let's see, they had this, one of the stories involved a horse that they had that when she would tried to ride it away from home it would never go. It would always come back home all the time and I think it picked her up by the back of, back of her neck by her clothes and carried her back home when she was little. And there were lots of things that happened there on the farm. And my grandmother, my grandfather, her, her father [Alex Hicks], he began life, raised by some people, by some people who were really rather poor. And he early learned to read and it was very interesting in that the lady was very kind to him because he was an orphan and she took this special interest in him. And even as a, as a little child he always wanted to be first and she would make her children walk behind him. Speaker 1: So--. Speaker 2: Because it was so important to him to be first. I thought that was really interesting. Speaker 1: So he was raised in a foster care setting? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you remember your grandparents' names, the maternal grandparents? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were Annie and Alex Hicks. Speaker 1: Okay, and they owned a farm in Columbia, Missouri? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. How would you describe your mother? What kind of person was she? Speaker 2: She was a very nice person, was very, very sweet, very loving, she was very intelligent and she was very cooperative at all times. Speaker 1: Now you mentioned just a minute ago that she graduated from the University of Illinois? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what did she study there? Speaker 2: She majored in English and then she taught school for a little while. Speaker 1: Okay, in Cleveland [Ohio] or in another community? Speaker 2: No in, where, where did she teach? I'm not, I imagine she probably taught in Columbia maybe. I'm not sure where she taught, but not for long. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Most of her life, I mean most of mine when she was married she was a housewife. But then during the [great] depression she worked for the welfare department as a visitor for the people that were on relief. Story_ID: 28998 Speaker 1: Okay. And you said that your mother [Vivian Elizabeth Hicks] and father met at the University of Illinois? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your father's name? Speaker 2: My father's name was Clarence Chavis Gardner and he was born in Indianapolis, Indiana. And well they met at the university and he graduated through from the University of Buffalo [New York] with a degree in pharmacy. And much later in life he went to Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio] and got another degree in psychology. Speaker 1: So he's studied in Illinois and New York--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and then finally in Cleveland--? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --at Case Western Reserve--oh Western Reserve University--? Speaker 2: Western Reserve, yeah. Speaker 1: --at that time before the merger? Speaker 2: Right, before--right. Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell me a little bit more about your parents meeting in Illinois and how they came to be a couple and eventually made their way to Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 2: They met I guess you know while attending the university and they told me that they had parties and dances and everything. I mean my mother was an, was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha], my father was an Alpha, Alpha Phi Alpha. Speaker 1: And for the non--. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --fraternity members can you tell us the, who the Alphas are? Speaker 2: Well Alpha Phi Alpha was one of the, was the, the, it was a major fraternity at that time. In fact I don't know whether the Kappas had even begun then so it was the first of the black fraternities and my mother was AKA and, which is Alpha Kappa Alpha in the sorority. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they apparently had a good time at the university. It was (unclear) pleasant but they of course studied and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay. And then when did they marry? Was it before or after graduation? Speaker 2: They married before graduation. They, they married in I think 1921. Speaker 1: And then after graduation went back to Missouri? Speaker 2: They moved--no then we moved to Cleveland [Ohio]. My father actually he made his money as a musician. In those days to have a pharmacy or to open a drug store was a little bitty mom and pop type of a thing whereas he made much more money playing music and he played out of Buffalo [New York] and then Niagara Falls in New York. And we had a good life, we had a pretty good life. We, we had automobiles all the time and took trips and did all kinds of things like that. Speaker 1: What kind of music did he play? Speaker 2: Oh he started off with you know the early, the early jazz and rhythm. He knew all the old, I mean he played with all the old guys I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. This is nineteen teens and 20s [1920s]? Speaker 2: Yeah, in the 20s [1920s]. Speaker 1: That was start of the jazz age? Speaker 2: Right. Right, that was at the beginning of the jazz age. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said he toured New York with (unclear)(simultaneously)? Speaker 2: Well he played mostly in Buffalo and in Niagara Falls. And they played in places like one of the places that he played they would call them a roadhouse but they were very nice, rather decorated places. My mother would sometimes take me with her at night to the place where he was playing and I'd make the ladies hold me in their arms and dance around the floor with me. Spoiled rotten (laughing). Speaker 1: (Unclear) so the family was traveling with the musicians--(simultaneously). Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that your father performed with? Speaker 2: Well no they didn't travel. No they were pretty stationary. Speaker 1: Oh okay in Buffalo? Speaker 2: Yeah, they almost always there, yeah. Speaker 1: I'm wondering now what his parents [Mary Anne Chavis and Clarence Chavis Gardner] thought of that? Did they--(simultaneously)? Speaker 2: Buffalo was quite a town then. This was really you know sort of in the roaring 20s [1920s]. Speaker 1: But were your paternal grandparents bothered at all by the fact that he had this college degree in pharmacy and he's, was out playing jazz and did they accept that? Speaker 2: I--no they seemed to me to accept--I never heard any discussion of that. Speaker 1: What were your paternal grandparents' names? Speaker 2: They were, his mother was Mary Anne Chavis was her maiden name and his father was Clarence Chavis I guess was it? I think it was Clarence Chavis. Speaker 1: And I suppose I should say for the record--(simultaneously). Speaker 2: Gardner. Speaker 1: --Clarence Chavis Gardner? Speaker 2: Gardner, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd just like to say for the record that we do have two observers here today and the first is Dorothy K. Jackson and, who is a dear friend of yours and also Allyse M. Ellek (ph.) who is your niece. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So when people see you looking over your shoulder--(simultaneously). Speaker 2: Okay, I'm looking (unclear). Speaker 1: --there's someone off camera. Speaker 2: Someone off camera. Speaker 1: And they'll be able to help us document the history. (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Some of the things. Speaker 1: Okay. And so we were talking about your grandparents that they approved then--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --of the pharmacist son--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --who is now a professional musician? Speaker 2: Right. Well his mother's, his mother, my grandmother, his mother [Mary Anne Chavis] had two brothers. One was a doctor and the other was a pharmacist and the doctor was putting her through, through Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] at one time, at one time but then he died so she then had to stop. She became a seamstress and--. Speaker 1: And Wilberforce is located where? Speaker 2: In Ohio. Speaker 1: Ohio? Speaker 2: Yeah, in Ohio. Speaker 1: All right. And now that too I believe is a historically black college--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --here in Ohio? Speaker 2: They were living of course at that time in Indian--in, in Indianapolis while all that was going on. Story_ID: 28999 Speaker 1: All right. Now I wanted to get-- I'm not in too much of a hurry, but to get to the time when the family is coming together and beginning to think about establishing roots in Cleveland [Ohio] and setting up a household here. About what time period is that taking place? Speaker 2: Well I was as I said I was born in Cleveland in 1922 but shortly thereafter why my parents [Vivian Elizabeth Hicks and Chavis Gardner] moved to Buffalo, New York so I spent the first eight years in Buffalo and that's where I started into, into kindergarten I think when I was four years old. All I had to do was to learn to tie my shoe so that morning that I was to go to school my father [Chavis Gardner] showed me how to tie my shoes so I could go to school. Speaker 1: Well that's the entrance exam? Speaker 2: That was the entrance exam. Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the school you attended as a kindergartener? Speaker 2: No I don't remember that no. No I don't remember it. I, I remember where we lived in Buffalo and I remember going to Humboldt Park where the, where the bison were, where the buffalo were. And I remember some in the streets. We lived at 104 Alexander Place and we lived on Purdy Street is about all I remember. Not much more (unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 1: And you said buffalo was a happening town? Speaker 2: Oh yeah it was a busy-. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: --town at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. And what, what made it so, so busy, so dynamic? Speaker 2: I don't know maybe that's where the bootleggers were. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: It was during, during--. Speaker 1: Oh this is prohibition? Speaker 2: --prohibition, right. Speaker 1: Okay, in the 1920s? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, so there was some of that perhaps. Speaker 2: Some probably, yeah. Speaker 1: And good music. Speaker 2: Good music. Speaker 1: You heard about some of that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what did you think of the schools then? You think you had a pretty good elementary school education in New York? Speaker 2: Oh yes, uh-huh, yeah. I remember I was in a play and I was a daffodil, this play. I don't remember anything else about the play but I had something around my head like a daffodil. That's about all I remember of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember one other thing about that, the area we lived in was called the Cold Spring district and when it rained a lot it would sort of flood. And you could sort of patter around swimming in the street occasionally if it was a really heavy rain. Speaker 1: Okay, sounds like you had fun. Speaker 2: (Unclear) of fun. Yeah I had a good time. Speaker 1: Yeah, what were some of the sounds and sights and smells that remind you of those early years in Buffalo? Speaker 2: Buffalo? Speaker 1: Besides the water. Speaker 2: Oh the water, not much else do I think about that, about Buffalo. I remember, in my mind I can see the house that we lived in and the people that lived--we lived upstairs and the people that lived downstairs their last names was Lightfoot and I can't remember her first name. I don't have a whole lot of memory about Buffalo. Speaker 1: But it's a two-family--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --frame house in Buffalo? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the community like, a diverse group of people there? Speaker 2: Yes uh-huh, it was mixed. Speaker 1: Um-hmm, racially and ethnically as well? Speaker 2: Um-hmm, right yeah. Story_ID: 29000 Speaker 1: Okay. And I'm anxious to get to Cleveland [Ohio] of course because--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that's my home town but--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you can take us there whenever you're ready. Does Cleveland come again after the eight years in Buffalo [New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then we moved back to Cleveland. One of the interesting things that happened there which to me is it's so different from what things are now. But my mother [Vivian Elizabeth Hicks] of course she doted on me I mean I was, I was the first child and I was seven years older than my sister [Vivian A. Gardner Papson] So for seven years I was the only, I was an only child and I'm sure my mother thought the sun rose and set on me for sure. She was positive of that. But on the other hand one time my father [Chavis Gardner] was, I think my, I think my father was in Cleveland at the time and my mother, and my mother and I were in Buffalo. And to show you how different life was back in those days my mother when I was four years old put me on the, took me down to the train, introduced me to the Pullman porter, put me on the train with a lunch to go to Cleveland all by myself. And one would never even dream of doing that nowadays, but it was perfectly safe. And I followed the, the Pullman porter around trying to help him to do whatever he was doing and I had this lunch which I was to eat. And she--he I think heard her tell me that I was to eat the lunch in Erie, Pennsylvania which was halfway. Well somehow I forgot the Erie part but I remembered that I was to eat the lunch at halfway. So after we'd be on the train for quite a while, I asked him, I said are we halfway yet and he said no we're not halfway. So I went on about whatever I was doing and later on I asked again. I asked him several times and each time he told me we weren't halfway yet. The next thing I knew we pulled into Cleveland. He had played a joke on me. Speaker 1: Oh so you didn't get to eat your lunch? Speaker 2: So I didn't get to eat my lunch. But it wasn't a disaster but I--. Speaker 1: I've heard some--. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: --interesting stories about the Pullman porters--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and how helpful they were especially--. Speaker 2: Oh they were very nice, oh very nice. Speaker 1: --especially to children traveling alone. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Yeah and it was all perfectly safe. There's no question about that. Speaker 1: In the 1920s I understand that that group was one of the first to unionize--. Speaker 2: It was--. Speaker 1: --among our black laborers. Speaker 2: A. Philip Randolph, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Do you remember at that time and what it meant to be a Pullman porter? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No I didn't really (unclear). Speaker 1: Well just for the record they were among the first in the 1920s. Speaker 2: Um-hmm, they were. Speaker 1: So you're coming to Cleveland. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: At the age of four. Speaker 2: At, at the age of, well at that one time but we moved to Cleveland when I was eight, eight years old. Speaker 1: And at that point is your sister here? Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, what is her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Vivian Anne Gardner [Papson]. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said she's seven years younger than you? Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: So there's a family of four--? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --in the Gardner household--? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Cleveland? Speaker 2: That's it, yeah. Story_ID: 29001 Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you live in, in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Well we lived on 86th Street when I was that age and I went to Bolton Elementary School which was at 89th and, 89th and Carnegie. And it was racially mixed, about fifty fifty. And I don't have a lot of, a lot of recollection as to what went on there but I mean it was just okay, it was all right. I just went to school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And this is now about 1930 in Cleveland? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well I grad- I got out, I graduated out of Bolton in 1933. And I would have, at that time I would have had to go to Rawlings Junior High, but that was even back then why they were very low expectations and fighting and that sort of thing at Rawlings. And my parents [Chavis Gardner and Vivian Elizabeth Hicks] both being concerned about education knew that that wasn't a very good place so to take me out of that district they moved up on Mount Overlook you know at the end of Quincy up on the hill by the reservoir there? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: You familiar with that? Um-hmm. And so that's where we lived then. Speaker 1: And then what junior high school did you attend? Speaker 2: Audubon [Junior High]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Still there. Speaker 2: Yeah it is still there and it was like 99.9 percent white. I was the only, almost one of the very few blacks in the school. Speaker 1: But this is also one of the Cleveland Public Schools? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were all of your schools public schools in Cleveland? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, of course from there I went to Adams. Speaker 1: John Adams High School? Speaker 2: John Adams, um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. And what year did you graduate from high school? Speaker 2: From Adams? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: In 1939, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 29002 Speaker 1: So all of your school days in Cleveland [Ohio] were during the ear of the great depression? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Do you remember those being difficult times economically or--? Speaker 2: No, my father [Chavis Gardner] he played music and of course he made money but I heard him say that when the depression was on that every night he played longer and longer hours for less and less money `til finally he played all night for nothing at all. That was the last time I picked up an instrument to practice. I said I wasn't going to get into that. That didn't seem to be a very good line of work to be in if something like that could happen. So the--when he was--then you know it was hard to get a job and everything he went to Sherwin Williams to try to get a job just as a laborer was the only thing--the music business the bottom had sort of fallen out of that. And while he was sitting in the room waiting to speak with the person who would hire him, this person was in, in the next room with the door partly open and he was speaking to another fellow, person about digging a basement which would be partly under the terminal tower but in an area that was owned by the Sherwin Williams Company. So my father heard them just idly heard them speaking. But he couldn't hear everything they said but he, he heard enough to know what they were talking about. So when he went in to ask the man for a job he decided to tell him that he would dig, that he would offer to dig the basement for them. So the, so the fellow asked him, he said well how much you know will you charge? Well so my father said well I have to go see the you know the, the volume of dirt that must be moved and so then he went, so my father went to the library which he always did every time he wanted to do something he would go to the library. And I guess he looked up the book on digging basements and he measured how much dirt the wheel barrel would hold and figured out how fast the people would walk and how far they had to move the dirt when they dug it. And he calculated all this very thoroughly and came up with an answer as to how much he should charge. So he went back to tell the man at the end of the week how much he would charge. While he was sitting there waiting to, to talk with the, with, with the fellow well he decided to double the price, double the amount. So he doubled the amount and then he went in and he told him that and the man was eager because it was lower than anyone else had bid, so he got the job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he worked right along with the people that were, that he had hired to help. He almost had a strike but--and a whole lot of other things happened but anyway he did get, he did dig this basement and he did get the money. Then he went in the post office, he thought that was better. Speaker 1: Okay. I hear lots of interesting stories about college educated African American men especially ending up in the post office. Speaker 2: In the post--oh yeah. Speaker 1: Earning steady wages--. Speaker 2: Yeah it was real--. Speaker 1: --and very good wages. Speaker 2: Yes, it was good for that time, very good. Story_ID: 29003 Speaker 1: Now you said a little earlier that your mother [Vivian Elizabeth Hicks] who was educated at the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign] as an English teacher. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: When she wasn't doting on you. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Depress--and your younger sister. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: During the depression years also worked for the WPA--. Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: --under the work relief effort? Speaker 2: No, for the Welfare--. Speaker 1: The welfare office I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Welfare Department, yeah. And she had you know in those days you had a caseload in which you had to visit each family. I guess you had enough that you would, you could visit the whole caseload in a month and so every month you would get to see the people to find out what they needed and whether they had moved and whether, what had happened and what, what the status was and there were very interesting stories about that. Speaker 1: Pleasant or unpleasant--? Speaker 2: All kinds--well there, there were all kinds. I mean nothing ever happened to her, but she had one client this, he was Chinese. His name was Mr. Fongong (ph.) and he, he informed her that according to the rules of Chinese banditry one is supposed to kill one's benefactor which she of course was being his benefactor just didn't make her feel very good about the situation. But he didn't kill her of course but at least he told her about this. Another time why she told about the fact that these people had this dog tied with a chain in the middle of the floor to some kind of a metal loop there in the middle of the floor. And the whole time she was there why the dog was charging at her on this chain. She was very much afraid of, afraid of dogs and so this was the most unpleasant situation. And there were a lot of other good stories though, but those were the ones that I happen to remember them, the ones that were sort of like that. Speaker 1: So this work with the welfare department is that part of the city's relief effort? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 29004 Speaker 1: And Dr. Gardner we were saying just a few minutes ago that all of your school days in Cleveland [Ohio] took place during the 1930s. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And I just wondered if you have any special memories of going to school there at the elementary, middle school, junior high school or high school level (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well not much about the elementary. I don't remember too much, it was within walking distance of the home and so forth and I just don't remember anything particularly that happened there. But in junior high school why I had a very, I had a, a really good time most of the time in junior high school. I belonged to the fencing club and the math club and several of the other clubs and had good friends and they were all white of course. And there was, there was my family on Mount Overlook and diagonally across the street was the Cheeks family and on the next street over was the Hill family and those were the only blacks in the whole area. The rest of the people were Italian pretty, mostly. But the one, one problem happened at, in, in Audubon [Junior High] I had in eight grade arithmetic I had this teacher named Ms. Pratt. She was a very old lady, single, spinster and she had, well I think behind her back we called her Ms. Pratt the rat but other than that why--and we were, I was, the children were seated alphabetically and my desk was right in front of her desk and almost every day she would find something wrong with me or my paper had a smudge on it or my pencil didn't have a point or something was wrong. And she would make me stand up and she would publicly ball me out in front of the class. I was the only black in the class. So it made what doubly humiliating was the fact that since there were no, no other black people around I liked the little white girl that sat next to me. Of course I never told her or anything like that but I imagine she knew it or at least I knew it so it made it doubly humiliating to be you know treated in that manner. This kept on day after day and I was really getting very demoralized, and not even wanting to go to school because of this. And I felt somehow I, I felt that I had to deal with this problem myself. So what I did was I decided I would look at her right dead in her eyes and keep repeating to myself my God this woman is losing her mind right in front of my face. And I kept saying that to myself as hard as I could and kept looking at it as fierce as I, as hard as I could. After two days of that she did stop. I don't know maybe she thought I was going to attack her or something. It was enough I guess to frighten somebody but I was fiercely looking at her and repeating this in my head just to myself. But I passed eighth grade arithmetic with a red seventy and the prognosis that I might as well drop out of school. I was through. Well then in the ninth grade I had a young German lady named, named, her name was Ms. Radke I remember. She seemed to like me, I liked her. I got straight A in algebra, trig, geometry, calculus all the way through math. I could do triple integrals in math as long as you didn't ask-- told me that if eight hens lay eight eggs in five days how long does it take thirty hens to lay twenty five days--eggs? I, for the moment it would, it would almost like blow my mind and it wasn't until I learned dimensional analysis that I was able to comfortably do eight grade arithmetic problems. Everything else was all right but just those men digging ditches and hens laying eggs was terrible. Speaker 1: Didn't like the word problem? Speaker 2: No I didn't like those kind of problems, no. But I did not mind everything else that I, that I experienced at Audubon was very nice. I, I had Latin, I had French in addition to everything else cause I was always in college prep. Speaker 1: And was that true of the high school years as well at John Adams [High School]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Always in the college prep program? Speaker 2: I didn't, yeah I didn't have any problem at Adams. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said you graduated in 1939? Speaker 2: '39 [1939], yes uh-huh. In June. Speaker 1: And did you decide-- In June of '39 [1939]? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Did you decide before graduation where you were headed for college? Speaker 2: Oh yeah there was never any question about whether you were going, it was what college were you going to. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Is the only question. Story_ID: 29005 Speaker 1: And I guess this brings us to the reason why I became a chemist. What happened, see I was born in 1922 which was a few years after the end of World War I. You know World War I was the war that was to end all wars. They weren't going to have anymore wars after World War I. The people were done with war. So my parents gave me--so I was going to say Hollywood made movies you know depicting war, not of the war but depicting war and I went to see these movies. And when I was about twelve or thirteen my parents [Chavis Gardner and Vivian Elizabeth Hicks] gave me a chemistry set for Christmas so after I did the experiments in the chemistry set I told them very formal I said I have decided to become a chemist. And they said why? I said well for two reasons. One I said I like to put you know this with that to make the chemical reaction. I said and then when they have the next war I said I won't have to go fight. I'll stay behind to make the bullets for them other people to go fight with cause I had seen in these movies these people crawling around in the blood and the mud with the arms and the heads and the legs blown off. But that, I thought that was something to be avoided at all costs so I began to study chemistry religiously because at the top of each page in the chemistry book to me it said learn this or die. I really thought if I didn't learn chemistry I was going to be dead. Fact, when I graduated from high school and I went to Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio], they had the Downtown branch of Western Reserve called Cleveland College which was part of Western Reserve. But they had a work study program and of course I chose study first you know so I would be further along in chemistry. Well when I went there I passed the whole first year of chemistry the first day of the course cause I had worked all the problems in the college textbook on my own with no help from anyone else. Speaker 2: So you were able to test out of it--. Speaker 1: Test out of--. Speaker 2: --and to get credit for it? Speaker 1: Right, um-hmm. I didn't want to shoot anybody and I sure didn't want anybody shooting at me. Speaker 2: Were you thinking seriously about the military at that point? That was the fall of 1939, before the, there's a formal declaration of war by the U.S.? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But I guess war was on the horizon because it's starting in Europe. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. But I, I was determined I wasn't going to go. And so anyway, so we weren't in war at that time so then I went to Cleveland College, West- And had a very good average. I think I had something like six As and one B for the first--well they had like a semester and a half like six months of school and then you were to go to work. Well as the time came near to start to go to work I would hear the students in business saying that the school had arranged an interview for them to be a bank messenger but they wanted something more related to business than simply carrying around pieces of paper so they were waiting for the school to arrange a second interview for them. Well they never arranged one for me. I was the only black in the, probably in the whole school, or at least certainly in that whole year. So I you know decided well I would take the little pamphlet that outlined the plan and I got on, looked in the telephone and got on the street car, went to places that I thought I could get a job. And I wanted any job in the chemistry laboratory doing anything. I didn't want to sweep the floor but anything else I'd wash the dishes, wash the chemist- you know the, the glassware and so forth. But I, but anyway but I never got anything. At that time I think I was about seventeen years old and I got turned away by the guard at the gate, by the receptionist. I never even had a chance to talk to anyone that could have hired me even. So my parents went with me to talk to the woman who was in charge of placement of the students and I still can see her in my mind. She was a big, fat white lady with a black dress on and a string of pearls around her neck. And she reared back and said that she was trying to get me a job as a bus boy or as a waiter or to work in a hospital kitchen. I was very angry. I wanted to jump across the, that table and annihilate her but my, my, luckily my parents had taught me restraint so I didn't do all the things I thought but I sure did think. But anyway so we went home and I told 10:45 my parents I said well I wasn't going to go back to school. I said what's the point of me you know trying if all I'm going to be is a bust boy waiter or work in a kitchen? They didn't argue with me. So some friends of ours that I had known all my life that, that I would, we would visit them every time we went to my grandfather's [Alex Hicks] farm in Columbia, Missouri we would go through St. Louis and we would stay with this family overnight every time and we'd take the son with us when we went to the farm. Well they had moved from St. Louis out to Oakland, California and their son was two years younger than I was, and I was one year ahead. He was two years younger and he was in the same grade I was. He was a genius. I think his IQ was like a hundred and seventy or something like that. Billy was his name. And so they had moved out to California and Billy was attending the University of California at Berkeley so his mother wrote and asked if I'd like (unclear)-asked if I'd like to come out and stay with them to go with the school. My parents claimed that they didn't tell her to do that but I believe they did. Anyway, but anyway the lure of California made me change my mind about going to school so I went out. Then that year in, in 1940 I went to the University of California in Berkeley which was very nice, had a lovely time there. Story_ID: 29006 Speaker 1: Okay. And did you eventually graduate from Berekley [University of California, Berkeley]? Speaker 2: No, the war was on so then we thought I should be closer to home so I went to Illinois. That's where I got my bachelor's degree in, University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign]. Speaker 1: And when did you receive a degree, what year? Speaker 2: In 1943. Speaker 1: You said earlier your determination to stay out of the war, very strong in '39 [1939]. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Did that determination change at all after Pearl Harbor in '41 [1941] [Attack on Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941]? Speaker 2: Oh no. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: It got stronger--. Speaker 1: Stronger, okay. Speaker 2: --if anything. I didn't see any point in that and I was in the Kappa [Alpha Psi] house at the time and by the end of the, end of that semester the last semester why there was only three people to two (unclear). One fellow walked with, walked with crutches. He had one shriveled leg. The other fellow had stomach ulcers even at that young age and I was the only one, I, and I, I was kept classified 1A. Well they kept sending me the last semester in school they kept, I kept receiving these induction notices and you know report somewhere, such and such a place for induction into the army and according to the law which I made myself familiar with, because I was in chemistry I was supposed to be allowed to complete my degree and I was to be given either three or six months in which to place myself in an industry essential to the war effort. If I did not do that then they were--and also I was to have been classified 2A, not 1A. But they kept me, they kept me 1A the whole time and kept sending me these, these draft notices. Well this, each time I would write back a letter to them according to law and explain to them what I was supposed to do. I didn't go anywhere. And then I was supposed to be given I think either three or six months in which to place myself in industry essential to the war effort. So I transferred my, when I graduated in '43 [1943] I transferred my draft board from Cleveland [Ohio] to Chicago [Illinois] cause I felt I had a--since Chicago is larger than Cleveland I felt I had a better chance to get a job in Chicago than in Cleveland. And a friend of my parents' I guess that had been at the university when they were there that lived in Chicago, called me and said that they were hiring chemists at the University of Chicago. So I'm sure I was out there before he, he hung up the phone (unclear) so fast. And I made an application there to work at the University of Chicago as a chemist. I had--and so after a while I mean within a week or so I was scheduled for a physical examination which I took and then I got a letter telling me to report for work. And I can still remember what the letter told me to report to the metallurgical laboratory, that was Ryerson Hall. And I, I remember walking up the steps handing the letter to the, to the receptionist there. She looked at the letter and she said, she told me to go down the hall to my left and knock on the door at the end of the hall. So I went down the hall, knocked on the door, went in and I was in the atomic bomb project, the Manhattan project. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't even know there was an atomic bomb or an atomic bomb project, anything at all about it so it was really quite a surprise. Story_ID: 29007 Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about how that project came together 'cause this is 1943, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Two years before the world has ended by the dropping of that bomb? Speaker 2: This was in December 1943. Speaker 1: Okay, and what can you tell us about the history of that? I know there were a lot of scientists from other countries in fact coming into the United States. Was that the time that Einstein [Albert Einstein, German born U.S. physicist] came in? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, yeah that was the time, I don't know if he came that year but he was up, up in that area, yeah. Speaker 1: In that area. Speaker 2: Yeah. Einstein and a number of the other German, Jewish scientists came. And we, I spent the first ten days on the project even though I only had a bachelor's degree which in chemistry if you just have a bachelor's you're really much kind of like a pair of hands really. You don't get to do much contribute, much in the way of contributing to your work unless you have a, really a Ph.D., maybe a little bit if you have a masters but mostly you should have a Ph.D. And but I spent the first ten days reading all about the bomb and all about the dangers of radioactivity, alpha beta and the gamma rays and how to protect yourself and how, how dangerous they were and all about the fact that the Germans were also working on making the atomic bomb too. And to make the bomb you, I can tell you--would you like to know how to make the bomb? Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Okay. You see every uranium atom at some point will emit a neutron from its, from the nucleus, you know the nucleus, the little, there's a little heavy thing in the middle of, of, of the center of the atom. Speaker 1: With protons and neutrons right? Speaker 2: Protons and neutrons, you got it. Speaker 1: Fifth grade science. Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right. Yeah. So every uranium atom will sometimes emit a neutron and if a, if a uranium atom--but that neutron when it is emitted has too much energy to be captured by another uranium atom so it would just go on out. So what they do is they put the uranium rods in a thing call a moderator which allows the neutrons to bounce around when they're emitted and lose energy but won't capture them. Well the two things that can be used, one is heavy water made with heavy hydrogen which is deuterium. Ordinary hydrogen contains one proton and one electron. Heavy hydrogen has in the nucleus in addition to the proton it has one neutron. So since the proton and neutron weigh about the same it's twice as heavy as the ordinary hydrogen. And so heavy water then is made instead of H20 it's D20, two Ds and an O, so that's heavy water. So heavy water doesn't capture neutrons very well and hardly at all so they can use that then as a moderator to let the neutrons bounce around in, in the heavy water and lose energy. So when they've lost enough energy to be captured they're called thermal neutrons and that's the word they call them and so then they can be captured. Well we instead of using heavy water we used highly purified carbon in the form of graphite so they had blocks of graphite about a foot square on the end and about as long as maybe from here to the wall, that would be about eight feet long. And they had holes drilled longitudinally in these, in these blocks and they put the rods of uranium in there and then let them sit there. Well when the ones would--when they captured the neutron, when a uranium atom captures a neutron it, into the nucleus then it advances--well what it does is that it then loses an electron in the form of a high energy beta particle as a high energy electron. And this transforms one of the neutrons into a proton which makes it go from the uranium which has ninety two protons to neptunium which has ninety three. Neptunium spontaneously loses another beta particle which is another electron converting another neutron into a proton and that goes to ninety four which is plutonium. Now when plutonium picks up an electron it then fissions, it splits into little pieces and at the same time it emits three more neutrons. But if you gather together all the little pieces and weighed them, they would weigh less than the plutonium atom weighed. And the difference in weight or in mass is what's converted into energy according to Einstein's equation E=MC2. And C is the number that's three times ten to the eighth so when you square it you get nine times ten to the sixteenth. So you can see that a tiny bit of mass converted into energy makes an awful lot of energy and that's what makes the bomb so fierce and so explosive and so powerful. And the bomb is the, the atom bomb maybe the first one might have been equivalent to maybe a hundred thousand tons of TNT, something like, I mean some tremendous amount of energy. Story_ID: 29008 Speaker 1: Now this wasn't public information was it when you started working on the project [Manhattan Project]? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No the, the lab was in a little white one story, big white one story building that didn't look like anything. I mean there were no guards outside at all because you didn't want to call attention to the lab because it would be a prime target for sabotage. And they trusted the people not to, not to tell anyone as to what they were doing. Speaker 1: Okay. So this continued then the research--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to produce this atomic bomb--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --for about a year and a half after you got there? Speaker 2: Yeah, right and--. Speaker 1: And so when is the technology perfected? Speaker 2: Well the work I was doing was, I did two things there. One, I worked on some of the development of the process to extract the plutonium. See the plutonium now is, is on, is in these uranium rods but the amounts of plutonium were tiny, micro, microgram amounts, so, so tiny you can't you know really precipitate it or anything like that. So they had to devise methods for concentrating this plutonium and the method that I was working on was called co-precipitation. Turned out they found that bismuth phosphate had the same crystal structure as the plutonium phosphate. So when they precipitated bismuth phosphate the plutonium phosphate would occlude on the top of the bismuth phosphate or come down with the bismuth phosphate and in that way they could concentrate the plutonium. Then they would oxidize the plutonium to another oxidation state and this time when they precipitated the phosphate it didn't come down. It, it was a soluble phosphate in that time. So alternating back and forth why they were able to concentrate it eventually to the point where they could use metallurgical techniques to make, to make the bomb. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the bomb is about the size of, about the size of a kind of big grapefruit just maybe about that big around. And the way you, the way they did it they had in those days developed what they call dynamite in shaped charges. In other words they could fix the dynamite so it would blow in a certain direction like that. So you would, a machine ate pieces of plutonium that they, that when they put them together they would make a sphere. But you're not supposed to try them together to see if they fit cause if you did it would be, then the atom bomb would explode. So you have to be seeing these pieces of plutonium but don't as I say try to see if they fit each other. And then they would be in this container inside some kind of apparatus so they were apart and then to explode the bomb they would have the dynamite blow the pieces together and of course as soon as they came together why then they would you know begin this fission. So I mean so you have you know three, three neutrons and then you have nine and you have eighty one then you have two, forty three and so forth, but all this happens just like that and the bomb goes off. Speaker 1: All right. So one of these bombs or the capability of using this bomb--. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --for 1945 and--(simultaneously). Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's interesting in that there are several things about this. One is the fact that when I first went on the project many people that I talked to hoped that it was really impossible to make a bomb because we felt that mankind is much too flaky to be entrusted with such awesome power. But on the other hand if it was possible to make one, we had to be first before Germany. So we did work you know very diligently at this to try to make the bomb. Story_ID: 29009 Speaker 1: Is it true that Albert Einstein provided information to the government that the Germans were working on a, an atomic bomb at the time of his--(unclear)(simultaneously)? Speaker 2: I imagine so yeah he may yeah, because he would have known that, yeah. Some of the German you know--the original work was done by the, by three German Jews. It was Otto Hahn, Kurt Straussman and Lisa Meitner [German physicist, 1878-1968] and that was the lady who was Lisa Meitner and also Enrico Fermi [Italian physicist active in the U.S.] did some of it. He was one, also the fathers of the bomb. And during the war why toward the end of the war, why the, see Germany was obtaining its heavy water from Norway from the hydroelectric plants in Norway and the fellow who was the prime minister of Norway was named Quisling [Vidkun Abraham Lauritz Quisling, Norway, traitor during World War II] and so that's why they, they call the Germans the Quislings because the Quislings were the ones that were helping the Germans, that's what they called people. And they were getting the heavy water from Norway. Well the demolition experts American and, and English blew up the hydroelectric plants in Germ--in Norway and this kind of knocked Germany out of the race. Well Hitler [Adolf Hitler, Austrian born Nazi dictator of Germany] didn't try to recover because of his, he called his work on the bomb Jewish magic and he was much more interested in the, in the rockets that the German made than in the working, that building the bomb although he was trying. They were, they were working on it but he didn't really you know he wasn't really you know really involved in, and so anxious about the bomb as he was about the rockets that were German made. And from my reading which I didn't really try to find out how far along they were but I've come across a few things that made me from what I read feel that they weren't as far along as we were at, at that time. But I frequently thought and you know just thought about how the fate of the world really hung on Hitler's attitudes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His prejudices and, and his feelings 'cause if he, if he had been more you know diligent about it why maybe they could have beat us. So it kind of makes you shudder. Story_ID: 29010 Speaker 1: --[World] War II and the fact that [Adolf] Hitler had to be stopped. And I'm just wondering what the work atmosphere was like there in Illinois where you're working on the Manhattan Project? Speaker 2: On the atom bomb, yeah. Speaker 1: Was there a sense of urgency? Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, yeah. We, we, I don't think, I don't know that they particularly worked too much overtime but they were very diligent about the work and I'm almost sure no one told anybody else you know outside what we were doing because as I say they would, we knew this would be a prime target for sabotage. Speaker 1: So your family didn't even know--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --exactly what you were working on at that point? Speaker 2: Yeah. No, no I didn't tell anyone. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So America is involved in a second global conflict in the first half of the twentieth century that that first great war [WWI, 1914-1918] was not in fact the war to end all wars. We're in another one. Speaker 2: We're in the second one, yeah. Speaker 1: And then this one that we'll call World War II, we've got two major theaters. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: One in the pacific and one in Europe. Speaker 2: When they dropped the, when they, when they dropped the first--well my friend, my very, a very good friend of mine that I'd met at the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign], fact when he went to the army while I stayed, I simply sort of moved into his home and his parents almost treated me almost as if I was their son. They had a printing shop there in Chicago [Illinois], the largest black printing shop and so I learned to print and do, you know make business cards, letterheads and everything, did a lot of the printing and while he was, while he had gone to the army. And he hadn't had to go overseas yet but I think there was a rumor that he was about to go overseas and this was toward the end of, end of the war and I knew that we had, that we had the bomb. And I think maybe, maybe they hadn't exploded the one at Alamogordo, New Mexico--but I knew that we were about to, to explode them and to really end the war. And I didn't tell him what we were doing but I did tell him I said don't worry. I said everything is going to be all right. So he said from that moment on he stopped worrying--. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: --cause I had told him--his name was Lawrence Carroll. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah it was the Carroll Printing Company was where we, was where I lived. But then they had their rooms in the back of the shop and that was quite an interesting place to be because the people would come to pick up their printing and all kinds of people came so I got exposed to all sorts of people there. And it was really quite an interesting part of my life was being at the Carroll Printing Company. Speaker 1: And you said that was in, that was in Chicago? Speaker 2: Yeah on 31st Street which is kind of like the bottom where the jitney turned around you know they had the jitney cabs. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You know what a jitney is? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Yeah okay, they had the cabs that run and down South Park and Chicago was really fabulous then. Everything you wanted to do was up and down South Park and the jitneys ran from 31st to 65th [streets] for ten cents. Speaker 1: Now in case there's someone listening to this and they're not familiar with the jitney. Speaker 2: Yeah well the jitney is simply a limousine that has a jump seat so that it can, so that let's see, three, six, it can carry about eight people. So they would--and for a dime you could ride from 31st to 65th. Story_ID: 29011 Speaker 1: Okay. I wanted to ask too because there are various theories that get kicked around in the academy about the United States' decision to use the bomb when it did and where it did. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: One suggests that racism was a motivating factor in deciding to drop the bomb on Japan. So this is Truman's [Harry S. Truman, 33rd U.S. president] decision now deciding to bomb Japan rather than Germany. Speaker 2: Well Germany surrendered before the bomb. Speaker 1: Okay, so the technology had not been perfected in the spring of '45 [1945]? Speaker 2: Well they, that's right uh-huh, and they, when they exploded the first one in Alamogordo, New Mexico and it worked pretty much as they had expected it pulverized everything around. Then they passed around a questionnaire at the laboratory there and asked us what we thought should be done. They had four, four questions I mean four choices. A was, now that we have the bomb drop it immediately on Japan, B was now that we have the bomb drop it on an uninhabited island, invite them to view. If they don't surrender drop it on Japan. C was, now that we have it tell them but don't use it. D was, now that we have it, don't tell them, don't use it. Well of course C and D were you know ridiculous but everybody that I ask and I asked everybody I could at, at, at the project, voted for B to drop it on the uninhabited island first cause we felt that, that that was the only right thing to do. Well they didn't, they dropped the bomb without any warning on, on Hiroshima [Japan] and I think the first bomb killed thirteen--thirty thousand people and then two days, two or three days later before they had a chance even to figure out what happened they dropped the second bomb on Nagasaki [Japan], that killed sixty thousand so the two together killed about a hundred thousand. Those are, those are killed, that's not counting injured and the radiation damage which is apparently still prevalent in Japan. The reason they, they, they did that I, I've heard several things. One was they said that they only had the two bombs and it would take them six months to make two more. Another thing I heard was they wanted to bomb Japan to frighten Russia but I thought we were allies with Russia at the time so I didn't, I didn't quite understand that one. It did actually save lives rather than to try to invade Japan cause would have been much more loss of life on both sides than a hundred thousand. But on the other hand the Japanese I understand had made peace feelers at that time and were putting out ideas of peace. So you just don't know. No one knows. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Story_ID: 29012 Speaker 1: Just reflecting back on that period in your life I know you said earlier that even as a student you decided you wanted to, to have this knowledge as a weapon that would keep you off the battlefield and maybe make bullets--. Speaker 2: Yeah well--. Speaker 1: --you know that other people could use? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But do you have any regrets about the path that your life took and--. Speaker 2: Oh--. Speaker 1: --the science was used state side to end or--(simultaneously)? Speaker 2: Not at all. Speaker 1: Not at all. Speaker 2: I feel chemistry saved my life, that if it didn't do anything else it did that. Speaker 1: What--? Speaker 2: I really feel that's the reason I'm here. Speaker 1: And the availability of that kind of weapon of mass destruction certainly transformed the way that we fight our wars? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And our sense of security too I believe as the people. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah well it was just as we thought. We thought man was much too flaky to be entrusted with such awesome power. We hoped as I said way in the beginning that it was impossible to make a bomb because we thought that people aren't capable of dealing with it. But as I said if it had to be made we had to be first. Speaker 1: So you're observing VJ day in late summer 1945 victory over Japan because of that surrender. Speaker 2: And the party was something you can't believe. You can't imagine it was some kind of party at the lab. It was a total release of emotion. Speaker 1: But what do you do now? Where do you go from there? You know that you can build these bombs and this particular war is over, but a lot of damage has been done. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: To the Japanese in Japan to Japanese-American citizens many of them who were in those internment camps and, and losing their livelihoods and lots of property. Speaker 2: Rather rec- I say within the past couple of years I did hear one thing that said that we had, we had stopped the flow of oil to Japan and that's why they, why they did Pearl Harbor [Attack on Pearl Harbor, December 7, 1941] cause they had to, they had to do something because we were going to freeze them out or something. So you don't know all that's happening in international affairs. I don't know it just always seems to be like the one thing you do know is that whatever they tell you isn't true. You may not know the truth but you know one thing that isn't and that's what they, what the common impression is, it's generally not true when you find out what's going on behind the scenes. Speaker 1: So what does a scientist, the kind of information that you and your colleagues had access to or that you had developed, the knowledge base that you developed during the war years, what do you do with all of that once the war is over? Is there peace time use for the kind of work that you do? What happens after September 1945? Speaker 2: Well, they tried-- they have tried to convert it into useful, to making electricity but really it's, seems is sort of strange cause all they, all they do is take the heat from the, from the, from the nuclear reactor and boil water with it to make electricity. Well that, it seemed to me very, seemed to be kind of like you're starting in the Atom age and going to the Stone Age to do this. It didn't seem to me to be so constructive. They're experimenting and they're, they're on the verge of being able to, to harness fission which is what we were talking about is fusion of-- no fission is the one we were talking about, they're harnessing fusion where they can get energy out. I think they're right on the threshold of getting out more energy than they're putting in by jamming these nuclei together. So we'll see what happens whether or not they're able to capitalize on that. Now that wouldn't be radioactive much. It would be pretty good. Whereas this business of the, of fission is so dangerous. You know out there in Hanford, Washington I think that they used the process that I did some work on to make the bomb but they had these, they had a lot of water waste that was radioactive and they said that they, they, they had it stored in fifty-five gallon drums, stainless steel. And they, they told the navy to take these drums and bury them and bury them at sea. So the navy took the drums and would roll them off into the ocean. Well not all of them were completely filled and some of them were, were, had, would actually float. And they said the navy took guns and fired holes in them to make them sink which wasn't too--so that wasn't a good idea. Of course even I imagine that the salt water would eat them up anyway which didn't seem to be a reasonable thing. No. Speaker 1: Okay. So now that the war is over how long after the fall of 1945 does the Manhattan Project continue? Speaker 2: They moved out to Argonne, Illinois and that, that was 1947 and that's when I returned. I quit and I wasn't too happy about all that radioactivity cause I felt it's really dangerous to be around it. And actually I worked on the health physics group and monitored the people you know to see how much exposure they had had to the alpha, beta and, and gamma rays. Story_ID: 29013 Speaker 1: So what are you doing after 1947? Speaker 2: Oh I came back to Cleveland [Ohio] and I expected to come back to Cleveland to go to work. Speaker 1: As a chemist? Speaker 2: Yeah, as a chemist. And one of the first places I went to was Standard Oil of Ohio. The research lab was on Cornell Road up there by you know Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio]. And the lady there gave me a one page piece of paper to fill out on both sides and said that she'd put it in the file and if an opening came she would call me. Well I went to every place that I could have been hired as a chemist and I couldn't get any job at all, for no wage at all. There was nothing I could do and I, I was married at the time so I ended up waiting table for three, for about, for two years which made me very angry of course. And I want to also point out that in addition when I, in addition to working on the atom bomb I also took several courses at the University of Chicago, one given by Enrico Fermi you know won the Nobel Prize and everything and he was the one that introduced me to quantum mechanics. And I, in that way I had studied under Enrico Fermi and I had taken several other courses and it was very disgusting to have had that sort of exposure academically and to have had that work experience on the atomic bomb and yet to not be able to get any job in chemistry at all when I, when I returned. So two years later after I got back why a friend of my mother's, no my parents' [Chavis Gardner and Vivian Elizabeth Hicks] that was on the Board of Trustees at the Urban League called my mother [Vivian Elizabeth Hicks] and said tell Ralph to go back to Sohio [Standard Oil of Ohio]. They'll be more receptive now because they were agitating in Columbus to make an anti-discriminating hiring law as a law in the state of Ohio and the companies were trying to show they'll do it on a voluntary basis to keep a law from being passed, which is what they usually do for that sort of thing. So I went to Sohio. I saw the same lady I'd seen before. She gave no sign, neither did I. I didn't want to rock the boat because I wanted a, I wanted a job. So this time I got a four page piece application to fill out and she, they had me take some examination that they had. Well I finished the exam so fast I had time to go back and check every answer twice and I heard that I had made the highest grade they ever had made on the exam. So, so I, they almost like had to hire me because that was, I mean the whole point was to do that. So I got hired at the why Sohio, in the research laboratory and I knew after about a year after I was there they moved out to Warrensville [Ohio] to the buildings out there and there were about a hundred and fifty people there. And for ten years I was the only black in the place which made me angry also. Speaker 1: But during the Cold War era were you able to tell people hey I know how to build bombs? I work for the government. And I helped bring a speedy end to this war and I saved a lot of lives, hire me. Can you say that at that point? Speaker 2: Sure, I could have. Yeah I did. I tried to say everything I could think of to try to get a job. Speaker 1: And that didn't open any doors? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So you were a waiter for how long? Speaker 2: For two years. Speaker 1: Oh okay. But with this training as a chemist? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So by 1949 you're working for Standard Oil--. Speaker 2: I finally got on to Standard Oil--. Speaker 1: --of Ohio? Speaker 2: --of Ohio, right. Speaker 1: And you were there for ten years? Speaker 2: No, for nineteen years. Speaker 1: Oh I'm sorry so for ten years you were the only black person there? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, right, yeah. Speaker 1: But for nineteen years working with Standard Oil. Story_ID: 29014 Speaker 1: Now when do you have time to go back and get your master's and Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Well that's, well when I started on in, in something like March, the spring of the year I started on and by the, by September I realized that if I was going to make any significant contribution to my work, to design my work or to plan my work that sort of thing, that I had to get a Ph.D., so I started into grad school then, in September. And the day after I started grad school my son was born. That's the day after I started grad school so--. Speaker 1: I want to talk a little later in greater detail about your family life. But can you just tell me your wife's name and your son's name at this point and--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, we named him junior, Ralph A. Gardner. That was my name. I didn't have Chavis on there at that point so it was just Ralph A. Gardner, Jr. And--(simultaneously). Speaker 1: And your wife's name? Speaker 2: --my wife's name was Francis Christine Bailey. Speaker 1: And when were you married? Speaker 2: Where? Speaker 1: When were you married? Speaker 2: Hmm, I don't know the, I don't remember the exact date but it would have been, let's see it would have been in 1940--actually I was married twice to her. Speaker 1: Okay, but in the 1940s? Speaker 2: Nine--wait, yeah the late 1940s. Speaker 1: Okay, well we'll talk a little bit more about that later. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: But again you were just starting to talk about the, your post-baccalaureate educational experiences and you said you were starting at the university. Is that Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio] again--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the graduate program? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and--(simultaneously). Speaker 2: Part time. Speaker 1: And you said your son is born shortly after you start? Speaker 2: The day after I began. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And when did you finish the requirements for the bachelor's degree? Speaker 2: Master's in-- I started in '49 [1949]. Speaker 1: For the master's. Speaker 2: --the masters in '52 [1952] and Ph.D. in '59 [1959] so it took ten years for Ph.D. In those days you didn't have to do anything for the master's just when you got a certain number of credits well you got a master's automatically which was convenient. Speaker 1: So are you teaching chemistry while you're working toward your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: No, no I'm working at Sohio [Standard Oil of Ohio] the whole time, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So part time student--. Speaker 2: Going to school part time. Speaker 1: --and full time employee at Standard Oil? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. When do you begin to teach at the post-secondary level? Speaker 2: After the nineteen years. We'll get into that later. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: I'll tell you about that. Speaker 1: Am I rushing through the Standard Oil years? Well let's--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, those were some important years. Story_ID: 29015 Speaker 1: Well let's stay there at the Standard Oil experience for a little while longer. I hear and I've read too some of the reading and preparation for this discussion that you've done a lot with catalysis. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you told me some years ago that a catalyst is a thing that starts a process. Speaker 2: Yeah that makes a reaction take place. Speaker 1: That causes a reaction to take place. Speaker 2: Take place right. Speaker 1: Okay. So were you at that point in your career focusing on catalysis or something else? Speaker 2: Now yeah, I went on, I went to, I began at Standard Oil in '49 [1949] and I did my work for several different, I did several different things there in the beginning. But the one thing that I did work a good deal on was a separation process called liquid thermal diffusion. Well we, did the, the group that I was with they did, we did all the work that they wanted done. In fact they actually sold the process and the patent to somebody, to another company so therefore they were really completely through with that. So they gave me a, a chance to choose something else I would like to work on that of course would be of interest to Sohio [Standard Oil of Ohio], had to be something they were interested in too. Well I had, knew there was such a thing as a catalyst and that, that the catalyst would cause a, a chemical reaction to take place but it wouldn't be consumed in the, in the reaction. So it meant that a small amount of catalyst could then initiate a tremendous amount of reactions and, which almost seemed to me like, it almost seemed as if you were getting something for nothing practically to have this thing that would keep on you know operating and operating and not be used up. And the people didn't know much about it at that time but just that, what I've said is that the catalyst initiated the chemical reactions, it wasn't used. So I thought that would be an intriguing area to work on so I made a proposal to Sohio and then I, my first proposal was that I would simply do some reading in the field to see what if there was something I could come up with that would be of interest and so they allowed me to spend several weeks reading papers and books and articles, publications and books. And what struck me about what I was reading was the fact that the work that others seemed to do, appeared to me to be what I call anecdotal. In other words what this person did didn't seem to bear much relationship to what the next person did. And I have described their work as being like little vignettes that were very carefully done, very scientifically measured and very, very well reported but there still was no unifying concept or thread between them. And thinking about this made me realize these people really didn't know what they were doing at all and made me feel that I didn't want to do what they were doing. I wanted to do something different. And a person came to the research lab named Ray Meyers and he gave a lecture on his idea. And his idea was that a matching of the vibrational frequencies, you know all the molecules and things are vibrating all the time like they're shaking all the time. All our atoms are shaking and the vibrational frequencies or the matching of the vibrational frequency of the two reactants would facilitate the reaction, would cause a reaction to go. Why in my reading nobody else had ever said anything like that and this seemed to me to be an idea that nobody else was using and also one that made a lot of sense because I kind of thought about it like Pacman was, was present in those days. And so Pacman ran around like that so if they were doing it in, in, in phase of each other they could interact but if they were doing it out of phase, they couldn't, made a lot of sense to me. So I thought well I wanted to design my work then to either use or test this Meyers idea. Speaker 1: Okay. And so you're working in the labs--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --at Standard Oil? Speaker 2: At Standard Oil. Speaker 1: Were you able to, to also focus your, your research, your graduate research for the Ph.D. on that same material? Speaker 2: Eventually I was able to, yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 29016 Speaker 1: And, again, when are you completing the requirements for the Ph.D.? Speaker 2: What, what--? Speaker 1: When are you completing the requirements for the Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Well when-- Sohio [Standard Oil of Ohio] had the policy that after you completed all your, all your examinations your major field, your prelims and all exams and go into your language exams-- in those days you had to do two languages and everything and you had done everything but your actual research for the, for the thesis they would give you one year off with full pay to do the experimental work for the thesis. So when I reached that point why I'd learned to play, I've never been terribly, very athletic. I mean I could you know, I could hit a baseball occasionally or catch one or throw a football and so forth but was not big time in sports. But I had seen them play ping pong. We had a, there was a large room and when they weren't having meetings they would put the chairs aside and they'd put up the ping pong table and people would play ping pong. Well, I watched it and I thought gee I think I'd like to try that so I began to play ping pong. Well at first I could just barely hit the ball but I got to the point where I could hit the ball, stand on one side and hit it with every ounce of strength that I had and it would land on the other side and I could cut and do all the things you do. And I could beat everybody in the whole lab except one person. And even him, I could beat him sometimes so I really enjoyed just playing ping pong. So when my year came though to do this research I decided I wasn't going to play ping pong anymore. In fact I wasn't even going to go in the room when anyone else was playing ping pong to stand and watch. So I did that and I began the, the, began the research. Well at the end of the year I'll go into the research later but I wanted to say that when the year was up and I had completed the, the research I thought I'd go play ping pong. You know I couldn't play at all, not at all. It was as if somebody had written ping pong on, on the black board and erased it off. It was gone. I had no control. Speaker 1: But now you have a Ph.D. What's the dissertation topic? Speaker 2: The cata-, it was the chemisorption of metals, the chemisorption of carbon monoxide on metals was the name of it--. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --which is one of the elements of catalysis. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 29017 Speaker 1: All right. Dr. Gardner you were just starting to tell me about the research for your dissertation and the topic for that. And you said there was more that you wanted to share--. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --about that phase of your life? Speaker 2: The two things that, I think the two more important factors in my beginning, that occurred in the beginning of my research, one was that my supervisor--well I began this work at Sohio [Standard Oil of Ohio] and then I was able to do a portion of it for my Ph.D. thesis so it was very nice. But at Sohio my supervisor was a very, very nice person, Art Strucker (ph.). You see as I said that the companies were, hired me to show that they didn't need a law, that they were going to voluntarily integrate their employees but I was like one black in like a hundred and fifty people so it wasn't much of an integration. But nevertheless apparently why that was sufficient to keep the law from being passed and that's all they were interested in. But my supervisor Art--well let me, let me, let me put it this way, I kind of imagined them saying well we're at the point where we have to take, take on this, this negro and who would like to have him work for them or who would volunteer in their meeting? You know who, who will take him? And I'm sure, I just sort of feel that Art raised his hand and said I would like to have him work with me cause he was so nice, he was such a nice person. And he was a very gentle, very gentle man and a very just a very far as I knew just a very good person. And as such he really allowed me to do what I wanted to do on this project and he had bought me--I had made my own glass apparatus, I learned to blow glass, I made my vacuum system and I was, attached a vacuum pump to it and everything. And he bought a, a thing called a Toepler pump which is what you would use to move gas around inside of the vacuum system but he had sort of wanted me to do what was at that point a standardized sort of weighing that I was to weigh the, to expose, I was to make the catalyst, expose it to some gas and get the difference in weight using that thing called the microbalance or something like that. But I didn't want to do that because my feeling was as I had said that a small amount, that the amount of catalyst didn't seem to matter it was the efficiency of the catalyst that was important. It was the energy of the catalyst, what were the energetics of the system was what I was so much more interested in than the amount of the material in the system because that what seemed to me to be important. So even though he had spent a fair, I don't know maybe couple of hundred dollars to buy this Toepler pump I never put the pump into my piece of apparatus cause I didn't want to use that. I wanted to, I was more interested in using infrared spectroscopy to measure the vibrational frequencies of the molecules cause that's what the, the, Meyer's hypothesis was and here was a method that some people in Beacon, New York in Texaco research had devised to measure the, the vibrational frequencies of molecules in contact with the surfaces of solids. So that's what, I wanted to do that and he didn't argue with me about it, and-- Art didn't. And so I went ahead and did things my way. So I think that those were the two things that were the most important. One was the, was the invention and commercialization of infrared spectroscopy because without that there would have been no way to do what I did. And people prior to me that didn't have this instrument had no, no way to even begin to understand what was going on in catalysis without this, so that was very fortunate that that instrument was available. And the other thing that was fortunate was the fact that he allowed me to do what I wanted to do and so that, that meant a lot I think. Story_ID: 29018 Speaker 1: And what I did was just to put it briefly was that people had thought there were only two possible interactions of a gas with the surface of a solid. One would be a weak interaction like the condensation of steam on the bathroom mirror which of course is so weak an interaction that it doesn't change the water at all it just changes the spacing between them. When, when they're in a liquid they're much closer together than when they're in a gas so that was too weak to, to be important in catalysis. So the only other thing that, that the other people envisioned was the idea that there was an actual bond formed between this molecule from the gas phase and an atom in the surface of the solid so that it was actually stuck in the, stuck on the catalyst. And so they did a, so they would generate a, make the catalyst, expose it to the gas and let it sit for say an hour or something, then they would evacuate the system to remove all the what they call the physisorb species, these weakly bonded things and then study the ones that were strongly bonded. Well I sensed, as I said I felt they didn't know what they were doing. I was determined to see everything that happened from the moment any one molecule of this gas got in contact with the surface I, I wanted to try to see what it was doing. So I added little tiny bits of gas and then ran multiple spectra and then added a little more and twice as much and keep adding more and more and more until I would see the spectrum of gaseous-- of the gas and then I would evacuate half and evacuate half and evacuate half and running multiple spectra each time so that I had a, as complete a record of everything that transpired. And what I found was that there were certain bands, this spectrum gives you bands like this, like this. Well there were certain bands in the spectra that were readily removed by evacuation as if they were physically absorbed, the weak thing, but yet the, the vibrational frequency was quite changed from that of the gaseous molecule as if they were chemisorbed as if some more important, more significant reaction had occurred. So I, I realized I was seeing quite an anomaly where it was looking like the two opposite things at the same time. And this of course it intrigued me and also made me realize that what I was seeing was exactly what you want for catalysis, for the molecule to come from the gas phase, hit the surface, be changed, react, jump right back off. And they had estimated that the enzyme carbonic anhydrase is estimated at thirty million reactions per second. So that's awful fast for getting on and off per second. So that made me realize that I had seen, seen something of importance and so then I set about trying to identify and enlarge and to work with this. So I published my first paper in nineteen-- I began this work actually in '54 [1954] and I did the portion for my piece, the thesis in '58 [1958] and that's when I got my, really the results. And so then I published my first paper in 1960 and of course my major professor, Dr. Petrucci, his name was on it. Well he didn't know anything about catalysis at all so I had to explain it to him all about it. So this put me in a good position and that I was the only one that knew what I was doing and when it came time for my oral exam why one was a physicist, the other was a mathematician and the other was my major professor, the three of them. So after I talked to them, I was explaining my work, I talked about forty-five minutes and they said well that's enough. I said oh no, wait a minute, I got a lot more to tell you. They said no, no we don't want to hear it. No, you got the Ph.D., that's enough. So I thought that was pretty good. Speaker 2: Yeah it's, really a fascinating story that you've shared with us related to the Ph.D. research. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And fascinating for me because I understand now that I have this Ph.D. why they call it the terminal degree because it takes over so much of your life. But to be able to do the thing that you love to do, that's what I hear you saying. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: And you keep smiling through this. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And to be paid for it and to be given time to focus on it. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was wonderful. Speaker 2: And then to be the expert that you have to tell you teachers about it, it sounds like you have the best of both worlds? Speaker 1: I had the best of all possibilities right there. Speaker 2: And then you have to leave that and go into the classroom and teach it to others. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneously). Speaker 2: Or was it just a different way of sharing what you love to (unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 1: No that was all right because being able to teach gives you time for the research so it didn't stop at all. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I continued right on, yeah. And teaching is, teaching was fun too, I enjoyed that. But I, I didn't get there yet. Speaker 2: Not yet. Speaker 1: We're still at Sohio [Standard Oil of Ohio]. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 29019 Speaker 1: I had several run-ins with the, with, mainly with the head of the laboratory with respect to racial problems. But in a way I, I had a degree of admiration for him in some ways even though he didn't seem to understand, he didn't act like he, he didn't act like he was supposed to. But he was a clever guy. He was quite a character. I remember one time that the project leaders of the, the other project leaders were complaining about they were being overworked, they had too many responsibilities. So what he did was he said well I'll let you, I'll let you as a project leader tell me what you think you should be doing. So what he did was he assembled them all in a room with a secretary and he was in there and he asked one person you know well so and so what do you think should a project leader do and so this one said one or two things and then someone else spoke up to say a couple of things and so not to, not to be neglected someone else spoke and pretty soon everybody spoke. And by the time they got through they had a much more rigorous schedule than the, the one they'd had in the beginning. But they couldn't complain because they made it up themselves. I thought that was really clever, really clever. But that's the kind of guy he was. I mean he was one where you'd feel like you're gonna have to give the devil his due. (laughing) So anyway I was sorry that I never really had, had any sort of a you know friendly relationship with him more than--but we had some falling outs too over various things. Speaker 2: What, what are some examples of those things? Speaker 1: Well this is what--one of the big ones was you see I was doing everything that a project leader was supposed to do on my project when I was working on, on the catalysis. I was ordering my chemicals, I was doing the library work, I was writing my own work plans and reasons, I was doing everything. But he, but I wasn't made a project leader. So I went to Art [Strucker, (ph.)] who was my supervisor. I had just been transferred to Art. I had been transferred out and then back to Art. And I told Art I said Art I want to go talk to Doc and tell him that I should be made a project leader. So Art said to me, said well do you want me to go with you? And I said no, I said I just got transferred back to you it's not you know, not sort of related to you. This should have happened before. And I said no I'll go. And Art said well don't you think you know you would want me to go with you? He asked a second time and I said no, no, that won't be necessary. He said I want to go with you. I said oh, okay if you want to go all right. So we went up to see Doc, the two of us and Art said Ralph feels that he should be made a project leader. And Doc Hughes (ph.) said well what do you think about it? Art said I agree with him. I think he should be made a project leader. So Doc Hughes said well we'll take this up in an RTC meeting, this little meeting. So I was made a project leader but they didn't give me anybody to lead. So I thought I'll, after several weeks like this I decided I was going to go to Doc myself without Art this time. I'm working on Saturdays trying to make a success of my project which that wasn't required but I was there every Saturday working. And so I thought, I knew Doc, he usually came in on Saturdays too so I knew this was a good time to catch him. So I went that Saturday up to see him and I said Doc I, you know from the work that we had planned for me to do and from my work plans and reasons I need help. I said I have to have someone to help me. I need a project associate to, to work with me in order to achieve the goals that we have set for me. He rears back in his chair and he said well Ralph he said don't you know someone who is the son or daughter of some friend of, of your parents? I thought to myself I wonder what he's talking about. I said oh I know what you mean. I said you want to know don't I know some negro who can come and work with me. He grinned then, he smiled he said yeah, yeah. He was happy cause he didn't say it, I did. I said well I said I want Standard Oil to hire every qualified negro who comes here if there's a job opening. I said but they're not going to work with me. I'm not going to start a little negro group in the Stan, in the center of the Standard Oil research laboratory. I said I am integrated and I'm going to stay that way, which is so funny to say you're integrated and you're going to stay that way. Anyway, so by that time he had gotten up out of his chair and it was interesting in that it was kind of like slow motion. He was backing up and I was walking forward toward him. And as we talked like we'd take a step, take another step and he said well Chen (ph.) who is Chinese he said Chen has had Chinese girls work for him. I said it's a big difference between being Chinese and being negro in this, in this country at this time. I said there's only two things you can do. I said you can hire somebody and if they don't want to work with me you fire them. I said or else you can transfer somebody to me that is already here. So he's still backing up and I'm still moving forward. I think unconsciously I had my fist clenched cause I'm very angry now. I think he thought if I caught him I was going to knock him through his window into the lake that was outside his window. So he backs up and he said well it's very difficult to get the project associates away from the project leaders to transfer someone to me. I said well those are the only two things you can do. And he had a little laboratory in his room and he backed around and backed on into this laboratory. As he closed the door he said we'll talk about it another time. I said any time you want to. I was really mad. So I went on away and I continued to work and do my work the next week. Well the next Saturday he came down to my, to my laboratory and he said, he came to the door and he said hello. I said hello, how are you, something like that. He said we were discussing your work at the dinner table the other evening he said and my daughter would like to work with you this summer. So I thought I'd sort of won hands down in going away, if he offered up his daughter. So I said well she's a good worker, that will be all right you know cause she had worked there before summers. Well he didn't transfer the daughter or he didn't have the daughter work with me he transferred a, a woman who had personality problems with the other people, with the other, other supervisors and we worked amicably for six or seven years, no problems, yeah. We thought that was interesting. Speaker 2: So it sounds like you were making progress there. Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: At Standard Oil. Speaker 1: Yeah definitely. Story_ID: 29020 Speaker 1: After how many years are you seeing progress? Speaker 2: Well--. Speaker 1: After a few years. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I--in those days you see when you published papers why you would get maybe fifty or a hundred reprints from the publisher because people would write postcards or letters to you asking for copies of your, of your paper. See they don't do that now because it's on the internet and everything and you don't have any idea whose reading your papers or anything. Not, not everybody who read it would write for them but still you still had some idea that somebody's reading them. And I had gotten letters for every country where there was science even New Zealand and South Africa, all over Europe and all over Asia and North and South America (unclear). Speaker 1: And that first paper in 1960--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --was based largely on the dissertation research? Speaker 2: Right, and that, and all the ones--I, I published papers every time I came to a plateau where I could make a story and then I published another paper. And by the time I left Sohio [Standard Oil of Ohio] I had published something like eight or seven or seven or eight papers and all along-- cause I wanted to make a paper trail cause I didn't want anybody else to come, come in later and claim that they had done this. And I thought I'd fix 'em. Speaker 1: Now you said by the time you left you had these eight papers to your credit? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: And when do you leave Sohio? Speaker 2: Well here's what happened was that in 1967 I got a letter from a fellow Yuri Martinchev (ph.) in Moscow [Russia] requesting reprints of the papers and he was reminding me that the Fourth International Congress of Catalysis was going to be held in Moscow the following year '68 [1968], the end of June beginning of July and he was suggesting that I might want to submit a paper. So I took that letter to Doc Hughes (ph.). I was on good terms with him I guess and showed him the letter. And he said oh, he read the letter. He said oh that would be really nice he said to get to go to Moscow, get to give your paper, get to see Moscow, strongly encouraged me. So I write up a good paper and sent it in and a few months later I get the answer back that the paper is accepted and on the program. This is all in '67 [1967]. So the, and the conference now is going to be the end of June, beginning July '68 [1968]. So in, I guess in, in May of '68 [1968] I went to him and I said Doc I just wanted to check to make sure the company was making-- oh no wait a minute, left out something. When I got the answer after a few months that the paper was accepted and on the program and I took that letter to Doc thinking he would be pleased, he glanced at it and said that's nice, handed it to me and walked away rapidly. I thought geeze, not as enthusiastic about this as he was the first time. So I must have had misgivings so that's why I went in, in May of '68 [1968] to check with him. I said I wanted to check just to make sure the company was making the necessary arrangements to send me to the Moscow meeting. I wouldn't have been the only American going but the only one from Sohio. So he said no, he said the company is not going to send you to the meeting. I said what do you mean? I said you, you read the letter. My name is on the program. I said when they call my name I have to be standing there to give the paper. He said well that was a decision of management. Well I was very upset but I maintained my cool. All I said was I'm going anyway. I said when they call my name I said I'm going to be standing there. I said I'm going to give my paper and I turned around and walked away. Well over the next week I cooled down a little bit. I went back to him, I said Doc, I wonder would the company help me go, either pay my round trip plane fare or pay the room and board for the twelve days that I would be there? He said no they're not going to pay anything. I said well at least you'll give me the, the time off to go. He said no if you go you'll have to take it as a vacation. I said well I'm going anyway. I said when they call my name I'm going to be standing there. I'm going to give my paper. So I was really pretty, very, very angry again. So next thing I heard was that they're going to send Bob Gracelli (ph.) whose, I'm, remember I'm the only black person in the place so they're going to send Bob Gracelli whose name was not on the program and who was not giving a paper. Well they weren't idiot enough to have him try to give my paper. Said that would have been mayhem. But anyway, but that really made me mad so I told everybody in the building one by one, I think there were about a hundred people in the building, I started with the receptionist at the front door. I told everybody how they were going to send Bob Gracelli whose name was not on the program and who's not giving a paper and they weren't going to send me and my name was on the program to give a paper. I thought everybody should know. I even told the janitorial firm that came in at night to clean the building. Fact it's a wonder I didn't run out on the street and grab people and tell them. I was, oh I was beside myself. I was so angry. Well next thing I heard was that they weren't going to send anybody. So I, I was so angry I felt that, that I, that well I, I actually felt I only had two choices, either to quit or blow the building up. So I decided to quit and I gave two week's notice and quit. Story_ID: 29021 Speaker 1: So and then the importance of presenting this paper it's, in the academy or just at this Ph.D. level it's how you establish your reputation as a scientist. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: This is groundbreaking research. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And folks on the other side of the ocean want to hear about it-- Speaker 2: Right. Right, and--(simultaneously). Speaker 1: --for the person responsible for the--so it was important--. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --for you to be there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and not asking too much for the company to support you in that endeavor. Speaker 2: Right. Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's the kind of thing that happens all the time. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Or should have been happening. But it wasn't happening for you at Sohio [Standard Oil of Ohio]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: So you had to leave. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But you're going to Moscow. Speaker 2: Oh yeah I went to Moscow. Speaker 1: And when was that? Speaker 2: 1968, June of '68 [1968] I spent twelve days and I had taken-- remember I said I had to have two exams, two languages for my Ph.D.? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: I had the choice of French, German or Russian. I chose French and Russian cause I'd had French several years in high school and the Russian, chose Russian as the other one. I had got my first C in college in Germany in, when I went to Berkley [University of California, Berkeley] and I hated German, Germany, German so I wouldn't do German. So I did the French and Russian. And the French exam I did all right on. That wasn't too much of a problem, but the Russian exam was interesting in that I had been told that I had to get a scientific book that was at least two hundred pages long and prepare the first one hundred pages well and then go for the exam. So I chose a book on crystallography, all about crystals and growing them and everything about crystals. And I prepared a hundred papers and I took my book and I went to the prof, to the, to the Russian teacher. Well there was another person there to be examined and so the Russian teacher said she was going to examine that one first and she handed me a journal and said find something in here you can read. Well that was not what I had in mind. I wanted to read my book the one I had prepared not some journal that she picked up. I opened this journal and you know I couldn't recognize not one word. You know the Russian is a cyrillic alphabet and all those little things there, I (unclear)--oh I couldn't, I couldn't pick out, I couldn't find one word that I knew. Panic was beginning to set in. And I turned to the table of contents and there, there was the Russian titles of the articles and underneath in parenthesis was the English translation of the Russian titles. Well seeing that amount of English with the Russian it all came back. I found an article, read it and passed my test. Speaker 1: Okay. Well you know I wonder--. Speaker 2: By the skin of my teeth. Speaker 1: Well and I'm glad you did. Speaker 2: Just barely. Speaker 1: Do you suppose that, that your supervisor's reaction to the possibility of you going to Russia had anything to do with Cold War politics between the United States and Russia--? Speaker 2: Um-um. Speaker 1: --at that point? No? Speaker 2: They sent Bob Gracelli (ph.) and his wife. Speaker 1: Oh okay, so it had nothing to do with being an American scientist going to Russia to share this information? Speaker 2: No, cause there were fifty other, fifty others went. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I was the only one that spoke any Russian and I, I learned, I not only learned the scientific Russian to do the crystallography book but then when I was going to go I learned more conversational but everything was first person, present tense. But the Russian people were very nice to me cause I could speak something in the language and they you know appreciated me trying to learn it and they went out of their way to show me and to take me places and to do (unclear). I had a wonderful time. Speaker 1: So you were well received by the, I almost said civilians--. Speaker 2: By the, um-hmm, and--(unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 1: -- but the non-scientists? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And how 'bout the paper? Speaker 2: Oh I gave the paper and there were some questions and everything and I have the, the books that, of the conference in my office. I, I bought those. Speaker 1: All right. So you were there for twelve days? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was really nice, uh-huh. Russia was interesting in that in '68 [1968] they had no bars and no night clubs. The entertainment was in, in restaurants and they had hotels that were of the various ethnic hotels like the Latvian hotel and the Estonian hotel and the, this one or that one. And they would have music, they would have an orchestra and you could dance, drink and eat. And by 12:00 o'clock everything closed up tight and everybody went home I guess. At least you, you left there anyway. Speaker 1: So generally a pleasant experience? Speaker 2: Very pleasant and they, they washed, this was in summer, they washed the streets every night in Moscow. So I probably saw the best of Russia though. I understand I didn't see the farms or little towns but at least in, in Moscow things were very nice. I saw the subway and everything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It, it was really very pretty. They had everything washed and cleaned and spic and span. You'd better not throw any paper down cause the ladies would come, would beat you, beat you I guess. You didn't dare litter. It was a really nice experience. Speaker 1: All right so you had a pleasant twelve days in Russia? Speaker 2: Yes. Right. Speaker 1: But you don't have a job? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And there's a homecoming at the end of the twelve days? Speaker 2: Right. Right. Story_ID: 29022 Speaker 1: So Dr. Gardner seems like the year from 1967 to '68 [1968] was pretty momentous in your career? Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: As a scientist and then too as a Clevelander--. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --with Mayor Stokes being elected and you know and it's, and folks are celebrating, it's great day. Speaker 2: Um-hmm, yeah. Speaker 1: --when a black man becomes a mayor of the city of Cleveland [Ohio]. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: But you still don't have a job--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you got to come home. So what do you do when the celebration dies down? Speaker 2: Well I'd already started work on this American Dream Soap Company and I met a fellow my God, what was his name? Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Huh? You don't know. Let me think about it. I can't think, his name doesn't come to me right at this moment but anyway maybe it will come later. But anyway he seemed like a businessman and he thought we ought to start a soap company. Speaker 1: Another chemist? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: Just a business, young fellow with a business interest. And I thought it was a good idea so, so we got together and my sister [Vivian A. Papson] came up with the name, the American Dream Soap Company and the, the soap we made was called Jet Power. And we had, we had an artist that drew or we drew, I think we drew the, the box. It had curly things all around. It was a nice box. It was very attractive. And to begin with why we didn't have the apparatus, the soap making apparatus of course so we had to have Tide, the company that makes Tide make the soap for us. And they colored it blue for us and we put it in a, in-- and they packaged it for us so all we had to do was to distribute it, but we went under the name of the American Dream Soap Company, not under the name of Tide and you know Jet Power. And they had a bar soap which we called Dream Soap and Dream Liquid and those and which we would run around merchandising this. We got the stores to take it and we, we gave presentations in churches and everywhere else about this soap company to get the, the people to buy the soap company, the soap. And actually the, some of the store owners called and asked us what we were telling these people that they were in there demanding the product and if they didn't have it, they got mad and it was, it was a terrible thing was going on. We were really doing a good job in other words of merchandising and getting, getting this soap all around in Cleveland. And I still have one of the empty boxes of, of the soap, I kept one. But anyway I was a, I was a stockholder and along with the other, with the fellow that was the president and maybe there were few other people that held stock in the company and then at one point why he got greedy and he wanted to water down my stock. Well I don't know where he got more money but he apparently appeared with a lot, considerable more money and this would have reduced my whole, my, my percentage of the company. So I went to an attorney to see what I could do about it and he said that I, I should put a, a lean or the company or sue him, no sue him for like a hundred thousand dollars. Well what this did was it prevented him from getting credit and of course when you're in business if you don't have credit you can't really do much in the business. So what it did was it sort of killed the business. Now my feeling was that if, if he was going to not act right then there shouldn't be any business. I wasn't going to let him profit from you know what I had done so that was the end of the American Dream Soap Company. Speaker 1: Well how many years were you in business? Speaker 2: Couple of years, just a couple of years, uh-huh. Speaker 1: So it was a success or it was self sustaining as a business? Speaker 2: Well, up to the point where I sued him then it went down and went out. Speaker 1: The American Dream. Did you name the company? Speaker 2: No my sister told-- was the one who suggested that--(simultaneously). Speaker 1: Oh yes you did say that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was it related at all to your experiences with Russia and America? Speaker 2: No, not Russia, no. Speaker 1: No? Just American Dream? Speaker 2: Just American Dream Soap Company. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: With Jet Power and Dream Liquid and Dream Bar Soap. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So then let's see where am I? Speaker 1: So is it 1970 yet, was there a couple of years you spent there--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with the American Dream Company? Speaker 2: Um-hmm, Story_ID: 29023 Speaker 1: Yeah and then, yeah a couple of years well at the same time I started out at Cleveland State University [Cleveland, Ohio] then. The, Cleveland State was started in 1964 and I came in '68 [1968] was when I, I came when I applied and was, was hired. I was hired as an associate professor because I couldn't come in as an assistant because I'd had like some seventeen years of research experience and assistant would be you were just a green graduate student just you know from graduate college. So since I had had that much experience why they took me on as an associate professor. And I began to teach chemistry. Well I had never taught before but I tutored. And I mean I knew how to teach pretty well. I never had courses in education but I still thought I could teach. I thought it was the problem of simply can I explain all this business so that people can understand it and use it and work the problems and so that's what I did. And I, I did enjoy the teaching a lot. I liked it, I liked the students. Because I had gone part time all my, all the time when I went to school I chose evening students. My wife [Frances Bailey] had died and I didn't have any really reason, I could do the evening students very well. And I was trying to be very lenient with them cause I knew you know the baby, when their baby was sick or their wife was sick or the car didn't start or all these things that happened to you when you're going part time working and I liked them because they were all, they, certainly there was no you know problem of attention and that sort of thing. They were anxious to do what they wanted to do in order to improve their condition. So I tried to help them as much as I could and I did enjoy the teaching a lot. Speaker 2: To get to interact with the--. Speaker 1: Yeah interacting with them. Speaker 2: --young people. Speaker 1: And it was then that I began--well I was quite friendly with a, with the few black students. I didn't have many but the few that I had I was very friendly with them and they would tell me that that their, you know wife was expecting or something like that. Well what I had done, one of the things that I had done, I was, I was interested in making an equation of human behavior and what I got was a graph that showed you how each year represents actually a smaller fraction of the total cause, cause like if you take the first year as one, the second year is half. It adds half to your life, the third year it adds a third to your life so each year adds a smaller fraction to your life. And that, when you, when you draw it you, you it makes a nice curve down like that. And when I saw this curve I thought that's, this explains why time appears to you to go by faster as you get older because each year is actually a smaller fraction of your total but it's the same length as the others but then it seems a little, it seems shorter. That's why time appears to go by faster as you get older. So but looking at that then I thought I knew from calculus that the area under a curve is always important. So there's this large area in the very beginning and I, I thought gee that explains why it's so hard to teach an old dog new tricks cause if the dog has learned something from zero to three that's a pretty big area under that part but it's much smaller under the rest of it. So you'd have to wait, if this was the only factor then you'd have to wait till this area out at the other end got equal to the other one in order for you to cancel, but there are other factors that contribute to this of course. But then thinking that, then it also made me realize the, the importance of early childhood when it comes to the, that that area under the curve had to have something to do with experience or learning or memory or something like that. And so then I pointed out the idea and that's what, that was one of the things that made me begin the idea of reading to the babies. And the other thing is that I had met a, one of the politicians that I had met we had talked about that and he had said something along the same line too. So putting all these things together I began what has now developed into my national crusade. It started very small with just these students in the class and then got bigger and has gotten bigger and bigger. And I'm not a poet, in fact I wrote only one poem in my life in-- prior to this time in high school. They said write a poem and I wrote a poem. But I never really was very impressed with poetry because most of it seemed to me to be so artificial and contrived. So frequently it did seem to me to be like that. And so I never got really a great interest in poetry. Some of it I liked all right. In school I, when I took literature why English literature I remember Wordsworth [William Wordsworth, English poet; laureate], 'A Few Miles Above Tintern Isle--Tintern Abbey' or something like that. Thought everybody got to read that one and we dissected that, could even find out what he had for breakfast that day we dissected it so completely, the poem. Story_ID: 29024 Speaker 1: So and about the same time that you're interacting with the college students, young adults--. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --then you're also beginning to push for folks to interact in a different kind of way with infants? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Babies? Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 1: Okay. And the focus is reading? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well I found out that somebody, I read or heard something that they found that a baby up to the age of two or three has twice as many neural connections in the brain as an adult. I said well it seems to me like one could interpret that to mean that the baby had a two hundred IQ since one hundred is average so if it has twice as many connections maybe it, maybe its IQ is two hundred. And I thought about the fact that when they bring the baby home why after the first few days why the baby is just lying there and the parents are running around cooking and eating and, and changing and dressing and undressing this baby and I wondered who is the smartest, the baby or the parents? The baby has the parents running around madly. So anyway I thought that, that maybe that that would be a good thing and I realized that people used to read to, read I would say probably fifty percent of American families there was a bedtime story every night possibly, something like that before television. But when TV came people stopped reading to the, to the, to the babies in large-- lot of people did stop. And they, I heard people say I'm going to buy a TV for my baby and they didn't mean as a baby sitter. They thought the thing to do was to get the TV, turn it on, set the baby in front of it and learn everything you needed. I too thought TV was going to be this wonderful thing that was going to elevate everybody to a whole new plateau of knowledge and understanding. I didn't realize it was going to turn out to be the single most destructive force in this country in the last seventy years. And it was particularly destructive to us because if you weren't a sports star you had to act a monkey (unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 1: You mean as African Americans? Speaker 2: Yes, as African Americans it was extremely destructive to us. Speaker 1: Well how did your students take to this whole notion of reading to, to babies who can't talk? Speaker 2: The ones I talk-- the ones I talked to they, they started, I, I think they started doing it yeah immediately. I explained to them that you know they sure can hear and I said that what this will do, the, the baby will get the book mixed up with the mother's heartbeat, love and all that sort of thing and the father too but it's going to be mostly mother. And that she'll have a lock on this child and no amount of negative peer pressure nor inadequate education is going to stop it from reading so, because for the rest of its life, every time it picks up a book it will get a little warm feeling in its heart and love to read and do well in school, just works. And it does work like a miracle. Fact I, I say it's the only miracle that happens on earth is what a baby, what a mother can do for the baby. Speaker 1: So this--(simultaneously). Speaker 2: Change their whole life. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. This local initiative started with students here at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You say it's gone national now? Speaker 2: Yeah far as I know. Yeah I've sent packets all over the country and the one thing that's been a little annoying in that I don't get any feedback. But if I ever see somebody that got a packet they say oh, I ask them what they do and they say, and their expected to make ten copies of everything and send to ten more people. And my idea was that if we did that then I expected the people sending packets would be receiving packets, there'd be so many packets going around. The post office would be bent double carrying these packets back and forth cause if we did ten times ten just seven times that would be ten million and that's how many black families there are in the United States. And we, we could get practically all of them I thought that if each one would do the ten thing. But they didn't do the ten thing like I had hoped. But we would have solved all these reading problems. They wouldn't need tutors and all this other stuff. Story_ID: 29025 Speaker 1: So what was your (simultaneously)--I'm sorry. Speaker 2: And the other thing was to speak to the child numerically. Try to use a number every chance you get in talking to the baby. Count the stairs when you walk up the stairs, um-hmm. Don't say some, say two or five or one or something and just whenever possible introduce a number and this will give the child a comfortable num- feelings with numbers that lasted through calculus in college. Speaker 1: So initially is the motivation to get better college students or students who are better prepared to succeed in college? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay, but you tell your students to go back and start with the babies and get them (unclear)? Speaker 2: That's the place. Speaker 1: Well now what about--? Speaker 2: (Unclear) they're the smartest they'll ever be. Speaker 1: Well we've got this wonderful public university here after 1964 and people are coming in as young adults and they haven't had those experiences. So--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --is there anything you can do at that point in your teaching career to help them make sense of this chemistry and the other subjects that you (unclear)(simultaneously)? Speaker 2: No, you just teach I mean do the best you can in teaching, but we've lost all the good part which is zero to three is the best part for educate- you know to lay the groundwork for all education. And I've talked with just, a few months ago I talked to a young black girl in the computer department. She was a monitor in, in the room there and she had done this for her baby without ever knowing me or knowing about it. I guess maybe her mother had done, done it for her and she did it. And so she had read to the baby prenatal and afterwards and the baby was six months old and her, her girlfriend had a baby that was twice as old, a year old. And the one that was talking to me said her baby was more advanced in every way in wanting to talk and walk and everything than the other baby. It, it really has, I'll tell you it's, it is really miraculous what can happen. It's amazing. I mean I didn't even know how powerful it would be myself, but it, it--(simultaneously). Speaker 1: Just through the power of words and the setting. Speaker 2: And the book yeah, the set--(unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 1: You said with the mother and the baby. Speaker 2: Yeah you see the mother is going to hold the baby which is good contact and then I think it's going to also make the mother pay more attention to the baby because of this time she's invested. And if she's holding the baby and the baby does like that she'll say look it's trying to read, it's pointing at the book. And so it's a very sort of self, self motivating sort of a situation that, that really it helps itself. Speaker 1: It's interesting that you're saying this after that comment about poetry and being artificial. Speaker 2: Well sometimes, not all of it. But--(simultaneously). Speaker 1: There's some great poetry out there we can read to our children. Speaker 2: Okay, I'll have to learn that. Speaker 1: I'll tell you about it after the interview. Speaker 2: All right, I'll have to learn-- Speaker 1: Paul Lawrence Dunbar especially. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Story_ID: 29026 Speaker 1: This is wonderful. So I'm glad that that project has taken off but are you finding that there are rewards that come in the classroom teaching environment too? Do the students come back to say that that chemistry course made a difference or--? Speaker 2: I've had some who had, yeah I've had some that commented and at first I, some--in earlier days why I did really get letters from employers saying how well prepared they were, the students, a few of them. A couple of times that happened, felt pretty good about that too. Speaker 1: Good. I heard you say that there were relatively few African American students--. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --coming through the chemistry courses that you taught here on campus [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And, and the other side of that argument is they have very few African American professors even now in Cleveland [Ohio] and this majority African American city. And so obviously there can be a special relationship between an African American scholar and an African American student. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Were there any special courses or other initiatives that you were able to launch at the college level to sort of benefit the students here? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was, when I first came I wasn't, I hadn't been here very long but there were some, some problem that happened between the white students and the black males and they actually barricaded themselves in I think Mather Hall or somewhere for fear of bodily harm. And I was appalled at this. I thought this is ridiculous. Why is this going on at a university, you know? What is happening here? This, this shows some great lack of understanding and knowledge. So I introduced what I called, what later became called Group Four and I made the point that whereas the United States is, is multiethnic it is primarily biracial. And I said the black/white area represents an area of special concern and special importance. And I said that both groups learn all about white culture and white history and white attitudes. I said it would seem to be necessary for black students and especially white students to learn about black culture to equip them to function in our biracial society. And I went on to point out that, that courses such as history of jazz and that sort of thing or music wouldn't, wouldn't serve to accomplish what should be done in enlightening all the students. And out of this came Group Four and it was--other schools in the country had these courses but to my knowledge why Cleveland State was the only one that had it as a university requirement. That every student had to take-- I had asked for one course and the curriculum division decided to make it two courses. So I think this was certainly the only, the only, perhaps the only university in the country that had it as a university requirement. Speaker 1: So that step was probably the beginning of the black studies program--? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I would guess here at Cleveland State University? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And you said that the course work shouldn't consist primarily of music courses? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: To help people understand the black experience? Speaker 2: That's right (unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 1: And if not music then what? Speaker 2: Well it had to, each course, each department was assigned the responsibility of designing courses that dealt with the problems of the black man in the urban setting with respect to racism, prejudice, poverty and employment. (unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 1: Sounds like the humanities and social sciences? Speaker 2: Yeah that was their responsibility to design these courses. And these courses then you know counted toward graduation and were requirements. Speaker 1: And that was in the 1970s? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Cleveland State was the only-- I would imagine now they have these courses in other universities but they were always elective. And of course the, the black students didn't feel they needed them cause they lived it and the white students didn't want to find out about it. So nobody really wanted to take the courses at all hardly. Speaker 1: So there's a struggle going on? Speaker 2: But this was the only one where they, where they was required and so (unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 1: And in fact still is. Speaker 2: It's, and probably is. Speaker 1: As the African American experience course requirement--. Speaker 2: Um-hmm, course requirement now. Speaker 1: --or diversity requirement. Speaker 2: Right, that's what they call it now. Speaker 1: So you won? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah at least I got that over. And they several times tried to abolish the courses and I would read that, all I did was I would go to the meeting and I would simply read the original proposal and everybody would get on up and go back home and keep the courses. Speaker 1: Okay. It seems then that you enjoy a number of successes. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: I said rather light heartedly that you won. Again--. Speaker 2: Well no, that's what I wanted, yeah. Speaker 1: --you're able to-- one of my Ph.D. professors in fact my dissertation advisor had said that's how you know you have power if you're able to achieve your own ends you know over your adversary. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Or to exercise your will over that of your opponent. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: And we see that you're doing that with some success. Speaker 2: Some success yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 29027 Speaker 1: Now you earned tenure here at Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yes, I got tenure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was just, just a few years I got that but I never got promoted. Speaker 1: Now why is that because I know that you're publishing still and the research is continuing? Speaker 2: Yes. Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And what happened with this tenure battle? Do you want to share (unclear)(simultaneously)? Speaker 2: No the tenure wasn't a problem it was the promotion was the problem. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: When I-- in 1981 I, I decided that I had solved, had solved the problem of catalysis. Up until that time no one that I, that I had ever heard of knew really very much about catalysts. They didn't know why they functioned. In the textbook why when it came time to write about the catalysts they had a little box and on it, it said CAT, things went in, things came out. What happened inside the box nobody seemed to know anything about it. And like I said they only had those two ideas and, and it seemed to me they were going off on the wrong tangent anyway. And so that I had solved the problem and actually other people used quantum mechanics and the super computer to try to explain what is happening. Well the way that I approached it was different from what anyone else did and all I needed was, was ninth grade algebra. All I needed was the quadratic equation and you solved these two, you solved this one equation that has a square term which means a quadratic and the answer tells you one, what metal will function as a catalyst, it tells you the oxidation number you know they had plus one, plus two, plus three for 'em, tells you the oxidation number of the metal, it tells you the mechanism of the reaction as to which bonds and atoms of the two reactants are contributing, and four, it tells you whether the catalyst has to be a solid or can be an enzyme. All that in one simple ninth grade algebra solution, that's very powerful. No one else has, is doing anything that even approximates this. So in '81 [1981] I decided that I should be promoted to full professor and so I wrote up my dossier and I had the student evaluations and I, I was a very good teacher. I mean I really went out of my way to be sure that the students, that I did everything I could to help them to understand and to do well. And I had external excellent letters, one from Paul H. Emmett who was like the grandfather of all catalysis research in the United States. And he'd been a referee on several of my papers. You know these referees they don't sign the, their review because they remain anonymous and he was the only one that would ever, that would sign his name. And he might ask you twenty six questions. You answer those satisfactory and he would approve the, you know the publication. So he wrote a very good letter promote, you know encouraging that I should be promoted and I had other letters from people at Sohio [Standard Oil of Ohio] and my, my supervisor and my major professor and they were all good letters. And I had excellent student evaluations. So when I had the dossier written up I gave it to one of the members of the PAC [Personnel Action Committee], Roger Binkley ahead of time and asked him to look it over you know and tell me what he thought of it, do you think it was okay. So he kept it a couple of days and then he gave it back to me and he shook my hand and he said, "Ralph I want to congratulate you for a very fine piece of work." You know of course I thanked him and I turned it in expecting to sail right through. It was unanimously rejected. Speaker 1: And the PAC is that the Personnel--(simultaneously)? Speaker 2: Personnel Action Committee. Speaker 1: --Action Committee and it's (unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 2: Made of the four, of the four professors, Roger was one of them and he, and they, they unanimously rejected it so he voted against it too. And Frank Bochoff (ph.) who was chairman of the department, I'd given him other papers that I'd published while here. I'd asked him to proof you know to check it over and see was everything okay so he knew exactly what I was doing. And he wrote a nice letter that started off nice but in the end he sort of caved in and said that my work needed further theoretical justification. But that's, everything needs further theoretical justification, that wasn't a legitimate excuse. And the one person who wasn't on the, who wasn't here at the time why he, he, he-- when he came back from England why they asked him to sign the refusal to make it unanimous, and he refused. He said "I've read Ralph's work and it's good." Story_ID: 29028 Speaker 1: Okay. We were talking about your unpleasant, rather unpleasant experience with the chemistry department's PAC [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Oh I--. Speaker 1: The Personnel Action Committee and that's in '81 [1981]? Speaker 2: Yeah in '81 [1981]. I almost had a nervous breakdown. I was, I, I know, I mean at the time I knew I was agitated and very upset and so much so that the chairman of the department [Frank Bochoff (ph.)] who had voted against me but he still, he, I guess he realized that I was really in bad shape and he suggested that I, maybe I should go ask the other members of the PAC to see what their complaints were, why they didn't. So two of them I went to them and they sat and listened to me explain what I did and did, and they turned around, got up and said thank you and walked out, never asked one question, never made one comment as to what I was say--as to what I told them. Then I went to Harry Andrews (ph.) you know that became one of the, something like a, what was he, something in the provost's office. Anyway, and when I started to tell him to, to talk with him why he said I don't need to know what you're doing. Nobody understands what you're doing. You have ten papers and you need twenty. I can count how many papers, that's all I need to do and he practically turned around and walked away. So I really-- so then I went to Carroll (ph.) Knox who was the chairman of the PAC and he accused me of numerology and said how he-- finally he said he never wanted to speak to me again about my work. And I very-- it took a lot of strength for me to maintain my cool and all I said was "Carroll, I'm sorry you feel that way." I turned around and hurried out of the room because I was on the verge I think of-- man. I was real, very upset, extremely so. And then I went to Jack Soles who was the dean of arts and sciences and I started to tell him. And I said I measured these vibrational frequencies of carbon monoxide and before I could get the sentence in, he said oh we don't need to measure the, measure things like that. He said we can calculate them using physics which I knew at the time was a lie. They can't, they can't get, they can't do that. That's, that's just all, it's like the emperor's new clothes, it's a whole bunch of stuff like that. Not that all of quantum mechanics is wrong but this part of it is wrong. But anyway I just, I just turned around and walked out of the room. Speaker 1: So basically they're questioning the conclusions you say you reached based on the research or the amount of research? Speaker 2: I don't know what they were-- I think they just don't want to hear anything about it. They just didn't want to hear anything about it. You see in science it's, in many fields it's like this. In, I always say in the olden days when you came up with a good new idea in science they would behead you, burn you at the stake, stone you, ex-communicate you from the church. Now all they do is ignore you which is a great improvement I say over what they used to do. But the idea is that they don't want new things to come up because the people who were the experts are the experts because of the status quo. So they want you to do pretty much what they did and maybe do a little bit more, that's all right. But don't come up with any brand new idea or brand new-- cause then they won't be experts anymore. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: You see? Story_ID: 29029 Speaker 1: May I ask you a question about science? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This was related to an article that we were reading by a sociologist, W.E.B. Dubois, sociologist/historian. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And he talked about Galileo [Galileo Galilei, Italian astronomer, mathematician and physicist, 1564-1642]. Galileo was convinced that the earth was not at the center of the solar system. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: The sun was. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that, that things moved--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in ways that were not in keeping with what the church had taught. Speaker 2: I know. Speaker 1: And so the religious leaders hauled him in--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Galileo, you know--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --is not man God's greatest creation? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And is the earth then not at the center--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of the universe? Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And he said yes. Dubois said Galileo lied--. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to save his life. Speaker 2: To save his life, right. Uh-huh, yeah. Speaker 1: So I mean here's your livelihood. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah and you put the truth out there--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --based on your findings. Speaker 2: Right (unclear). Speaker 1: Using the scientific method. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: And do you, and what do you do in the wake of that? Do you stay on at the university where, where folks are dealing with something that's not quite the truth? Speaker 2: Yeah well I was so upset then, that was after teaching seventeen years. I stayed on till '85 [1985], from '81 [1981] to '85 [1985] cause I was determined--they were going to have a buyout and I was determined to get something out of this and so I got a few years and retired from the teaching. And then that's when I went to another company, opened a company Molecular Technology Corporation. That was a company based in Canton, Ohio and I was the vice president in charge of research in the company. And we had a big, a good contract with Cummins Engine Company and they're the world's largest producer of diesel engines in there, in Columbus, Indiana. There was a very, very lucrative contract. We had like six people were pulling down a hundred thousand dollars a month, a month for the research. No not that much, it wasn't a hundred thousand a month but anyway we were pulling down good money. But-- and the research was doing good and I found the equations as to explain how the catalytic converter on the automobiles destroy nitric oxide. I don't know if you heard of nox, nox as a contaminant in the air and how the rhodium can, functions to destroy the nox and what the mechanism of the, of the reaction is in detail each step along the way. And everything was going along fine but then in '91 [1991], why the fellow who was president of the company stole a hundred and seventy thousand dollars and lied to Cummins [Engine Company] to get more money, took money for stock and didn't deliver the stock and was even making steroids and selling them illegally and the sheriff stopped him and then he went to Notre Dame [University of Notre Dame, South Bend, Indiana] and got an MBA. Nobody wanted to prosecute him. He was white. If it had been me, why they'd have built another jail to put on top of me so they could throw away the key I'm sure. But anyway, so the company, Cummins took all the money and most of the equipment and the company limped along for another two years trying to get financing but we, we couldn't get enough financing so I had to put the company into bankruptcy. By then I had softened up on Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio] so I returned cause since I was emeritus and to continue my research. Speaker 1: So after seventeen years of full time teaching--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you run into these stumbling blocks on the campus. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you leave--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to go into this other entrepreneurial type--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --situation which doesn't work out and you come back home to Cleveland State. Another homecoming? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: This is wonderful. Story_ID: 29030 Speaker 1: All right. And the year then is, are we in the 1990s at this point? Speaker 2: Yeah, the 90s [1990s] right. Speaker 1: Okay. And you get back into the classroom or is it just primarily your research that you're focusing on? Speaker 2: Just, just as research. I, I remained retired. I didn't want to teach anymore (unclear) (simultaneously). Speaker 1: So you don't get to interact with students at all? Speaker 2: Well I do. They come around. I offered to tutor any of the black students especially. I've tutored even non-black students but occasionally, but mostly them I try to get them to come. When I see them in the hall I ask them, are you taking chemistry? If they say yeah I say well come and-- are you having any problem? If they say they're having problems I try to get them, I almost beg them to come and tell them I can make it easier for you. Speaker 1: And some of them take you up on that offer? Speaker 2: Some of them do, not enough of them. Speaker 1: Okay, maybe they'll see this tape and(simultaneously). Speaker 2: I wish more--. Speaker 1: --be motivated to stop by the office. Speaker 2: Maybe so, right. Speaker 1: What building are you in on the CSU [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio] campus? Speaker 2: I'm in the science building, SI, its 3008 on the third floor in the science building. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I-- we've talked so much about your public career--. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --as a, a scientist at Standard Oil of Ohio (unclear) company founded by Rockefeller is it? Speaker 2: Yeah it was. Speaker 1: Okay. And then your public career as an educator at the post secondary level, seventeen years at Cleveland State--. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --and then your entrepreneurial activities with the American Dream Soap Company. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: And then some other things that would help clean up our air--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --if that company had continued. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But I'm wondering because it sounds to me that it's such a lonely journey as a scientist. You're in your lab and maybe you have a research assistant or an associate but otherwise it's your mind and your chemicals and your experiments in your lab--. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --and your research--. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --alone? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Are there other people though? (unclear) where is the family at this point? I know you had a younger sister and I know you have a son. Speaker 2: Yeah well I keep in contact with him. I talk to him almost every day. He's had some health problems so I keep in good, good contact with him. And my sister [Vivian A. Papson] she's, she's married. She lives in Saranac, New York. She's sixty miles south of Montreal, Canada so that's way up in New York. When it snows I call to ask her are you tunneling yet? Speaker 1: Is that your little sister? Speaker 2: Yeah that's my baby (unclear)(simultaneously). Speaker 1: Are you still picking on her? Speaker 2: Oh I never picked on her. Speaker 1: Oh that's not really picking on her? Speaker 2: I never picked on her. I was always (unclear) (simultaneously). Speaker 1: Well there's nothing you can do about the weather. (unclear). Speaker 2: No, just to joke with her. Speaker 1: Are there other relatives and good friends around town? Speaker 2: Oh yeah I have lots of friends and relatives. Not other relatives but lots of friends. Speaker 1: Okay. I-- Speaker 2: Dorothy looks after me. Speaker 1: Oh, one of our observers. Speaker 2: Right there. Speaker 1: Oh, you have a friend who looks after you in Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Looks after me, yeah right. Right. Speaker 1: Another Clevelander. Another history maker. Speaker 2: James looks after me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Denise looks after me. I have all this nice, wonderful people looking after me. Speaker 1: It's wonderful. Speaker 2: I need all the help I can get. Speaker 1: Is that right? Story_ID: 29031 Speaker 1: You know I think it's really interesting that we're having this discussion today because we started out hearing a little bit about your parents [Chavis Gardner and Vivian Elizabeth Hicks] starting with your mother [Vivian Elizabeth Hicks], the English teacher. Who I imagine must have had a great love for words. And while she's doting on this first born child, this son. You probably recited some poetry to them (unclear). Speaker 2: I remember my first book had cloth pages and I remember this picture showed a squirrel and he was sitting beside a tree and beside him was a box on which was written nuts, n-u-t-s, and the thing under, the words under it said the box says nuts and they look good but they seem a little hard for food. Said something like I would try one in a minute but each one has a worm hole in it. Well actually the box had the kind of nuts that you screw on a bolt so they had a hole in them and the other thing that was funny was that I insisted on saying that each one had a wame (ph.) hole in it even though my parents said worm hole. I said wame (ph.) hole in it, I don't know why. Speaker 1: So that's one of your earliest memories, this first book(simultaneously)? Speaker 2: That's (unclear) this was, I must have been about three years old I guess. That's (unclear). Speaker 1: You think that's related, your mother's love for the language and the written word, related at all to your program in mothers--. Speaker 2: Reading to their babies? Speaker 1: --encouraging, reading to their babies, encouraging them to love language? Speaker 2: Maybe so. Maybe so. Speaker 1: Maybe so. It's interesting too what you said about your father's [Chavis Gardner] work as a musician in the depression era. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: And then to get to Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio] and see it's not by music alone--. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --that we're going to make it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Through these undergraduate programs. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But you didn't say you don't need music. Speaker 2: No, no I didn't say that. No I love music. I--. Speaker 1: Oh, so we can use both sides of our brain? Speaker 2: I, I always have, I've hummed tunes in my head that I haven't heard since 1930. Speaker 1: While you're in the chemistry lab? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now which side of the brain is it that focuses on creativity? Speaker 2: I forgot. I think it's the, which is it the left? Speaker 1: Well maybe it doesn't matter if we were to use both? OFF CAMERA VOICE: (Unclear) right. Speaker 2: Huh? OFF CAMERA VOICE: I think the right side. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: The right? The right is creative? OFF CAMERA VOICE: (Unclear). Speaker 1: I, I took one of those tests for the brain. It said I was almost equal to two sides. I wasn't right or left. Hardly, there wasn't much difference between right or left in my brain. Speaker 2: Actually that was going to be my hypothesis, that theory to be proven. Speaker 1: What is? Speaker 2: That you're a little bit of your father with the music and a little bit of your mother with the creativity. That love for language and words and then you're a whole lot of yourself. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You know that you are, you sort of carved out a space for yourself as a scientist. Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: And you were determined to do that even before you graduated high school? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Story_ID: 29032 Speaker 1: Any regrets at all about-- And I keep asking at different points no regrets after World War II? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: None after 1985 when you're leaving Cleveland State [University, Cleveland, Ohio]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So chemistry has been kind to you? Speaker 2: Yes it's been good. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything else that you'd like to say about your work and your life here in Cleveland [Ohio] before we look at some--?. Speaker 2: I wrote--. Speaker 1: --of those wonderful pictures? Speaker 2: Yeah, I wrote the last few things there on that page I think it is. Let me see. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't know if I should read this. The reason I want to read this is that I want it recorded and I wanted, I-- in case anybody ever looks at it I want to have it recorded. Speaker 1: Oh lots of people will look at this. It will go right into The HistoryMakers' archive. Speaker 2: Okay. My research in catalysis initiates the conversion of chemistry from an experimental science to a mathematical science where accurate predictions may be made. Several new principles of chemistry have developed from my work. A few of the examples are one, the conversion of data from infrared spectroscopy into numbers of electrons elevates the information to be gained from spectroscopy to an entirely new plateau of knowledge and interpretation that would be impossible by other means. Two, I placed Meyers' hypothesis of the matching of vibrational frequencies of reactants as a criterion for a reaction into a more fundamental basis in terms of the matching of what is known, what can be called the transition energy of the electric fields of reactants between electronic states. Third is the discovery of an electric field, a necessary criterion of catalysis. Each ion capable of acting as a catalyst has an electric field with a different partial charge. This is related to data in the atomic energy levels tables put out by the National Bureau Standards of the nation by the government which is now called the National Institute of Standards and Technology. These fields may be termed, I have suggested that they be called the Gardner-Chavis Sulliver (ph.) fields or the GCS fields since I, since I and Ted Sulliver (ph.) were the first people to observe these and were the ones who discovered these fields. The appropriate catalyst for a reaction is the one that has the field with the fractional charge that will change the transition energy of the electric fields of the reactants that did not match in the gas phase so that they match in the presence of the catalyst fields. The fourth point is that reactants, intermediates and products are all in a gas like state not bonded to the surface of the catalyst. Speaker 1: Well I thank you for sharing that--. Speaker 2: Thank you--. Speaker 1: --statement with us. Speaker 2: --for letting me. Story_ID: 29033 Speaker 1: Well this is wonderful. We, within the, the larger group of HistoryMakers, we have a special category for science makers. Maybe you can visit the website and see some of your peers who have also contributed their stories to the archive and once we get all of this together you know we'll be able to cross reference the stories of the various science makers and perhaps have a better understanding of this whole idea of catalysis. Speaker 2: One more thing I wanted to tell you the poem. The second poem I wrote is seven pages. I'm going to give you that one. The third poem is only one page and it's about black on black crime. Speaker 1: You want to recite that (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah I'll recite that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That one says, he stole your birth right and your woman too. He makes you ashamed for you to be you. he keeps you unemployed so he can call you lazy and then he gives you crack just to drive you crazy. But you do what he wants cause he's hurt you so bad, brothers killing brothers make a racist white man glad. You turn your anger inward cause he's made you masochistic, too often hurt your family cause he's made you sadistic. He gives you a gun so you think you're a man, he wants to wipe you out and you help him with his plan. So you do what he wants cause he's made you so mad, brothers killing brothers, make an evil white man glad. Look in the mirror and see the white man's tool cause when you kill your brother you must be a fool. He sees there's no gun control so you can kill each other. He don't have to fire a shot, he knows you'll kill your brother. He fights a war of genocide but doesn't pull a trigger. Every time a black man dies he says one less nigger. He hurt you so bad, he makes you so mad. Brothers killing brothers make an evil white man glad. He makes the sentence light when you kill a black man. To keep black life cheap is his well laid master plan. He puts you in the trick bag cause he games with your mind. You can't see in the mirror, your hate has made you blind. To see you've killed yourself every time you kill a brother, which takes away all hope so you go kill another. So you do what he wants cause he's hurt you so bad. Brothers killing brothers make a racist white man glad. Speaker 1: And when did you write that? Speaker 2: In the 70s [1970s] when I began my program. Story_ID: 29034 Speaker 1: May I ask you one final question. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Which perhaps is indirectly related to what you just said in that poetic statement since it references genocide and systematic killing. With all of the important work that came out of the Manhattan Project and all of the things that were said and done about a year ago in America that led to our involvement in war in the Middle East--. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: --are you optimistic about our future as a people with the availability of weapons of mass destruction? Are we smart enough to use technology to improve the quality of life or are we so concerned about power that we're going to end up in this self destructive kind of cycle that you've just described? And that's not a leading question. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I really do want to know your opinion. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But we had the anniversary is it not today--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --of the invasion--? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: --in the Middle East? Speaker 2: Maybe so. Well I think, oh I've definitely for quite a while think mankind is not high enough on the evolutionary scale to have the necessary conceptual capability to live in a densely populated technological society. In other words it's all over with the shouting. (laughing). Speaker 1: Shall we run on that note and (unclear) to the next--? (simultaneously) Speaker 2: It's sad. I'm, it's sad. It's kind of sad. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he just ain't got it. He just simply doesn't have it. It's not there. It's like asking dogs to live in the meat market and not eat meat. You might get one or two that stop but the rest are going to eat it up. It can't be. The problem, the two problems that he, that might give him a chance is he has to get, he has to prevent the accumulation of wealth and he has to gain population control and I don't think he can do either one of them. Speaker 1: And this is all of mankind, not just America? Speaker 2: This is all of mankind, not just America. Oh I understand that China is giving America the blues. We're about to, they, they are talking, I have heard people talking about the U.S. imploding in ten, twenty years. Speaker 1: Well in that regard--. (simultaneously). Speaker 2: It's that serious. Speaker 1: --I hope you're wrong about it. Speaker 2: I hope so too. I hope so. Speaker 1: But I thank you for answering my question. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 29035 Speaker 1: Well, that's a picture of my wedding, my marriage to Francis Christine Bailey, married of Francis, Francis Christine Bailey to Ralph A. Gardner Chavis--to Ralph A. Gardner, that's all. The Chavis wasn't there. OFF CAMERA VOICE: Okay, and what was the date? Speaker 2: The year? Speaker 1: That was, when, where was (unclear)? I would say about 1940--'44 [1944], '44 [1944]. And that was another picture of the cutting of the cake at, at the wedding. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That is a picture of my mother when she was in college I believe. Speaker 2: Say her name. Speaker 1: Vivian Elizabeth Hicks at that time. That is a picture of my grandmother on my father's side, in other words my father's mother and her brother. And her brother was a, that brother was a doctor and that is his sister. FEMALE SPEAKER: Name. Speaker 2: And their names? Speaker 1: Her name is Mary Ann Chavis and I think his (unclear), his name was Charles Chavis. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That is a picture of my grandfather on my, on my, my mother's side, maternal grandfather in his store in Columbia, Missouri. He is the person on the far right as you look at, as you look at the picture. In other words he's the person with the white shirt on and that is his, his store in Columbia, Missouri. He started as a foster child of very, very poor people and he managed to wind up with--quite a businessman owning a cemetery, several houses. He built a church there, a black church in, in Columbia, Missouri. Speaker 2: And did you say his name? Speaker 1: His name was Alex Hicks. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: That's okay. Speaker 1: That, that is my sister Ann as a baby. She must have been about one and a half or two. The lady is my mother's mother, my grandmother Annie Hicks. The next picture is my cousin Dorothy Ann Hicks and the last to the right is me, Ralph A. Gardner--. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --as a baby. That is a picture of Annie Hicks' sister Matilda. Matilda would have been, Matilda either Ridgeway or Campbell. I'm not--Matilda do you know was, were they Ridgeways or Campbells? They're one of the two. FEMALE SPEAKER: I think, I was going to say Campbell. Speaker 2: Campbell, I think they were Campbells yeah. I think they were Campbells so that would be Matilda Campbell and my, her sister, my grandmother would have been Annie Campbell. That is me at the age of four, Ralph A. Gardner at about four years old. That's me at the age of about one year old I guess. That's me on, on a horse at probably at Coney Island in New York at the age of about four. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh. This is my father's mother as a young lady. Her name is Mary Ann Chavis. OFF CAMERA VOICE: Do you know the occasion for this or anything? Speaker 1: No, I don't have any idea-- Story_ID: 29036 Speaker 1: Yeah, that's again a picture of Mary Ann Chavis, my father's mother, my grandmother. (Unclear). Oh that's my grandmother on my mother's side, Annie Campbell the taller one and the shorter one is Matilda Campbell her sister and she's the same one in the, as the lady in this stern picture. And he graduated from high school isn't that what it says? Um-hmm. Yeah. That was him, that's Clarence Chavis Gardner. He liked Chavis so he went by Chavis Gardner always. And he was the one, he was the musician, the musician, the pharmacist and the psychologist. What's the caption in the bottom area? I think it said well I'd have to look at it. Graduation from high school. Graduation from high school, Chavis Gardner graduation from high school. Yeah. Is that me and my father, Chavis Gardner and me isn't it? Is that who it is? Um-hmm. Yeah. Yeah. Do you know what graduation that is, bachelors or Ph.D.? That must have been bachelors, yeah. He, he had, oh well that, that was the bachelors so it wasn't Ph.D. I had a fancier outfit. Okay. Oh that, now that's me November the 24th. I was two years old there. That's Ralph A. Gardner. (Unclear) that's Ralph Gardner at two. Okay so that's in Buffalo? Yeah in Buffalo. That one? This one? Fifteen? Oh no in 1937 I was fifteen years old, August. That's me, Ralph Gardner, 1940. Oh yeah, that's my wife and myself and my son. He must have been just a few months old. That's Ralph, Jr., Ralph, Sr., and Francis. That's my son with a dog, Ralph, Jr. That's a great shot. And there's Ann. That's my sister, Vivian Ann Gardner. Those are two, two little tomahawks on the wall. One is for cherry, was Washington's birthday I think that he chopped down the cherry tree. Um-hmm. And that's why the tomahawks. Are they way back there or are they just really small? Yeah you see them? (Unclear). Yeah, you can see them. I've never noticed them before. Yeah. That's a scream. (Unclear) that was it. Same, same totals. Same totals. That's really a good thing, focus them and everything. That's me and my, with my sister, Ralph Gardner and Vivian Ann. And do you know the year? What you think, she's about seven or eight (unclear)? Eight maybe. Eight. 1938, round in there? '38 [1938] yeah. Great contrast, you see what life has done to us. Those were some great kids. (Unclear). (Unclear) that's with my sister and must, that's been about last year or so when--. That's December of 2002. 2--02 [2002], okay. Here we are, there's Denise my niece, my sister, Vivian Ann and (unclear). INTERVIEWER: (Unclear). I'm sorry. Okay, that's my um-hmm, that's Dorothy--. Jackson. --Jackson, Ralph Gardner and my sister in her apart, in her condo. (Unclear). (Unclear). And professor of eight papers on catalysis. (Unclear) October '61 [1961]. I don't know. CSU professor to read paper on catalysis (unclear). I know. Probably--. (Unclear). What's that? What year was that? Is there a year on that? I think this is the Moscow--. Oh, let's--. --in '68 [1968]? Yeah. Let me see it up close and see. I'm out of that (unclear). (Unclear) I'm the one on the left and that, the, Mary Krazam (ph.) was my, was the lady that worked with me as my lab assistant and Casper Stussell (ph.) was from Switzerland. Okay, so this was at Sohio? Sohio right. Yeah, and this was October '61 [1961] we determined? Yeah. Oh yeah I forgot to tell you why (unclear) I wanted to tell her, Regina? Um-hmm. I found out many years later just, just (unclear) I would say without the last five years why it was that Dock and them did what they did. (Unclear)? Yeah, they had you know there at Sohio cause they had encouraged me all along and all of a sudden they--. (Unclear). --so completely. And what it was, was that that was my nineteenth year at Sohio. If I had stayed one more year I would have been vested in the retirement program and that's what it was all about. Wasn't that dirty? That is dirty. I mean that was dirty. And one of the people who became the vice president in charge of research was Glen Brown at that time and when he first came there why he was my room partner, my--and we sat in the same room together. And I mean I, he was my friend that's all. And I know he, he must have known what they were doing. (Unclear). I even I (unclear) diploma? Oh really? I did. Oh. (Inaudible) had three baccalaureates. Yeah. Ralph you know what (unclear) used to say? What? The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong but the one who endures to the end. That's right, yep. He's right. Yeah. (Unclear). Okay, what was this photo taken for? I don't know. Was it a special occasion? It's a professional photo and that's in the newspaper article about (unclear) too. Yeah. Yeah. So it might have been taken--. Around that time then. This one says--. Well actually--. --October '66 [1966]. Well see--. Well that's what written in. --(unclear) a little bit before. Well if it was written then it must be. Yeah, October '66 [1966]. Yeah, that would be. So you were (unclear)? Okay so pretty good. The Pentson (ph.) club. Here we are with our frills. That's at Audubon? Yeah at Audubon. (Unclear). Okay, what's the occasion here? Yeah what is it? What am I doing? It looks like you're giving a presentation. Pretty recent. Oh yeah that's pretty recent cause see my hair is totally white. Oh boy that must have been what do you think, the year 2000? That's recently in the last couple of years. Last couple of years. (Brief interruption.) That's (unclear) here. That was, (unclear) that I sort of knew. Who is that? Is that me? That's you in Russia, absolutely. Oh, me in Russia. Yeah judging from the words on the buildings here. Yeah. Which I can't make heads or tails of. Yeah, Cyrillic alphabet. Yeah I stayed at the Hotel Russea (ph.) which was the best hotel they had, had six thousand rooms. Oh my God, six thousand rooms? Yeah, that's--it was the biggest hotel in the world. (Unclear). Okay, Baruvsky (ph.)? Yeah that was Guthrie Baruvsky (ph.). Forgot most of it. All I can remember is (unclear). And what's that? I'm not going to tell anything. Oh. (Unclear) 1939. 1939, yeah. Darcy Runkel (ph.)? Yeah that was chemistry Runkel. Yeah that's a nice one. Yes. There's a National Honor Society (unclear). That's the National Honor Society--. Honor Society pin. Excellent. And that age, how old do you think I was in that one, about ten? (Unclear) no, no, no that looks like maybe about fourteen. Fourteen um-hmm, that's the National Honor Society pin (unclear). Um-hmm. I think you're about fourteen (unclear). Fourteen, yeah. Okay...