 Story_ID: 7655 Speaker 1: Can you tell us your full name and spell it? Speaker 2: My full birth name is Yolande, Y-O-L-A-N-D-E, Cornelia, C-O-R-N-E-L-I-A, Giovanni, G-I-O-V-A-N-N-I, Jr. I am named for my mother [Yolande Cornelia Watson] who was named for--we believe, Yolande DuBois because my grandfather was taught by [civil rights activist William Edward Burghardt (W.E.B.)] DuBois, and Cornelia comes from my great grandmother whom we called 'Mama Dear.' And I am called 'Nikki,' N-I-K-K-I, because of my sister, and my sister's only three years older than I. My--what I would call my baby aunt, Agnes, who's my mother's youngest sister, says that she's the only person who knows why I'm called Nikki, so I said to her, "Well, why?" She was introducing me and she's a Presbyterian. She was introducing me for a speech and I had never even thought that Agnes had anything to do with it, and she said there was a woman in the church--now we actually grew up in a Baptist church--who used to like to kiss babies, as older women do. And she would see little fat babies and say, "Oh, give me a little bit of that neckie," and she would kiss them on the neck. You know, just--and it's Agnes's thought that my sister's, who's name is Gary Anne, we call her Gary--that Gary heard her say that, you know, you know, give me a little bit of that neckie, and thought that who's I am. I'm Nikki. I mean and what she heard was Nikki and she started calling me Nikki Rosa. And as I grew, the Nikki stayed, the Rosa really didn't so I'm called Nikki and that's the only thing I know about it because Gary has, of course, no memory of this and Agnes was probably the only person sort of paying attention. Story_ID: 7656 Speaker 1: Give us today's date and tell us where we are? Speaker 2: Today is (laughs)--today is January 31, 2003 and we are in Chicago, Illinois on South Michigan [Avenue]. Story_ID: 7657 Speaker 1: Can you give me the names of your parent's full name? Speaker 2: Certainly, my mother's name is Yolande Cornelia Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N, and she married Jones, whom we called Gus, J-O-N-E-S, whom we called Gus, G-U-S, Giovanni. Speaker 1: Her hometown? Speaker 2: Mommy was born in Albany, Georgia and her parents moved to Knoxville, Tennessee. All three of the girls, my mother and her two sisters were all born in Albany, Georgia. It's my grandfather's home and my grandmother's home, too. My grandmother's Emma Luvinia (ph.)Terrell. She married John Brown Watson and my dad is from a little town that no longer exists right outside of Mobile, Alabama. His mother was Mattie Jones, and Mattie Jones married--or had a child with, we really don't know, Thomas Giovanni. And Mattie moved to Detroit [Michigan], actually. I now know that Mattie was a part of the Great Migration because they moved up in the--my dad had a--my dad has been dead for about seventeen years now. But he had a half brother, Bill Atkinson, and Bill lived in Columbus [Georgia] and my father had an Aunt Fanny. Right now, my mind is blank on Fanny's last name. I don't remember Fanny so well. She made good white beans. But Fanny lived in Wilberforce and she worked for Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio]. And so she helped to rear Gus and so, you know, in the old days people would have help with the children. And so when Mattie moved on to Detroit, she took Bill but Gus stayed with Fanny, and I think it was probably very lucky because Gus ended up going to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee], which if he hadn't gone to Knoxville College he wouldn't have met Mommy. And I don't know which I would have been, a Giovanni or a Watson, but I wouldn't have been who I am, so I'm glad they got together. Story_ID: 7658 Speaker 1: Giovanni is a very interesting name, you know. Do you know how your family--your dad's family--? Speaker 2: Well we know that Thomas Giovanni--and actually, I named my son when I was expecting. We call my father 'Gus.' Gus said to me, you know, "It'd be nice if you have a boy," you know, "you can name him Thomas," you know. That's after his father, but we don't know much about Thomas Giovanni. We know that Mobile [Alabama], as you know, is a port city and we know that Italians are sailors. We also know, as does everybody, that Giovanni is a first name and even now in any part of Italy, I get teased about that because it's usually Giovannetti or there's something else to it, because Giovanni is simply John. And so it is our thought that at some point there was an Italian, there was a Giovanni, in Mobile who sired, as it would be, the man who became Thomas Giovanni, who clearly was a black man. I mean there's no question of what Thomas Giovanni--we don't know much about Thomas Giovanni's father. So we just have to assume that people held on to what they remembered. She remembered that Giovanni impregnated her. She named her son Thomas Giovanni. Thomas Giovanni and Mattie Jones became an item, as it were, and the fruit of that was, of course, Jones for his mother and Giovanni for his father. But it's such a nice name that I like it and I've kept it (laughs). Once you learn to spell, you don't give it up, you know. Story_ID: 7659 Speaker 1: I'm Adele Hodge, the interviewer, and observing and participating is Larry Crowe, staff interviewer here at the HistoryMakers. And let me get these 'People'-like questions out of the way. Speaker 2: Matthew Hickey. Speaker 1: Oh, and our cameraperson is Matthew Hickey. What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: I guess blue. I mean I don't--I end up with a lot of blue but I like red. My car is red with black interior but previous to that when I had a Cadillac [brand of car] which I no longer have and probably wouldn't have if they gave it to me, but it was blue. So, I have a lot of blue, but I'm not in the blue period. I've been in a gray period. I guess I don't really have what you call a favorite color. I don't really think like that that much. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Any place with sun and beach. I like the Caribbean and have recently fallen in love with--and I should say fallen in love again with Mexico, and the long answer--I give long answer so you cut me off at any point, but this is my sixtieth year. If I get to June, I'll be sixty years old. And I realized I love the water. I would--if I were rich, I would just go from one cruise ship to the next. I just love being underwater. And of course I, like most black women during the era of segregation, I never learned to swim. As you also had your hair straightened and, of course, swimming is going to make your hair--what we would call "go back." And so most black women my age actually don't swim. And I had decided at the beginning on my birthday last year, I said I'm going to set a goal, and the goal was to learn to swim by sixty, and so I'm pretty much there. I've been taking swimming lessons, and my goal--because I'm always going ahead. I'm kind of futuristic. My goal for sixty-one is to learn enough Spanish to be conversational. I know I'm never going to be good. I'm a writer and writers don't like other languages, you know. We think in a language and you notice that with writers. They really don't do well in that second language. If you can't hold on to your language, we generally lose you, and that's black and white and Russian, anything else. But I want to learn enough Spanish that--and I know buenos dias, buenos nachos, you know, things like that. But I want to be able to say, you know, "How you doing?" You know, "Okay, well that's good," you know, that kind of thing. So I'm--and to read a good menu. I mean I don't--I can read a French menu and I can read a German menu and--we're food people, so I want to be able to sit down and read a menu in Spanish, you know. Speaker 1: Speaking of food, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: If it's not actually moving and it's not a primate--I will eat--I don't eat primates. I think that that's wrong. I have enough sense to know when I'm in Africa, when I'm in the African continent, not to eat bush meat because bush meat is a primate. It's usually some poor gorilla they've killed. So I don't want to do that, you know, but other than that if it's on the plate that's an old, you know, you learn that one from your grandmother. If it's on the plate, eat it. Speaker 1: And sayings, what is your favorite saying? Speaker 2: Well right now I think, "What kind of sense does that make?" I must say it all the time, "What kind of sense does that make?" You know, because there's so much craziness out there. I also say, "I just wanted to mention that," a lot. So, you're asking, like, "A stitch in time saves nine," or something like that. I don't think I have one of those that I readily pull up. I'm sorry. Story_ID: 7660 Speaker 1: I'm having a low-level grandmother project going in my head and I, I edited a book called 'Grandmothers,' which I enjoyed. [Publisher] Henry Holt [and Company]. And we got so much feedback from it. The book did well, but mostly--not just the financial--that end of it, but the response that people had because I'm getting letters, you know, "When you going to 'Grandfathers'?" you know. And it's like, "Oh, okay. That's a good idea." And I did 'Grandfathers'. I had to do 'Grandfathers.' And I'm now in the process of trying to edit 'Aunts,' because that would be the three people. But grandmothers are clearly essential. And then we had a problem. There was a problem on the savannah with the elephants. I've been doing a low-grade zoo project, too, which is another thing that maybe we'll get a chance to discuss. But they had a project--in the human's mind there were too many elephants and they were destroying the trees, and this is humans, because if we had not bothered it would have all been all right, but nonetheless. What they decided to do was move the juveniles, because if they thought, "Okay, we'll move the juveniles and everything will be all right." Well, they took all of these elephants, moved them to a whole new place, and of course the elephants started fighting. They got to be, you know, very stressed out, very crazy, and people were watching, "What's wrong with the elephants?" Well, we realized the people who study the pachyderm recognizing it as an intelligent, noble animal. Said, you know, you got these juveniles, nobody's teaching them how to be elephants. And so what they did was they went back and they got a couple of grandmothers, all right? [Laughing] And this is the truth. And they took the grandmothers up there who of course immediately--because you know how grandmothers, they are "Boy, sit down!" Immediately taught the elephants, you know, "This is not--maybe those other people conduct themselves like that but we're elephants. We don't do that." Straightened it all out and, and, and peace is continued. So they now know when they're moving animals, take the grandmothers. That would be anybody. So my grandmother was Emma Luvinia (ph.) Watson. She's from Albany, Georgia and Emma Luvinia (ph.) Terrell Watson, from Albany, Georgia. She was twenty years younger than my grandfather who was married when he met her, and as he said, "I only wanted to kiss her." And she, "John Brown, I wasn't going to kiss because if you had kissed me, you wouldn't have married me." (Laughs) It took me the longest to realize the kiss was a euphemism, but grandfather was determined to have her and he got a divorce, which was unprecedented in the family, and married her, and they lived happily ever after. My grandmother did and still fascinates me. I mean I draw pictures of her in my mind, you know, things that sometime you're going through or things that you're wondering about, you know, and then grandmother's just right there. Speaker 2: What is among the stories you remember the most about your relationships to and with your grandmother? Speaker 1: Well, the thing that I liked about grandmother--and if I am not yet a grandmother, but if I were to become, is that she always took you seriously. And grandmother--neither one of them--neither grandmother nor grandfather suffers fools gladly. And so you're expected to be up to date on a certain number of things and so if she asked you about something you were supposed to know it, you know, because whether it was world affairs, you know. If I roll it back to when I was living with my grandmother. I was, what, ten or eleven years old and so world population was one of the big--and grandmother was big on that, you know, but she never did understand abstinence. She's just, "What is this abstinence?" (Laughing) You know, you try to explain it just like that. "I don't understand that." And you'd say, "Well, it's okay." And of course, grandmother was very active. Grandmother was a Democrat and my grandfather actually was a Republican, because of the era and, you know, going back to the party of [U.S. President Abraham] Lincoln, not the party of [U.S. President Dwight D.] Eisenhower, because I remember them arguing about Ike [Dwight D. Eisenhower] and, of course Ike was an idiot like the Republican government--presidents that we've had. Ike was not a good man but they used to be that--we are now in Knoxville, Tennessee. And grandmother also was involved in Civil Rights Movement, and again, not that grandpapa wasn't, but you have to--when I met--if I could put it that way--when I actually met my grandmother to recognize this is a separate entity from my mother and stuff, Grandmother--and I realized that fairly recently, Grandmother had to have been about fifty-five, fifty-six years old. See, I'm fifty-nine, and so all of a sudden you realize a couple of years ago I was, like, "Wow," and I think that's what got her back. I mean she's always been in my head but it's like, I am the age that my grandmother was--when I met my grandmother I am now at that age. She had a bad heart and she had a heart attack, she was going to die, but grandmother at fifty-seven, that made grandpapa seventy-seven. So grandmother's gonna always be the one who's going to be a little more active and a little more energetic because seventy-seven in those days was old. Seventy-seven now, you know, people are still out playing tennis, you know, they're skiing, they're, you know, on their cruises and stuff because time, time has been changed so much. But in those days, seventy-seven was old. So grandpapa did--he cut his grass to the day he died. I mean it was a push mower, that was what, you know, of course you didn't have riding mowers in those days. And he was in good shape. They--all of the Watson's are very wiry, very thin but very strong people. Speaker 2: How old were you grandparents when they died? Speaker 1: Grandmother died at about sixty-seven and grandpapa died--let me roll it back in my own head--I graduated from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] in '64 [1964], so grandmother died in '64 [1964], because she had always said she was just living to see me graduate. So that's very sad, you know. Speaker 2: There's a beautiful moment in your book where she died like March--. Speaker 1: And she did, she did. Speaker 2: Graduated in March something a few days later. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. So it was very sad. Speaker 2: Did you know--these are your maternal grandparents? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 7661 Speaker 1: You didn't know your [paternal grandparents]--? Speaker 2: No, Mattie Jones died--the Giovannis are not long livers, and my sister and I were laughing about fairly recently because you get to the age that, you know, and I said I'm really praying for my Watson genes, because the Watsons live forever. Cousin Bea in Atlanta [Georgia] is ninety-eight years old and she has four sons, and angry with her sons because they finally made her sell the house. You know, she didn't have any daughters. Cousin Bea is funny and she said--when I'm in Atlanta I always go down to visit her. And I said, "How you doing Cousin Bea?" And she said, "I'm fine, but I wanted my own house. I'm not like everybody's daughter now." And I'm like, "But, Bea, you know, you shouldn't be in the house alone. It's still Atlanta and Cousin Ed being gone, people know you would be here alone and," you know, "people are not particularly nice." I mean the best way to love people is to not get them opportunity to mess with you, you know. Well she said, "I could still keep house. I can take care of myself." I said, "Well, Bea, I understand," and we called them 'the boys' but of course they're older than I am but, "I understand why the boys did that." She said, "I knew it was a mistake." I said, "You know what was a mistake?" She said, "I always knew I should have held out for a daughter." (Laughs) And she said, "If I had a daughter she would let me stay in the house." I said, "I think you're right because I have a son and I didn't have a daughter and I know you need daughters. Nothing wrong with sons, but you do reach a point that you need daughters," I said, "But Cousin Bea, the boys are still right. You need to be in a situation where if something happens--" " Nothing's going to happen," she said. "Nobody wants to worry, to stay awake all night making sure that you're all right." So it's good she's living in an assisted living place and, you know, so she doesn't have to cook, but I'll bet you Cousin Bea will live until 110, 115. There's nothing wrong with her. She's in great shape. Good appetite. She looks at, you know, 'Jerry Springer' [television talk show] and stuff but she knows what--she's fine. My mother [Yolande Cornelia Watson] is 84. Story_ID: 7662 Speaker 1: You and your mom [Yolande Cornelia Watson] had a good relationship. Speaker 2: We have a good relationship. (Laughs) I was gonna say. Speaker 1: Tell me about how your relationship with your mom developed over the years. Speaker 2: See, I was always a mother's girl and--that I couldn't begin to tell you how or why. I mean as a baby I was always a momma's girl and I went--I am still--my sister, who is older, was always a daddy's girl, and so I don't know if it was just the reaction, you know. You're too little to know these things, but I've always been very close to momma. Now when Gus [father, Jones 'Gus' Giovanni] had a stroke and was in the hospital and they discovered this intestinal cancer, I was living in New York--I had a son, I'm living in New York--and to tell you the truth, I've always hated and still do hate people that say, "Call me if you need something." Somebody had a stroke, you know, they shouldn't have to call. You know damn well they need something. And so my first thought was, "Okay. I need to move back home because there's no way she can take care of him by herself," you know. You can't. For any sick person, you need two well people. There's just no doubt about it. So I just sold the apartment in New York and moved back to Cincinnati [Ohio], which worked out really well because New York is a great city, and I love it, but I don't think it's really any good for kids, because you can't let them go to Central Park and they can't ride their bike and stuff. And we live in an area of Cincinnati called Lincoln Heights. It's actually an independent city. It's in what is called 'the Valley.' So, we had a stream. They could go out and catch tadpoles and the boys could leave--Thomas, like all--he's an only child, and I think all 'onlys' collect children. And so the kids would all, you know, be at our house and stuff, and you get anything delivered. So I used to have--I wouldn't buy soda pop because it was too expensive, but I would buy those fruit juices and, you know, get a bunch of them. The gallon--they come in like five or six, you know, the five-gallon things. I put a refrigerator out. We converted the garage, made it into a playroom for them, so, you know, now you know where they are, and my mother's a social worker but she's an old school teacher. She used to teach third grade, and so after school--now we got Mommy--Gus is sick, but I'm home. We got Mommy, right, and we're in town and we got the dog, and what she would do is organize because she's going to retire shortly after this. So she organized the boys then everybody'd come up--they'd have to do their homework before they could play, you know. So, it really--it was good. I mean I'm a big fan of the extended family. I get along--because I like my mother and I think she likes me and so I think that was a part of it, and I was very much aware of living in my mother's home. And even though she needed me, it was still her home and it was going to make everybody happier if we treated it that way, you know. Otherwise, you've got this conflict, and I know people that live with their parents, and you do. You get into this pissing contest about who's going to do what, but you got this older person. I'm older person, actually, older female prone. And so anytime you got an alpha female, the easiest thing to do is do what they want done, and then everybody's happy. You get tired of them, you get on a plane and you go some place. So it worked for me, you know. And I was really--I bought a home in Blacksburg [Virginia] where we live now. I teach at Virginia Tech [Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, Virginia]. When I took the job at Tech, Mommy didn't want to come to Virginia and Gary [sister, Gary Ann] and I didn't want her to live alone. I mean she couldn't live alone, because my theory, you move them while they're well. Because, one way--you're gonna move them when they're sick, or you're going to move them when they're dead, so might as well move them while they're well, let them make the adjustment. So I had a long talk with Mommy and, like, "These are your choices," you know. "You can move to Virginia with me which would be delightful or you can move to California with Gary." She said, "No, there's another choice there." I said, "What would that be?" She said, "I can stay in my home." I said, "No, that's not one of the options," you know, "and the reason you had daughters, right? Is that you knew that at some point somebody was going to have to tell you what to do, so I'm telling you these are your options: California or Virginia." So she's pouting, right. "I'm going to go to California." Said, "We can go to California." Because I know Mommy and I knew eventually--because we do get along very, very well, so she went to California and she loved it. She bought a home out there and she was out there for about ten years and loved it. And finally got to the point that people are having operations and, you know, people are getting sick and it's like, "Okay, we need to make a family decision now." I get teased--it wasn't my decision. I said, "We need a family decision." So Gary, mommy, and I sat down and of course, Gary's son Christopher who's grown and my son and we were talking, "Where should we go?" Now the boys don't--our children--really don't have anything to do because they're going to go where they're going, and Christopher lives in Hawaii, my son, of course now, is out of law school and he lives in New York. And so they're going to be on our side whichever way, so it comes down to the three of us. And I said, "Well I'm voting for Virginia because cost of living is so much better. Blacksburg is a wonderful retirement community, good hospitals, a lot of nice older people that you can meet," yak yak yak yak yak. And so the two of them voted for California because they really like--they're living right outside of San Francisco [California]. And I should be ashamed to say this, but of course, I'm not going to move to California, so I said--I felt like Abraham Lincoln, the Cabinet has spoken, you know, and this is what we're going to do--I said, "Well I'm really glad. Now what we're going to do is that Mommy's going to come to Virginia and we're going to move to Virginia. So, everybody's had their say. This has been very democratic. So Mommy said, "Well, if that's the way it is--" because she knew, I mean, that's what was going to happen, because that's what happened. She said, "Well, then I want my own home." Because I had bought a home and had put a wing on for her. I said, "I've got the wing," you know, "and it's really nice. You got your sitting area, you got your bedroom, you got your bath," you know, "this is--" she said, "Well I don't want to live in your house. I want my own house." And I said, "Well then let's compromise," because it's a term I use a lot with my son. I said, "let's compromise, momma. You'll come to Virginia and you'll find and purchase your own home, right? So, this is good. When Gary retires, then she will come to Virginia and in five years everybody will thank me." Because of course--and it did, it worked so beautifully because she could sell her home in California and just about buy a mansion in Blacksburg, right? So, it's going to be a good deal all the way around. There are lots of people who are all members of Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority, Inc.], and so she had sorors in Virginia, you know. She had people to play cards with. Story_ID: 7663 Speaker 1: And then I started on my middle aunt who's name is Ann in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and Ann's husband was ill, you know, and ultimately he's going to die, which I could see Haynes was going to die. And I said to Ann, you know, "I know you're thinking about where you're going." And she said, "No, I wasn't." I said, "Well I was," because I'm the only daughter that thinks ahead, and I said, "I think you need to come to Blacksburg [Virginia]." So, Ann came and lived with us for a while. Then her daughter, Pat, who lives in in Vacaville, California. So Pat said, "I want mom to come live with me." I said, "You're making a mistake." Which I sincerely think that she was, but Pat is my age and so she said, "No, momma's gonna come live with me." Well, Ann and my mother [Yolande Cornelia Watson] are thirteen months apart. I mean they think as one and it was very good for both of them to have each other, and so Ann has been having serious health problems, which I know is because Pat goes to work--we called her 'Pat.' Pat goes to work every day, right? So, Ann is home alone. She doesn't have anybody to talk to. She doesn't have anybody who has her memories, where she and my mother could sit there, "You remember that night we went to the dance and K.S. kissed you and--," you know. And of course my mother, my baby aunt from Atlanta [Georgia], and I talked to her and I said, you know--because Uncle Clinton had a heart attack and I spent every night the two weeks he was in the hospital, and I'm just the child that does that. I spent every night, no matter where I was on the road, in Atlanta. And so this is going to kill me. I mean I knew that Agnes needed somebody to be there, you know, and there wasn't anybody else to be there but me. Her son works in Africa, so by the time Terry--we called him 'Terry'--Terry gets there, you know, Clinton's going to be out--by the time we get the word to Terry. And so I'm flying in and I said, "You didn't ask me to do this," and she didn't. And I'm happy to do it because I know you're under stress, you know, you're worried about Clinton but I can't do this, you know. It's not fair to me. I'm trying to be a good niece and so what we have to do here is you and Clinton have to move to Blacksburg [Virginia]. You just have to do that. You can come up; you can stay with me or stay with Mommy, you know, Mommy or whatever you want to do. Look around, find yourself a house, whatever but you have to move closer because we're all getting old and you and I know that Clinton's not going to be with us always. And if you're going to be here in Atlanta, you're going to be by yourself. I'm going to have to come down, try to deal with it, you know. I won't be able to do that. I'll probably have a heart attack, stroke, something like that. It'll be your fault and it'll be ugly so why don't you move now. And Clinton talked to and he agreed that--because you know--he lived for another three years. He just died in December [2002], but we have to be close and these are decisions, and it works. I mean it's very--I had just had some exploratory surgery, and I was home for that and so she stayed with me, because my mother still smokes, and so nobody--she does, yes--but at eighty-four, you know. What are you going to say? She smokes. But I didn't want Ag recovering at Mommy's house because it's smoking and of course you couldn't stay alone. So we all live in--we're not, you know, next door but we're all within five miles. We could walk to each other's home. Speaker 2: (Unclear) rich family life is in the very foundation of your being. You came here strong and confident, spirit. Speaker 1: (Laughing) Yeah. Speaker 2: And you happened to have a family life that supported that. Story_ID: 7664 Speaker 1: What was it like growing up in the Giovanni house? Speaker 2: Well, you know, my dad [Jones 'Gus' Giovanni] drank too much and I think there were many unpleasant weekends, you know. I just think that you have to keep everything in perspective, you know. There's a lot of stress out there and I think as a kid you don't realize that some of the ugliness that you're seeing is not directed at you, and I think that that's just me, Nikki. I think a lot of life is about decisions and the joy of having intelligence is that you can begin to separate how you feel from what you know. And eventually if you're lucky, what you know is going to override what you felt. And so my dad is very clannish. His relatives are very clannish and the Watson's, you know, invented it, and so bringing it together is going to make the kind of person that you are. I'm very much more patient. I mean, the Watson comes out of me and in a lot of ways I'm very patient. And I do a lot of forward thinking, and I think that that's important for anybody because whatever the glue is, is going to hold whatever family together. There are decisions that you can make and then there are decisions you can't. I know that my aunt's needed help in making decisions about where to live. I knew that because they're all very independent people and if somebody doesn't say, "You can't stay here." If we had left Ann in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], she would be--she was living in Germantown [Pennsylvania]. I don't know what you know about Germantown, but it's a changing community. Story_ID: 7665 Speaker 1: Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is a changing community and there was a time right across the street, you know, we had friends, you know, all around but a different group of people started to move in and you got an old lady. [Aunt] Ann's an old lady. She's blind in one eye and it's not that, it's just that people--there are predators and it worried me because she has a brownstone--you know how they have those houses, but at the attic there was what I would call a weakness because you could come through, and that always worried me because even if we put bars on the windows down here, we had a possibility--and somebody knowing that she's there alone, that there's a television set. You never know. You've got a drug addict--you never know. And we'd get a call that would make us all crazy and so it was, "No, you have to move," you know, "Ann, this is what we have to do." And so, I called Pat [Aunt Ann's daughter]. I took Ann on home because, again, it was just that Mommy was so happy and I'm sorry that she's living with her daughter right now and we miss her so much. My mother [Yolande Cornelia Watson] misses her because she's very close to her baby sister, but Mommy and Ann are practically twins. They used to kill us at canasta because, you know, we play cards, we card play, but they think as one. I mean Mommy could throw two cards out and Ann would know exactly what she's got in her hand, you know, and we'd sit there and struggle (laughs), you know. They'd beat us at canasta. We could get them some time on bid whist because we could play a little bit faster than they could see the cards and stuff, but they killed us. They loved canasta, they killed us on that. Story_ID: 7666 Speaker 1: Now my dad [Jones 'Gus' Giovanni] taught school. He was actually a mathematical genius. My sister has that. When [sister] Gary [Gary Ann] graduated from--she was a late college graduate--and so when she graduated from college, Mommy [Yolande Cornelia Watson] and I were trying to decide where to go and she'd always wanted to go to Paris [France]. And I said, "Well I'll take you to Paris. If you'll keep the boys, I'll take her to Paris." And so Mom said, "That's a good deal." And so I took Gary but Gary could always do any calculation. She can calculate a lot in her head. I'm not good at--with figures. And we took the--we landed in CDG--Charles de Gaulle [Airport, Paris, France] and changed some money, which Gary watched them change it so it was like, click, and by the time we paid the cab driver, Gary had the exchange rate down pat. You know, she's just good at things like that. I never do. I just, you know, reach my hands in my pocket and, like, "Take what you want," because you know what the hell you--way away from, there's no point in arguing with people about. But she does things like that and Gus did that, so he taught math and he was very good at that, and he'd come home, change clothes, and then he went to the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association]. He worked for the Y and he ran the basketball programs and other things. And then Mommy would pack him a lunch and he was a night watchman. I know now--this is again, this is something that is a perspective--he's gone. But I know he slept on the job. But luckily, he was having a job at a time that people weren't actually shooting night watchmen, you know. So, he was able to do that. So somebody's going to say, "Well what did you learn from that, Nikki?" Number one, I learned that you do what you have to do. And so my father was an influence on me, and I learned that if you needed to get something done, say, "Yes." So, he had a job. He had a job, he wasn't working. No problem because he still had to have the job. He had a wife and two children to feed. Ultimately, my mother started teaching school she taught third grade, and then ultimately she got a job as social worker, and that's the first time that she actually was making, you know, enough money to contribute and we bought a house in Lincoln Heights [Ohio], and so I remember all of that very well. Speaker 2: How old were you when she started work? Speaker 1: Fourth grade. Story_ID: 7667 Speaker 1: School years--tell me about your school years. You used to be quite a handful. (Laughs) Speaker 2: I didn't think so. (Laughs) guess, again, I'm lucky that I didn't grow up in an age that people give you drugs all the time. My kindergarten teacher was a wonderful woman named Mrs. Scott and I remember Mrs. Scott so--no, Mrs. Scott was a first grade teacher. My kindergarten teacher [at the African American Oak Avenue School, Wyoming, Ohio] was Mrs. [Elizabeth] Hicks, and Mrs. Hicks was always making you behave, I guess. But Mrs. Scott was just wonderful and I don't know, I guess I was smart or whatever, but I always loved my teachers and so she was great. And I am very dutiful and probably nobody knows that. I mean, you have take my word for it. But generally if asked to do something I will do it. I don't like to be told. And I don't know what it is about Mrs. Scott that I remember so well, and my eighth grade teacher Alfreda Delaney and Miss Delaney became a friend, you know, and she only died recently, actually. I used to go over-- when I moved to Blacksburg [Virginia]--Miss Delaney's in Knoxville [Tennessee] and that's just four hours away, and so I used to go over every Christmas and address Christmas cards for her because, you know, she was getting old. And we would have dinner and address Christmas cards, you know, and so that was very nice. No, you're making a reference to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and--. Speaker 1: No, I was making a reference to when you used to take up for Gary [sister, Gary Ann] all the time to really outside (unclear)--. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah but that wasn't in the classroom. No, I was going to say. I know I was--. Speaker 1: (Inaudible) Speaker 2: I had a fight--not a fight but a discussion with my third grade teacher [sic, fourth grade] whose name was Miss Pearsal. I forget Miss Pearsal's first name. Miss Pearsal had to go--I just always remembered this--she had to leave class to go--we were in Episcopal schools [St. Simon Episcopal School, Lincoln Heights, Ohio], and Sister Virginia, no, Sister Winifred called a meeting or something, and she had to go, and she said to the class, "I want you to read your books," right and whatever. And the kids--George Cooper and them--and I remembered so well--started talking and Charles and them. And they were laughing and joking and pretty soon you could hear the third grade all over the school, you know. And she came back and that was in the day that people paddled you. And she had everybody hold out their hand because she was going to give them a swat. And so when she got to me, I'm like holding, you know, my hands are like this, and she said, you know, "Nikki, hold your hand out," and I said, "Miss Pearsal, I was not talking," you know. "You said not to talk. I wasn't talking. Maybe other people were talking but I was not talking." She said, "Well, I'm going to give everybody a swat," and I said, "that's not right." I said, "I'm going to go--," and I meant it, I said, "I'm going to go speak to my mother." Because my mother taught at this school. I said, "I'm going to go speak to my mother, Miss Pearsal because I was not talking and I don't think that I should be punished." She said, "Well, everybody's going to be punished." I said, "Miss Pearsal that's not right." (Laughing) Third grade, what am I, eight, nine years old and I said, "I'm going to talk to my mother, and then we'll see what she has to say about this because I know that I wasn't talking." And she said, "Well, go on," because my mother's classroom was down. She said, "Well, go on down," and I went down and I told my, I said, you know, "Miss Pearsal is wanting to spank everybody, hit everybody, but I wasn't talking and this is not right," you know. Because I still have always had this, I don't know where that came from. So, Mommy--now we got--Miss Pearsal is in a bind because she's got this student who's saying, "No," right? And so she's trying to figure out how she's going to handle it, and so Mommy said, you know, it's--I'm just about to get her first name in my mind. Mommy said, you know, "It's her classroom and I think that," you know, "you're going to get a swat," you know, because she doesn't want to interfere, you know. And I was like, "This is not right." So I go back and, you know, she did and of course, she didn't hit me very hard, but it was like so wrong. I grow up, write books, get acclaimed for one thing or another, Lincoln Heights day. Lincoln Heights has a Nikki Giovanni Day and Miss Pearsal is one of the people that they invite. And she was talking about me, she said, "I just never had run into anything like that with any student," you know. She said, "And I just remember you standing there," you know, "and you just going, but--." I said "Well Miss Pearsal I didn't and you were still wrong." (Laughs) No, there was no acrimony involved in that but you were still wrong. Actually, she said, "I did learn something," and she did, and I learned something. I did learn to stand up for myself. I know that I didn't get what I should have gotten which is, "Nikki didn't talk," because she also recognized I would never had done that. I'm very dutiful. I would never have done that. (Laughs) So that's my Miss Pearsal story. Speaker 1: But she had to retain control of the class--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, but it was a false sense of control, and so in that small moment that I stood up for myself, she also learned that you don't lose control, but she didn't want to back down, because she--you know, they look like they're old when you're in the eighth--when you're in the third grade. Your teachers look old but they're not old and so what she learned was that she didn't actually have to lose face because she could discriminate on who did what they were told and who didn't. But you grow up thinking, "I want to treat all these kids the same." But that's a discrimination that doesn't work, to treat everybody the same. You have to make decisions on who did what, so everybody learned something, and I think that's good. No, we used to have fights because Gary was always mouthing off and Gary couldn't fight. I could always fight. I, I, I don't think I could fight now but you know, in the old days. Sure, beat up people that bother my sister--what the hell was that? Story_ID: 7668 Speaker 1: What are the kinds of things about your elementary, middle school years that stand out? Speaker 2: Well, see Mommy [Yolande Cornelia Giovanni] took a job at St. Simon's [St. Simon Episcopal School, Lincoln Heights, Ohio an all-black church school in this African American community] and there was a rule and I think it was a good rule that parents shouldn't teach their children, and so that's why I ended up in Miss Pearsal's class. Mommy never taught me but now we're in the same school and she taught--she was at St. Simon's for three years while I was there because it just went to eighth grade, and then she took a job in social work. But of course Flora Alexander who's still a friend--I see Flora when I'm in Cincinnati [Ohio]. She just recently had a stroke and she's living in assisted living. And of course Gene Baker was my teacher and Gene died unfortunately breasts cancer and Mrs. Jenkins was my teacher. And Mrs. Jenkins is dead. She had a heart attack but her daughter Jenny--I just spoke to Jenny over the holidays--but the person that I met there who was the first person outside of my immediate family who became a friend was a nun named Sister Althea Augustine. And Sister Althea was my science teacher and for the last five years she spends Thanksgiving at our home. And again, she looked like she was old, but Sister Althea's only, you know, fifteen years older than I am. And it's amazing because being a nun, she definitely looked old and she came to teach in a small church school and, of course, that's a different level of credential. And I remember we were laughing about that. She was our science teacher and she had this big tank and, of course she--somebody--I don't remember, I think it was George Cooper because he was always hitting birds and stuff--had found this owl, right? And so now we've got this owl, this little owl, you know, they're meat eaters. And George went out, something had come up and George went out and took a rock and got a bird, you know, so the bird is injured. And so they put the bird--it was horrible--in with the owl, and of course, the owl, you know, ate the bird. And I said to Sister Althea, you know, "Jeez I remember that." And she said, "It was so long ago." I said, "It was the most horrible thing I'd ever seen." I mean what was it--in that [Alfred Lord] Tennyson "Nature, red in tooth and claw." And I thought, "Oh, my God," you know, "there has to be a better way," you know, "we need to train these owls to," you know, "go to McDonalds or something. We can't be doing things like that," But it's amazing, you know, that she has remained a friend. She comes every year. Well I see her more times than that but she spends every Thanksgiving with us and it's very nice, it's very nice. Story_ID: 7669 Speaker 1: How early did you know you were ahead in writing, especially the poetry? Speaker 2: I really didn't. I mean people don't believe you when you say things like that. But I like story telling and I come from--I mean I'm an Appalachian, you know, by any other way of looking at it. I'm black Appalachian. I'm born in Knoxville, Tennessee, grew up in Cincinnati, Ohio, came back to Knoxville because of problems with segregation in Cincinnati which was breaking down. But my sister had already integrated Wyoming High School [Wyoming, Ohio] and my parents had decided unbeknownst in many respects to me, they had decided that they weren't going to put another kid through it. But my dad [Jones 'Gus' Giovanni] and my mom [Yolande Cornelia Watson] used to argue a lot and it was making me nervous. I wrote a poem called 'The Wrong Kitchen' and it was making me nervous because to this day, to right now, to I am sitting here, don't raise your voice at me. Now that's the truth. Nobody, don't do that. And I know that all of that was what I'm hearing which I also know that and I wrote a poem 'The Last Train To Knoxville.' I didn't have any question that Gus loved us, but he let the pressures of the world come into the house, which I know that to be not a good idea, you know. And so I was ready to not be there because it was making me extremely nervous. And so I went to live with my grandparents which got me out of a whole bunch of other things which allowed me to continue to have a good relationship with my parents. But I'm still, nonetheless, an Appalachian. And so we're storytellers. And now I'm living with two old people, one who is the most practical human being on earth and I know that she has affected me. Any set of problems, I can find a practical solution. It's the grandmother influence. But grandpapa was a Latin scholar who was in love with Greek myth, who was in love with the stars. And he used to take me--when I was a little girl--he used to take me--and I don't know why all the other--my cousins and my sister, you know, "Grandpapa would only talk to you." I said, "Well, I was the only person reading the books that he was reading. If you had been doing your Greek mythology he would have talked to you, too." But they were doing other things, you know, they wanted to go out and play. But grandpapa would say, you know, "Well, Nikki, let's go--." We lived across the street from Cal Johnson Park [Knoxville, Tennessee], and we would go over to the park and he would point out. I have such a memory of him--the first time he said, "Now, that's Orion's Belt," and, you know, and he would, you know, "Now, you show me the North Star," you know, and that's, that's where I feel in love with the heavens. So both of these people have influenced--I'm a very practical poet. That's some kind of oxymoron isn't it? (Laughs) Story_ID: 7670 Speaker 1: When you were in high school is that when you started writing more poetry (inaudible). Speaker 2: I was writing some short stories and stuff, but again I never took it--I think now I take it seriously, you know what I'm sayin', but it seemed to me that if there was ever one big word I learned, it was 'existential.' And it seemed to me that writing was the existential situation. So one is only a writer if one is writing. And as I sit here again, I have that level of nervousness. I just finished a book 'Quilting the Black-Eyed Pea.' I'm not worried, you know, if somebody had said, you know, "What are you working on now?" I said, "I'm working on enjoying the book that I just wrote." But there'll come a point that I'll say, "Well, am I a writer or am I a human being who used to write? Because if I don't go beyond what I just wrote then I used to write." Story_ID: 7671 Speaker 1: I have very little regard for a [author] Ralph Ellison because, you know, you write and it's true, I mean Ellison was not a nice guy, first of all, but that'd be a whole other discussion and I never heard anybody say that he was, you know. I didn't know Mr. Ellison. I met him once. I read his review of the new black poets in the New York Times and I thought, "Well, didn't we bend over," (laughing) because, you know, drop your drawers there, Ralph, because he was complaining, you know, about us and our use of language and what language should be and what art was and it's, like, no, Ralph, you and God wrote one book. The only difference is that God understood that there are human beings around here you're living off of, you know, some kind of reputation that I'm not so sure is so well earned because it was Richard Wright's book 'The Man Who Lived Underground'. 'Invisible Man' was just an idea he borrowed from Richard Wright, so all those Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] people annoy me, and I'm very honest about that. What's his name, Murray? And all of that little snide George Bushy [ref. to U.S. President George W. Bush] kind of arrogance, which I think is unfounded. They're not that bright. They're not that interesting and they haven't brought that much to the table that they can sit around and talk about what somebody else hasn't done. We who are out there struggling everyday so Bill [William] Shakespeare has to be everybody's image of what you want to be. Not because he was the bard, but because he, in his own words, "The place, the thing to catch the conscious of the king." And Shakespeare had to tell royalty, you know, "You people suck," and kind of smile and keep his head. And we black poets coming up through Black Arts were trying to do the same thing. We're telling America, you know, "You got to get right," you know, "you are not right here." Everybody's mad at us. "Well, we don't like your language," and it wasn't the language. They didn't like what we had to say, and I didn't think of Ellison and the crew, that whole Oklahoma crew, as being good elders. I just don't. And the more you know--I mean I was a history major at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and I'm totally in love with black history. It's such--it's so rich. I mean you could just mine that indefinitely, but the more you know about Tulsa [Oklahoma] and the riots in Tulsa, the more you know about Langston, Langston, Oklahoma. The more you know about the black cities, Nicodemus [Kansas] and stuff-- and then what do you got form these people, 'Invisible Man'? Come on. He, he, he had something to say about--I mean he should have. He lived through something and that was painful, and so Ralph [Ellison] avoided it. And he wanted to go to Tuskegee but he didn't want to take that seriously, so he wanted to be snide about that, so everybody wants to laugh at Booker T. [Washington], I'm a big Booker T fan. I'm a big Booker T--because whatever Booker T did, he had a dream, and it wasn't just that he had a dream. He put that dream in the hearts of other people so that they took the mud--and to me this is fantastic. They took the mud to make the bricks, right? Because at first mud--they were mud bricks--to build the oven to bake the bricks that became Tuskegee. So I don't want Ralph Ellison or any of them people telling me what he didn't do, because he took what he was given and did what he knew how to do. If he wanted to do something else, then you were supposed to do what he did. You take your dream. Don't stand there and tell him his dream is wrong, and I'm sure that Mr. Washington was an unpleasant man, because as my opinion, most people with power get to be unpleasant very, very quickly. But nonetheless, Tuskegee is so key. And if they hadn't murdered him--and I do believe that he was murdered--[U.S. Air Force General] Benjamin [O.] Davis, [Jr.] was going to be a Tuskegee Airman [he commanded the Tuskegee Airmen in World War II], would have been the first black president because he's the only one--Colin Powell could never be president of the United States. But Ben Davis, being a four star general, being what he was because the first black president's going to come from the military. We know that, because it can't come from the cops because if it's a cop he's dirty. I mean do you understand what I'm saying? Because any black cop out there--I don't care who he is--he's done something, right? And I know policemen. They're my friends and some of them I really love. I love [Cincinnati Police Lt. Col.] Ron Twitty in Cincinnati [Ohio] but they're going to be prowling. If they could have come from the military during the Ben Davis age, right? Then this was an honorable way to come. It's patriotic. I'm not big on patriotism. I think America sucks and anything that happens to us we deserve it, but nonetheless, if you try to run the campaign, this is what you want, right? Speaker 2: Why do you think they killed Ben--? Speaker 1: Because he was in line to be president. Because he knew how to use power. He was an ambitious and articulate man, and I just found it to be unbelievable that he just sort of one day woke up with this heart attack and he's dead. I don't believe America. I, I, I have no, you know, way to deal with that. I just don't believe them and I am not a fan of coincidence. I just--I'm not a fan. If I walk out of here and a run away truck hits the car and I get killed, see, if you could talk to me, if you say, "Nikki, what do you think?" I'm going to say, "I don't believe in an accident." I'm going to say, "You ought to find out who this truck driver is, find out who he's affiliated with, find out where his bank accounts are, find out who's putting money into it because I don't believe in accidents." And so, when I saw that General Davis had died, it was like, "No." That's like watching that first black astronaut. His plane crashed. I said, "No." That's like watching [Ed] Dwight who actually--I'm so glad Dwight is no longer an astronaut, because if I had the money and I'm not one who envies rich people in any way, shape, form. That's true, I have no--I don't know why. I'm just so fortunate to have no envy in my heart but if I had the money, I would love to have Dwight build my--for my grave, to build my monument, because God knows his sculptures are so beautiful and he's so much better and more important a sculpture than he would have been an astronaut. So we got the better of that, but I said all the time, you know, you either have to ask yourself, "What's the lesson or the blessing?" Because one way or the other all of these things, you know, are working out. I just never believed that this man is just going to retire and have a heart attack. It doesn't make sense to me. What kind of sense does that make? How convenient was that for everybody that likes to control people? Story_ID: 7672 Speaker 1: Let's go back for a moment to your high school years and what was it like socially for you? Or were you so busy, you know, expressing all this that's bubbling up in you. Were you very social? Speaker 2: I never think of myself as being particularly friendly and I don't--, Speaker 1: Oh really? Speaker 2: --I don't really. No, I mean I get along. I mean I'm not unfriendly, you know, I'm not not responsive I just never did--I had friends, you know, and I'm the outside kid, though, because I'm always the kid--I mean I'm now living in Knoxville, Tennessee with my grandmother. Everybody else is gone from kindergarten on up, and so of course, everybody knows Grandmother. Grandmother knows everybody's parents and so, you know, Grandmother's going to call, well, you know, "Nikki's here" and, you know, "make Frankie come and play with her." You know it's one of those kind of things. And so I think it's probably good for what I turned out to be because it makes you stand back a little bit and you're always an observer. And there was another kid in Knoxville. His name was Floyd, and Floyd used to draw cartoons. Floyd was a New Yorker and he was in Knoxville living with his grandparents the same way, and we didn't actually form a group but Floyd and I traveled the same circles because we were both outsiders. So even though you knew people and even though everybody, you know, liked you and even though I was elected--which I thought was wonderful--Mardi Gras Queen. I'm just a new kid in town and I really didn't, you know--when they said, you know, we're going to put you up for Mardi Gras Queen, I was like, "Well, I know I'm going to win that," you know, and so I just put in my mind, click it out, so that I'm not, you know, you don't want to be hurt. And when I was elected Mardi Gras Queen which mean that I would also be, you know, an attendant to Miss Austin for the homecoming court, I was totally surprised because I--you know, I felt like Sally Fields on the other side, like, "Oh, they really like me." Because you're, you know, you're just a kid on the outside and I was dating the captain of the football team, Calvin, and so that's not going to make you have many girlfriends because now you're the outside who's got the football captain, you know, and so, you know, you--and so you're always trying to work this thing through. But then I--one of the early loves of my life is a guy named Joe Mack and Joe was just smart. I mean Calvin was football and, you know, and he brought a lot of heat to the relationship and it was, you know, really nice. But then we used to sit in assembly and talk to Joe, and Joe was the only other person. I was reading Alfred North Whitehead at that point, and Joe was reading Alfred North Whitehead and Joe went on to become a physicists. And so as we're sitting there talking--because all I do with math is theoretical. And so it ends up, you know, and Joe and I--I mean we dated all the way, you know, from actually my last two years he graduated and then he went to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], but I was an early entrant at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and so once we go to Nashville though, you know, life becomes a whole other thing, and so we kind of drifted apart. I see him as still, you know, as really funny because, you know, your first loves are always wonderful but he was really smart. And so I always knew then whatever, you know, you begin to learn a lot about your heart, but it's way more important to be smart than to be charismatic. (Laughs) Story_ID: 7673 Speaker 1: What made you pick Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Well, during that time the Ford Foundation was looking for geniuses is what it amounted to. And I had been reading--I read a lot--but I had been reading John Hersey, and John wrote a book--it's really--it's still an interesting book to me--called 'The Child Buyer." And what they did was they had this guy who goes around buying children. They're looking for geniuses. And it started of it's like, "Okay I want to buy," you know, "you got a son or a daughter, you know, I give you one hundred thousand dollars for your kid if you'll let me rear him." And people are like, "No," you know, "I'm not going to sell my kid for one hundred thousand dollars." And they finally realized--and this is what I love about it--now they revamped, they came back to you and they said, "Hey," you know, "you got a really smart kid and what we'd like to do is we'd like to give you a new refrigerator and paint the house if we could," you know, "take the kid and educate them." I was like, "Yeah, I need a new refrigerator." Because people could understand--it was really--it's a great book. But I don't know what affect that book had on the Ford Foundation but they were looking for geniuses and Mrs. Delaney--Barbara Brookes was our librarian and Mrs. Stokes who's my French teacher, all said to grandmother, you know, "There's a new program and Nikki should take the test." Grandpapa wanted to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and he wanted me to go to Philadelphia with him, so we got on a train and we went to Philadelphia because my Aunt Ann was there, and we saw, you know, Liberty Bell and did all of that. And they called me in Philadelphia and they said, "No, Nikki has to be back here to take the test because this is going to be the day that they do it." And so Grandpapa said, you know, "Well I'm staying with Anne. Can you go home alone?" And I'm like, "Yeah, I can go home alone," and it's one of those don't--I mean, 'Little Red Riding Hood.' Don't talk to strangers. So now you're on the train and of course you got the young soldiers and I had--because I loved chocolate chip cookies and I had these chocolate chip cookies. And these soldiers who I now know were flirting with me, but I didn't--you can't corrupt the innocent. And so they were saying, I just remember somebody, you know, "Boy, we'd really like to have some of your cookies." And I'm looking and I say, "Well, you can have a cookie but I don't have that--," because they were little, and of course, they finally realized, you know. But the Pullman Porters, right? They weren't going to harm me. They weren't going to rape or nothing like that. They were just on the train flirting with me but the Pullman Porters kept coming through. And it was very interesting because, again, this is an image in my mind and, "How you doing? Is everything okay? Now what you need?" You know, and everybody knew that they were looking out for me. I got back to Knoxville [Tennessee] that Friday and that Saturday morning, I had to be at the school to take the test and I passed it. And so you could check I could go--you know, you could check Swarthmore [College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] and you could check Smith [College, Northampton, Massachusetts]. The had--all of the seven sisters were a part of it and there was Fisk. And so I checked Fisk because I knew Grandpapa went to Fisk and, you know, if this works but again, you know, you never know. You take a test who knows. And I did that and they offered me a scholarship, but more to be honest, they offered me a way out of high school because even though I did okay in high school, I would never fool anybody, say, "High schools a good period." It's not and I was glad to be--to not have to do a senior year because now I've got nothing--I'm not going to say nothing learn, I'm not trying to say that, but I've done it. And I think that the senior year in high school it's the time that people get in trouble, and I think they get in trouble because they've done it, you know. And I'm not going to get physics, I'm not going to get some other things, so it was time to move on, so I went to Fisk. Story_ID: 7674 Speaker 1: I got lucky. Mrs. Hill was the dorm director, Jubilee. And there had been a mistake. This was before the age of computers. There'd been a mistake about housing. And so we have everybody at Jubilee Hall [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] now, and they're not having rooms. It was very clear because I'm also, I think, a very compassionate person. It was very clear that this woman is under stress, you know, and so I just got a blanket and bunked in the room. It was not a problem. People were screaming at her. People were hollering, "My mother's gonna--." And I would see her and I'd say, "Mrs. Hill," you know, "Don't worry about it. I'm good. I'm going to class," you know, "Don't worry. Take care." Because, you know, these people are making me crazy, and of course, without realizing it, she had made up her mind because I was the only one being nice to her, trying to put myself in her position. So, she--they moved a lot of the kids into another dorm, but she had made up her mind that she was going to give me a room in Jubilee and she did. I lived in 212 so I'm not only in Jubilee Hall, I'm on the oval. So now, everybody knows me because I'm the only early entrant. I was not a freshman. I'm an early entrant. I'm an early entrant living in Jubilee Hall, which is the premier with a view to the oval, right? So, everybody got to know me. Story_ID: 7675 Speaker 1: You started off on a good foot [at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Unfold for us the years that you bloomed and as you bloomed intellectually (simultaneously, unclear). Speaker 2: Oh, I enjoyed Fisk, you know, but you're in college. You've got a lot of freedom and you've got a repressive institution, which my concept of college was going to be what I had seen in the movies or what I had heard, you know, that you do these things. I'm able to do the work. I tested out of freshman English, you know, you're doing that, so I'm in good shape with the work. I'm enjoying that very much, but and I say repressive, and I mean no disrespect on that, but they wanted to fine tune you and we're in the '60s [1960s] and the sit-ins are there and there's a lot of volatility going on. The [1960] sit ins in Nashville, as you know, were started by Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and it was the State kids who led it and the Fisk kids were--not that we weren't involved--but they were, kind of, watching it. But Tennessee State, the president [Walter S. Davis] was not a strong man and that was understated. Some would say he was crazy and evil but I wouldn't probably push it that way. But he was compelled in his own mind to expel the students. And so he expelled the leadership of the student movement which was not yet SNCC [The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] in--from Tennessee State, you know, they all got these pink slips. And so a girl who I know you have interviewed or should certainly, Diane Nash, and so Diane Nash said, "Well, Fisk will take it up," and Diane did. And I was a foot soldier. I did enough to know that it was very frightening and that's the truth. And people talk about the days--I know how brave those children were in Birmingham [Alabama, protests in 1963] because we didn't have that in Nashville, and it was still very frightening to get in the line of people and go downtown and protest. I've got an angel sitting somewhere on my shoulder, you know, or certainly I did at that point because the group spread out to do different things. They gave us--this was my first march--they gave us different targets and I could easily have been in the group going to the bus station, but they had sent my group over to the restaurants. There was a place called the Simple Simon['s] and we were to go in. Well the Simple Simon actually, which was, you know, just a restaurant. And when we came in the man said, you know, "We're not serving you." And we were told, you know, you sit down and, you know, you dressed respectfully, whatever. And so we sat down and he sent the staff home and locked the doors, said, "I'm just locking the doors." Well in many respects this probably saved our lives because at the bus station [which Nashville students also attempted to integrate], the young, crazy whites came because where I grew up--when I grew up riot meant white people. And they beat those--I mean in the bus station you were slipping. The blood was so bad, they just beat people to death. We were locked in, right? So even if somebody had wanted--and I'm saying we because there were, like six of us and we were told to sit, you know, so that's what we're doing. We're sitting on the counter. But now you're sitting on the counter watching what's going on on the outside, and of course, you know, you saw the people begin to run because it was--there was the--it was, was the Nashville riot [The violence against protesters actually did not reach the level of a riot.] It was a, it was a really terrible thing but nobody came to let us out until night, and so now it's dark. It's ten o'clock at night, so we've been there. We knew better than to eat or drink anything, you know, we're just sitting there and waiting to see what's going to happen. So the guy opens the door and now you're afraid that he's opened the door and we're going to go out and somebody's going to kill us. And we're a pretty good distance, you know, Fisk is on the other side of town, and so we just grouped off into two's and walked back to the campus. We just got lucky nothing happened, you know. We cut through and there we were. Story_ID: 7676 Speaker 1: And the chapter of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], it became more formalized--(simultaneously, unclear). Speaker 2: Well see, Dean [of Women at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee, Ann] Cheatam was a limited person and so she kicked a number of people out, including me. I went home that Thanksgiving and she said I didn't have permission to go home, and so that's what started my problem with Dean Cheatam among other things. And I didn't think that I needed Dean Cheatam's permission. That's just one of those 'no-nos'. I don't need your permission to go home. If you think I do you're sadly mistaken. And so she put me on what they call social probation. I was only to go to class and stuff. And actually I found that to be obnoxious and unacceptable. And so I wasn't going to do it. Unfortunately for me I did finally recognize that Dean Cheatam was a young woman. And Dean Cheatam dating Noel Phillips who was actually a Hawaiian, who was a good friend of Vernon Shields, and Vernon Shields was a friend of my sister's right? Unfortunately for me they all lived together. So I'm now over at Vernon's, you know, having a beer, and Dean Cheatam is dating Noel. So we're going to run into each other. Now she knows that I'm supposed to be on social pro- probation, and I know these are all (unclear) students. I know that she is not supposed to be dating students, right? And so, I'm happy, you know, you leave me alone, I leave you alone and what happens on campus, you know, because she had no way of knowing that I'm not only discreet, but I had no interest in her. And I think that's it just one of those perpendicular kind of things because she thought I did care what she did. I just wanted her to leave me alone. And so it was going to be a clash and ultimately I'm going to get kicked out of school. And these things happen. It was not a happy period, you know, I was, like, "I'm really sorry about that," and you had to think it through but some of it was my fault, but some of it was the fault of Fisk. And so I spent the next couple years just, kind of--I guess I'm a borderline beatnik, you know. You drive around, you see the country. It was fun to do, but I realized too, number one, everybody was disappointed. My grandmother was disappointed, my mom [Yolande Cornelia Watson] was disappointed. I don't handle disappointments well. And I finally realized, "Okay, what's going to make everybody happy?" you know. "Nikki needed to go back to school, okay." So I drove down to Fisk. I had an old Buick and I drove down to Nashville just to see who was dean [of women] and what kind of person, you know, she was, but Dean was a woman named Jackie [Blanche McConnell] Cowan, who was a social worker, who's a wonderful woman. I loved Jackie so much. And I said, "Hi, I'm Nikki Giovanni, I was at Fisk," yak, yak, yak. And so she pulled my, she pulled my file, and she said, "My God, you must have scared this woman to death," because the file's looking like that. (Uses her hands to show the file was thick) And, I mean, Dean Cheatam's, you know, they had things like, you know, "She smoked cigarettes." or "She--" you know, I mean it was like--it was crazy. And you could see (laughing) that she said, you know, "I love what you did to her,"[Cheatham] but, you know, I was like I didn't really do anything--I mean I knew I annoyed her but I had no idea it was like--. And she [Cowan] said, "What are you thinking about doing?" I said, "I think I need to come back to school because it's time," you know, "I'm willing--totally willing to take responsibility because I should have conducted myself a little different." And I was thinking, you know, you can keep running up against these walls and it's going to be all right, but you can't. And she said, "I'll sign off." Well she didn't say it like that (unclear). "I'll sign off when you're coming back I'll talk to Dean Red," who was the dean of the college. And so she did and everyone, you know, and we had a new president of Fisk and so I was readmitted. But Jackie became a dear friend. She had an aneurysm. That broke my heart. I dedicated one of my books to Jackie and I was just--she was everything to me, and one of the things, you know, Fisk--because Fisk was a changing institution. One of the things that when I went to Fisk the first time, women weren't allowed to ride in cars, you know, you weren't allowed to--you had to sign out and stuff. And I liked to paint at that point. And I had an opportunity to rent space over a garage for my studio, you know, and so I went back and talked to Jackie about that. "I can rent this place," and she said, "Well, I can't let you spend the night," because I'm older than everybody now. She said, you know, "You can't spend the night off campus because that'll get me in trouble," you know. Said, but you know, "If you want to rent the studio I'm not going to object," because it's that--you know. And so I got a studio so that I could, again--I finally realized--Aaron Douglas was my art teacher. And I finally realized, of course, that Mr. Douglas was very gentle, you know. "Well, you're coming, Yolanda. It's interesting what you're doing, but I heard that you'll never be a painter." (Laughs) "I heard that," and so I did. I enjoyed it but, you know, he would have never said it like that but I heard it. And of course I'm still telling stories and, you know, and so that was nice. And Jackie never bothered me because I was not bothering her, and ultimately--and again, I realize she was smarter than I was. What she did was pull me back on campus to make me a part of the campus by making me a TA [teacher's assistant]. I became an assistant, you know, and she was like, "I really need some help. Can you help me out?" And of course, you know, I realized--and I was laughing when I said, "Well, you suckered me," you know, "That's what it is," because I had no ability to say no to old ladies, and so she needed me to do this, she needed me to this and so now I'm a part of the campus in a way that I wouldn't have been. But you asked earlier about high school and graduating, and going back to Fisk to graduate. I'm still in the same position of being not quite in sync and it's the artist position, but when I went back I'm still older than the young, you know. So, it keeps you--you know you make friends, people know you and, of course, I'm a legacy with Delta Sigma Theta. And that means in the old days of the legacy system, they had to take me under the table. So I got to know all the Delta's because I was teasing them, you know. I said, you know, "You girls need to write me a letter," you know, "because (inaudible) you'll have to write me a letter." So, you get to know people but I'm still not having a gang as it were. And so the things that students did, I didn't have that much interest to do. So the second [period at] Fisk was a smoother ride, of course, than the first. Story_ID: 7677 Speaker 1: Did you know [Rev.] James Bevel? Speaker 2: I knew Jim just because he was there [Nashville, Tennessee]. I mean we didn't hang out. Like, I didn't hang out with Diane [Nash]. John Lewis grad--John Lewis was not only in my class at the beginning, but he went away and as it turned out, we all marched together in '64 [1964], because he had come back to school. Also because he wrote a paper on civil rights and, you know, and they did the right thing to graduate--to give John his degree. But these were not people that I hung out with, these were just--if you're going on a march, you know. Jim was an explosive, charismatic kind of guy and, of course, I think he married Diane, and that was an explosive relationship. So it's something looked at. I mean you would never date Jim Bevel for God sake, but she did. I guess she liked him. He makes you nervous. Story_ID: 7678 Speaker 1: Had you started publishing in college or was that just right after college? Speaker 2: No, it was right after college. You know, we, we, we started a magazine called 'lan' you know, all the kids that were writing, you know, we had a good time with that. And as graduation came--I graduated mid year [1966]--and as graduation came I was trying to decide what to do, because my family was still just working-class people, you know, we didn't have any money. And I knew that probably grad school was going to be the way to go, and [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] Dean [of Women, Blanche McConnell 'Jackie'] Cowan helped me get a scholarship to the University of Pennsylvania School of Social Work [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], because everybody I totally admired was a social worker. So I thought, "Now, this is something interesting. See what we can do with social work." But I get to Penn. I've got this scholarship, which thank God I did, which afforded me a home in Delaware [Pennsylvania]. If I tried to rent an apartment in Philadelphia I'd have gone broke and had a bad apartment. But I could rent a home in Delaware--a house--at a place called Rosehill for a hundred dollars a month, and it was wonderful. And all I had to do was, you know, take the train to Philadelphia and then take surface subway out to Penn. So, this is working out. I ended up buying a little Volkswagen, right? And it was really great. I was loving, loving, loving social work school because it's fun, you know, the kind of things that I enjoyed doing. And Louise Shoemaker was my dean there. Louise Shoemaker, at the end of the school year, you know, "Miss Giovanni," she said, "Miss Giovanni, I'd love to take you out to lunch," you know, "We can talk about your future." I'm thinking, wow, my future--because, you know, I'm doing well. And so we went to lunch and she said, you know, "We love 'em," you know. She said, "It's so much fun." She said, "You know whoever you're writing for, we pass your papers around." she said, "We love them." She said, "But you know we don't think that you're going to ever really be a social worker." She said, "We don't think that it works for you." And I said, "Well, I'm passing." She said, "Yes, and you'll graduate from the program but it's not your strength." She said, you know, "You're really a wonderful writer." And I hadn't thought about it as that. She said, "Have you considered Columbia's [Columbia University, New York, New York] program? They have an M.F.A. program." And I said, "No, Dr. Shoemaker, I haven't because I'm just barely considering Penn," you know. And she said, "Well I know some people," she said, "I think that I can recommend you for a scholarship if you'd like." I said, "I would be thrilled," you know, because obviously I'm not going to make it in social work. My placement in social work was with a settlement house called People's Settlement, and I was in group work. I don't know what you know about social work. I was in group work. One of my students--because I'm working with young people--one of the girls became pregnant, and Delaware's a small town so everybody knew it. And she had an abortion. She had nothing to do with me, but my supervisor had heard that she was pregnant and had had an abortion. So he--you know you make notes, and so he's looking at my notes, and he said, "I thought whatever her name is was pregnant?" I said, "I don't know what made you think that." He said, "Well I understood that she was." I said, "I don't think she's pregnant." And he said, "Well if she's not then she had an abortion. I said, "Well that's why," you know, "pencils have erasers." His name was Jim Sillis. And he said, "Well, it should be in your notes." And I said, "I don't know--," I called him 'Jim', "I don't know Jim because if she was pregnant and she had an abortion, she's not pregnant then why should she be in my notes so that when she runs for lieutenant governor thirty years from now, somebody can open it up and embarrass her?" You know, "If she's pregnant I'll write it up, but if she's not, it's none of my business and none of yours and since she's mine and not yours, I'm not writing it up and you can't." So you can see I was not going to be a good social worker, because he--his position was you owe loyalty to your institution and my thing was, the institution pays my check, I owe loyalty to my clients and so I wasn't going to write that kid up. I tell you right now I don't remember her name and I'm glad, you know. I remember I was a big fan of [actress] Ingrid Bergman's and I remember Bergman said a long time ago, you know, "I've been blessed with good health and poor memory," and it took me the longest to get that one together and it's like, "Yeah." So I don't even remember her name. I could barely pull her face up, but I know she didn't need me to write up what she had herself identified as a mistake. What kind of sense would that make? So obviously I'm not going to be a good social worker so I was able to move on up into New York which is everybody's dream, and Columbia, of course, is right there. Story_ID: 7679 Speaker 1: Without accessing it in the same way I'm in [poet] Langston Hughes' territory [New York, New York] and so I'm entered in the M.F.A. program [at Columbia University School of Fine Arts, New York, New York], so I'm being paid to sit at home and write and I wrote a book called 'Black Feeling, Black Talk.' And at the end of the first year--this is a two-year program but at the end of the first year I had a book. And so I called my grandmother, you know, I did a whole bunch of things and borrowed money and I published it, so I was really pleased, you know, and I'm coming in like, "Here's my book," you know, "give me my degree." And they're like, "No, it's a two year program." I said, "No, it's an M.F.A. program where you learn to write a book, so give me my degree." And its like, "No, you have to be in there for another year," so we laughed--I'm always laughing with Columbia about this. And so I had to think about what I was going to do. And this is where I know my dad's [Jones 'Gus' Giovanni] genius just kicked in. I was like, "I have a scholarship and even though it's coming through Columbia--this is ten thousand dollars--even though it's coming through Columbia for my tuition, if I can get my hands on that check, which actually says Nikki Giovanni, then I'm going to be able to live in New York until I can see if I can earn a living with this book." And so I went to see the--it's a vice president for students, and I said, you know, "I know you all haven't thought about it this way, but I think it's ugly and racist of you to take my money." And it's like, "What do you mean, Miss Giovanni?" I said, "Well, I have a scholarship and yet I'm presumed to be incompetent to pay my own bills." I said, "I can no longer accept this scholarship if this is the way it has to happen. I think this is my check, it should come to me." And we went back and forth on it for a while. Said, "You do what you want but I'm not going to enroll in this school unless I have something to say about this money. That's paternalistic and it's wrong." And I meant it because this was my only chance, right? And so, they made a decision which actually, they were right not to have given me my money--to give me my check. And so I deposited it in the Bank of New York, right? So that I could pay my tuition and, of course, Columbia didn't--it took them, you know, almost a year to find out I had dropped out, but in the mean- --it was my money--and so in the meantime I've got a book, right? But they still won't give me a degree. I was up at Columbia recently and it was like, "I want my degree," because it's a joke now, you know. I'm like, "Give me my degree," and it's like, "No, you have to put that other year in," but that was seed money for me. Story_ID: 7680 Speaker 1: I had an apartment which I had gotten, you know, through their [Columbia University, New York, New York] good offices and I don't know what you know about Manhattan [New York, New York], but being a Columbia student I also get my phone turned on on time because if it wasn't for Columbia in those days you could wait a year, you know. Now, of course, everybody's got a cell phone. But we got that and that was wonderful. And I had a book ['Black Feeling, Black Talk'] and so all I had to do was find a way to sell the book. So I had five hundred books at five hundred dollars which meant if I sold them for a dollar, which I knew I should because I need to get it below movie fare in order to be able to sell it. So I'm going to lose thirty cents every time I sell a book, so I know I'm going to go broke, right? 'Cause there's not that many--you know that's econ 101. But I wrote the book 'Black Judgment,' and I decided that 'Black Judgment,' you know, if it's going to be my swan song it's going to be a good one. My mother's [Yolande Cornelia Watson's] a real jazz fan and I'm, as I said, I'm close to Mommy. So I had decided when 'Judgment' came out--my friend Bill helped me out and got it illustrated and we got it printed, and so now it's great. And I wanted to have a book party because I'm a southerner and I'm used to how you work small towns, right? New York just a bigger, small town. So I decided I wanted to have it at Birdland. I thought this is great because Birdland is the home--I mean it's [musician] Charlie Parker, right? A little gangster--he's a wonderful man, he's dead, he got murdered--named Harold Logan who was a partner with Lloyd Price own Birdland. And so, I went down, I made a call and I made an appointment with Mr. Logan and went down. Now, I know Mr. Logan (laughing) is a gangster because he was. I get dressed up and I go down, because Birdland is down [in midtown Manhattan], you know. I go down and Logan is there and, "How are you doing Mr. Logan? I'm a poet," yak yak yak. And said, "On Sunday you're closed," which they are, "and I would like to have a book party," you know, "and I wondered if I could have it on Sunday. It wouldn't cost you anything and maybe we could make a deal that would make sense." He said, "Well how much money--(imitating his voice) how much money do you have?" I said, "Well, I don't have any money, Mr. Logan, I'm a poet," you know, "Where am I going to get any money?" I was--I said, "I was thinking, well, if we did that," you know, "you could open the bar and," you know, "that would be your money. I'm not trying to make it I'm just trying to sell books." And so I'm sure, you know, Logan thought, "What the hell is this?" And he said, "Well, I'll tell you what," he said, "Bring me one hundred people and you can have the club. Bring me ninety-nine people and you owe me five hundred dollars." I said, "You're on," I said, "That's great. Thank you," and I shook his hand. I walked back upstairs into the sunlight of Broadway and it hits me, Harold Logan is a gangster. I bring ninety-nine people into this club, he's going to break my legs or something, because that's what he is, he's a gangster, you know. It's like, "Oh, my God." So I started doing late night radio. You know, WWRL I started all over the city, you know. And what we kept saying is "'Black Judgment' is coming." And so people got into the habit, and so now you started to hear people uptown, because now my base is Harlem [New York, New York] and I'm going to bring Harlem downtown without even realizing I was doing something extraordinary. It was like up in Harlem everybody said, "'Black Judgment' is coming. 'Black Judgment's' at Birdland." And so people are coming to say, you know, "Yeah, we're going to do that." My neighbor's [actor] Morgan Freeman, right? Morgan agreed to read with me. Barbara Ann Teer read, Larry Neal read, you know. So, I had all of my actors and, you know, friends. Amanda Ambrose and them. And of course Birdland is overlooked by the New York Times [Building]. So Sunday about two o'clock people start to line up, and it's going to be a four o'clock show, so the line is going to grow and grow and grow. Now, the New York Times is watching this line and they're, "What's going on?" So they sent a reporter down. And the reporter, you know, is asking people in line, "What's going on?" They said, "'Black Judgment,'" right? And so at the time I was like, "Wow, what's going on?" So somebody finally, you know, said Nikki Giovanni. So a reporter comes over to me and says, you know, "I'm looking for Nikki Giovanni." I said, "Yeah." "Well where is he?" And I said, "I'm Nikki Giovanni." "I need to talk to him 'cause you're not listening." I said, "I'm Nikki Giovanni." "I just want, I--." "I'm Nikki Giovanni." And he said, "You're Nikki Giovanni." I said, "I'm Nikki Giovanni." "So what is this?" And I had the same answer, "It's 'Black Judgment.'" So they took a picture and the line went from here and then turned on 42nd Street--it was a phenomenal thing. So I got the second news front, 'Black Judgment,' right? So my book is, like, okay, this is going to do really beautiful because this is going to get the attention of William Morrow, who is still my publishers. The 'Amsterdam News,' [Harlem-based African American newspaper] of course, was a weekly at that point and the 'Amsterdam News' ran it and 'Muhammad Speaks' [Nation of Islam newspaper] ran it, and it was 'Muhammad Speaks' that called me 'the princess of black poetry' and it stuck. Speaker 2: Beautiful story. Speaker 1: Yeah. Oh, it was wonderful. Yeah, Harold--. Speaker 2: What year was that? Speaker 1: '69, '68 [1968] excuse me. Harold [Logan] did, by the way, get murdered, shot down on Broadway [New York, New York]. He was a gangster, but I always liked Mr. Logan. I wrote a poem for him because he was my kind of gangster. I mean he stood for something. He's not--I mean he earned his living the way he earned his living the way he earned his living. What did--Don Corleone [fictional character from 'The Godfather'] he said, "I apologize for nothing." He did what he had to do, but you could talk to Mr. Logan and you could work with him and he worked with--he didn't have to do that, you know, but of course, it was good for Birdland. I mean he, he--but when he did it, he had no idea. All he knew was there was some poet standing there who didn't have a pot to piss in or a window to throw it out of. He didn't have to do that. And so I always appreciated that, because I didn't know Lloyd [Price], but I know Lloyd well enough to know it was Harold who made that decision. Speaker 2: And you brought in the drink--Sunday afternoon--, Speaker 1: I did. Speaker 2: --at 4:30 [p.m.], cash register. Speaker 1: I did. He did okay with it but he didn't do it for that reason. He did it from his heart and I always loved him for that and I was very unhappy with his death. Story_ID: 7681 Speaker 1: I grew up with numbers runners. I'm from Knoxville, Tennessee. I grew up with, with, with the guys running the numbers and stuff and I've known petty gangsters all my life. I mean in the black community you know them and they're good men. And probably the regret that you have now is that the drug pushers aren't good men. They--it's not what they're doing, it's the way that they're doing it. And that's, that's too bad because they're still gonna to do what they do but they could, they could contribute. That they could--they could give a dollar for every A that the kids get. They could build their protection by being committed to the community, you know. I saw that stupid movie 'New Jack City' and I hated for eight hundred and fifty thousand different reasons. But number one I hated it because he took over the housing project--same thing that they did with Denzel [Washington] in 'Training Day' which was a stupid movie. Took over the housing project. From what I know about gangsters, every Saturday morning, he should have lined the boys up just like he did and said, "Who made an A?" and give them a dollar, "Who made the B?" give them a quarter, right? And then you're going to find--this is where your lawyer's going to come from because you're going to send your smart boys to school, right? Your protection comes from the fact that the community loves you. Should have married a Link, right? Or should have married a black--shoulda married a Delta [Sigma Theta sorority sister] and put her in The Links [African American women's organization]. Should have gone to church because all that I know about numbers runners, every Sunday they're in church. And all the good people are saying, "This old reprobate is sitting in church but he puts fifty dollars in church every Sunday." So, the preacher loves him because he's supporting the church, right? The movies need to show what those men did because those were good men, and I know that, you know they're gangsters and stuff but they built something. You had a kid, you wanted him to go to college, you went to the numbers man because he had the money. And you say, "I need some tuition money and I don't have any money to pay you back." They would lend you money without any interest. They're moneymen, they're not fools. They're not giving up anything. But you need to--Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] five hundred dollars. You need five hundred dollars to go to school, they give you five hundred dollars, you know, and you pay them the five hundred dollars back. If you needed five hundred dollars because your girlfriend wants a trip to Bermuda, then you pay him back fifteen hundred dollars. So, he made his money but those men made friends. They were good men and that story hasn't been told yet. Speaker 2: And they respected women. Speaker 1: They respected themselves. You know and I'm sure they killed people too, and people them. But it wasn't this kind of random crap, you know. I mean I liked--I mean as you can see I have an affection because I've treated everybody the same. I write to people in prison. I know people who are priests, you know. You treat everybody respectfully and we learned that watching how, again, those men--I hated 'New Jack City' because they didn't build a community. They ended up fighting over nothing and we failed to teach people how to--and movies teach. Hollywood [California] has a lot to answer for, but it was a spectacular failure in that movie because you had every opportunity in that movie because you had every opportunity to teach who these men were, and what they did, and how they did it. Story_ID: 7682 Speaker 1: How long after your 'Black Judgment' breakthrough did you become a mom? Speaker 2: Six, seven, eight months. I don't know. I don't think I was pregnant during 'Black Judgment' was Tom was born in '69 [1969], so it was right on the cusp. Speaker 1: Talk, talk to me as a mother. Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not big on children. (Laughing) People have them because they do things that you get pregnant but, I'm glad I had him. I mean I don't have those kinds of problems and I've enjoyed Thomas. You have a kid, you have a dog, you know, you enjoy them and you treat them--and I do--treat them all the same. I don't hit my dog and I don't hit my kid, you know, and nobody else can. But, I always thought, well, you got a kid you have to keep him because kids don't know the difference. The biggest breakthrough I had with Thomas was in feeding, because, you know, you have an infant and they cry in the middle of the night. And everybody says, you know, you get up and you heat the bottle. And it finally dawned on me, this child does not know hot from cold, right? He's going to get colic while I'm heating the bottle because somebody said, "Oh, don't give him cold milk." So that solved that one, and then he started to get cold milk. But actually Thomas said if it's not moving, he'll eat it too. And I knew that I always wanted to keep him with me, because when you have a kid, like you have a dog, I traveled with both of them. And I have a wonderful photograph that I love so much. I was in Detroit [Michigan] at the new library and I had Thomas and Wendy, the dog. And Wendy is actually paying attention and Thomas is running all over the place, but that's--I traveled with him. I took him to Africa. I took him every place that I went. And I shouldn't be cynical about children, but in this day and age you don't want somebody to think that oh, you know, gosh I need to have a kid so that I have somebody to love me. If you feel that way, you should get a dog. I like Tom. He's smart and that was--my sister [Gary Ann] said, "That's not normal," you know, "most people want healthy children. You just wanted a smart one." I said, "I want somebody I can talk to." And I think that he's--well I don't think that--Thomas has been a very good son and, it's kind of important at some point--I think you have to let children where they're no longer children. You have to, you have to let them go. But he's the one who wanted to--I wanted him to go to college because a black boy that didn't go to college is going, you know, who has no skills. If I had birthed Kobe Bryant [professional basketball player], I would have wanted him to go to NBA [National Basketball Association] because Kobe's perfectly capable. If I had birthed Allen Iverson [professional basketball player], I would want--you know. If I had birthed Michael Vick [professional football player], it goes on, you know, see what I'm saying? But my kid is a little kid who if he doesn't use his brain, doesn't really have the brawn and has no talent, so then what am I supposed to do, just watch him piss his life away? I don't think so. I didn't want that. And Thomas always used to complain about it because he is smart and we know he does politics and stuff. So, he was talking about his right to privacy. I said, "You don't have a right to privacy. You have a right to your own apartment," you know, "in which case, when it's your apartment I'm not going to come in there, but as long you're living in my house," I mean, you know, it's not-- "you don't have a right to privacy." Because, you know, like all parents I worried about drugs. So I said, "Don't have anything in your drawers that you don't want me to see," you know. "Don't hold anything for anybody." And I signed a permission when he went to junior high that the principal could open his locker without any forewarning. And I told Thomas that. I said, the principal, you know "I'm signing this because you think you're slick," because all fourteen, fifteen year old boys think they're slick. Story_ID: 7683 Speaker 1: Thomas [son] majored in what in--, Speaker 2: Philosophy. Speaker 1: --undergrad? Speaker 2: He went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. When Tom graduated from high school, he was really sweet. He was like, you know, we take meals, we take dinner on important occasion and he's graduating, it's like, "Let's have a dinner." And so it's like, "Yeah." And I'm saying, "Thomas, what are your plans?" And he was like, "Wow," you know, "I was thinking of going to Europe," because he likes, he likes Paris [France] a lot, and we spent a lot of time, you know. And I said, "That's wonderful honey. What are you going to do?" He said, "I'm," you know, "just going to spend some time finding myself." I said, "Thomas, I don't mean to be old-fashioned, but I was just never under the impression you could find something where you hadn't lost it. I just didn't know you had lost yourself in Paris." " Oh, Mom," I said, "It's okay," you know, "that's good." Yeah, I can see where if I was young, Paris would be appealing. So I said, "That's wonderful sweetheart." I said, "How are you going to take care of yourself?" And he said, "Well I was hoping that you would help." I said, "Well, I guess I would help you. You're my only kid but maybe we should define help," you know. I said, "Help to me is like, I don't know. Mommy and I are sitting there looking at Jeopardy and we miss you and we send you one hundred dollars and that's help," you know. He said, "No, I was thinking regular allowance." I said, "Oh, no, no, no that's due, and next year (inaudible) that does Paris will be me." I said, "You have to think of something else." He was like, "Oh, mom." I said, "I'm not going to do it Thomas." I said, "Now, here's my counter- suggestion, why don't you join the Army?" (Laughs) And he's like, "I'm not joining the Army." I said, "Why don't you think about it," I mean, "that's your reaction right now, but why don't you give it a thought, because the alternative to not--," and he had a car. I gave him a car when he was sixteen. "The alternative to not is I'm going to give you a gas card and it's going to run out in a year, right? And you can take your car and everything you put in it, and take the gas card because I want to know you have gas, and you'll leave and I won't see you again, and I'll miss you, and I'll be sad many a night, and I'll cry, but I know that if you leave under these circumstances the only reason you'll come back is that you're a failure, and I do not want to see you as a failure. So I'm going to let you go so that I can go back to a memory of you when I thought you were wonderful." So he thought about that for a couple of days and he said, "I'm going to join the Army." I said, "Good, good, good decision." He was mad at me, right? He joins the Army and he gets stationed in Fort Knox [Kentucky] and I get a call from a young man about three weeks into basic [training]. And he said, "Mom," and I heard it in his voice. Said, "This is Thomas." I said, "I know it's Thomas because you're the only person that calls me Mom." He said, "Do you know, I need to go to college?" I said, "Well, why would you need to go to college?" He said, "These people holler at you, they don't know anything." He said, "It's terrible. I need to go to college." I said, "Well you have," you know, "another year because he's got the--." I said, "Why don't you apply to college," because I had been begging this little Negro to go to college. I said, "Why don't you apply and, you know, use my address and whoever accepts you first, I'll send your room fee in. I said, "Does that--I mean--will that be helpful?" And he said, "Yes!" So he did, he applied to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], applied to Morehouse, because those were his choices. And Morehouse accepted him. I sent the room fee in and he went to Morehouse. And then this is where I got lucky. Me, Nikki. He met a wonderful young lady named Sydney, and fell head over heals in love. I mean just for the first time in his life, just--she was at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And all of a sudden--because Sydney was very smart, you know, and I'd call her, "How you doing, honey?" "Oh, I'm studying right now. I'll give you a call in a bit." This is my kid, who--you know, he's always been smart but, I mean, I'm seeing focus, right? And what it is--and you know I'm talking to him. He's like, you know, "Sydney," you know, "thinks that she knows so much and I have to look up this, that, and the other," and he doesn't need any computers so, you know, you do all these. And he graduated magna [cum laude]. And I know that I owe it to Sydney. And then he said to me, "I'm going to law school." And I said, "Well that's wonderful. I'm really proud of you. That's good." And he said, "I was wondering if you wanted to help?" And I said, "Actually, yeah, Thomas I don't." I mean, "My mother [Yolande Cornelia Watson] sent me to school. I sent you to school, and no, I don't," you know. But a couple of people that he knows--one is a dear friend of mine and he lobby's me for Thomas all the time. And so he called me up, he said, "I was talking to Tom," and I said, "I don't want to hear it," you know, "if you feel that way, you send him." And he said, "No, Nikki, you don't understand. If he goes to law school and you don't send him, he'll be in debt. He'll come out of law school in maybe seventy to a hundred thousand dollars worth of debt." I said, "Right, but if he doesn't, I'm a hundred thousand dollars out." And he said, "No, no, no, listen to me. (Laughs) If he comes out with that kind of debt, then he takes a job and the first time they need insider trading, or the first time they need some dirty work done, because he's in debt, they'll ask Thomas to do it. And he'll end up in prison, disbarred, all because you were too cheap to help him out." Said, you know, "You two kill me," because they were always working against me. And I said, "Okay, I'm going to send this little crazy Negro to law school," because it did make sense. I didn't want him to come out in that much debt, and so I did send him to law school, and it's like, "You owe me." But he graduated from Georgetown [University] Law [Center, Washington, D.C.] and actually married, not Sydney because she married someone else, married Zieta and he now lives in New York. Speaker 1: (Inaudible) Speaker 2: Yeah, I was glad for him and you know, you like them and you want--but I really didn't. Law school was not my trip and so it was really funny because people sometimes say, "Oh, yeah. You made Thomas go to law school." I said, "No, I made Thomas go to the Army because I knew he would hate it." And I knew in the hating of it--because you know, you know your child. I knew that in the hating he would begin to focus because I wanted him to know, "If you don't do something else with your life, dumb people will always be hollering at you." And it's so important. It is so important, not to let that happen. Speaker 1: Did Thomas have a relationship with his dad? Speaker 2: They know each other, you know, that's none of my business. Speaker 1: But they didn't really stay (inaudible). Speaker 2: I'm sincere. I don't try to answer anything about Thomas and his father because that's not a part of my public life. Story_ID: 7684 Speaker 1: Do you have grandchildren? Speaker 2: Not yet. I want a granddaughter! (Laughs) Speaker 1: (Laughs) Speaker 2: I do. I deserve a--I mean, I'm very lucky. Now, my mother [Yolande Cornelia Giovanni] was so pleased because she had always wanted a son and my dad [Jones 'Gus' Giovanni] had always wanted a son. Both my sister [Gary Ann] and I had sons. So, she did but she didn't have anybody to have tea with her, right? Because Thomas, who adores her--Thomas loves the ground she walks on. Thomas feels about my mother they way I felt about my grandmother, right? But even he wouldn't have tea with her. Because she would say, "Thomas, let's have tea," and it's like, "No, Grandmother, boys don't have tea." But I'm, like, I've got this little tea set that actually used to belong to my sister. And it's like, "I want a granddaughter," you know. Make your tea and cookies and stuff like that. But you know, you walk by the Gap and you put your little nose up, you know, oh, because it's so cute the clothes and stuff, but you know, it's nothing to rush with. I mean he's got a dog. I like the dog. But, they're not having kids right now but, everybody wants a grandchild. Story_ID: 7685 Speaker 1: So, you had a little travel companion in Thomas [son]. Speaker 2: Well I thought he should see the world and I know that people said that to me. I was a big fan of the Skinner box. I'm a '60s [1960s] person. I don't know if you remember, you know, the Skinner box. And what we--. Speaker 1: (Inaudible) Speaker 2: Yeah, what we learned is that no matter how young you are, when we expose you to things you retain something. And so, I took him around the world with me so that he would somehow have a memory of knowing that the world belongs to him, so that he lives with no boundaries. And so even to this day, and as I say, he finally did, by the way, tell me that I was right about the Army. And probably never is there a young man so happy that he joined when he did because he was in the peacetime Army. And now you've got this fool [referring to U.S. President George W. Bush] going to war, you know, at least Thomas is not going to be a part of that and yet he, he, he did his service. But I wanted him to be at home anywhere on earth and the only way to make that happen is to take him with you. And of course he's a well-behaved kid. I mean, he always did eat well, you know, and we used to practice that, because you know he'd have his jacket on and so when we were traveling, and you know, whether we were on a cruise or anything else, you know, he'd put his dinner jacket on and he could sit down and he would sit with me while I had coffee. So, you know I always enjoyed talking to him, so we used mealtimes to catch up with each other which we actually still do. So he had--he, he, he came into a lot of skills because of the ordinary exchange. And I think people make a mistake leaving the kids at home. I used to take him to the theater and, you know, you could see people just quake when I would walk in because I'd walk in with a baby. You know, with a baby. And you could see that, "Oh, he's going to cry or something." If--the first (makes a baby noise), I'm out of there because I don't want him disturbing people. I don't people to, you know, "Shh," or anything like that and ultimately as a child without knowing it, he got used to laughter. He got used to applause, he got used to noise coming from some place that he didn't actually see and so if you start to take them--you know, church is a good thing to do. If you start to take them young enough they learn how to behave because it's something that they get used to. I think things like that are important and I was always comfortable to take Thomas because I didn't mind leaving, you know. I was never going to be the person that's going to sit there, you know, because the kid will disturb people whether it's in a movie or anything else. The minute you hear a sound you have to get out of there. Either let the kid calm down or go on home and, you know, the words of [musician] Little Richard, "Come back tomorrow night and try it again." The only other way to teach them is you hit them and I was just determined--I don't hit anything and I don't believe in it. I don't hit my dog, I didn't hit my son. I don't believe in it and so I had to find a way to teach him. And I assumed intelligence and so I thought you teach him by keep repeating the information and pulling him back out. Eventually he learns. Speaker 1: When is his birthday? Speaker 2: August 31, 1969. Story_ID: 7686 Speaker 1: Back when you had [son] Thomas there was quite about of stigma attached to unwed pregnancy. How did you--. Speaker 2: Oh, that--I never looked at myself through anybody's eyes. And I was talking somebody else recently. I've never looked at the world through white eyes and I've never looked at myself through anybody's eyes. So I figure what I do is my business and what you do is yours. I'm not a judgmental person and I'm not going to be judged, and that's just a huge no-no. So anybody that didn't have anything positive to say to me about my expecting the baby, I knew they weren't a friend. And so they had to go, because I didn't need advice. If I had needed advice, I would have called you before I got in bed. It's too late for advice now, you know, and people do that. People approach you like, you know, "Are you going to have it?" "Well, what does it look like?" But you know, you know, then you know you have to get rid of these people and, you know, you lose people but you can't be friends forever. Story_ID: 7687 Speaker 1: Does [son] Thomas run into any problems being the son of a well-known author? Speaker 2: You know I--and we were talking about it today because of Dexter. I've been running into Dexter King [son of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] on tour because he's on tour with 'Growing Up King,' and so I see him. I was not a famous child and so what happens to famous children is really different. Now Tom [her son Thomas] was in school with Ennis Cosby [son of Bill Cosby]. Ennis was ahead of him. Morgana Freeman, Morgan's daughter, was at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, among other people. And so you've got these famous kids who are making these adjustments. I don't really have any access to what kind of things happen. I remember Thomas was in a classroom. I said, "That was funny," because another friend of his, Lanca, was telling me about it. It's so funny. And he said, you know--he said they were discussing Nikki Giovanni poetry and somebody, "What does she mean by this? And what does she--." And finally someone said, "Well her son is here. Ask him," right? And Thomas is sitting there. Thomas said, "Well I don't read her. She's my mother," you know, and that was how he, "I don't read her she's just my mother." And it was the smart--I never said that--but that was a smart thing to do. Because it would be like people saying to Ennis, you know, "What's Bill [Cosby] like?" "He's my dad," you know. And I think it's not easy because I think people put things on you. But I wanted Thomas to, I mean, be normal. I'm just a low level--and I'm a mid-level author. And I think people read me and I'm really, you know, don't misunderstand--I'm really happy, but you don't want that to get blown out of proportion until you think, "Well, I can't go to the grocery story. I can't date or--." You know, you're just an ordinary person and so your parents do this job. Your parents work or, you know, somebody's parents are CEO. Somebody's parents are comedians. Somebody's parents are an actor. Somebody's parent is, is a poet, you know, you just work through it. So I don't think it was a great burden but, I've never been in that position. And I know that there has to be some discomfort because there are always going to be somebody that's going to approach you for use instead of for just being--letting you be who you are. So I don't know. I mean, that's something--I would like to see famous kids--famous white kids have done books on it and they've done books together on what it's like, you know. But the black kids haven't really because Ennis is gone and we really--that was very sad. I had to call Thomas because I happen to have been up and it was like 5:30 [A.M.] news and I didn't want him to wake up and turn on the news. He was in New York. Of course, you know, when the phone rang and, you know, he's got caller ID and he knew it was. So, he said, "What's the matter? How's grandmother?" I said, "No, no, no, no, no," you know, "I just wanted you to know that Ennis Cosby got killed last night." Because I just didn't want him to get blindsided on it, and I was very sad. That was, that was extremely sad. But I think that black famous kids need to talk about it because I think it's another area that's relatively new. [Poet] Paul Laurence Dunbar, you know, didn't have any kids. He was famous, you know. Yolanda DuBois [W.E.B. DuBois's daughter] didn't do well. For that matter, A'Lelia Walker [daughter of entrepreneur Madame C. J. Walker] didn't do--even though she's smart, she didn't really do well as a famous child. And I think that they're obviously doing better, you know. They're making their way in the world in, you know, in a kind of different way. But it's a burden. I still would imagine a bit of a burden, you know. I'm not saying, you know, "Golly, I'm going to drink myself to death because my parents are famous." But, there was some adjustment. Speaker 1: You seem to do an excellent job of staying contemporary while holding onto to your knowledge and participation in history. And probably some of that comes from having a son with whom you've had a good relationship. Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Story_ID: 7688 Speaker 1: I recall a few years ago there was an interview, in 'Essence' [magazine] where you and--and I don't even remember the other young contemporary women who had a conversation. Speaker 2: I did one with [musician, actress] Queen Latifah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Oh, yes she's a great kid, isn't she? Speaker 1: That was it. I thought that was a wonderful--, Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: --interview and exchange. Speaker 2: It was fun. I went out to California because she makes movies. And the theory of that would have been because I'm senior and older, she should have come--her name is Dana [Owens]. Dana should have come, you know, to Virginia. But I knew she was busy and I'm not--I'm just not off on a lot of trips. And I knew that she was busy and I said to 'Essence' because they said, "We're trying to get her." I said, you know, "I can go--I can go to Los Angeles [California]. It's not nearly as hard. I'm not doing a show," you know, "I just teach a couple of classes and it's not a problem." And they said, "Oh, you don't mind?" I said, "Oh, come on," I mean, "people helped me and I surely--" you know, you wanted to be of some help. And so I just flew out to L.A. It was wonderful. She was like, "Oh, my God. I can't believe you did this." And it's like, "Yeah." I just dropped her a note because she was talking about in this country, she said, you know, "What we need are aunts," and that's what started me on the aunts book. But I just dropped her a note because I was very unhappy about her being arrested on a DUI. And I know enough about Los Angeles Police to know that once you get arrested on a DUI you can expect to be arrested again. And she is a very famous face. And so I just wrote her a note and said, you know, "Dear Dana, I know it's none of my business and I'm really out of line here but," you know, "sweetheart, get a driver." You know, she does okay. She's making enough money. Get a driver because these people once they get their hooks in, you can't count on them being good. You can assume that at some point somebody's going to put their hand on the gun--that you could be hurt. Get a driver for the ten thousand dollars you'll be happy, for twenty thousand dollars, whatever it is, you know. Driving Queen Latifah. You know, they get a book out of it. Get a driver, you know. (Laughs) So, you know, really I hope it works. And look at [actress] Halle Berry, you can't be vulnerable to them because the Los Angeles Police Department and New York City Police Department are two of the most vicious police departments in the country. And they're mean and they're jealous. And so you need to be very careful. Story_ID: 7689 Speaker 1: What other highlights and--I see 'Black Judgment' as that story you had is (inaudible). Speaker 2: Oh it was wonderful. Speaker 1: What other kind of highlights as your career continued to unfold, what kind of highlights--? Speaker 2: Being in New York [New York], sure. Being in New York, of course, everything is there. And there was this television show called 'Soul!' and it was being produced by Ellis Haizlip. And Ellis was going around meeting everybody. I mean he just wanted to meet a lot of people. Actually, [Dr.] Alvin Poussaint was starting out to be the original host of 'Soul!' And I don't really remember now why Alvin didn't work but nonetheless it wasn't working, and Ellis took it over. Well I had met Ellis because he had cast a net, as it were, and invited people in. I'm always looking, you know, you can do this and you can do this and you can do this, and so I was just sharing a lot of ideas and of course I'm also doing poetry. And he was like, "Well, come on down and do it." But then because 'Soul!' became essentially Ed Sullivan. It did so many different things so Ellis would call and say, you know, "If you have a minute why don't we go to see the play and then we'll talk about the play." Actually, I ended up doing something like a third of all of the 'Soul!' shows produced, I was a part of. But as the show went on and it, you know, was grounded, Ellis was saying, you know, to me, you know, "Well what," you know, "if you were doing the show what would you like to do?" And I said, "Well, black women poets," so we did it with Jackie Early (ph.), with Anna (inaudible) but that was a great show and it got really good reviews. And so, of course, now he's taking me out to dinner saying, you know, "What else would," you know, "if you were doing something what would you do?" I said, "Me? I would do something with gospel because I totally love it." I said, "I'd do something with gospel and poetry." He said, "Well do you know any choirs?" I said, "No, I don't." And he said, "We'll I do." And he said, "I know Benny Diggs in New York Community Choir. Would you like to meet then maybe we can work a show out?" I said, "Hey, I'm up for it." I smoked at that point, and so we made an appointment to go up to see Benny and we went to his apartment, right? And so, he's got the choir. He's got about--well the choir is a little over a hundred people but about fifty of them were there. And I'm sitting there. Now, they're sanctified, right? So I do know enough to know, okay? And so I'm going to see a sanctified choir, well I'm not. I'm a revolutionary, okay? And so, we know that we're going to have some compromises along the way. I smoked and so I lit a cigarette just, you know, like, how are we going to handle all of this, and so it was like really cool. They were cool and so I put it out because we were just testing the waters. And I read some poetry so that they could hear what I do because I said, "If it's going to offend you it's not going to work, so let me read the poetry." And then Benny said, "Would you like to hear us sing?" And I said, "I would love--," because I grew up in the Baptist church. I said, "I would love to hear you sing." And he said, "You know, well--," he turned back to Isaac to say, you know, "well what shall we sing?" And Isaac said, 'Should Jesus Bear The Cross Alone.' And somebody else said, "Yes, let Jesus bear it," it was like, I loved this choir because you never see a sense of humor coming out of sanctified--and so I knew this was the choir for me. And because we meant 'Must Jesus Bear the [Cross Alone]'--I mean he had gotten nervous, and this is the choir for me. So, we did--we got together and then we, of course, I met them at the church because they were meeting in a storefront, and we did our rehearsals and then we did that, which ultimately a man named Carl--you see, Carl's name is gone right now but probably that's because Carl didn't pay me. But (laughs)--Proctor, Carl Proctor, asked me, you know, "Why don't we record?" And so we recorded 'Truth Is On Its Way' and Carl (inaudible). Carl Proctor was Aretha Franklin's producer when Aretha Franklin was with Columbia [Records]. And they wouldn't let Carl produce Aretha the way that she did and that's why they lost her to Atlantic [Records] and Arif Mardin took over. But Carl had all of these ideas and so now, I'm there and so he was able to use some of them. Benny and I did the poetry and the songs, you know. Carl did the mix but that was a huge, huge, huge hit, and, of course, the album became a gold album. I won the NATRA [National Association of Radio and Television Announcers] Award for that. I have a statue right on that. Speaker 1: And those recordings are still available? Speaker 2: Oh, yes they're out on CD, of course, collectibles. You can get them anyplace, you know. Rose's--I mean well Rose's isn't here anymore. I guess Rose [Records, Chicago area record store chain] sold out to Tower [Records], but you can get 'em any place. Anybody will have them or they can order them. They don't keep a lot of product because I'm just a mid-level. But then Ellis said to me--because at this point we're really on a roll. We're doing great shows and it's doing what it should do, so he said, "Well what next?" And I said, "I'd love to talk to Jimmy [James] Baldwin because I've been such a Baldwin fan." And I said, "I don't suppose we have any way to do that." And he said, you know, "Actually I know Jimmy." And I'm like, "Wow, you know Jimmy Baldwin?" And he said, "Yeah." He said, "I'll give him a call and when I run him down I'll see what he says." So he did. He called Jimmy and ultimately, you know, spoke to him and said, you know, "Nikki Giovanni." And Jimmy said, "I'd love to talk to her. I didn't know he even had any idea who I might be." And PBS [Public Broadcasting Service, television station] did a show on him, 'The price of the ticket' at his home in St. Paul-de-Vence [France] and he had this really big fireplace. And he has books on the top. And the book that was facing out when they shot that was 'Spin a Soft Black Song.' And so when I saw that, I was like, "Oh, my God. Jimmy Baldwin reads me." But Jimmy didn't want to come home because he was busy. So he said to Ellis, you know, "I'd love to do it and we can--I'll take the week," which is what we did. And he said, "But," you know, why don't we meet in London [England]? Would she mind coming to London?" I said to Ellis, you know, "I'll go to Moscow [Russia]. I'll go to Beijing [China]." I mean, to do Jimmy--I mean it was no time, no place. I'm canceling all of my calendar because this is what I want to do, you know, it was great. Took [son] Thomas. We went to London, you know, and of course we met and talked and, you know, you do things so that we're all working together with the director because now we have British director which was really lucky for us, because the Brits do such a different thing with video. Both Jimmy and I talked with my hands and what the director did, if you ever get to see the footage of that, is he's shooting my hands while I'm talking and then he's shooting Jimmy's hands so we have as many hands as face because we're always wonderful. But Jimmy, you know, he's a nighthawk, right? And so, we're only able to work at night because he mostly sleeps during the day and then he would go out because he has friends all over the world, you know, and he would go out with his friends. He'd be coming into the hotel, you know, and it's six o'clock in the morning, seven o'clock in the morning. Thomas and I are up eating breakfast, having oatmeal, porridge, and Thomas could just sense him, you know. And they always say Jimmy Baldwin, Jimmy Baldwin. And Thomas was like, "Jimmy Baldwin, Jimmy Baldwin take me for a walk." And Jimmy's like, you know, I mean it happened every morning, you know, "Thomas, God, I need to get in bed." "Take me for a walk, Jimmy Baldwin and so Jimmy said, "Oh, come on." And so they would walk around the park and, you know, he didn't have to do that. I just thought it was so sweet. And I've been wanting to write a book, actually. I just haven't had the time to put the things together they way that I want to--take me for a walk, Jimmy Baldwin, and I want to show all of that where they walked, you know, because London is so wonderful and it's got such an important black history, just to show, you know, that kind of thing. It was funny. Jimmy was funny. Story_ID: 7690 Speaker 1: You have referred to yourself once or twice, as "mid-level," however, that's not my understanding on where you are. Speaker 2: (Laughs) Thank you. But, you know, I'm talking about the books. You know, Terry McMillan and E. Lynn Harris and Zane are bestsellers. That's what I mean. And there's something really humbling about realizing--I've only had one book on the bestseller list, you know, 'Blues: For all the Changes' and it went to number four and I was really proud of it. I say it--and I'm not being kind of phony about it but you know, if you're not careful you'll end up being crazy, and so you need to know where you are in the spectrum of things. I think I do good work. And I think that I get 90 percent of my audience, maybe even a hundred. I think that everybody that's a Nikki Giovanni reader is probably, you know what I'm saying, reading--I'm saying 90 percent because maybe there's somebody coming up, right? So I'm not feeling bad about that but I do have to laugh because it came up sometime somebody said, "Well, you know you're just a mid-level author." And I said, "Yeah, that's what I am." And I think my influence is beyond the numbers of what I'm selling. On the other hand, I have to laugh because I have to keep it in, and in the words of [musician] Tupac Shakur, "You have to keep it real otherwise it makes you crazy." It really does. And when I did an album like 'Truth Is On It's Way,' which was a gold album and it was twenty weeks in the top ten right? It wins everything. If I'm not careful, people are going to have me thinking I should compare myself to Aretha Franklin who sings for a living. That's not what I do. And I watched a beautiful boy just fall apart named Gil Scott-Heron. And Gil--and I'm not talking out of school or anything like that but Gil and Brian [Jackson] did Midnight Band, right? And he, too, did poetry with music but Gil got excited about the whole clamor, you know. 'Cause we were playing--Benny and I played the Spectrum [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] right? Benny and I were here, you know, and I realized I can't do this a lot, because this is not--I'm glad. I was really, really happy for 'Truth [Is On Its Way]', but this is not who I am and if I get caught up in that life, I'm going to end up as--I looked at Gil, you know, Gil just got out of jail a couple of weeks ago. It's 1903--it's just--because he was sent back, you know. He's a drug addict and he has other issues that go along with that. He doesn't have any teeth. He's--he doesn't look well. And I'm not saying that maybe if Gil hadn't made an album he would look well and be happy and have all of his teeth. But I know that you start chasing those kind of dreams, you lose track of who you are, and when you lose track of who you are anybody can convince you to be a part of anything. I didn't really want that. I knew--after 'Truth' I did another album 'Like A Ripple On A Pond' and that too was a million seller but not the same kind of acclaim. And so for a while--and I'm just going back to that for a minute--for a while I really couldn't walk into a room without everybody looking because this is because of 'Truth,' right? And so it brought a level of fame to me that I realized, this is not--I'm a writer and I still have to be able to go into a room and assess it. Not because somebody's going to attack me but because what's going on--what's the story here? And you lose that ability when everybody's looking. You know what I'm saying? At you, and so I just thought, "No, I need to get back to what it is that I do because I write, and I'm really happy. I have a CD that's traveling with 'Quilting the Black-Eyed Pea,' and it's really selective. And I really love it because I got to tell stories in it and stuff. And I'm enjoying but I'm a writer and so the most important thing is what I can learn and what I can apply that I know. And everything else has to take second seat. It was nice to make the money because I liked to travel and I had a kid and you need to take care of yourself. So I was very pleased, you see what I'm saying? About of that but I knew that this was not my contribution. And in many respects, I met [businessman] Russell Simmons a couple of years ago now. And he's a nice kid I think and he's just like giving me--, "Oh, you're the lady who started it all." And I said, I did I had quite an affect on the spoken word because Right On Records which actually was being distributed by Atlantic [Records], petitioned the Grammys because it was the biggest record of the year and I should have one a Grammy and that's a fact. And they petitioned the Grammy to say, you know, "How come Nikki's not nominated for a Grammy?" And the Grammys said, "Because we have no category for spoken word with music." And so Carl's position was you should take--and so was Jerry Wexler. I knew Wexler. Atlantic's position was, "Well then create it." And they were, "No, we're not going to do that because it's not going to last." Then I did Ripple--'Like A Ripple on a Pond.' And we're back there the same thing, we're petitioning the Grammys. It wasn't about, you know, "Does she just want a Grammy?" because of course, anybody wants--you want whatever's out there. If you can run for it what you want it, you know? But it wasn't that, it was that it needed to be recognized as what--as the achievement, right? And of course, they didn't do that then, but it kept coming so they did--the Grammys ultimately did create a category spoken word with music, which is going to ultimately evolve into the rap. It was important. And I'm glad to see the kids go through it. And if I had to do it over again, I would still want my Grammy because I know I did something, you see? I did. And I'm very, very proud of that. Story_ID: 7691 Speaker 1: Rap, spoken word Grammys and so on and so forth. Would you give me your feelings and response about rap and its--when and how it came on the scene? Speaker 2: Now I'm a big fan of the whole hip-hop nation. There's a wonderful movie called 'Brown Sugar,' and I think that they do a really good history too. Because what you had was uptown because they took away gym and they took away band. And you know the things that you grew up with they took away theater, they took away arts and there's been a consistent Republican taking away of arts and expression from inner city kids. And the kids said, "Well you know if we can't do it one way then we're going to do it another," so they started break dancing right, which is so athletic. Breakdancing should definitely be an Olympic sport. Because it's something that everybody can do all over the world. They do--but I always wanted to see double Dutch be an Olympic sport because I think if they can do synchronized swimming, double Dutch makes a whole lot more sense. And what they did was they took the old vinyl, going back to--and they used it to scratch and they created the beat [makes a record scratching sound]. And a woman named Sylvia, formerly of Mickey and Sylvia you know (singing) "Love, love is strange." Sylvia was uptown because she lives in New Jersey. She was uptown and heard the Sugarhill Gang, you know (singing) "Hotel, motel, Holiday Inn. If you're girl won't treat you right you can see her--." And she thought well isn't this something. Invited them, the Sugarhill Gang I don't know if they were called that at that point, but invited them over to New Jersey to make this recording, which they did and of course it was wildfire and it just went every place, everybody loved it. So, you have the break dancin' and you had the rappin', and you had the beat, right? And I think that if you're going to call it the 'Mother of Rap' I think to great degree you'd have to look at Sylvia because she did it. Now, I'm going to come from another point of view, so I'm going to intercept in here just me Nikki as an artist because I love spirituals. And so when I got ready to do this I'm on [television program] 'Soul!' and so we're getting some level of exposure that's different. But I'm working with the choir and I'm putting poetry with the choir. And my record broke AM [radio stations], and that was what was in terms of what was really, really, really important. Because you know FM underground stations do everything. The WWRL-AM started to play me and when they did that to that degree, which [Def Jam recording label founder] Russell Simmons said, and I appreciated him saying that, and I met Sean Combs once and 'Puffy' [Sean Combs] said the same thing you know that, "You're the mother of us all." And I am so pleased to think that this would be so, because once we could break AM, then we're going to be able to reach the black community and we're going to say that there's something new, right? And of course it was just, as I said it was just wildfire and that was important. Story_ID: 7692 Speaker 1: I've been writing, I've been working with Sony [Records] writing liner notes and my liner notes are probably a little different from the average liner notes and Sony is the biggest music thing on earth. And so Sony has been fighting--we're back to these same little Grammys--with the Grammys about my Grammy for liner notes, because they don't like--they don't like--they say, "Well she never says," you know, "the trumpet blew this and--," you know I don't do that. And I did a thing on [musician] Aretha [Franklin] you know, and along came Aretha. And what I'm doing is hooking Aretha up to the Great Migration, because that, you know, they don't want that. They want you to say, "Oh and then Aretha sang this and then--," you know I'm not interested in that. I want to put it in the, in the context. I know--and it's--I know I'm writing excellent liner notes you know. I did [singer] Regina Belle. I did the [music group] Isley Brothers, I've done some wonderful liner notes. I'm never, ever, ever going to get my Grammy. And probably the next generation that writes liner notes, like I'm writing them, they'll all get Grammys everybody'll say, "Oh, isn't that wonderful." So, you know and again I don't have any envious or thing like that it's just you're always out there on the edge someplace, which means you know your kid doesn't get to see your Grammy in the house. You know, when I'll die and they'll say, "Oh, we're going to give you an honorary Grammy," I hope he has enough sense to turn it down. Because I don't want an honorary Grammy, I want mine for the notes that I'm doing. Story_ID: 7693 Speaker 1: Rap music, there is a lot of controversy about, you know, the negativity in some of it. Where do you stand about that? Speaker 2: First, of all it's another generation's music. And I'm going to answer this in a kind of strange way. I did grow up with my grandmother and I listened to my mother's [Yolande Cornelia Watson's] music and, and we pretty much about the last generation that did pass on a generation of music. But my grandmother intensely disliked Billy Eckstine. And Billy Eckstine sang a song that said, "Jelly, jelly, jelly, jelly stays on my mind." And my grandmother thought that that was the dirtiest song she had ever in life heard. But he also sang a song, which when I met Mr. Eckstine I said to him, you know, because he was performing. I said, "Are you going to sing a song called, 'What's my Name?' And he said "How would you know that song?" And I said, "Mr. Eckstine it's not that I know the song, I know every word to the song." And I do cause my mother played (singing), "What's my name/because I love you/some people call me fool/what's my name? If I should leave you/people would call me wise/lover, you call me--." I know the whole song. And he's just looking at me like, "I don't believe this," right? Well my grandmother thought that that was bawdy, right? My mother, who had heard her mother is now complaining because Little Richard right [singing], "Slippin' and a slidin'/peepin' and a' hidin'/I been told a long time ago." And she said, "Why is he talking like that?" She's like, "Oh my God listen to this--." And of course cannot stand Prince. By the time [Giovanni's son] Thomas is listening to Prince, you know [singing, Prince's song 'Head'], "The morning noon and night/she give me head." Mama's going, "What did he say?" you know. And what I'm saying in terms of rap, every generation complains about the generation that's in front of them, right? I listen to rap because I try to stay--I want to know what the kids are doing. I know that if it's a train the track is going to run all the way back to the spirituals, all the way around the corner to the work songs. Rap is a legitimate voice and it's a legitimate voice of the community. And I learned enough about it to know that. And so if you say what's on right now actually in my six-changer CD in my automobile, I'm listening because I'm teaching Harlem Renaissance right now. I'm listening to the Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] Jubilee Singers's 'Rise and Shine.' That's what's in there. And when that pulls out [Charles] Mingus goes back in. Because I--a day without Mingus is a day without sunshine to me. I love Mingus. I love, you know, John Coltrane. But if you say what do you think, I know enough Tupac [Shakur] to know that this young man told the truth. And I have such respect for him. I have a tattoo for Tupac because I wanted--I don't know his mother. I don't know Afeni [Shakur]. I still don't. But I wanted to share with Afeni that we all mourn the loss of her son. And I went and got a tattoo so I could have a public expression and not just the words of my mouth but as it would be the meditations of my heart. I wanted to do something that she could see that this young man was a loss. I love OutKast. And I know Mrs. Parks and I truly love Rosa Parks and I was so sorry that she got such bad advice. Because you know Mrs. Parks does not listen to rap. So, when she was upset with OutKast it's because somebody told her they did 'Rosa Parks' and that this was a disgrace. And she of course allowed herself to sue them, which should have never had happened. Because OutKast, they're nice young men and 'Rosa Parks' is [singing], "Ho, ho, get off the bus." It's a nice--it's nice and it was so respectful and I'm just so sorry that the people around Rosa Parks are not always sensitive to the fact that she has to--she is a public figure she has to stay alive. But I will tell you I liked 'Barbershop.' And you know of course they were laughing in 'Barbershop' saying she didn't do that much, but she did. And I liked the fact that the whole barbershop said, you know don't let Jesse Jackson hear you say that. Jesse should have had a t-shirt made up. They talked about me in 'Barbershop.' Because they were given him props. I don't know, I don't understand all of that but I thought that Cube did a good job. But the reason that Ice Cube could produce and write 'Barbershop' is that a kid named Tupac Shakur had opened that door. Because Hollywood has two tracks. It has the Sidney Poitier, Denzel Washington track. And it has a bad boy track. And the bad boy track belongs to Tupac. And what he did in Hollywood [California, ref. to film industry] was open all of those doors and they've come through. And I think that the impact of Tupac Shakur is yet to be felt because he's only been dead six years. I think that Tupac is number nine on the, what they call the dead artist list. You know the most--the biggest dead artist of course is you know Elvis [Presley]. But, Tupac is right there. So, this young man is being kept alive and I think that's so important that his work. It's a shame that we don't have him, but if we have to lose him we've got his work. Speaker 1: Unfortunately, we don't have as many Tupacs in the rap camp as we need so that the thing that is highlighted is the negativity especially about black women. Speaker 2: Well I think it's all, you know, the proof in that pudding is all in the eating. And I think in any given point--I mean I'm a blues person. You know, actually I came here to Chicago [Illinois] a couple of years ago because people don't bother you. I wanted to hear Bobby 'Blue' Bland. I came in and went over and got my ticket and sat on the grass and listened and, you know, "Look at the people. I know you wonder what they're doing." I love that. "They're just standing there watching you make a fool of me", [ref. to Bobby 'Blue' Bland's 'I Pity the Fool']. I mean I just--I love it. But if you look at the blues, what's the butt of all of those jokes? A bad woman, right? But we now have the maturity to look at the blues as what it really is and recognize that this is a metaphor. And we look at it not as how come the black man always is bitching about the black women, but we look at it as the metaphor that it is. Rap deserves that same respect. And it's easy because in the heat of the moment everybody can look at it, "Well, it's angry. Well it does this--." Well what it is, it's a legitimate voice. And so, it's been around, what are we into almost the twentieth year. It's not going any place. It's on Broadway [New York, New York]. And you really wish [poet/author] Mr. [Langston] Hughes was here, "You've taken my blues and gone. You put them on Broadway and Black Mikados [ref. to Langston Hughes's 'Note on Commercial Theatre']." It's so wonderful to think of Def Jam [Recordings] on Broadway [ref. to Def Poetry Jam on Broadway]. So, this is a legitimate voice. And I think that, we need to, in another clich, accentuate the positive. But that's to say, I'm more worried for example about [Robert S.] R. Kelly, who is a predator and a child molester than I worry about some rapper who is using female as a metaphor. And I don't know how else to say that. And I think that it's easy to be a little frustrated with the guys because we always wish that everybody would pick up the banner where we dropped it. But everybody has to pick up the banner where they stand. Speaker 1: So, I'm going to put it in the terms of a metaphor I guess that does something different to what you're hearing. Story_ID: 7694 Speaker 1: What do you think you will be remembered for? Speaker 2: I don't know you know Larry King just wrote to me, which is--I did Larry King's show a long time ago. But he wrote to me and he cast a wide net on this and he's doing a book on eulogies, how would you like to be remembered. So, I had the letter from Larry and I actually I let it sit on my desk for a little over a week. And I decided that I didn't want to write my eulogy. I don't want to summarize my life, and it's not my job how I will be remembered. It's my job to do the work and if I do the work I will be. And so I declined to participate in something I'd probably be sorry that I didn't because it'll be a big book and everybody will say, "How come you're not in it?" And I'll be saying, "Well, I didn't want to summarize my life," but, I don't want to ever go to that place because I'm a fan of gospel music, "Don't let him catch you with your work undone." So, I just want to do my work and I want to do it as well as I can. You know, and then [the prophet] Isaiah, "Let the work of my hands be pleasing in thy sight." And I mean this is how I grew up. I regret that a really wonderful religion has gotten taken over by Nazis and the right- wing and I really hate them and I'll be glad when God smites them or something because I'm really sick of them because you can't enjoy a wonderful book like the Bible because these fools are running around and hypocrites and, you know--they're all against abortion because they love children but they're for capital punishment because once the children get grown they want to kill them. You know [U.S. President] George [W.] Bush is a big Christian and let's give some money to the churches to do something. But on the other hand I want to bomb the crap out of you know Saddam [Hussein]. You know you get sick of all of that because at some point there has to be a consistency in our, in our lives that we have to really walk that walk. And this is supposed to be the home of the brave and the land of the free. We in the civil rights community was a--you know we always agreed with that home of the brave black people and free white people. And it's time, you know, for somebody else to step up, you see what I'm saying? So, you see that's a long way to say I'm just not going to summarize myself. I'm only sixty years old. I hope that I have more to contribute but, I don't think that it's my job and I'd disadvantage my work by making that choice of what I think is significant. Speaker 1: Then it answers--actually consistent with your consistency in staying contemporary and building on what you've done. Story_ID: 7695 Speaker 1: It's fun though, I like to be alive, I think it's a--Langston [Hughes, poet/author] wrote that wonderful poem 'Theme for English B'. And he--and my favorite line and it's a simple line is, "I'd like a pipe for Christmas/or a record by Bessie [Smith]--the blues/I like being in love." And I just like the way he put that together. But see, I like being alive, I think it's such a good idea. And I think that everybody should. I think that the most important part of the [U.S.] Constitution and I think the Constitution is a good document despite the founding fathers being assholes, if I may. The most important part is, "--and the pursuit of happiness." And if you think about the future of planet earth, it's going to be so important that human beings learn to be content. That we learn to be happy. I know we've got to stop the crazy greed that we've got. I know we've got to stop old-fashioned out of date things like prisons. I know that a lot of things just aren't working. We have to move into the twenty-first century. I'm a fan of the Mars probe. I know we have to go to Mars, because we know that Mars cannot come here because we're crazy and if Mars comes here we'll kill it, because that's our response to anything that we don't understand. It's very important that earth get out of this sense of what they call the cosmic loneliness because it's illogical and it's time for us to move forward into the 21st century. Send the probe to Mars. Spend the money--we got to go to Mars. Somebody said well maybe there's no life there. But if we go there will be life. It's so important to do something else. This is not the fifteenth century. We are not gonna go killing whales and cutting people heads off. All of that is finished, let us move forward. Let's send black kids to school. Let's let girls play sport. You know let's open up--let's get rid of these borders. Let's open up this society. Let's quit fighting with Mexicans making three dollars a day, we bring them here we want them to be grateful because we're offering them five. That's got to stop. That's got to stop so that somebody can have, what, five hundred million dollars so that they can then play with everybody else's life. We have to tax them. If there's going to be a floor on poverty, there's going to have to be a ceiling on wealth. And everybody's mad about that but we're going to have to put that ceiling there. We have to do it because what do you need, what do you need with three or four hundred million dollars? It doesn't make sense. And some may say, "Well Nikki it's not for you to decide," but maybe one day it will be. I'm just a mid-level author; nobody pays any attention to me. Story_ID: 7696 Speaker 1: Let me ask you. Can you do 'Choices' for me? Speaker 2: I don't, I can't, I mean I know what the poem is and I really like it but I don't--I could probably--and I don't even do that. I've read 'Ego Tripping' for so long. I could probably do most of 'Ego Tripping' but then you still drop a line. But 'Choices' is all about accepting choices and accepting responsibilities and I love the poem. I really do, but I don't dare to recite it. (Laughs) Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything I didn't ask you that I should have? That you would like to leave on this tape? Speaker 2: No, I want to thank you for allowing that the, the consistency I have striven for is maybe there. You know Bob Townsend? Robert Townsend, the film director. He's such a cute little kid--about five years ago they asked a number of Hollywood [California, ref. to film industry] young men, you know Townsend, Eddie Murphy and them. "If you could only have one person on a desert island who would you chose." And you know people were choosing the beautiful and you know, the young. Robert Townsend said, "Nikki Giovanni." And I was so touched. And you know he said you know, "She's had an amazing consistency," and he said, "and I know that if we were on an island I would not tire of talking with her." I just thought for a young man that was serious props. I mean I was so touched by that. And I'm so in love with black people. It's such a fascinating history and we're just beginning. You know I mean it's like you've got a toothbrush and you there you know near the Congo River just pushing things back looking for a bone that's going to be the link between the humanoids and the humans. You know it's out there. This history is so important and so the more you know the more you're able to keep putting the pieces together. You know if you look at 'Quilting the Black-Eyed Pea' and that's all I'm--I love it so much. And so I've enjoyed my career. I'm enjoying my career and I continue to. And I've never wanted more for the people than the people wanted for themselves so I was never burned out. And I know a lot of people my age who have gone through the same things and they're disillusioned--the people--and they say the people let us down. But the people didn't lead us down. We wanted something that the people weren't ready to do. You have to learn to listen to the people. And I have a lot of respect for the people so that's why I responded to you the way I did to you with rap. I'm always comfortable with the choices that they're making and I'm trying my job as an intellectual if I can use that kind of term in this kind of thing. Is to say if this is what the people are doing than what's right about it? How is this working? There are gonna to be things I come up with no matter how, it's not a good idea. Drugs are a not a good idea but I know how it works because I had a cancer. And I know without drugs my body could not have tolerated the pain. The only difference between me and somebody in the, what was formerly the Cabrini Green [Homes Chicago, Illinois] is that everybody thinks that I should have drugs for my pain. And nobody thinks that they should have drugs for their pain. So, I know these things, you see what I'm saying? And I know that without drugs the pain becomes intolerable. So I'm not going to try to justify and say that drugs are a good idea because I think that we can relieve the pain. But I'm not going to condemn the people who have found a way that they can get through. In the words of Kris Kristofferson, "The night/it's not right." That's why Marvin Gaye's thing was so wonderful, 'What's Going On' "I go to the place where good feeling awaits me." This is a feeling of a Vietnam [War] veteran. 'What's Going On' is a great, great album always was. And poor Marvin, you know poor Marvin. The price he paid to produce things like that and nonetheless we learn from that that everybody's pain has to be alleviated. So, if we don't like it we don't like what they're doing we have to find something else. You see what I'm saying? And that's all you're trying, that's all I'm trying to do figure it out and not just need you to knee-jerk condemn it. But to try to figure out well what's--why would people do this because life is logical. It has to be. Life is like--God is just and life is logical and if you go from that premise, knowledge is going to flow into you from another level. It's going to free you because God is not punishing us and that which is illogical cannot, cannot exist. It just helps you learn differently. Story_ID: 7697 Speaker 1: I think that the HistoryMakers and the oral histories that you're putting together here and of course I'm a Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] graduate and Ann Shockley was our librarian who worked on that and of course the Schomberg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] has one. I think you're out-stripping everybody. I had the great pleasure of being at the new Margaret Walker [Alexander Research] Center [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi] and they're, they're, they're really futuristic. I mean they're right there in space with what they're doing and the temperature control and things like that. So I'm really pleased. I'm not a big fan of the libraries in Timbuktu [Mali] and I'm even a bigger fan like the libraries in Alexandria [Egypt]. Because as an Egyptian people, the DNA experiment that we've been doing in America show there's six strands of DNA, right? And they all reside in Africa so we're all black people. We know that the achievements of the Egyptians were great achievements. We know that they discovered first acetylsalicylic acid, which we now know to be aspirin as a painkiller, speaking of painkillers. But we also know that they mummified, which we've lost because the priesthood had that knowledge and they didn't share it. It resided in the libraries and when the Romans sacked the libraries it was gone. We know that they had knowledge of the heavens because the Century Star falls into the Great Pyramid of Giza [Cairo, Egypt]. And that could not have been an accident. I'm not a fan of accidents. So, we know that they had knowledge of the heavens that were wonderful. But we know that again this knowledge was not shared. All traditions remind us that we are our libraries and somebody can shoot me and somebody can shoot you and somebody can bomb Chicago [Illinois] or New York [New York] or whatever and we're going to still tell the story. We will continue to tell the story. And it was again the decision of those Africans in 1619 as they are stepping off that Dutch man-of-war going into Georgetown, which I always remind everybody was the second Georgetown settlement--I mean Jamestown [Virginia] excuse me, was the second Jamestown settlement because the first Jamestown settlement was lost. And it was lost because they didn't have any black people to tell them what to do. And whatever this country was going to be they knew they needed black people and they went and got them. And I'm tellin' you the truth. But they made a decision, those black people, that they would keep the story alive, they would tell it. So, you know in 1621, when the first child was born--and it was gonna be a girl. It had to be a girl because any system. It was never a question of which comes first the chicken or the egg. It had to be chicken. Because egg is a 50 percent chance rooster and you get good music but it's going to stop, it had to be. So, you get you know that that mother whispered to that child, "It's going to be a better day," because life was hard. I don't know about your mother I know about mine [Yolande Cornelia Watson]. It's going to be a better day. My grandmother, my great-grandmother, it's going to be a better day. And that's all these things do they keep reminding us. You lost here in Chicago but the world lost a great woman when Mamie Till Mobley [Emmett Till's mother] died. And she said, "I want the world to see what I see. I want the world to see what they did to my boy." So she lost her son in the most horrible way you could think of and her last thought to Emmett as she was laying him in the ground had to be and she's kept it alive for these last forty-seven years. It's going to be a better day and that's what she worked for that's who we answer to. Story_ID: 7698 Speaker 1: Major funding for the following program provided by, McDonald's Corporation. Additional funding provided by the Coca-Cola Company, Bank of America, Georgia Power, Turner Broadcasting Systems Incorporated, UPS. Story_ID: 7699 Speaker 1: She was born in Tennessee, raised in Ohio. And her career has transcended generations. Poet extraordinaire, spoken word artist, author, teacher and activist. Her name, Nikki Giovanni. And The HistoryMakers, the nation's largest African American video oral history archive is proud to present 'An Evening with Nikki Giovanni'. And now, to our host, novelist and playwright, Ms. Pearl Cleage. Story_ID: 7700 Speaker 1: Nikki Giovanni's earliest memory of me is as a young child in need of a babysitter. I used to try to tell her that this couldn't be true because she's only my senior by a few years. But she insisted, and after a while, I realized that our actual ages are completely beside the point. It's the spirit of our first meeting that's important. What she remembers is that when she first encountered me at my father's church on the West Side of Detroit, Michigan, I seemed to her so full of youthful innocence and naivet that I was in need of a good babysitter. (audience laughter) What I remember about her is that she was a girl poet from Cincinnati [Ohio], outspoken, unapologetically female in a sea of macho males who pulled up for her reading in a beat-up little car, with her books in the trunk, a perfect Afro adorning her head, and a grin on her face that said, "This was the best possible way to live your life if you were a woman in love with the careful arrangement of words on paper." And she was right. Ladies and gentlemen, brothers and sisters, the words of Nikki Giovanni. Speaker 2: ['Ego Tripping (there may be a reason why)', performed by: Andrea Mills; Adriana Santiago; Charlotte Cain]: "I was born in the Congo. I walked to the fertile crescent and built the Sphinx I designed a pyramid so tough that a star that only glows every one hundred years falls into the center giving divine perfect light. I am bad. I sat on the throne drinking nectar with Allah. I got hot and sent an ice age to Europe to cool my thirst. My oldest daughter is Nefertiti. The tears from my birth pains created the Nile. I am a beautiful woman. I gazed on the forest and burned out the Sahara desert with a packet of goat's meat and a change of clothes. I crossed it in two hours. I am a gazelle so swift, so swift you can't catch me. For his birthday present when he was three, I gave my son Hannibal an elephant. He gave me Rome for Mother's Day. My strength flows ever on. My son Noah built new/ark and I stood proudly at the helm as we sailed on a soft summer day. I turned myself into myself and was Jesus; men intone my loving name. All praises, all praises I am the one who would save. I sowed diamonds in my backyard. My bowels deliver uranium. The fillings from my fingernails are semi-precious jewels. On a trip north I caught a cold and blew my nose giving oil to the Arab world. I am so hip even my errors are correct. I sailed west to reach east and had to round off the earth as I went. The hair from my head thinned and gold was laid across three continents. I am so perfect, so divine, so ethereal, so surreal I cannot be comprehended, except by my permission." Speaker 1: [MUSIC CLIP]: Speaker 2: I mean, I can fly like a bird in the sky. (voice echoes) Speaker 1: Please, welcome Nikki Giovanni. (audience applause) Story_ID: 7701 Speaker 1: We have been so excited about doing this. We've known each other for such a long time. So we've kind of had a good time getting ready for this moment when we invite you all into the conversation. Speaker 2: I cried when I first saw that. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: But I want to say something before you, you go on. See, Pearl always says I didn't babysit her because I'm not that much older than she is. But what she forgets is that the difference between twenty and, and twelve is--it changes when you are twenty and twenty-eight, right. And when you get to be forty and forty-eight, right, it gets erased. You are actually now older than I am because (audience laughter)--right, because she's a grandmother, and I'm not, and (audience laughter and applause) grandmothers--so I did babysit her. I don't want you to think I was coward 'cause I wasn't a coward. But Rev. [Albert B.] Cleage [Jr.] would always--look he didn't want to carry--he didn't want Pearl and her sister home alone. And so he would say, "Who would keep my children?" Well, quite naturally, I could go out into the street and get my head beat, right, or I could babysit and be doing revolutionary duty. This was a no-brainer. (audience laughter) Speaker 1: So this is the babysitter of my dreams. (laughs) Story_ID: 7702 Speaker 1: You've been written hundreds of poems, and many of us have been moved by them for years. This one, that our beautiful sisters started us off with is one that continues to be one of your more popular ones. What audience did you have in mind when you wrote that poem, and why do you think people still respond to it so enthusiastically? Speaker 2: Well, I grew up with a--and we all did actually, with a poem called 'Shine' [by Etheridge Knight, 1973], and 'Shine' is about the fact that the Titanic went down--there were no black people right. But it's a male--for those of you who know 'Shine', it's--and I could not begin to respond to--you know (unclear)--but it's a dirty poem, but it's, you know, "Shine, Shine, save poor me, and I'll--", you know, whatever. (audience laughter) And Shine swam on, right. But the men always had a way of--to say who they were. And you tired of the little girls always doing the "Little Johnnie Walker sat in the saucer", and they're always, you know, looking to the East and West for someone to love them. I thought you know, "Crap," (audience laughter), you know, little girl, no, you know, little girls need one--And so I wanted to write one of those 'hmm-hmm' poems for little girls. And the rule in, in writing is start at the beginning. And so I'm driving down to, to Livingston [College at Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey] campus, and I'm driving, and it's just like, "Whoa, wait. I was born in the Congo." Once you get your first line, right. And it, it just--your story--I just made everybody, as you can see, I just everybody a black woman, right. So I got Christopher Columbus 'cause the one who sailed, west to east--east, right? He's gonna have to round--but the black woman is everything. And I just wanted to do that so the little girls could do it. Well, I volunteer a lot in daycare centers and stuff. And maybe five years after I'd written the poem [1978], and the poem--people were listening to it, and I'm delighted. But again, you don't have a sense of it. But I was at a daycare center, and they said, you know, "We want to perform for you." And so I'm like, "That's cool, you know," 'cause that's--the first time you hear somebody call you, "Miss Giovanni," you feel old. But they were little kids. And a little boy got up, and he--"I was born in the Congo," and I, I looked--'cause I never thought of boys liking that poem. And so the surprise and, and the delight. I knew I had a good poem, once it was finished, but to know that I had a poem that inclusive was wonderful. And I think that's what's made it live, that it is an inclusive--it did not exclude anybody, 'cause I think everybody's a black woman anyway (laughs), I do. Story_ID: 7703 Speaker 1: I want to talk a little bit about your family. You were born Yolande Cornelia Giovanni, Jr. in Knoxville, Tennessee, and you're named after your mother. Who named you Nikki? Speaker 2: My sister did. But that's, that's a part of the myth that we will never know because Gary's only three years--her name is Gary, Little Gary Ann, but we, you know, we dropped that when we moved North (audience laughter). But, certainly in the South, that you people got two names for everything. (laughs) But, and that's true. But Gary started calling me Nikki. My aunt Agnes says that it's because they had a friend who used to kiss babies and say, "Give me a little nicky," and she would kiss them on the neck, right. And that Gary misheard and thought that that was me. But we--Gary was only three so we don't know. But it's a cool name, so I've kept it. (audience laughter) It works, you know, the name. Speaker 1: You didn't stay in Knoxville very long. Your family moved North, and you grew up in the Cincinnati area. Tell me a little bit about your parents, about how you all got to Ohio and what it was like growing up in Cincinnati? Speaker 2: We were actually a part of the Great Migration. But if you would have asked me that ten years ago, I wouldn't have said it like that. But my dad's [Jones "Gus" Giovanni] family from right outside of Mobile, Alabama. His mama's name--his mother's name was Mattie. And Mattie Jones moved the kids to Cincinnati. Gus had a job working with juveniles, in fact, and ultimately, my mother has a job teaching school. Speaker 1: What do you remember most about growing up in Cincinnati? Speaker 2: I grew up in Woodlawn. And we had an outhouse, and I've always loved outhouses, and I am, I'm not (audience laughter)--that's true, that's true. I'm not a person who wishes she was rich. I mean you got to put bread on the table and you got to have a car--my car is seventeen years old. So things like that don't bother me. But if I would ever be rich, even yet, what I would do is I would build a round house because it makes sense. And I would put all of my windows on the inside, right, and I would have a courtyard. And the reason that I would do that is that rich people make you crazy because you end up being jealous because they have these big homes, and so people come and they kill you, right, or they rob your home. And then you have to hire people them (audience laughter). I mean it gets so ugly when all you have to do is build a house and put it on the inside, right. And I would, I would do that (laughs). Speaker 1: (Laughs) I like that. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, it's something, you know, it just stops them out of confusion (audience laughter). But I would, I would build my kitchen, of course, away--because, you know, you shouldn't have to smell your chitterlings, you shouldn't have to smell your--you know, what you cooking, right. But I would also build an outhouse because it only makes sense. And I would build, you know, I'd have my bidet, I would have my bath, you know, I'd have my, my sauna. I'd have, of course, my refrigerator chilling my champagne and my chardonnay, right. And I would have all that, and this is an outhouse, 'Architectural Digest' would call me--no question, no question. (audience applause) Speaker 1: (Laughter) We're gonna be looking for that house. Speaker 2: Yes, no, you know what I'm saying. No, Oprah would be on the phone, you know, "Girl, what you got? You know, I want that." I'd be selling--'cause Oprah's rich, I'd be selling her my plans for a lot of money (audience laughter). That's the truth. My memory of the outhouse is of the fact that my mother had flowers. It was a traditional outhouse, right. And she had magazines in there. And what I liked about it, was that if you went to the outhouse, nobody knocked on the door. Our next house, that was in Woodlawn, we lived on Foucher Street, our next home had a regular, regular situation. And there was always somebody wanting to come into the toilet and so it was like, you know, "Aren't you finished, get out of there." And, and so I'm, I'm having memories that I know don't make sense in a way. And, and I know that other people could look at it and say, "You couldn't have been happy." But I was. Story_ID: 7704 Speaker 1: It's often true, I think, that there is one person in the family who gets it, who understands that this child is a little different, but she's a writer. And it's my understanding that your grandmother [Emma Louvenia Terrell Watson] was that person in your family for you. Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, can we talk a little bit about your grandmother? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And we got tissue, so you can cry all you want to, it's okay. (laughs) Speaker 2: No, you know, I, I still remember grandmother's phone number. It's 3-1593. Yeah, yeah. I just don't--I don't know where we'd be without, without the grandmothers, period, not just mine. One of the--you know, you're not that much younger, but you'd look at civil rights just a smidgeon different. But one of the things that definitely happened with people my age, is that we, we had choices. We could tell our grandmothers, "We can't do it," or "We could change the world." It was way easier to change the world (audience laughter). It was, it was. No, I remember, no, girl I remember--and I never did like to picket, you know, I mean some people got really high off of picketing. All of that stuff scared the crap out of me. But how was I gonna tell grandmother I couldn't go and picket--actually Rich's [department store] one of the first time I picketed--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And she volunteered you for the demonstration. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, she did. They went to--well, there was a--but they, they went--the day that the kids were bombed in Birmingham [Alabama], right. And that was a Sunday. And grandmother was one of those, you know, 'cause she would do that. And it was very annoying. I loved her, but that was annoying. And she would say, you know, "Stay home, get off the phone. Do not stand in front of the window." And it's because in a way, the Birmingham bombing was war. And all of the old women--that's when adults were adults--all of the old women and men went to churches all over Knoxville, this happened in Knoxville, Tennessee, and they were trying to decide what to do. And they decided to picket. And, of course, they were--Rev. [Robert E.] James, Mount Zion Baptist Church was looking for volunteers. And grandmother was the first to stand up, right. And when she came in the house--grandmother had one of those looks, you know, (unclear) and when she came home I was sitting there waiting to see what, what was going on. And she said, "Nikki," and I thought, "Unh-unh" (audience laughter). I recognized the tone. She said, "Nikki, we decided we're gonna picket--," And I said, "Yes, grandmother," 'cause that the answer then. She said, "--and they called for volunteers." And I saw (audience laughter), "Yes, grandmother." She said, "--and I told them, John Brown [Watson] and I--," 'cause that's my grandfather--"John Brown and I were too old, but my granddaughter was here." (audience laughter) "And we're gonna--she, she's gonna be there." She said, "Now, you go on to bed because get up in the morning, and I'll give you breakfast, and you'll go on up. And grandpapa--John Brown and I will take a, a cab, and we'll come up and watch you later." I said, "Yeah, later, I'll be dead, grandmother." But she did and I did that. Who wants to go picket? Nobody did, but how was I gonna tell her, "Well, actually, you made a mistake." I did mention, "I said, does mommy [Yolande Cornelia Watson Giovanni] know you're trying to get me killed?" (audience laughter) But she gave me a hug and thought I was kidding (laughs). Speaker 1: Was that your first, was that your first demonstration? Was that your first experience with absolutely confronting racism in a direct way? Speaker 2: No, that was my first picketing, you know, because we--I grew up at that, at that age. People had begun picketing. We picketed even Cincinnati (Ohio) against some of the things in the South. See, my sister integrated Wyoming High School. And what we remember about Wyoming High School in that, is that Gary [Ann Giovanni] was there in Wyoming High School when Emmett Till was killed. And when Emmett Till was killed, Gary and everybody was upset, but there were only three black kids, Jimmy, Beverly and Gary are the only three black kids, right. And so they wanted the sociology--they were in sociology class, and they wanted them to say something about him. And the sociology teacher said, "He got what he deserved," right. So they walked out, right. And so Gus [father, Jones 'Gus' Giovanni] went to, no, he went up to the school board, and he said, you know, "I want Brad Barry (ph.) fired." And so what they decided to do, they had to work out a compromise, "Could he apologize?" And they accepted that. But you get scarred by things like that. And so he and mommy in talking things over, just decided they had given a child to integration--sent me to grandmother, thinking I would be safe, never realizing that one, there was no safety. I mean I--if there's one thing my grandmother did for me, I know that there's no safety. I mean even now, I, I fly in planes and, and you have to take off your shoes and open your mouth and do all them crazy they ask you do, (laughter) say "Do you have a bomb or something?" But the United States has a hell of a nerve to want to be safe when we're bombing people--by what right? By what right are you saying--. (audience applause) Speaker 1: Amen. Amen. Story_ID: 7705 Speaker 1: Your, your grandmother was such an important part of your life, and when she made her transition, you wrote a beautiful poem called 'Lady of Pleasure' about your love for her and about your loss, and we're gonna ask our, your young sisters over here if they'll say that poem for us. Speaker 2: [Musical selection performed by Faye Raye] Speaker 1: [Poem performed by Andrea Mills] "Some small island birthed her and a big, probably white ship took her from mother to come to America's recreation. She lives in the top of my building. I only know her through her eyes. She is old now not only from years, but from aging. One gets the impression she was most beautiful and like good wine or a semiprecious jewel touted out for the pleasure of those who could afford her recreation. Her head is always high though the set of her mouth shows it's not easy. She asks nothing seems to have something to give but no one to give it to if ever she gave it to anyone. Age requires happy memories like Louvenia smiled when she died and though her doctor had told her not to there was pork cooking on the stove. There are so many new mistakes for a lady of pleasure that can be made it shouldn't be necessary to repeat the old ones. And it was cold on the elevator that morning. When I spoke to her and foolishly asked, How are you. She smiled and tilted her head at least, I said, the sun is shining, and her eyes smiled yes. And I was glad to be there to say through spirits, there is a new creation to her." Speaker 2: [Musical selection continued]. (audience applause) Story_ID: 7706 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. You enrolled at Fisk University twice. The first time you were expelled after a run-in with the conservative Dean of Women [Ann Cheatham]. Your grandmother [Emma Louvenia Terrell Watson] was very much in your corner, but Fisk really didn't care about anybody being in your corner, and they asked to you leave. The second time things had changed when you came back. And you were welcomed back. They expunged your record of being a troublemaker, and you started taking writing workshops with John O. [Oliver] Killens and reestablished a chapter of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] on the campus so that your second experience at Fisk was very different. Can you talk a little bit about Fisk, about that, that first time there and what really greeted you when you got there the first time? Speaker 2: Well, I was an early entrant, first of all, and--and I think it's a good program. I still think it's a good program. I also have to say in honesty and all fairness, and I have said before, "See, Fisk was right. I was wrong," and, and I was running roughshod over a lot of people. And the Dean of Women was wrong to kick me out, but I was wrong to push her. And so you had to learn something, no, you have to learn. And so I could sit here and say, "You know, I was right," but I wasn't. And she kicked me out. I saw Dean Cheatham, as a matter of fact. I was in the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] recently. And a woman came up to me. She said, "You don't know who I am, do you?" And I try to usually be nice about it, but something said, "No, I don't." (audience laughter) And I did. And she said, "I'm Ann Cheatham," and I said, "Hey, you know, how you doing?" Because I didn't--she was right. And I wanted to say that, "Ann, you were right." And, and was I upset about it? Yeah, but it was time for me to lose at something because if I never lost, then I would never have an appreciation for what I won. And I got kicked out of school, but I did get to travel--Civil Rights Movement was going on, I mean I got a lot of good things. But I also realized, you know, I don't look like Halle Berry, you know what I'm saying. I'm not drop-dead gorgeous. I, I, I'm not, you know, Serena or Venus Williams, I can't play anything. I--you know, if I'm gonna live, it's gonna come from--all of my strengths are here up, right. It's, it's all in my head. So I'm--that means I have to go back to school. Could I have enrolled at the University of Cincinnati [Cincinnati, Ohio] or something? Sure, but if I'm having a failure at Fisk, then I need to go back to Fisk. So I borrowed a friend's car, and drove down and wanted to meet the Dean of Women 'cause I figured if I couldn't get along with the dean, I'm not gonna make it the second time (audience laughter), so that's gonna be a waste. And we talked, and she said, you know, she pulled my record. She said, "My God, girl, what did you do?" Because the record is like that, right. And I'd only been school for--I said, "You know, I wasn't really good at taking a lot of stuff. I think I had a lot of anger, and if you think I'm bad now--." (laughs) Well, no, there was a lot of things happening that make you unhappy. And I had to work through a lot of things. And I'm very patient, and a lot of people weren't. And Dean Cheatham and I had different visions of what a lady is and what a woman should do. And I'll say again, I, I was just lucky because I really love Jackie [Blanche McConnell Cowan]. I, I totally adored her because she said, "Okay, what do you need?" And I said, "Actually, I think I need an apartment," which was a no-no. For any of you Fiskites in the room, you know, you didn't do that. And I'm grown, I mean I need an apartment. She said, "Well, you can have an apartment if you don't tell anybody that you do." I said, "Oh, I keep secrets (audience laughter). I can handle that." And I did because I'm too old to live with the dorm girls and that, and that foolishness. So I didn't say that I did, and nobody else said that I did, and that worked. And what I wanted to do was, was, was actually, you know, made Dean's List and live happily ever after. And we did that. I think Fisk was an excellent experience. Their sons and daughters ever on the altar, and Fisk University is an important, important, important institution, and it must be--(audience applause) yeah, it is, it is. Story_ID: 7707 Speaker 1: Did you know that you were a writer at that time when you were at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Pearl [Cleage], as long as you--I still don't. I, no, I'm sitting down, I'm working on a new book on--it's called 'Acolytes'. And everyday that I sit to work, I think, "Am I gonna get through?" I haven't taken anything--and I don't know why that one, that's, that's not one that I can answer. But I don't take anything for granted. And I think, I think I go at full tilt because I never know what's gonna happen next. You--tomorrow is not given. Speaker 1: How important was, was John A.--John O. [Oliver] Killens workshop to you in, at that, at that moment? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Sharp. John Killens had the first Black Arts Festival at Fisk. And we had LeRoi Jones [later Amiri Baraka]. He was--LeRoi Jones then and Bob Hayden. It was wonderful. 'Negro Digest' sent David Lawrence down. And David was a good friend. David was a wonderful man, right. And David asked everybody to write something, right. And so all of the--John's workshop got to write something. And we all sent it in, but mine got lost. So the 'Negro Digest' came out, and they couldn't find it. And, you know, I--you try not to be upset because I figured, "Nobody deliberately--," right. David finally realized I wasn't there, and so he called, Jubilee Hall, I was at (unclear). He called, and said, "You know, we lost your piece." And I said, "Yes, you did." He said, "Well, you didn't call and complain." I said, "Well, David, I figured, you know, it wasn't personal; you lost it." He said, "Well, if you'll write something else, I'll see to it that it gets in." So I said, "Thank you." It turns out to be great because instead of being one of ten people, I now have my own byline. That was my first experience in publishing. And it was just very lucky that something like that happened, and it was lucky that I didn't complain because if I had said to David, "What are you doing--?," I'm just gonna make him angry, and then he didn't mean it. Speaker 1: Did you, did you find that interaction with all those writers that came for that festival, did that help you at all, did that push you in any direction or another to have LeRoi Jones and all of the folks who came there to be at the festival interacting with you? Speaker 2: You know, we just screamed when Roy [LeRoi] walked into the room, you know, I mean, because you know, that's when he's in 'Up Against the Wall', you know. Melvin B. Tolson was there. And Melvin Tolson is probably the underrated, great writer in America. And Tolson has that wonderful line, "When the skins are dried, the flies will go home." And it always stayed with me. It's libretto for Liberia. And it always stayed with me, so I learned a lot. Of course, Gwen [Gwendolyn] Brooks came down, I knew Gwen, you know. And, and we Dudley Randall. And Dudley solicited, though I did not participate in that--solicited for Malcolm X, and I did not know Malcolm. I didn't have the opportunity. I do know, I did know Betty [Shabazz, formerly Betty Jean Sanders], and Betty is, of course, my sorority sister. But I never had an opportunity, so I didn't want to write at that point about Malcolm because everybody had remembrances, and I, I didn't know him. So I did not--but I, I did get to meet Dudley. So it was wonderful, I mean it was--those were good years. Speaker 1: And then you, you worked with Dudley Randall at Broadside Press. They actually distributed your second book ['Black Judgement', 1968]. Speaker 2: They did. Speaker 1: Was that helpful to have a publisher after doing everything independently because I do have such a great memory of you and some of the other writers who came around that time to Detroit [Michigan] with your books in the trunks of these little cars; seemed like everybody had a little broken up Volkswagen, but having a publisher would actually would help in distribution, did that make a difference in terms of getting your work in the hands of people? Speaker 2: Yeah, it did. I'm so very proud of the self-publishing industry 'cause I think that I had a lot to do with helping people see that you don't have to wait on other people to come to you, you can, you can do it. And, of course, it--you, you know you have to give so much credit to a young woman named Zane, 'cause Zane is brilliant young writer. E. Lynn Harris is a brilliant young writer. He did the same thing. What we were doing is publishing ourselves. What we needed, and what I, I thought, because I--and on that level you have to put your business hat on--we needed a central distribution place, right. So if I would publish the book, I could control the paper, the quality of the ink, the color, I could control everything. I could get it to Dudley, right, and then Dudley could distribute it. Now, this means one thing, and boys and girls, what does this mean? Nikki doesn't make any money, right, 'cause there's no way to make any money if you do that, because if you're gonna make money, then your book is selling for more than anybody else's--what they're selling for, and that's not gonna work, right. So I decided to go for the length, right. I just said, "Okay, I'm just gonna, I'm gonna get the book out there, and I'll worry about the money at some other time." Speaker 1: And how much were the selling for? Speaker 2: A dollar. Speaker 1: That's what I was gonna say, I have it 'cause the little dollar is up in the corner. A lot of those books costs a dollar, yeah. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) But a dollar as a lot of money. A dollar was a lot of money. Story_ID: 7708 Speaker 1: I was at, at Columbia [University, New York, New York]. And I was, I had been in social work school [University of Pennsylvania School of Social Work, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was like not gonna happen. (audience laughter) It wasn't. I, I was very fortunate in my, my later deans, because Dean Louise Shoemaker took me out to lunch one day. She said, "Nikki, you know, we, we, we need to go to lunch." And it's like okay, and I'm happy 'cause I'm doing good papers. And she said, "You know, we, we love reading your reports--we love everything." She said, "But you know, you're not gonna be a social worker." (audience laughter) And I said, I--I did, I was about to get fired. I said, "I, I fear you may be right." She said, "You know, you don't report." I, I had a group--for those of you who are soc-, I had a group. And one of my girls got pregnant. My supervisor says to me, "You didn't write up, what's-her-name was pregnant." And I said, "But she's not pregnant." She said, "Well, she was." I said, "But, she's not. And if I write it up, when she runs for governor of Delaware, somebody will dig it up, right." And he said, "Well, your, your loyalty is to the agency." I said, "No, my loyalty is to the girl had a eraser on her pencil." And so I knew I was gonna get fired. Louise knew I was gonna get fired. And you also have to know I didn't have any money, right. And so Louise said to me, she said, "I, I did something I probably shouldn't have done." And I said--she said, "I sent your writings up to Columbia." She said, "I have a friend at Columbia, and I sent them up to Columbia for the MFA program." I said, "Oh, Louise, I--thank you, but I, I can afford the MFA program." She said, "Well, I thought that, and so I took the liberty of applying for a scholarship for you." (audience laughter) Speaker 2: I'm very glad they told you not to be a social worker because we all, I think are grateful that you're writing. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, it's fun. Story_ID: 7709 Speaker 1: This time that we're, that we're talking about was definitely a time of political upheaval and introspection for us as black people and unrest. And some I think would say that this was actually a time of black judgment, and we're gonna let the girls kind of give us another poem. Speaker 2: ['Nikki-Rosa' performed by Adriana Santiago]: "Childhood remembrances are always a drag I you're black. You always remember things like living in Woodlawn with no inside toilet and if you become famous or something they never talk about how happy you were to have your mother all to yourself and how good the water felt when you got your bath from one of those big tubs that folk in Chicago barbecue in. And somehow when you talk about home it never gets across how much you understood their feelings as the whole family attended meetings about Hollydale, and even though you remember your biographers never understand your father's pain as he sells his stock and another dream goes. And though you're poor, it isn't poverty that concerns you; And though they fought a lot, it isn't your father's drinking that makes any difference, but only that everybody is together and you and your sister have happy birthdays and very good Christmasses. I really hope no white person ever has cause to write about me because they never understand black love is black wealth and they'll and they'll probably talk about my hard childhood and never understand that all the while I was quite happy." [DRUM MUSIC] Speaker 1: ['Our Detroit Conference' performed by Charlotte Della Cain]: "We went there to confer on the possibility of Blackness and the inevitability of Revolution. We talked about black leaders and black love. We talked about women and black men. No doubt many important Resolutions were passed as we climbed Malcolm's ladder. But the most valid of them all was that Rap chose me." (audience applause) Story_ID: 7710 Speaker 1: Did you ever see a conflict or feel a conflict in your own life between being a writer, being an artist and being the radical revolutionary force that you were? Did they work together or did you see them as in conflict ever in your work? Speaker 2: Well, I just always thought that this was my contribution. And a lot of things, I mean to see [H.] Rap [Brown, later Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin], really bother--I mean it touches me probably more than anything because, see, he, he should not be in jail. He should be teaching classes some place (audience applause) too. No, he's, he's a great man, and history will, will bear that out, and, and that's a great loss, that he's sitting there rotting like that. But--. Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about him at that conference [Detroit Conference on Unity and Art, 1967]. So many young people really don't know much about Rap Brown. They didn't see him (unclear)--talk a little bit about that. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Rap Brown is the, is the reason that we talk about rapping because he rapped. And he would do that thing with (laughter) his--you know, and "This young brother," you know, he would do that 'cause he was from Alabama, he got that brogue. And, of course, he's very charismatic, and Rap didn't back off with anything. Rap did not know compromise, and, and you really did wish that somehow in talking to them, you wish that you could have tempered it somehow. It just never did. I mean they, they shot Rap, I mean, you remember that, and it was--they were gonna kill him, you know, do what they did and gonna lie and put him in jail. And, and, and it, it's, it's a loss because Rap is, is one of the best thinkers of his generation. And that's, that's, that's reality. So you just, you--you're very sorry that we're--and I'm, I'm sorry about prison, period. It just, it's a bad idea getting worse. It was a bad idea when it was a new idea. It's a worse idea now that it's an old one. And I hate that we are privatizing prisons, therefore, guaranteeing that we're gonna put people in prison. And we're doing a really vicious thing with the middle class, which again, my generation, since we all went to jail--everybody went to jail. But now the middle class is like, "I didn't go to jail," and so they don't want to be bothered with the brothers and the sisters who are in jail. And that's a shame (audience applause) because the people are in jail, because, you know, you happen to be there. And that's not to say that you want to just pick up your, you know, next door neighbor, you know, who is a murderer or rapist or something. I'm not trying to say that. But I am saying those people need to vote. We--prisoners need vote. They, they need, they need all of the rights and responsibilities of citizenship so that they can rejoin us. It's, it's so important that rethink. It's so important that the black middle class quit being afraid of being black (audience applause). Speaker 1: You have, you have such a clear idea about your work as part of the struggle that we're involved in as black people. Do you feel that same kind of commitment, that same kind of energy from contemporary black writers from young writers today, that same connection to a movement, that same connection to a, a force for change that you felt when you were writing 'Black Feeling, Black Talk'? Speaker 2: I like what the kids are doing because they're business people. And if it's one thing that the black community has proven, I mean and that's Detroit [Michigan], you know, that's Tulsa, Oklahoma, we have proven that we are good business people. Our generation was not good business people. That's not what we did. We were good civil rights people, but now the kids that are coming are good business people again. You look at Russ [Russell] Simmons, you look at [Sean] Puffy [Combs], they are not just doing their entertainment thing. They are also doing restaurants, and Puffy's got a restaurant here. They're also doing clothes. They're also expanding being able to hire people. They're being able--you know, you look at Queen Latifah, she started off, she's reading a little poetry. She goes to Hollywood. She's helped to change Hollywood. And so it's been wonderful to see what the kids have done because they've changed it. Because if the rappers can put 5,000 seats--if they can put bodies in 5,000 seats, then Hollywood has to say, "Now what kind of movies do we make to make this work?" And it works. It's, it's important. Somebody will say, "Well, Nikki, I don't like 'Phat Beach'," you see what I'm saying, because it's not made for you. It's made for young people. You all are too old. (audience laughter). It ain't about you and me. You know, I was so hurt because the brilliant, brilliant group who's right here, OutKast, and I so admire OutKast. I was so hurt that, that Rosa Parks's people got involved in this thing with OutKast because it was so ugly because we know--come on now, we know that Mrs. Parks does not wake up and tune into WAOK [AM, radio]--, (audience laughter) Speaker 1: And listen to--. Speaker 2: --and, and listen to what's being--no, no, somebody had to bring this to her. And somebody brought it to her the wrong way because OutKast was giving her a shout out. They were saying, you know--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Um-hum, that's right. Speaker 2: --we want the younger people to know who you are. It's very important. It's true. (audience applause) Speaker 1: How do you, how do you bridge that gap between those of us who are older and, and the young people who are making that music because I know for, for many of us, once your kids are old enough to get out of the house, you turn that radio back to another station, and you don't hear their music as often as you used to. How do you, how do you bridge that gap between us and them? Speaker 2: Well, I just--basically, because I teach, and I'm lucky that--I try to pay attention. But if you ask me, I mean what's in my, what's in my CD [compact disc], and you see that--, Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It's gonna probably be Bobby Womack. (laughs) Speaker 2: --I probably show my age. What's in--what's on my iPod, what's in my CD right now, right. Gene Ammons, right. I mean I'm listening to old jazz, John Coltrane, I listen to--[Charlie] Mingus. I, I can probably get the other two 'cause I have a six [disc] changer (audience laughter). I'm listening to jazz, right, because that's what I listen to, but I'm also knowing not to judge what I'm hearing about what the kids are hearing, 'cause my mother did not like Ray Charles. My mother [Yolande Cornelia Watson Giovanni] thought, "Why--," as she said to me, "--does that Negro always stutter and shout?" You know, he would, "I, I, I'm a fool," you know. She would, "Why is that Negro--". That's what she'd say, "Why does that Negro always stutter and shout?" But my grandmother [Emma Louvenia Terrell Watson] didn't like Billy Eckstein because Billy Eckstein used to sing the song that said, "Jelly, Jelly, Jelly, Jelly stays on my mind," and my grandmother knew that to be a dirty song. It took me the longest where I didn't--I realized he wasn't talking about bread and butter. (audience laughter) But, every generation dislikes the music of the next generation. It's the truth. And so you just, you let that roll, you know, you have to ask the kids, you have to, to see how they are responding to the music. What, what is it doing for them? Story_ID: 7711 Speaker 1: You recorded an album, reading your poetry with the New York Community Choir years ago, 'Truth is on Its Way'. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Did reading the poetry with a choir, with live music change your experience of the words because the music was so much a part of what you were doing? Speaker 2: Well, again, I grew up in the Baptist church, and the one thing that I loved always was the choir, was, was the gospel choir. I liked the anthems, but I loved the gospel choir. And I would never, ever, ever miss church on the Sundays that I knew the gospel choir was singing. (audience chuckle) So I'd go, no, I mean, you know, your grandmother wouldn't let you miss anyway, but I paid attention. And I always liked what they were doing. So I wrote--and I always knew them, and I still do--I'll write to music. And I did the gospel because Ellis Haizlip did 'Soul' [television program], and Ellis--I, I did a lot of favors for, for Ellis because I was like a go-fer on 'Soul'. And again, I learned that for--everybody's young--forget getting paid, if you can get the position, everything is gonna work. And so I was working on 'Soul'. I did a lot of things for him. And he finally said, "What would you like to do?" And I said, "Well, what I'd like to do is, is something with gospel music." My grandmother [Emma Louvenia Terrell Watson] was dead, of course, but what I wanted to do was something in her memory. And so that would be gospel music. So she was singing 'Peace, Be Still', right. And that was the song that always fascinated me because I would--again, it was the longest before I realized it was peace--comma--be still, because I always thought it was peace be still as opposed to war be troublesome, right. And you know, Jesus, is, is out on the, on the lake, right. And he, he says, you know, "Peace, be still." But I was looking at it in the, in the larger context. So I wrote the 'Great Pax Whitey', to 'Peace, Be Still'. And it was James Cleveland, I met James--James was a good cook. (audience laughter) And he was. He was a wonderful man. And James came to New York after, shortly after I had made the recording. And James came to New York, and he was at Madison Square Garden [convention hall], he sold out--of course, he's Cleveland, you know. And he said, "And now, we're gonna do that song that everybody's singing," right. And I'm backstage, so when he comes off, I said, "James, everybody's not singing that song, only you and I." He said, "I know, baby, I know." (audience laughter) Speaker 1: This--but they will. (laughs). Speaker 2: He was a great man, the prince of gospel. He was a great--God, he could sing. Story_ID: 7712 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about gender. Does gender have as, as large a part in your work as race does? Speaker 2: I, I--Jimmy Fowler, who was a critic and a good friend, says that everything that I write about is about the world as a black woman, that there is no gender, that's it's all--I look at the world as a black woman. So I'm always writing through that. On the other hand, I realized a lot of images--if you just read my work individually, you would see a lot of male images because the male images are universal. So I even will, will talk about--for example, [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], when you'll see King, all the way, you know, through, or you'll see Emmett [Till], I write, I write a lot about Emmett, right. And it's not that there aren't other people. It's that you're using the images that everybody can use. But I'm always looking through the eye, so I always think of everything as coming through the eyes of a black woman because to me, if you say, "Who am I?" I am a Southern, black woman, very much grounded in the women of my grandmother's generation. Speaker 1: What do you think that we have put forward, our generation, to replace those things that we watched our mothers do and our grandmothers do? Is there anything that we've created that steps into that void? Speaker 2: I, I don't see it. I, I see us struggling in our sixties to try to figure out now, having done a good job at what we set out to do, what do we now do? Our socialization has been very different because so much of our youth was spent in public. I don't, I don't know if people actually appreciate how much we all grew up, whether known or not in public. All of our mistakes were public mistakes, and it's one of the reasons that I have such a sympathy for some of the young women that we're seeing now because they, too, are growing up, and, and you can't condemn people for doing the same things that everybody else did. And, and we had to grow up in public, you know. And, and look at my friend, Julian Bond, Julian grew up in public and remained sane. And, and we all have problems, right. But he's a committed man. And, and I'm so happy that he took over the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], that, that he remained doing that. Somebody can say, "Well, Julian, you know, divorced his wife," or whatever, but, you know, you get married, you have to get divorced. What the hell? (audience laughter) Story_ID: 7713 Speaker 1: You've appealed to a whole new generation with your, with your understanding and your support of hip hop. And Tupac is certainly a, a part of that, and, and his death, Tupac Shakur's death hit you hard, and you wrote about that. So I'm gonna ask our young sisters if they will share that poem with us and we'll talk a little bit about Tupac. Speaker 2: [All Eyez on U (For 2Pac Shakur) performed by: Andrea Mills; Adriana Santiago; Charlotte Della Cain]: "As I tossed and turned, unable to achieve sleep, unable to control the anxiety, unable to comprehend why 2Pac is not with us; if those who live by the sword died by the sword, there would be no white men on earth; if those who lived on hatred died on hatred, there would be no KKK [Ku Klux Klan]; if those who lived by lies died by lies, there would be nobody on Wall Street in executive suites, in academic offices instructing the young. Don't tell me he got what he deserved. He deserved a chariot and the accolades of a grateful people. He deserved his life. It is as clear as a mountain stream, as deafening as a lightning strike, as terrifying as Sunda vampires. 2Pac told the truth. There are those who wanted to call it dirty gangster rap, inciting. There are those who never wanted to be angry at the conditions, but angry at the messenger who reported your kitchen has roaches, your toilet is overflowing, your basement has so much water the rats are in the living room, your house is in disorder, and 2Pac told you about it. What a beautiful boy, graceful carriage, melodic voice, sharp wit, intellectual breath; what a beautiful boy to lose, not me never me. I do not believe East Coast West Coast. I saw them murder Malcolm X. I saw them murder Emmett Till. I saw them murder Martin Luther King. I witnessed them shooting Rap Brown. I saw them beat LeRoi Jones. I saw them fill their jails; I see them burning churches, not me, never me. I do not believe this is some sort of mouth action. This is some sort of political action, and they picked well. They picked the brightest, freshest fruit from the tallest tree. What a beautiful boy, but he will not go away, as Malcolm did not go away, as Emmett Till did not go away, your shooting him will not take him from us, his spirit will fill our heart; his courage will strengthen us for the challenge; his truth will straighten our backbones. You know, Socrates had a mother. She too watched her son drink hemlock. She too asked why, but Socrates stood firm and would not lie to save himself. 2Pac has a mother, the lovely Afeni had to bury her son. It is not right, it is not right, that this young warrior has been cut down. It is not right for the old to bury the young, it is not right this generation mourns 2Pac as my generation mourned Till, as we all mourned Malcolm, this wonderful young warrior. Sonia Sanchez said when she learned of his passing she walked all day walking the beautiful warrior home to our ancestors. I just cried, as all mothers cry for the beautiful boy who said he and Mike Tyson would never be allowed to be free at the same time who told the truth about them and who told the truth about us. Who is our beautiful warrior. There are those who wanted to make him the problem who wanted to believe if they silenced 2Pac all would be quiet on the ghetto front. There are those who testified that the problem wasn't the conditions but the people talking about them. They took away band so the boys started scratching. They took away gym so the boys started break dancing. The boys started rapping 'cause they gave them the guns and the drugs, but not the schools and the libraries. What a beautiful boy to lose, and we mourn 2Pac Shakur, and we reach out to his mother, and we hug ourselves in sadness and in shame and we are compelled to ask, R U happy, Mz. [C. Delores] Tucker? 2Pac is gone, R U happy?" (audience applause) Story_ID: 7714 Speaker 1: Can you articulate for me why you think Tupac [Shakur] struck such a chord in you? You actually had "thug life" tattooed on your arm after he died. Speaker 2: I did, yeah. Speaker 1: What is it that, that touched you so deeply about him? Speaker 2: First of all, I spent enough time in prison and, and correctional institutions with young people, in, in women's prison. I, I do a lot of volunteer. Everybody likes Tupac. I could go to a high school, and I'll mention Tupac. Everybody likes Tupac. I go to college, you know, and you sort of--there was no way to avoid the breadth of this young man. And it, it's the love. When you start to talk to people, you know, it's the love that, that they felt about him, that they felt that he was giving to them. Everybody feels warm about Tupac, that, that listened to his, his work, that, that heard him. And it's very unusual--you know, I'm not any other rapper or anything like that. It's just very unusual that you can go into almost any venue and people will say, "Yeah, yeah, I, I know his work. I liked it." And I thought, "Wow." I got the tattoo because I thought my generation should mourn with the younger generation. And, and I thought that we should do something to let them know, we do understand that this is a loss. Tupac is a, is, is a loss. Speaker 1: How do you respond to people who recognize his genius as an artist, as a, as a very charismatic performer, but have serious problems with some of the attitudes toward women that come through in some of the music that he did? Speaker 2: But see, I'm an old blues person, so, I'm, I'm understanding what you're saying. But 90 percent of blues songs is "My, my man he don't love me," or "She done done something to me," right. (audience laughter). It, it's the metaphor, women are the metaphor of America. I'm not, I'm not backing off of anything like that, and so you end up with the rappers who are doing the same thing. Do I wish they would read a little bit more and, and bring some other images in? You bet. But women are always gonna be. But if you talk again to the women, you talk to the, well, girls, they are not feeling excluded by what he's saying, that they are not feeling an, an attack by what he's saying. And so, again, I, I have to step back as an older person to say, "Okay, I'm not really comfortable with some of the things that M.W.A. [sic, N.W.A., rap music group] says, for example, you know, it's like, "Hmm, I don't think I really want to bop down the highway listening to that." But that doesn't mean that the entire genre or the entire body of work has, is without merit. I just--I can't believe that. Speaker 1: Do you think that there's a, a space for, for those of us who may have problems with some of that, not just in his work, but in the, in the hip-hop world? Is there a way that we can communicate more directly with some of the artists or should we just as the older, older generation, just kind of say, "Go on children, make your music?" Speaker 2: No, I think you should probably go out to a couple of the clubs and watch and see what's happening. I, I think that when we have the opportunity to talk to people. 'Essence' magazine gave me the wonderful opportunity because they do these conversations, speaking of Queen Latifah--and they asked Queen Latifah who would she like to talk to, and she said me. And I, I just couldn't have been more delighted. But she's working on a movie, right. I'm, I'm an old woman, you know, (laughs) I'm not busy. And so--no, I mean you try to, you know, so I got on the plane, and I said--because she didn't have time to come to Virginia. I said, "I'll be happy to fly out to California." So she was saying, "Oh, you know, it's so nice of you." I said, "No, it wasn't so nice of me. I am supposed to be there for you. And I have the time, where you don't. There was a time that I wouldn't have had the time." But that's what we do. We allow them to reach back. You know, I've been trying to connect with Jill Scott 'cause she's a great gig--great kid. And it's just that there are things that are going on, and we who are older, of course, we should be involved, you know. Would I have a good time every night going to a club and listening to a rapper (laughs)--I'm way too old, but I have been in, in, in some of the--both the comedy clubs, which comedy can be very vicious and nobody complains about that, and in the hip-hop, you know, and watch the, the slams and things like that. You, you get a lot of different things, but you also, by being a part of it, can recognize where you want to take it and what you want to say about it, because what the kids are trying to do is, is live. And they're trying to live, and they're trying to say what they think. Now, sometimes, I don't believe it. I don't believe that many drug dealers who actually were this good at rapping. I think they--I don't. I think the drug dealers deal drugs and the rappers rap. And, and so they need to--you know, some of the lies need to stop. Everybody didn't have a hard childhood, and if they did, suck it up and go on. (audience laughter) Speaker 1: (Laughter) Amen, amen. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, that's true. Story_ID: 7715 Speaker 1: But you were, you were saying that what they're trying to do is live, and this is, is definitely a time in our country when lives are at stake and lives are being lost every day, and our country is bombing people and at war all over the world. What do you see as the, the writer's role in wartime when our country is doing all of the things that our country is doing, and we are citizens of the country? Do you think that writers have a special role in a critical time like this? Speaker 2: Whatever I'm a citizen of, it's earth, and 'cause otherwise you get stuck in this fifteenth century concept of who you should be because you happen to be born someplace, all of a sudden you owe an allegiance, I don't think so. The only people who have been in a space with no known landmarks and no expectation of positive welcome, has been the Africans, who were on their way to being enslaved in America. These people were a courageous and a brave people. They had to come through stormy waters with some really mean people, that they recognized that. They had to stand on an auction block and be oiled up and sold and branded and marched to a plantation and expected--and they expected themselves to remain sane. They had to re-imagine themselves. If earth intends to fulfill its, its prophecy of the 21st century, we're gonna have to learn from those people because space is middle passage, we're gonna have to learn from those people, "How do you maintain yourself when everything that you knew is gone?" The, the key to sane life on earth resides in those Africans who made middle passage. These were great people. And we have just begun to tap into what they're bringing to us. (audience applause) Story_ID: 7716 Speaker 1: I want to read you a quote from James Baldwin that sounds a lot like what I think about your work, and Baldwin wrote, "You write an order to change the world, knowing perfectly well that you probably can't, but also knowing that literature is indispensable to the world. The world changes according to the way people see it, and if you alter, even by a millimeter, the way people look at reality, then you can change it." Before we close for the evening, would you say one of your poems for us? Speaker 2: I'd be delighted. Speaker 1: Thank you. (audience applause) Speaker 2: "I only want to be there to kiss you, as you want to be kissed when you need to be kissed, where I want to kiss you 'cause it's my house, and I plan to live in it. I really need to hug you when I want to hug you, as you like to hug me. Does this sound like a silly poem? I mean it's my house and I want to fry pork chops and bake sweet potatoes and call them yams, 'cause I run the kitchen, and I can stand the heat. I spent all winter in carpet stores gathering patches so I could make a quilt. Does this really sound like a silly poem? I mean I want to keep you warm and my windows might be dirty, but it's my house, and if I can't see out sometimes they can't see in either. English isn't a good language to express emotion through. Mostly I imagine because people try to speak English instead of trying to speak through it. I don't know. Maybe it is a silly poem. I'm saying it's my house, and I'll make fudge and call it love and touch my lips to the chocolate warmth and smile at old men and call that revolution 'cause what's real is really real, and I still like men in tight pants 'cause everybody has some thing to give and more important, needs something to take. And this is my house and you make me happy." So this is your poem. (audience applause) Story_ID: 7717 Speaker 1: Major funding for the preceding program was provided by McDonald's Corporation. Additional funding provided by the Coca-Cola Company, Bank of America, Georgia Power, Turner Broadcasting Systems Incorporated, UPS. To order your own copy of 'An Evening With Nikki Giovanni', please send your check or money order for $34.99 to the address below or call 866-914-1900 to order by credit card...