 Story_ID: 596929 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. Would you please state your name and spell it for me? Speaker 2: Yes, my name is [HistoryMaker] Gloria Johnson Goins, and Goins is spelled G-O-I-N-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth? Speaker 2: Four, seventeen, sixty-three [April 17, 1963]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Miami, Florida. Speaker 1: Your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm the chief diversity officer for The Home Depot [The Home Depot, Inc.]. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: In my office in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: Is March 26th, 2007. Speaker 1: Great. Story_ID: 596930 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you what I call five People magazine-ish type questions. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: What about a favorite food? What do you like to eat? Speaker 2: Chocolate. Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, what is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Usually the Bahamas, but anywhere with beach and sand and sun. Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Christmas. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase? Yes: to whom much is given, much is required [Luke 12:48]. Story_ID: 596931 Speaker 1: Now, let's begin by talking about your family. And we'll start on your mother's side. Tell me your mother's name and spell it for me please. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Lillian. That's L-I-L-L-I-N-A [sic.]. Her maiden name was Dean, which is D-E-A-N, Johnson [Lillian Dean Johnson]. Speaker 1: Do you know when she was born? Speaker 2: June 1, 1922, I think. Speaker 1: Okay, and where would (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really sure. Speaker 1: --where was she born? Speaker 2: In Miami, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have information or stories about your grandparents? Did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: I only knew my maternal grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My parents were much older when I was born. My father [Albert Johnson, Sr.] was fifty-three; my mother was about forty when I was born. So their parents had passed for the most part when I was born. My maternal grandmother's name was Alitia, which is spelled A-L-I-T-I-A, Bain, B-A-I-N, Dean, D-E-A-N [Alitia Bain Dean]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you remember about your grandmother? Speaker 2: I remember her very briefly 'cause I think she died when I was about three or four years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was born actually in the Bahamas, an island called Eleuthera, and so she was a Bahamian immigrant. And I remember her having these blue slippers that she wore all the time. And she actually bought a pair of these same blue slippers for my mother. And I remember going to visit my grandmother one day, and I saw these slippers. And being a little girl, I said, "Hey, you took these slippers from my mother." And so I actually took them because I thought they were my mother's. And unfortunately, she passed before I could return them. And my mother kept them for, oh my goodness, decades after that. That's really what I remember about her. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did your mother talk to you about your ancestry in the Bahamas? Speaker 2: A little bit. She talked about the fact that her, her mother was from Eleuthera. She talked about the fact that her father [Thomas Dean (ph.)] was also born in Long Island [New York]--in the Bahamas. She talked about some of her relatives, but she didn't go into a lot of detail about, you know, what their experiences were. My father, on the other hand, really talked about more of what it was like to live there and to grow up, because he was actually born in the Bahamas. Story_ID: 596932 Speaker 1: So your mother [Lillian Dean Johnson], she really didn't share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: She did, actually. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother was the oldest of thirteen children, two of whom passed. And my mother had to drop out of school in the eleventh grade as to take care of all of these kids. And she would tell me stories how she had to make sure they were fed, they did their homework, the house was clean, and if anything happened to any of her siblings, if they had a scratch on them, that she would get punished. And she talked about all the odd ends, different jobs that she would do to help her mother make ends meet, 'cause I think my grandfather died when she was about eleven years old. And so my, my grandmother [Alitia Bain Dean] was struggling to take care of all these kids. You know, she was an immigrant with virtually no education, a house full of kids, so she looked primarily to her oldest daughter to help her take care of the family. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you said your mother actually left school in the eleventh grade. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now tell me about-well no, before I, I go to your father's [Albert Johnson, Sr.] side, do you know your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Thomas Dean [ph.]. Story_ID: 596933 Speaker 1: Now tell me about your father. What is your father's name? Speaker 2: His name is Albert Bernard Johnson [Albert Johnson, Sr.]. He actually changed his name when he immigrated to the United States. He was born Carl Bernard Roberts [ph.]. And he named himself Albert, after Prince Albert of England [Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha]. He kept his middle name, and Johnson was his mother's maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you know the reason why he changed his name? Speaker 2: Yes. My father was the child of two parents who were married but not to each other, and so Roberts was actually his stepfather's name. And there was a lot of shame and I think hurt that he endured, being the son of a child that was born out of wedlock during a marriage. And he even told me a story of how one time his grandmother tried to drown him. So he had a lot of pain around not being accepted in his family. And so when he immigrated to the United States, I think he immigrated here in the '40s [1940s], looking for a better life. Although he only had a sixth grade education, he decided to start over and change his name to something that he thought was more noble that would give him a head start. So that's why he named himself Albert, after Prince Albert of England, and then he honored his mother and took her maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he share more stories about his growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean he talked about all the fun they used to have swimming in the Bahamas, and fishing, and just spending time with his brothers. He had a lot of joy around his heritage, a lot of pride around his heritage. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And do you know the names of his parents? Speaker 2: Yes, Amanda Grant--wait, Amanda Johnson [ph.]. And his father's name was Horatio Grant [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was raised by his grandmother. I think her name was Mary [ph.]. I don't remember. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: My brothers [Albert Johnson, Jr. and Wilbert Johnson] are much better with the history than I am. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Story_ID: 596934 Speaker 1: So when your father [Albert Johnson, Sr.] moved to, came to the United States, what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: Any and everything. He, I mean, it was a, it was a time in America that was very segregated. So, although he came here looking for the American dream, he found a country that was very divided by race. So, with very little education in the '40s [1940s] for a black man, there wasn't a whole lot of options. So he basically did five and six different jobs at a time; he would be a janitor; he'd cut your yard; he'd wash your car; he sold mangos. I mean he did anything and every job he could get his hands on. But he spent probably the bulk of his career as a janitor. Speaker 1: And what about your mother [Lillian Dean Johnson]? What type of work did she do? Speaker 2: She was pretty entrepreneurial. She was a fantastic cook. She could cook anything without recipes, so she had a catering business for a while. She actually had a hair salon in a, a place of, in Miami [Florida] called Overtown, which at the time was very much the heyday of Miami. It was where all of the very high profile entertainers would come to perform in Miami. Particularly African American entertainers would come to Overtown. So Overtown was, was quite the place to be back in the time my mother had her beauty shop. So her shop was kind of a, a hot spot, if you will. So when she got pregnant with me, she decided to close down the shop. But before then, she had a very thriving business in Overtown. Story_ID: 596935 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Lillian Dean Johnson] and father Albert Johnson, Sr.] met? Speaker 2: Yeah, there is actually. It's, it's kind of a, an arranged marriage, if you will. My grandmother [Alitia Bain Dean], I guess she met my father. I guess my father saw my mother in passing. And my mother was an absolutely gorgeous woman, and my father was very handsome, although my father was kind of short. But my mother didn't like short men. And my father, being a very smart man, went to my grandmother, my mother's mother, and said, "If you let me marry your daughter, I'll take care of you and all of your kids." So she said, "Okay, well, when's the wedding?" So it was pretty much an arranged marriage, where, you know, my grandmother saw this attractive, you know, hardworking, seemingly sincere man who wanted to marry her daughter but at the same time had a commitment to helping the family. And so that's how they got married. Story_ID: 596936 Speaker 1: Was your father [Albert Johnson, Sr.] from the same island as your mother? Speaker 2: No, my mother was born in Miami [Florida]. My father was born (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, she was born-- Speaker 2: --in Grand Bahama [Bahamas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that island is called Grand Bahama island. He was born in a town called West End [Bahamas], which is about twenty-five miles south [sic.] of a town called Freeport [Bahamas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a very small town. Speaker 1: All right, so your mother and father are living in Miami, and they begin to have children. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about your siblings. Speaker 2: Well, my parents were married ten years before they had their first child. And they had my brother, Albert, who's named after my father, so he was Albert, Jr [Albert Johnson, Jr.]. And about two years later, they had my second brother, whose name is Wilbert [Wilbert Johnson]. He was named after one of my uncles in the Bahamas. And then there was an eight year gap between Wilbert and me, and I was born eight years later. And my mother always wanted to have a girl. And back in the days when my mother was having babies, they used to use, I guess, general anesthesia for pregnancy. I kind of wish they'd go back to that. But during that time, they would literally knock you out, and do something called twilight. And so, although she really wanted a girl, she didn't actually believe that she was gonna have one. So she didn't pick out any girls names. And so when I was born, I--she was unconscious, and because she wasn't prepared to have a girl, she hadn't picked any names. And the nurse said you know, you know, "Mrs. Johnson [Lillian Dean Johnson], you, you have to name your daughter. What are you gonna name her?" And she said, "I don't know. I mean I haven't, think I was gonna have a girl. I didn't pick out any names." She said, "What's the first thing I said when you told me I had a girl?" And they said, "You said something like, 'Glory hallelujah,' something like that." She said, "Okay, we'll name her Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Johnson Goins]." And so that's how my name was, was given to me, to, to reflect the fact that my mother was happy she finally had a girl. Story_ID: 596937 Speaker 1: Tell me, what is your earliest childhood memory? Besides the slippers (laughter), what is your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Gosh. Oh, gosh (pause). The earliest childhood memory I have, besides the slippers, is related to my [maternal] grandmother [Alitia Bain Dean] as well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember visiting my grandmother in the hospital before she died. And I had no idea why she was there. I mean I couldn't understand that. And she specifically asked to see me. Of all the, the grandkids she had, she wanted to see me. And I, I couldn't understand why she was in this bed, and I couldn't understand why she couldn't get up. And I just remember seeing her face and her talking to me so sin- sincerely and seriously. And that's what I remember about that, seeing-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --her in hospital bed before she died. Story_ID: 596938 Speaker 1: Now, Miami [Florida] is a, a very colorful place to grow up. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So think about sounds-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --smells, and sights of Miami in your early years, in your primary years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: What comes to mind? Speaker 2: I think of Miami as a child, obviously very differently than I see it now 'cause it's changed dramatically, but I think of things like going to the beach on Christmas, having my mother [Lillian Dean Johnson] cook some Bahamian cuisine daily. Every Saturday she would cook conch fritters. You know, I, I think of us playing [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte and calypso music on what was then the hi-fi. So my memories are around my mother's cooking, smelling it, tasting it, eating it, listening to traditional Bahamian music, feeling sort of strange that on Christmas I'd be outside in shorts and you know, thinking about going to the beach. So that's really what I remember about Miami in terms of how I would describe it as a child. Story_ID: 596939 Speaker 1: Describe the neighborhood [Overtown, Miami, Florida] or the community in which you grew up. Speaker 2: Wow, it was at the time considered one of the most desirable places for African Americans to grow up. It was truly an example of it takes a village to raise a child, because the community was very safe. I remember walking to school at four and five years old as a latchkey kid. I remember coming home and deciding that I want to climb on top of the roof and dance, and jump off the roof, and have my neighbor across the street say, "You know, you shouldn't be doing that, right," and then ensuring that she reported that back to my parents [Lillian Dean Johnson and Albert Johnson, Sr.] and I'd get in trouble about it. And I think today people are a little bit less willing to do that. So it was a very safe and happy kind of bustling neighborhood where people who were primarily working class people thrived and I think were very cohesive as a, as a community. Speaker 1: What type of occupations did your neighbors have? Speaker 2: They were, most of them were teachers. They were mostly educators, because that was back then the middle class job of choice. But most of the people were educators, or they were people like my father who did odd and end jobs all the time. Story_ID: 596940 Speaker 1: You went to elementary school at what age? Speaker 2: Let's see, I started elementary school when I was six, with first grade. And I was in a public school for two years, and then I went to a private school until I graduated in sixth grade. And a note about my father [Albert Johnson, Sr.] was that although he only had a sixth grade education, he was this staunch believer in the power of education to lift yourself out. And so every night he would say, "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Johnson Goins], make sure you get your education; make sure you become a professional so you don't have to work hard like Daddy." And my brothers [Albert Johnson, Jr. and Wilbert Johnson], they never went to public school in their lives. They went to private kindergarten. And if you think it, that's pretty amazing because here's a man that has a sixth grade education, yet he's putting two kids through private school from the time they're in kindergarten. And he did that by working, you know, four, five, six different jobs at a time. But by the time I was born he had slowed down a little bit 'cause he was fifty-three. So for the first two years of my life I was in a public school. And then, there was an opportunity for us to go to a private school, and I became one of two blacks to desegregate a particular private school called St. Stephen's [St. Stephen's Episcopal Day School, Miami, Florida]. And that was quite a culture shock for me, because many of the students at St. Stephen's were very wealthy white kids who really had never seen or interacted with African Americans unless they were their servants. And so I basically had no friends. I had one friend [Madelaine Bertram Osborne]. And when she didn't come to school, people wouldn't talk to me; they didn't eat with me; I didn't socialize with them; they didn't socialize with me. And it was really kind of a, kind of a jarring experience for me, but one, as I look back on it, really kind of shaped who I am today. Story_ID: 596941 Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers at that school [St. Stephen's Episcopal Day School, Miami, Florida]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about them. Speaker 2: I remember Ms. Betts. She was my fourth grade teacher. She was--her name was Marguerite Betts [ph.]. She looked like an angel, and she acted like an angel. She was so protective of me. I remember unfortunately my dad [Albert Johnson, Sr.] got in a really bad car accident. And my father was struggling trying to take care of me, get to school. And he had me stay with Ms. Betts for a couple of days. And she would take me to school and make sure I did my homework, and she was just an angel. And I, I remember in fourth grade that someone also called me the N word. And when she found that out, I mean she was just, you know, really, really angry about it and just took immediate reaction--immediate cor- corrective action of that situation, so she was an angel. I remember my sixth grade teacher, Mrs. Reynolds [ph.]. Mrs. Reynolds was a no nonsense kind of teacher. And what I remember most about her is I remember her being fair. And what I mean is two things. We did 'A Christmas Carol' [Charles Dickens] as a play. And I was one of--I was the only black child in the class and only one of two in the whole school, and she gave me the lead. And a lot of my other classmates were like, "Wait a minute. How can you be Scrooge [Ebenezer Scrooge]? Number one, you're, you're not a man, and number two, you're black. So how can you, black girl, be the lead in this play?" So that was the first thing. I thought she was fair. But then, something interesting happened. Growing up for most of my life, I, I just naturally assumed that, that white people were smarter than black people. Having spent the first couple of years of my life in a basically all-black school, living in an all-black neighborhood [Overtown, Miami, Florida], going to an all-black church, I really didn't interact with white people extensively. And so, even though I was getting straight A's, and I was in advanced classes, I didn't think very much of it 'cause I assumed everybody else was. And of course we weren't talking to each other because they never talked to me. And my best friend [Madelaine Bertram Osborne], I loved her death, but I knew she wasn't an Einstein [Albert Einstein]. So I knew that, you know, she wasn't knocking it out of the ballpark, but I didn't care; she was my friend. And so I remember Mrs. Reynolds because when it was time to graduate from sixth grade, she decided to wait until graduation day to announce who the top students in the class were. So she got, she gets up, and she announces that the third place student is Olga Gomez [ph.]. So I said, "Okay, yeah, Olga's pretty smart." Then she gets up and says the second place student is Nancy Roth [ph.]. And I said, "Wait a minute. How can Nancy Roth be second place? There's nobody in this class smarter than Nancy; something's wrong." So then she gets up and says, "Our first place scholarship winner is Gloria Johnson [HistoryMaker Gloria Johnson Goins]," and I didn't get up. So I looked around and looked around, and she's like, "Come on, get up, get up. What's wrong with you?" And I'm like, "Me? How could I be the smartest person?" I mean it took a long, uncomfortable pause for me to get up there and realize I had the highest grades in the entire class, stark contrast from where I started, 'cause I was constantly in the principal's office. It was a, a religious school. I was always teasing the priests, putting cupcakes in his chair, and putting tacks in his hair, and you know, disrupting the class. So the fact that I had the highest grades, I, I couldn't accept that. So it, it took me awhile to kind of come to grips with the fact that I actually was bright, and I was talented, and that I could compete. Story_ID: 596942 Speaker 1: Now talking about your, your school experience, what extracurricular activities were you a part of? Speaker 2: At what level? Speaker 1: In the elementary school [St. Stephen's Episcopal Day School, Miami, Florida]? Speaker 2: Not many. There were Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America]. And I always wanted to be a Girl Scout, but for some reason my mom [Lillian Dean Johnson] didn't get me involved in that. So there was nothing that I really did, except I will tell you that I went to church about thirteen times a week. We went to church as part of the curriculum. And because we lived so far away from where everyone else lived that went to the school, my father [Albert Johnson, Sr.] would have to drop me off at school early. And the only place to go was church. So I'd go to church twice a week, five days a week. Then I'd go to church on Saturdays, and I'd sing in the choir. And then I'd go to church on Sundays. So, really the only thing I did in elementary school was sing in the church choir. Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me about, back in your neighborhood [Overtown, Miami, Florida] and your friends in your neighborhood, what types of activities did you do in the neighborhood? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, because of where I went to school, which was not in the neighborhood, and because of where we went to church [Church of the Ascension, Miami, Florida], which was not in the neighborhood--it was for a while, but then we transitioned to go to another church [Episcopal Church of the Incarnation, Miami, Florida] that was about thirty miles from my house because my cousin was the pastor. I didn't really go to church in the neighborhood or go to school in the neighborhood, so I really only had one or two friends in the neighborhood I lived with. And this particular friend, Gladys Banks [ph.], and I'll never forget her, lived five houses down from me, and we did all kind of stuff. We would play with dolls, and back then isy- Easy-Bake Ovens were in vogue; and we'd bake stuff in the Easy-Bake Oven, hopefully not causing fires; and do gymnastics; and race; and talk about our futures. You know, we did all kinds of things that young kids do. We create our own Slip 'N Slides because we couldn't afford a pool. It was very hot in Miami [Florida], so we'd, you know, be creative and hose each other down, or we'd get a piece of plastic, and we'd put water on it and put some soap, detergent on that and make our own Slip 'N Slides. And you know, we were just really creative with what we did in terms of entertaining ourselves. And then we had really strict rules back then. You know, you had to be home before the streetlights came on. So whatever we did, we did it creatively, and we did it before it was time to get inside. Story_ID: 596943 Speaker 1: Did you live in a house or an apartment? Speaker 2: A house. Speaker 1: Okay, did your parents [Lillian Dean Johnson and Albert Johnson, Sr.] own the property? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did they always own the property? Speaker 2: They bought it in 1947. And they paid it off, I think, sometime in the late '70s [1970s] or so. So, yeah, they, they've always, they have always owned the property that, that I grew up in. I mean they were paying on it, and they finally got it free and clear. Speaker 1: Okay. What traditions, Bahamian traditions, did your parents instill in you? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, my father was a fantastic dancer. He would love to dance with me. He was incredible on a dance floor, so he taught me the importance of music and dance. But also just from a cultural standpoint, Bahamians are very generous people. And so there's a tradition that when you go to the Bahamas, they give you money, which is a tradition growing up I liked. So whenever I would visit my relatives, they would always give me cash in hand. They'd always cook you a meal that was just incredible. And they're just very hardworking people. They're also very godly people. I mean, the Bahamas is the only country in the world that has Christianity in its constitution. And so I grew up in a very, very strict, Christian home, where God first was the motto. And part of that is just part of the, the Bahamian culture and upbringing, is to really understand the importance of putting God first and, and maintain high, high values and morals. Speaker 1: Now you talked to your--talked about your mother being a great cook, and you told us about con-- Speaker 2: Conch fritters. Speaker 1: --conch fritters. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What else did she cook? Speaker 2: Oh, wow, she could make killer potato salad, coleslaw--I'm trying--peas and rice, which is a Bahamian dish. I'm just thinking. She would make this cube steak that was out of this world. She could, she could cook some stuff. Now there was one thing she cooked that I kind of avoided 'cause I wasn't quite sure what was in it. And I had the displeasure of watching her make it. She would make this dressing (laughter), and she would put all the leftovers that'd been left over from like a week or two. And it'd go into this dressing, and you knew that's not something you'd want to try. But, you know, when she catered events, people seemed to (laughter) enjoy it. I knew I wasn't gonna eat it. But she could cook anything, you know. She was a fantastic cook. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you learn to swim? Speaker 2: Barely. I've always drowned a couple of times. You, you would think that growing up in Miami [Florida] and the Bahamas you'd learn how to swim. And, and I've taken swim lessons, but I am not a good swimmer. I hate to say that. Story_ID: 596944 Speaker 1: Did you travel back and forth to the Bahamas a lot as a child? Speaker 2: A lot. In fact, back in the day when Eastern Air Lines was still in business we'd go over often. Growing up, my father [Albert Johnson, Sr.] had a boat that was named after me, called Little One. But unfortunately, I think he got lost at sea for like ten days. And when he got lost at sea my mom [Lillian Dean Johnson] said the boat had to go. So we, we went to the Bahamas all the time. It was much cheaper back then to go very, very often, and we did. Speaker 1: Okay, and who did you stay with when-- Speaker 2: Relatives (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) visited? Speaker 2: We stayed with relatives. We very, very rarely stayed in hotels. I don't--have very little recollection of staying in hotels growing up. Speaker 1: And were these your--these were your, your father's relatives. Speaker 2: Both. Speaker 1: Both, okay. Speaker 2: Both relatives. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. And usually during the summer would be the times that you would go. Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, sometimes she'd go over just, you know, you could do a quick trip over, depending what's going on. Maybe someone's getting married, or unfortunately someone's passed. I mean you could jump on a plane and be in the Bahamas. It's like a thirty minute flight. I mean it's, it's real simple to get there from Miami [Florida]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 596945 Speaker 1: Let's talk about church a little bit more. You told me that St. Stephen's [St. Stephen's Episcopal Day School, Miami, Florida] was Episcopalian. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And then you went to another church where your cousin was the pastor. Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, St. Stephen's was the school I went to, so I went to church as part of the curriculum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We were going to a church called Church of the Ascension [Miami, Florida], which was actually in my neighborhood. We later transitioned to another Episcopal church called the Church of the Incarnation [Episcopal Church of the Incarnation, Miami, Florida], which was about, oh, my goodness, it was a drive. It was probably like thirty-five, forty miles from my house. And my cousin was the pastor of that church, so we went to the church to support him. And I remember going to church every Sunday. My parents [Lillian Dean Johnson and Albert Johnson, Sr.] had this rule. You know, "Unless you've got, you know, on death's door, you're going to church. I don't care how sick you are. You know, if you can breathe, we're gonna put you in the car, and you're gonna go." So very, very, very rarely did I miss church, and very, very rarely did my parents miss church. And I just remember people sort of looking at me because I didn't use a hymnal or a prayer book when I went to service. And the reason why is because if you go to church, as I did twelve times a week, and you are, you know, reading and singing hymns, you kind of commit them to rote memory. So after doing that for several years, I would know what hymn to sing. So if, you know, if the, the pastor said, "We're gonna sing hymn 181," I would sing 'Joyful, Joyful, We Adore Thee.' If he said, "We're gonna now turn to intercessory form number three," you know, I would know that by, by rote memory. So I remember that. I remember the pride that people took in how they dressed at church. It was very much a competition, which is very different from how I dress today when I go to church. I'm just trying to get there. But you never went to church unless you were just immaculate, in the words of my mother, like a bandbox, as clean as a bandbox. So I just remember people wearing hats and, and just having the most beautiful attire. And I remember that my mother insisted that I wear something new every single week. So that was kind of my little thing, where every single week I had to have something new. And I just, I just remember that sort of pride that people had around the whole church community. Story_ID: 596946 Speaker 1: Let's talk a little more about your relationship with your mother [Lillian Dean Johnson] and your father [Albert Johnson, Sr.]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What did you--what do you think a trait that your mother had that was passed on to you? Speaker 2: Oh, boy (laughter). Speaker 1: Or a characteristic. Speaker 2: My mother could be kind of rough around the edges, and so I definitely have that. She was just a very sort of in your face, kind of no nonsense, unvarnished woman. And I've gotten a lot of that from her. At the same time, she was tough as nails. I don't think I'm as tough as she was. I mean, when I mean tough, I mean this woman survived so much, under some of the most adverse conditions. I mean she basically gave her whole life so that her siblings could have a better life. And she was just a tough cookie. I mean she was like Alexis Carrington [Alexis Carrington Colby] without the degree. I mean she was a tough cookie. So I don't think I'm as--I think people may perceive me as being that tough, but I'm really not. Speaker 1: What was your relationship with her like? Speaker 2: Growing up it was kind of strained, because I think my mother thought that she and I were vying for my father's attention. My father's mother [Amanda Johnson (ph.)] died when he was five years old, and so he would call me Mama. And I said, "Daddy, why you, why do you call me Mama?" He goes, "'Cause you, you're my mother. You're the only mother I have." And he was very much, he was--I was very much a daddy's girl. I was very much the apple of his eye. And I think that for a lot of parts my mom kind of saw that as competition. But as I got older, I think as a lot of people do, I realized the wisdom in a lot of things my mother was saying. 'Cause growing up your, your mother would say sayings and you know, give you insights about people that you say, "Oh, she doesn't know what she's talking about." And as you get older you go, wow, she was right; you know, she was really right. And there's an old saying that says that youth is wasted on the young. And it's that you don't know the things that you know when you're older, that if you did, and you were younger, you could use that energy as a young person to make better choices. Speaker 1: Is there something that your mother told you that you remember, that you will never forget? Is there something (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, gosh. Speaker 1: --like that? Speaker 2: There are so many things my mother's told me. "It's a mean world to live in, Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Johnson Goins]." I'll never forget that. She would say that weekly (laughter), weekly. And you know, I think about that a lot. Story_ID: 596947 Speaker 1: Now, you say you were daddy's little girl. Speaker 2: Yes, very much so. Speaker 1: Tell me more about your relationship with your father [Albert Johnson, Sr.]. Speaker 2: My father was my hero; not well educated but extremely bright. My greatest memories of him involved this ritual we would have. He, after working three jobs, would come home late. After everyone has already eaten their dinner and done their homework, he'd come home. And his ritual was either he'd stop and bring me a hot fudge sundae, which I was grateful for when he did. But regardless of when I had the sundae or not, I would take off his shoes. And I would untie them, and, and you could tell that he'd been sweating all day, but it was like perfume to me. And then he would go and he'd sit down, and he'd have his dinner. And even though I had already eaten, I'd insist upon helping him eat his food, and he didn't mind. And then he'd sit there, and he'd tell me some, something that happened in his day, or he'd tell me some pearl of wisdom, normally around making sure that you get your education because no one can take that from you. And he would say that: "Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Johnson Goins], I'm telling you, you have to become a professional person because I don't want you to work hard like daddy. And once you get your degree, no one can ever take that from you." I mean he drilled that into my head as far back as I can remember. When I think back and say, you know, what I want to be when I grow up. I wanted to be a lawyer from the time I was six years old, in part, because I had an older brother who wanted to be a lawyer, in part, because I felt it in my spirit to do that, in part, because I had a father who every night at the dinner table kept drilling that into my head. And I remember about a year before my father died, I did, if you will, an oral history of him. And I started asking him all these questions about, you know, why he married my mother [Lillian Dean Johnson], and you know, what was it like living in the Bahamas, and I recorded it. And one of the things I asked him--one of the things that he told me, actually, was one of his fondest memories of me is that one day he was taking me to school [St. Stephen's Episcopal Day School, Miami, Florida] when I was about ten years old. And he said, "I said, 'Glo [HistoryMaker Gloria Johnson Goins], what do you want to be when you grow up?' And you said, 'Daddy, I want to be a lawyer.'" And he said, "Well, I looked at you and said, 'Why do you want to be a lawyer, Gloria?'" And I said, "Because black people don't know their rights, and I want to help them know their rights." And I don't even remember saying that when he told, but I guess when he said it, I kind of started, you know, remembering that. And he said that I really believe that you're gonna help them one day. And so that's really what I remember about my father, just being this just machine in terms of just an incredible work ethic. I mean he was a machine. I remember him being so godly, wanting to be a priest. I remember him just stressing the importance of, of just getting an education and you know, putting yourself in a position where you can have a better life. Story_ID: 596948 Speaker 1: Now, back to elementary school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You go to St. Stephen's [St. Stephen's Episcopal Day School, Miami, Florida] until you were-- Speaker 2: Sixth grade. Speaker 1: --in the sixth grade. Speaker 2: Yes, from third grade to sixth grade. Speaker 1: And do you graduate, or you just go to another school? Is there a graduation or-- Speaker 2: That was the story that I told you about where Mrs. Reynolds [ph.] selected the top three students. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was in-- Speaker 2: That was graduation. Speaker 1: --sixth grade. Speaker 2: Um-hm-- Speaker 1: Okay, sixth grade. Speaker 2: --that was graduation day. Speaker 1: Sixth grade, okay. And what school do you go to next? Speaker 2: I went to a school called Ransom Everglades [Ransom Everglades School, Miami, Florida]. And Ransom Everglades, it's interesting because Ransom Everglades really sort of changed my life-- Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in many ways. And, and I'll explain that to you. As I told you, I had one friend. And-- Speaker 1: What was this friend's name? Speaker 2: Her name was, her name was Madelaine Bertram [Madelaine Bertram Osborne]. And if you've ever heard of Bertram Yachts, which is a very, very famous yacht company--it's no longer in business--but her father [Richard Bertram] owned a yacht company, a yacht company that was worth millions and millions of dollars. Her, her father's boats have been in movies. And she was my only friend. And all of her siblings--she had five siblings--they went to Ransom Everglades. Now my particular siblings went to a school called LaSalle [Immaculata-La Salle High School, Miami, Florida], which was a Catholic Cuban high school. And that's where my parents [Lillian Dean Johnson and Albert Johnson, Sr.] wanted me to go, because they were thinking, well, that's where your brothers [Albert Johnson, Jr. and Wilbert Johnson] went. It's a great school. That's where you should go. And I begged them, and I said, "I have one friend. She's going to Ransom. I need to go to Ransom." So like okay, well, we never heard of that, but you know, go for it. So, I applied and I got in. And remember I told you that although I, I had graduated as the, the number one student in sixth grade, I had conduct problems. I mean I was, I was the principal's worst nightmare. I was a teacher's worst nightmare. I mean I was, you know, putting the tacks, and telling the jokes, and just disrupting the class. So, I remember very distinctly when my life changed at Ransom Everglades. St. Stephen's was what we called a feeder school for Ransom. And we had a tradition at St. Stephen's called the speech contest, where all of the grades would pick a poem. You know, each student in the grade would pick a poem, and they would compete. And whatever the best poems were would win prizes. And so, to really demonstrate our commitment and our affinity for St. Stephen's, the headmistress of Ransom Everglades at the time decided that she wanted some alums from St. Stephen's to go back and recite a poem representing Ransom, which I thought was a great idea. So she said, "Whoever is interested, if you went to St. Stephen's and you'd like to go back to represent the school, come to my office and let me know." So, three people volunteered. I was one of them. Madsie, my best friend, was the second person. The third person was Nancy Roth [ph.], who had gotten second place on a scholarship at St. Stephen's. So when the day came for the decision to be made, Mrs. Harlow [ph.], who was the headmistress--she was, she, she was very, very scary looking and very, very stern--called all three of us into her office. And she said, "We've made our decision. We've decided who we're gonna send to St. Stephen's to represent the school. Let me tell you how we came to that decision. Madsie, you can't go. You have bad grades and bad conduct, so it's not gonna work. Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Johnson Goins], you can't go either. You have good grades and bad conduct. Nancy, we're going to send you because you have good grades and good conduct." And I have to tell you that was devastating for me, because I said, "Okay, what's the difference between me and Nancy?" And at the time I didn't focus on oh, well, you know, Nancy is blond haired, blue eyed. She, you know, lives in this mansion on the, on the ocean. What I focused on was the conduct. I said the only thing that separates me from her is how I comport myself. So I now have to change how I act, 'cause I got the grades; I just don't know how to act in school. And so from that moment on, I became this model student, ran for student body president, became president of the school, got all kinds of awards, and really stayed at Ransom from the time I was twelve 'til the time I was eighteen. So I ended up graduating from Ransom. And when I graduated, I received the highest honor that the school can give, which is called the headmaster's cup, I mean just really sort of changed my life. And I actually went up to Nancy about two weeks before we graduated, and I said, "I just want to thank you." And she said, "Why?" And I said, "Because you changed my life." I said, "I watched you. I emulated you. I saw how people responded to you, and I said, I'm gonna be like that. And so you really made the difference in my life." So, that's really what I remember about that. Story_ID: 596949 Speaker 1: Give me more detail about your time there and the activities that you-- Speaker 2: God, I did so much (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) were involved. Speaker 2: Well, I did so much. Speaker 1: Well, just tell me some of them. Speaker 2: I did student body, as I mentioned. I played four sports. I ran track for many years. I was running varsity track when I was still in middle school, broke all kind of school records, which I'm sure are gone then, 'cause I would, would run in these little boat shoes. I didn't run in track cleats. I played volleyball. I played softball. I played basketball for a hot second. I realized that someone 5'2" with my skills wasn't gonna--didn't have any game. And then what I decided to do (cough)--excuse me, I have a cough--was, I was the type of person that if I saw a void, rather than complain about it, I'd fill it. This is what I mean: when I got to high school, we had this ritual of bringing all of the grades into the auditorium to read announcements. So the ninth through twelfth grade would come in. And then you'd have someone up there telling us, you know, what the announcements for the day was. And I said, "Wow, with all due respect, we could do this in homeroom. You know, there's no need to bring everybody into the auditorium." And I said, "Why not take this time and create excitement around the school? Why not take this time and showcase the talent of the students?" So I went to the headmaster, and I said, "Mr. Young [ph.], I have an idea. Rather than just bringing us all in for announcements, why don't we do some type of entertainment?" And I said, "I will take responsibility at every assembly to showcase a different Ransom Everglades [Ransom Everglades School, Miami, Florida] student and their talent." So every time we had an assembly, yes, we had the announcements, but we also had a different student sing, play the guitar, do a comedy routine. Then we also did some community service. So rather than just being focused on ourselves, we adopted a very poor elementary school that was predominantly African American nearby called St. Alban's [St. Alban's Day Nursery; St. Alban's Child Enrichment Center, Miami, Florida] and used that assembly time to talk about the importance of giving back. And we would have the kids come over every Christmas. And we'd have one of the teachers dress up like Santa Claus, and we'd do all kind of activities with the kids. So, I wanted to use the fact that we had all this time together to really engage us but also show us the importance of giving back. Speaker 1: What was the makeup of the students at Ransom Everglades? Speaker 2: Most of them were white. So, in the entire school of say two hundred kids, there were proba- well, it was more than two hundred kids there, 'cause high--each class had about ninety-one kids in it. So out of a class of say ninety-one, there were like two or three blacks in the entire class. So there weren't that many African Americans there at all. Story_ID: 596950 Speaker 1: What year do you graduate from high school [Ransom Everglades School, Miami, Florida]? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-one [1981]. Speaker 1: Was there a prom? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you go? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know, back in 1981 I went through my ugly duckling stage. You know, I had the long greasy hair and the braces, and just, you know, my weight fluctuated. I went from being a four to being a twelve, depending on what season it was in. And I remember, I, I remember at my senior prom it was actually kind of painful because there was a gentleman that I probably was in love with from the time I was twelve years old named Charles Kaiser [ph.]. He was Jewish. And my dream was always to go to the prom with Charles. And Charles asked me to go to the prom with him, and I'm, I couldn't believe it, you know. And because I was kind of ashamed to have him come to my house, 'cause his family was a doctor, and they lived in this mansion, and you know, we lived in a nice, we lived in a nice neighborhood for, you know, I, I think as most black people that I interacted with lived [Overtown, Miami, Florida], but we were still poor, and I didn't want him to come to my house. And so when he asked me to go to prom, I said, "No, I already have a date," which was not true. And I, I think back on that, and (unclear) I kind of regret that. And he really couldn't find anybody to go to prom with. So he like asked somebody else at the last minute. And that's kind of something I kind of regret, is not saying, you know, this is who I am. You know, Charles who's known me and been my friend since I was twelve, "Charles, this is where I live." You know, it is what it is. And so I kind of regret that. Story_ID: 596951 Speaker 1: Do you really consider yourself at that time, your family being poor, because it sounds like a middle class (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a great question. Speaker 1: --neighborhood [Overtown, Miami, Florida]-- Speaker 2: That's a great question. Speaker 1: --but poor in comparison to what? Speaker 2: That's a fantastic question, because growing up, I honestly didn't feel poor in the sense that there was very little that I didn't get that I wanted. I mean you're talking to somebody who got a new wardrobe weekly. And it wasn't 'cause my parents [Lillian Dean Johnson and Albert Johnson, Sr.] could afford it. It's because they were creative. My mother, who had this art of cooking, made a deal with a wholesaler to say look, I'll cook food for you if you give me an open account and you give me a discount on top of your discount to come in here on a weekly basis to get clothes. So every week she'd take their whole staff lunch, and then in exchange we would pick out all these clothes. And these were clothes that my wealthy friends weren't wearing. These were clothes that were being sold in, in the best department stores in Miami [Florida]. So I didn't, I didn't really feel poor in that sense. But I didn't really realize what the resource gaps were between me and the people I went to school with until I started going to their homes; until, actually, 'til we got well into our professional careers when you started interviewing for jobs, and you're, you're interviewing for jobs, and you see law firms' names, and the names of the law firms are people that you went to, to school with's parents; or you go to a party in high school [Ransom Everglades School, Miami, Florida], and you're at someone's house, and the maid's house is bigger than your house, and Barbara Eden from 'I Dream of Jeannie' is driving by; or you'd go to someone's house, and they have horse stables in the front yard, and Madonna lives next door. I mean so, I was poor relative to the people I went to school with, but I never felt deprived. I never felt that I lacked for anything. Story_ID: 596952 Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you about the Cuban population in Miami [Florida]. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Definitely has evolved. I mean when I was growing up in Miami, the Hispanic population wasn't as predominant as it is now. It was actually in transition. I mean I even remember back in 1980, '81 [1981], there was a bill that tried to make English only a law in Miami. So that was at the cusp of what I think was a demographic change. But back then, because I have a love for language, I actually would, would pass as Cuban because I was fluent in the language. I mean I started studying Spanish from the time I was eight and studied well into college [Stanford University, Stanford, California], so I was fluent. And so most people thought, especially the friends of my--the, the parents of my friends--who were Cuban, that I was Cuban. And so I have seen the transition in the city become a lot more Hispanic. Many of my family members are Hispanic. I have two nephews who are Hispanic. I have a sister-in-law who's Hispanic. Virtually everyone in my family speaks Spanish. If you don't speak Spanish, which is my husband [Prince Leon Goins]--we kind of talk about him in Spanish to make him learn--you're kind of an outsider. So I've seen the transition. But we've embraced it because we don't, we don't see any other choice, and we have a love for the language, and we have a love for the culture, and we have a love for the people who are Hispanic in my family. Story_ID: 596953 Speaker 1: Before you graduate, is there a teacher or a counselor that lead you in the direction of what school you would go to? Speaker 2: Yes. There's a teacher at Ransom Everglades [Ransom Everglades School, Miami, Florida] named Dan Bowden, who is an institution within the institution. Mr. Bowden probably taught at Ransom forty years. I mean the, the power of Ransom Everglades is that the teachers could go to public school and make more money. But they loved teaching, and they loved the students, so they, they're committed to the school. So he's, he taught there forty years plus before he retired. And I remember him--he's a hoot. He and my mother [Lillian Dean Johnson], their birthdays were near each other. And he would always send my mother a birthday card on her birthday. But I'll, I'll tell you the most salient thing I remember about Dan Bowden, apart from the fact he was my poetry teacher and taught me this incredible poetry. I remember one day I was walking down the breezeway, which was sort of the main atrium of Ransom. And Mr. Bowden said, "[HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou is coming to town, and I want to take you to see her. I want you to go get permission from your parents to go see her." And I said like a, you know, a confused teenager, "Maya Angelou, who's that?" And he said, "You don't know who Maya Angelou is, oh, oh, please." I mean he was just so hurt and disappointed. So I said, "Okay, wow, I've just offended my English teacher, but okay, I'll ask my parents if I can go." So, of course, you know, whatever Mr. Bowden said was fine with them. So they signed a permission slip, and he took me and no one else. I was the only student he took out of the entire school to go see Maya Angelou. And she was the most incredible individual I have seen to date. I have never seen someone so incredibly talented and elegant and gorgeous. I think I laughed and I cried all at the same time. I mean she sang. She recited poetry. I mean I was mesmerized. And so, Mr. Bowden said, after the performance was over, he said, "I'm gonna take you up to meet her." And I'm thinking, okay, well, there's like two thousand people in here. How are we gonna get to that stage to meet her? And certainly, you may have heard of her. I don't think you guys are old, old friends that have tea. So he literally took me by the hand and really just went through the crowd, pushing people aside, "Excuse me, excuse me," I mean just pushing people aside. He was like a weed whacker, just getting through the crowd. And finally, you know, he kind of, you know, you know, got his way up to the stage. And I was like, oh, my god, I hope these people aren't mad because, you know, this man just kind of knocked them over. And he went up to her, and he said, "Ms. Angelou, I'd like you to meet Gloria Johnson [HistoryMaker Gloria Johnson Goins]. She's one of my best and brightest students." And she--I'll never forget this--she leaned down from the stage, and she took my face in her hands, and she said, "Gloria, you're beautiful." And I'll never forget that because I said, "Wow. You mean I could actually be like Maya Angelou one day?" So, that, you know, changed my life. And then, coupled with the fact that when I was doubting my abilities even then, he said, "Look, you can go wherever you want to go. So you want to go Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], even though nobody's gotten into Stanford for five years at this school, you can go there." And so he really kind of just really worked on my self-esteem and, and, and just told me, you know, "Wherever you want to go to college, you can go there. You want to go to Stanford, that's where you can go." And that's actually where I ended up going. Story_ID: 596954 Speaker 1: How did you prepare to make the transition from Miami [Florida] to California? Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a great question. Because my parents [Lillian Dean Johnson and Albert Johnson, Sr.] could not afford for me to go visit college before I went to college. You know how some parents can afford to take their kids around to do visits before they make a decision? We didn't have that luxury. So the first time I saw Stanford University [Stanford, California] is when I showed up freshman year, on the first day. And what I did was, I made the mistake of asking my friends at school [Ransom Everglades School, Miami, Florida] what was the weather like in California. And they said, "Oh, it's just like Miami." So okay, so it's hot, so therefore I don't need socks. So I didn't pack any socks 'cause it's hot. What do I need socks for? It's eighty degrees. I get to San Francisco [California] and that wind just rips me up, okay. I am freezing. Anyone who's been to southern--Northern California knows it's very cold. In fact, there's an old saying that says the, "The coldest winter I ever spent was the summer I spent in San Francisco." It's a very cold place. And my freshman roommate, who is today my best friend in the entire world, says to me, "You didn't bring socks, you know, like where, where are you from," (laughter)? You know, she, she grew up in California. She's a fifth generation Sacramentian [Sacramento, California], who had never been on an airplane in her life. And so she knew the weather, and she knew that it was cold. And she's like, "What kind of idiot are you that didn't bring socks to college?" So, just from an adjustment standpoint, I had to make that adjustment. And then you have to take into consideration that my parents were older; I'm the only girl; I've never been away from home; I can only afford to go home twice a year, if that, summer and Christmas. So being three thousand miles away, with no socks, was an adjustment for me. But luckily for me, I had great friends, like my best friend who was my roommate. And-- Speaker 1: And what's her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Terri Robinson [ph.]. She, she's probably one of the smartest people I know. I mean she is Stanford, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], I mean just one of the smartest people I know. And we were like complete opposites. I was the extrovert, and she was the introvert. And she just helped me get through school, I mean just in terms of being grounded. Like, I had never experienced an earthquake before. Story_ID: 596955 Speaker 1: So tell me about the earthquakes. Speaker 2: Well, I had never experienced an earthquake before, and I had been dreading them. And my best friend [Terri Robinson (ph.)] and another friend of mine named Darlene Martin had heard on the radio that a earthquake was coming and to the extent that you could predict them. And they decided not to tell me. And so I remember the first time I experienced an earthquake in college [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. I was in my room. I had slept on the lower bunk. My best friend slept on the upper bunk. And Darlene, who was a, a good friend of ours who lived down the hall, had decided to crash out in our room that night. And I remember the floor shaking and the refrigerator shaking. And I remember jumping up, running outside. I think I was just in my underwear. I think I was like not even clothed and just like ran out, which is like, if you know anything about earthquake safety, that's like the cardinal sin. You do not go outside in the middle of an earthquake. I didn't know that. And once the ground settled down, I went back inside and discovered that neither my roommate nor my friend had even woken up. They slept right through it. And so I woke them up, and I said, "What's wrong with you guys? Don't you know we had an earthquake?" They're like, "Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, we knew it was coming, and we just wanted you to experience it. We decided not to tell you so you can see it's not a big deal." So, I mean, that's one of the great things about California, is that it is beautiful, but I don't think I could ever get used to earthquakes. Story_ID: 596956 Speaker 1: Was there any other culture shock going from Miami [Florida] to California? Speaker 2: I don't think there was a culture shock. Speaker 1: No, okay. Speaker 2: I think that what was really powerful and really great is just something I actually miss today, is that I never met so many brilliant black people in such large numbers in one place. And, because remember, for most of my life, I grew up as one of only two black people. And so I actually lived in a black dorm. And it was called Ujamaa, which is Kiswahili for we are family and collective economics. And the whole purpose and theme of the, of the, of the dorm was around African Americans, and African history, and our roots, and the diaspora. And most of the people who lived in the dorm were, were black. And we would stay up just night after night talking about any and everything, politics, economics, relationships. And I had never had that experience before, to be around so many people who were so talented and more so who looked like me. And that, that just really is, is something that I'll always treasure. Speaker 1: Who was the president while you were there? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Don't remember, okay. Speaker 2: Derek Bok, B-O-K. Condoleezza Rice was there I think at some period of time when I was there. I think Derek Bok was the president. I could be mistaken. Speaker 1: Okay, I was gonna ask you who were your fellow students at the time. Speaker 2: Oh, wow, there are so many famous people that went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. I'm not as famous as they are. You had Yvette Lee, who's now Yvette Lee Bowser, who created 'Living Single,' 'Half and Half.' I mean she's so incredibly successful. You had Debi Thomas, who was the first African American Olympic skating champion. Came after me as well is Dominique Dawes. I'm just trying to think who else was there. Oh, Andre Braugher, who was in 'Glory,' who's also an actor. I think he's on a, he's on a show now. I can't remember the name of it. But he was very, very successful. There, there were so many really talented people there, just amazing. Story_ID: 596957 Speaker 1: Did you belong to any organizations? Speaker 2: Yes, I, I am a member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority and had the honor of, while I was at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], chartering a chapter of Delta for Stanford and some surrounding universities. I didn't pledge at Stanford. I actually pledged in San Francisco [California], but I was one of the chartering members of that organization. That was a great pride of mine. That's something that I take a lot of pride in. I think the power of, of our black Greek organizations is just such an honor and so humbling. And I think the potential that we have with those organizations is unreal. I actually don't think we fully tapped into what we can do as college educated men and women to really address the issues in our community. Story_ID: 596958 Speaker 1: And tell me about you professors. Anybody stick in your mind (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I had a weird professor. I had a professor named Phil Zimbardo [Philip Zimbardo], who, if you are in the psychology world, he is one of the most well known professors. And I remember him because he was, he was, he did things that were very avant garde. And I was fortunate that I had the opportunity to graduate with honors from psychology at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. And I did an honor's thesis at Stanford, and Phil Zimbardo was my advisor. He is well known for doing really avant garde things like there's something called the Stanford Prison Experiment, where he brought in students and assigned them roles where part of the students played guards in the prison, and part of the students played prisoners. And what you found is that when you put people in those circumstances that they kind of act out and become the roles. So the guards became very, very violent--these were students--and the prisoners became very, very passive. And it was just kind of to show you that personality can be defined by circumstances and situations. And my thesis that he helped me on was around class and racism. And my theory was that depending on your race, class, or the combination of the two, that you would experience more violence. And so, in other words, my theory was that if you are black and poor, as opposed to white and middle class, that given a situation involving, whether it's police brutality or, or even a prison situation, that you are going to experience more violence. And sure enough, not really surprisingly, when we did the experiment and the data, it proved the thesis right, that that, that poor people and people of color tend to experience more violence, all things being equal, than people who are in a different class or, or people who are not of color. And what was sort of interesting about that is that the way we define the na- the way we define the race and the class of the individuals was simply through a name and an occupation. And so we did some studies to say that if this person's name was Leroy Jones, was that person perceived as black? And I don't remember what the, the other name was. Or if this person was a janitor, was that person perceived as poor. And just based on just names, people redlined and stereotyped people based on the, their names and their occupations and treated them differently based on that. Story_ID: 596959 Speaker 1: Why psychology? Had you still had in your mind that you were gonna go to law school? Speaker 2: Great question. I had no idea what to major in. I mean, I knew that I wanted to be a lawyer. I mean that was engrained from the time I was six, but what to major in, no clue. We didn't have a quote, prelaw major at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], so that wasn't an option. Even if it were, I don't think I would have done that, especially now knowing what I know. So I kind of drifted a little bit for the first freshman year, not really knowing what I wanted to major in until I went to a class called psychology and the law. And that class turned on a light bulb for me because in the class, the professor, and it was a woman--I don't remember her name--showed all of the parallels between the law and psychology, particularly if you're talking about trial work, which is what I end, you know, I ultimately ended up doing, was becoming a trial lawyer, and the psychology of how you pick, how you unpick a jury, how you present yourself, what colors you wear, what motions you use; all of that is psychology. And so the tie was just right there and never saw it until she laid it out for us. And I said, "That's it: I'm gonna major in psychology," because I need to understand the complexity of how people make decisions, particularly on things that have nothing to do with the facts. And subsequently, I ended up doing some jury studies to really help understand why juries make the decisions they make. And if you talk to jurors after they've rendered a verdict, you will be blown away by some of the things they tell you. And this is actually a study I did when I was still in college and thinking about going to law school. I sat through trials in Washington, D.C. And then after the trial was over, I would ask the jurors, "Why did you make the decision that you made?" And they would say, "Oh, that prosecuting attorney, his tie was so ugly; his shoes were ugly." And I'm thinking, okay, what does that (laughter) have to do with the facts of the case? Or they'll say, "Oh, that guy was so guilty there was blood everywhere." Now mind you, I sat through the entire trial, so I know what the evidence was. I'm like, "But there was no evidence of blood." "Well, anyway, he was guilty anyway." And it was just really interesting to watch how they came to all of these decisions in the absence of, quite frankly, facts, the things they focused on that seemingly had nothing to do with the actual case. And it really just goes to show you how our justice system works, because you have people making decisions about your life and your livelihood that, quite frankly, a lot of the things they're using to make those decisions have nothing to do whether or not you've actually been wronged, or you should be vindicated. So it was just a fascinating thing. Story_ID: 596960 Speaker 1: So you leave Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-five [1985]. Speaker 1: And were you all set to go to law school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Speaker 1: Okay. You went immediately (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did. Speaker 1: No time off? Speaker 2: I did, I did. And the reason I did that is because I felt, you know, if I don't go straight through, I'm never gonna go back. I was afraid of losing that momentum. In retrospect, I would tell my daughter [Grace Princess Goins] or anyone else who was thinking about going to law school to take some time off and travel and work, because what I found is that the people who did that in my law school were actually, I think they were better students because they knew that that's where they wanted to be; they were more mature; they were more grounded; and I think that when they actually got out into the workforce, they were better to their employers 'cause they had a more worldly view of the world. So I was just in a hurry. And had I to do it over again, I probably would have taken a year off and traveled and you know, practiced my foreign languages, and maybe even had a job somewhere that was non-law related just to kind of give me that additional rounding. Speaker 1: So what jobs had you had up until this time? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean I was just doing odds and end jobs at school, so I'm putting up flyers; I'm working in the cafeteria. And other than the job that I described where I was doing the jury research, I didn't really do anything that was connected to that, to that path of going to law school. And the jury research job was unpaid. So while I was getting what I thought was gonna help me, one, look better on my law school applications, and two, have better sense of what it meant to be a lawyer, I also had to work another job to, so I could eat. There were many days that I, you know, had fifty cents and tried to scrape together the fifty cents to get a can of soup. But I figured I'd make that trade off. So, very little that I do that actually prepared me in the sense of now I'm going to law school, and I've got a background to, to be ready to compete. Story_ID: 596961 Speaker 1: So, tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: Go to law school at University of Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I will tell you I am not an urban person at all. I grew up in the suburbs [Overtown, Miami, Florida]. I don't really care for the city to live. I mean I like to go to the city to, to shop and eat and go home. And so going into an urban environment, growing up in basically the suburbs and growing up in Palo Alto [California], which is a college town, was quite a culture shock for me because you'd constantly have to be on guard when you're in the city. And you know, I had people, you know, try to steal stuff from me. And you know, that was just really, really different for me. And then when you're in law school, most law schools do not allow your first year law students to have jobs. And so all you're doing is studying. So it was the first time I'd ever seen snow. So I, I wore these snow boots that we would probably wear if you were going up to Alaska--I didn't know--that came up to my knees, and everybody laughed at me. I didn't know. What did I know? I was a person that didn't bring socks to college [Stanford University, Stanford, California]. You know, what do I know about snow? So I experienced snow for the first time. I experienced what it was like to live in a city and all of the danger and the vigilance that you have to have when you're in a city; didn't get a whole lot of time to actually experience what I think are the best parts of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the, the history, the great jazz. It's actually a very vibrant African American community. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: Didn't really get to experience that until I left and was actually practicing 'cause I was studying most of the time. Speaker 1: Why did, why did you pick the University of Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: You know, it's a great question. I applied to thirteen law schools, and I got into all of them except for Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And honestly, I went to Penn because I felt that's the place I should have been, and again, couldn't afford to visit, but I just got this feeling of that's the place for you. And I kind of went with gut, and that's where I went. Story_ID: 596962 Speaker 1: So your first year you're studying. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now usually that first summer you get your first job. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is that right? Usually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: --first year law students start working that summer? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So tell me about. Speaker 2: That was a time when being in law school was a big deal, not so sure it's still as of a big deal today 'cause there are so many lawyers and so many law students. But back then, if you were in law school at top school, and at the time Penn [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was in the top five in the country, you were a rock star. And I ended up getting my summer job at a law firm called Fenwick, Davis and West. It's in Palo Alto [California], so it was actually about a mile or two from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], so I went back out there. And they flew me out there. They paid me some ridiculous amount of money. And they had this policy that said if you take a law student out to lunch, or to dinner, or to any meal, you as a, a lawyer in the firm don't have to pay the comp- the company would pick up everything. So I had dates (laughter). I had dinner, and lunch, and breakfast dates all through the summer. I think I gained about thirty pounds that summer, literally, 'cause all I did was eat. And it was a great law firm because back then I got to work on the IPO [initial public offering] for a company that you've heard of today called Mrs. Fields cookies. And Mrs. Fields is actually a great story because Debbi Fields, who started Mrs. Fields cookies, said to her husband one day, who was very wealth, Randy [Randy Fields], "Hey, Randy, you know, I want to start a cookie company; I want to bake cookies." And he's like, "Okay, Debbi. Here's a thousand dollars; go bake some cookies." Well, the rest is history. So that summer is when we did the IPO for Mrs. Fields cookies. And so I got to see Mrs. Fields come in. And you know, as a first year law student, yeah, that was a big deal for me. That law firm was one of the most nurturing, fun places I'd ever worked. And actually, it's been rated as one of the best places to work in America, which is very unusual for a law firm. So it's not just one of the best law firms to work for. It's one of the best places to work, 'cause it was just fun. And the people were collegial. They fed you all the time. And they just gave you really interesting work to do. So that's what I did after my first year of law school. Story_ID: 596963 Speaker 1: Tell me, who were the students in your law school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] with you? How many women? How many blacks? Speaker 2: Wow, there were very few blacks. I want to say in my class there may have been five out of a hundred and eighty some students. So there were very few, very, very few blacks. Some--the most prominent law student that I remember is a gentleman by the name of Adrian Cronauer. And there was a movie made about his life called 'Good Morning, Vietnam,' where Robin Williams actually played him. And he was a disc jockey in Vietnam. And what he did was, through humor, he brought sanity to a very, very insane time in our history. And to meet him, because at the time he was in law school with me, he was a year behind me. At the time he was in law school with me, the movie was just about to come out--one of the most grounded people. And even after the movie came out, you never would have known, just so grounded. So, I went to school with, you know, some very, very bright and talented people. I remember Adrian. I also remember a gentleman by the name of Dr. Preston Wigfall who was in my class. Preston happened to be an African American. This man had more degrees than you can count. He had an engineering degree. He was a medical doctor. And he was a practicing medical doctor, so sometimes he would come racing into class in his greens, and he'd have blood them, and he'd run to class. So here is a gentleman who's got an engineering degree, an M.D., and law degree. So, just in terms of looking at someone and saying, you know, gosh, you know, for all the people that said that, you know, we couldn't do it or you know, we, we're not smart and we're not accomplished, you know, this man said oh yeah, well, I got three professions and, and excelled in all of them, such an encouragement to me. Story_ID: 596964 Speaker 1: What were some of the classes that you took your first year? Usually first year students take contracts and torts and-- Speaker 2: You know about law school, don't you? Yeah, I took torts, and contracts, and constitutional law, property, you know, your basic classes. I think the class that I had the most interest in was torts, which is just a fancy French word for personal injury. And my professor's name was Gary Francione [Gary L. Francione]. He was a hoot. He said on the first day of class, "If I call on you and you are not prepared, I'm gonna ask you to leave class." And that's pretty standard. But somehow when he said it, it, it had a little bit more fear and trembling in his voice. And I, I never will forget that when I was in his class, he called on me, and he asked me a question. And the question was, actually, the question was: "What is a bill of exceptions?" And I gave some answer that I think I had just looked in the, the 'Black's Law Dictionary' like two days before, so I kind of remembered it. And there was this long pause. And everyone was like, "Oh, he's gonna throw her out." And he said, "Excellent, Ms. Johnson [HistoryMaker Gloria Johnson Goins], very good." And everybody kind of looked at me, and I kind of looked up and went, "Okay." And he just became one of my, you know, best professors. When you think about it, law school is very, very competitive. You know, I had people steal my notes. I had people going to the library and rip out pages, I mean all of those sort of horror stories that you hear about how competitive law school is and was. I don't know what it's like today in terms of how law students experience school today, but back then it was very, very competitive. And you know, it was just a very tough place to be, where you're constantly trying to prove yourself. And then you have colleagues in law school who are trying to, you know, make themselves stand out by putting everybody else at a disadvantage. I don't think my law school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was the worst offender of that, 'cause we certainly heard more horror stories of people, you know, stealing books out of the library and doing those kind of things. But I definitely have had my notes stolen in law school. I've definitely gone to the library and look up an assignment and either the book not be there or the, the pages be ripped out. So it was just a very competitive environment, and to have a professor that kind of gave you a pat on the back every once in a while, it helped me. Story_ID: 596965 Speaker 1: So second year, does it get better? Speaker 2: Let's see, what's the old metaphor? The first year they scare you to death. The second year they work you death. The third year they bore you to death. That's about right on. I, I would say that second year of law school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was when I got into probably the heart of what I call the aspects of law that I really started in, you know, enjoying and practicing. I did real estate finance. I learned what a PIG was. I wish I could teach every black person what is a PIG is. Speaker 1: What is a PIG? Speaker 2: A PIG is a passive income generator. And my husband [Prince Leon Goins] and I use that phraseology weekly because our goal is to create PIG farms. Because one of the things that, that we try to, we try to share with, with young people is that the way to create wealth is to make sure that you make money when you sleep. And so if you're only making money when you're physically present or you're physically working, then you're limited in your ability to, to gain wealth. So you've got to find PIGs that make money for you, whether that's your dividends or your stock, whether that's your income from your rental property, whether if you have the, the, the, the blessing to be an entertainer; that's the royalties from your song or, or the residuals from your television show. You know, the goal is to create as many PIGs as possible so that you can let your wor- your money work for you and you stop working for it. So learned about PIGs, learned about real estate finance, really kind of got into the heart of what I call the core practice of law during my second year of law school. Story_ID: 596966 Speaker 1: And that summer, what job did you have? Speaker 2: I ended up working at a law firm that I actually started my practice at. And that law firm is actually out of business unfortunately. It was called Fine, Jacobson--it's a very long name. It was called Fine, Jacobson, Schwartz, Nash, Block, and England. They had a very long name, but it was very affectionately known as Fine, Jacobson. And I'll never forget my interview because I was really scared, because I was, by most standards, probably an average law student, although I made the law review [University of Pennsylvania Law Review], which is the goal when you're in law school. I didn't think I was that hot, you know, and so I was afraid they were gonna ask me for my grades (laughter). And unlike every other interview I had, they didn't ask me for my grades. They were really interested in my background, and, and, and how I interviewed, and what the fit was from the firm. And I remember the gentleman that interviewed me. His name was Paul Berkowitz. He was a Penn [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] grad, and he was a partner at the firm. And when I came down to the firm, which is based in my hometown of Miami [Florida], it's like I had been there all my life. I mean the people were friendly, and down to earth, and supportive, and I had people who took an interest in teaching me. And I remember one of the, the, the lawyers that, that I worked for. His name was Gary Brooks. He was a hoot (laughter). He, he was, he was a trial lawyer. He was only like, oh, five feet and some change but just brilliant lawyer. And what he would do, which is what I wish that every lawyer does for law students coming out into the profession, is that he actually taught me how to practice law. And what people don't really understand is you really don't become a lawyer until you're actually practicing it. And so unless you have someone telling you what to do in the actual process of practicing, you really don't learn how to practice law in school. So what Gary would do is he would give you an assignment, and then he would take that assignment and he said, "Okay, give me a copy; here's your copy. I'm gonna go over line by line what I'm gonna change and why. So the next time I give you this assignment, I don't expect these changes to be here." Then he taught me how to answer questions in court, how to ask questions in court, how to prepare witnesses, how to prepare a file. I mean he really was the first person that taught me how to practice law, and he loved teaching; I mean he just really, really loved teaching. And he took the time to train his lawyers how to be lawyers, and I'll never forget that. Story_ID: 596967 Speaker 1: Talking about the law review [University of Pennsylvania Law Review]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now that's a really big deal. Now, you make the law review, but then you also become the editor. Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and actually, you know, I was an editor. There's an editor-in-chief. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so what happens is, when you make the law review, I think your second year on the review you become an editor. And basically, you're responsible for making sure that the actual law review gets published. But there's an editor-in-chief, so I didn't have the honor of being the editor-in-chief, but I was one of, I think there were like, maybe twenty in the school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. I mean there, there, I mean the law review is very small, so I mean it was a very small editorial staff. Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell me about that. Speaker 2: Wow, I think that I was probably one of the most nontechnical people on the law review. Because what people don't understand is that legal writing is very, very technical, and when you are on the law review, you have to be so detail oriented. So, for example, when, when someone submits an article to be published, and you're assigned as the editor, not only are you checking that article for content and typos, and does this case actually say what they said it said? But there's a whole process; there's a whole book, called 'The Bluebook' ['The Bluebook: A Uniform System of Citation'], that every single citation, every single quotation has to follow. It's a very tedious, very arduous task to make sure that it has 'Bluebook' perfection. And I wouldn't consider myself to be the most detailed or patient person. So the fact that I was an editor that required me to do something so detailed, was one, kind of funny to me; but two, it also taught me the importance of that, because I think that experience is transferrable to other aspects of my life and to other aspects of my career because the devil is in the details. Story_ID: 596968 Speaker 1: So we were talking about your job the second year [at the University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], during the summer. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And usually--did you tell me that you actually begin your law career with this same firm [Fine, Jacobson, Schwartz, Nash, Block, and England]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And that's usually what happens in the second year. Speaker 2: Hopefully, if you're lucky. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: But I was, I was fortunate enough to also get an offer from my first law firm [Fenwick, Davis and West, Palo Alto, California] that I worked for right after my first year. Speaker 1: In California? Speaker 2: In California. I decided that I wanted to start my career at home with my family. And my parents [Lillian Dean Johnson and Albert Johnson, Sr.] were older, and I wanted to go back home and start my career. Speaker 1: Okay. What was the makeup of the firm? Speaker 2: Mostly white. It was a predominantly Jewish firm. I think there were of the maybe sixty, seventy lawyers, I think four of us were black. So it was, you know, not very diverse. There were a couple of Hispanics, maybe two or three. So it was very, I think it was just mostly white and Jewish, as I remember. Story_ID: 596969 Speaker 1: So you, you finish your, your last year [at the University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And tell me how your last year--you were bored to death (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes and no. I was bored a little because that's the, the, the paradigm, right? But a couple of things I did that I think were really fulfilling for me: one, in Pennsylvania, when you are a third year law student, you can be admitted to the bar temporarily to represent indigent people. And so I had the opportunity to represent children and children who were abused, and abandoned, and who were not being supported by their families. So I got to be--and I think it was called the Guardian Light Program [ph.]. I don't really remember, 'cause I also did it when I became a lawyer as well. But I had an opportunity to go to court and defend the rights of children, which meant a lot to me. And then I had an opportunity to work with one of the professors, who's not in law school--I want to say he taught at the business school [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--his name was Kenny Shropshire [Kenneth L. Shropshire]. And he, his sort of niche, his sort of specialty was sports and entertainment, which was kind of an interest of mine, so I helped him write an article that was published. And then I had another professor who was a judge, who's now deceased. His name is Judge Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.]. I actually took a class with him, and I also helped him write an article on race and law that was published as well. So I would say during that third year, although my coursework itself was probably not as intriguing, if you will, the second year, I definitely had opportunities to do things that I thought were of value and really fulfilled me personally and professionally. Speaker 1: Did you want to talk about the articles that you-- Speaker 2: You know I don't-- Speaker 1: --co-authored? Speaker 2: --I don't remember them. I re-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I sort of remember Judge Higginbotham because he, he's written books and articles about the whole sort of transition of race and the judicial system. And he talked about, in particular, race and education. And the article focused on how back in the times of segregation in this country, many of the colleges and universities that blacks had really no choice to go to were basically like fanciful high schools. And they were like high schools; I mean they didn't have the resources. And there were even laws down here in the South that said you know, "We don't want black students to go to our institutions, but we'll pay for you to go somewhere north." Which if you think about it, that's not an economically viable model. I mean if you think about it, segregation is not an economically viable model because you have to have different places for different people. It's just not economically viable. But they did have a law one time that said you know, "Hey, you want to go Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Great, we'll pay for it." And so he talked about in this article, this whole sort of transition of what happened in the law that was a reflection of the changes in American society around education and race and how, you know, the changes in education came as a result of obviously some great foot soldiers and fighters. But it came as a result of changes in the law but also just some economic and legal impracticalities of trying to maintain these systems separately. Story_ID: 596970 Speaker 1: So you, you receive your degree in 1988. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And you begin your career at Fine, Jacob- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fine, Jacobson [Fine, Jacobson, Schwartz, Nash, Block, and England]. Speaker 1: --Jacobson, okay-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --okay. So tell me what that was like, to actually begin--I mean, I know that you had already worked there for the summer, but now you are a full fledged lawyer. Tell me about taking the--you had already taken the bar, or--because you said you-- Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember. Speaker 1: --you, had to-- Speaker 2: I had taken--what happens is you take the bar in July, and I graduated from law school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in May. And so you--I think I took the summer off. But you started before you found out if you passed the bar or not. And to answer the question of what was that like, it was terrifying. And I have to tell you, I wasn't ready. I wasn't ready emotionally; I wasn't ready psychologically; I wasn't ready politically. And, and what I mean by that is, when you're a student, and you go through your whole academic career not skipping a beat like I did, it's hard to make that transition when you don't have a break. You know, when you're school you have spring break; you have Christmas break; you have I don't want to go to class, break. You know, you have all these breaks. But when you're out in the working world, you have very little built in breaks. And so that was a transition. Two, I did pass the bar the first time, which was a relief. But the part I wasn't prepared for and the part I don't think that even today a lot of black people are prepared for, are the politics and the unspoken rules that go on in Corporate America. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Do you want to stop? Speaker 1: Such as, such as? Unh-uh. Speaker 2: Okay. And, and this is what I mean: if you kind of put this in an historical context and say, when I got to my firm, there were like, again, four or five blacks. There was only one black partner out of this firm. They had two offices, one in Fort Lauderdale [Florida], and one in Miami [Florida]. A lot of the people that had--were my peers in the sense that we graduated from law school at the same time but went to different law schools. Their parents were professionals. Their parents were either lawyers, or their parents had at least a college education. I mean my father [Albert Johnson, Sr.], again, had a sixth grade education. My mother [Lillian Dean Johnson] had an eleventh grade education. I was the first generation college. And although both of my brothers [Albert Johnson, Jr. and Wilbert Johnson] had gone to college, they didn't have the same experience I had. One of my older brothers actually went to law school and graduated at the same I did. He went to night school. But we still had a different path because he was teaching during the daytime. And actually, rather than going into a firm, he actually went back and taught school even after he graduated from law school and passed the bar. So all of that to say, I didn't have someone to sit me down and say here are the rules of the game. I didn't even know we were playing a game. That coupled with the fact that just from who I am as a person--I have a naive streak in me--was a recipe for disaster, because I took people as, at face value. You know, if you came to me and said, "Hey, you know, I want to be your friend, and here's what's going on, you know," I took it for face value because I assumed that because I had no agenda, that you had no agenda. And certainly I didn't know that you were playing a game because I didn't know we were playing a game. And I will tell you that I ended up, in the words of one of my mentors today, putting my hand on a lot of invisible fences. In other words, you, you make mistakes that you didn't even realize were even, that were even out there to be made, because there are rules that no one ever told you existed, and you learned them the hard way 'cause you broke it. And I broke many, many, many un- unbroken rules, you know, the first I'd say eighteen, twenty months of my practice. Speaker 1: What were some of the unspoken rules that you're talking about? Speaker 2: You not only have to do the work, you have to be seen doing the work. So it's not enough that you put in the time. They have to see you put in the time. You got to be there before the boss and, and leave before the boss. You have to dress a certain way. I mean I knew that, but I also got feedback that I dressed too nicely. I got feedback that I was too happy. So all of these little politics and games that, that people played, I wasn't aware of. I didn't realize that people were competing with me or saw me as competition. I thought we were lawyers trying to serve the client. And so I didn't realize that I had people who were trying to outshine me, trying to discredit me, trying to question why I'd been hired. I didn't realize any of that until it was actually happening and found myself having to defend myself in the middle of that. So there's a lot of things that had I had a, a parent, or a godfather, or sibling that had gone through that experience, I could have learned from and not experienced. But unfortunately, experience was the best teacher in that case. Story_ID: 596971 Speaker 1: So how long did you stay at that firm [Fine, Jacobson, Schwartz, Nash, Block, and England]? Speaker 2: Two years. Speaker 1: Okay. And after two years, what did you decide to do? Speaker 2: One of the partners at that firm left the firm about a year and a half before I did to start another firm with a group of people. And he recruited me to come over to his second firm, so I went over there. The firm was called Adorno and Zeder, Z-E-D-E-R. It's now called Adorno and Yoss [Adorno and Yoss, LLP]. It is the largest minority owned law firm in the Southeast. It's very, very successful. And so I went over there and had I'd say an incredible experience, in that what I liked about that firm was, unlike most law firms where there is a stereotype experience that you have as a first year law student, so this is notion that you carry the briefcase; you make the copies; you keep up with the file; you don't really talk to the client. You know, there's kind of a stereotypical experience. Whereas at Adorno and Zeder, you did whatever you could do based on your talent and ability. And so if you were performing at a fifth and sixth year level, that's what you did. And I had mentors and bosses that believed in my ability, that gave me responsibilities and opportunities that I probably would have never seen until I was probably four or five years more seasoned into my career. And that actually made a difference, not only in terms of just my confidence and my ability to, to be a good lawyer, but it also put me in a position for my next job, which was one of my clients at Adorno and Zeder was BellSouth [BellSouth Telecommunications, Inc.; AT&T Mobility LLC, Atlanta, Georgia]. Story_ID: 596972 Speaker 1: And one of my clients said to me, "Listen, we've got this great job in Atlanta [Georgia] working for the company. I'd like you to interview for it." And I said, "I'm sorry. With all due respect, I don't want to go work for a corporation. You know, I've got this plan. We all plan our lives, and it never works that way. I'm gonna stay here. I'm gonna be a federal prosecutor. Then I'm gonna come back, and I'm either gonna be a partner of this firm [Adorno and Zeder; Adorno and Yoss, LLP] or I'm gonna be a judge. So, sorry, but corporation is not on the, on the plan." And he called me every day for a week, and he said, "Look, I'm not telling you absolutely you're gonna get the job. I'm just telling you that if you get the job, I think you'll be great at it, and I think you'll be thanking me forever if you get it." And so I basically interviewed for this job just to humor my client. So I flew up to Atlanta, met with the general counsel of BellSouth [BellSouth Telecommunications, Inc.; AT&T Mobility LLC, Atlanta, Georgia], interviewed, not caring (laughter) if I got the job or not, got the job, and made a hard decision, which was to leave my family, leave my friends, to leave my community to go work in a city I'd been to once, to go work in a corporation that was huge, to go practice in an area of law I'd never practiced before. So I basically gave up everything and moved to Atlanta in 1992 to be in house counsel for BellSouth. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, for BellSouth you handled a variety of, of things. And you said you had not practiced the type of law that you needed. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: And what was that? Speaker 1: Labor and employment law. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean I, I didn't know anything about labor and employment law. I was primarily a commercial litigator. I mean I would represent major corporations and the government, primarily doing multimillion dollar foreclosures, and collections, and I dabbled in a little family law. I would do divorce cases. I would do some white collar crime stuff. I did a little bit of entertainment law that I was just kind learning on sign. So, the actual labor and employment stuff, I had never seen it. I think I may have taken one class in law school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and didn't pay attention. And so I basically had to learn that area of law from scratch and ended up loving it, ended up becoming one of their best trial lawyers, who actually tried cases for the company. I was one of the few lawyers that actually went to the courtroom and represented the company in the courtroom and took the chance that we'd lose and loved that, did that for many, many, many years. Story_ID: 596973 Speaker 1: Were there any cases that you can talk about that you worked on (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes. They're, they're, they're done; I mean they're over. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: They're public record. I remember my very first federal jury trial. It was against a gentleman named Michael Dawson [ph.]. And what, what, what made this case interesting, there were so many dynamics going on. The lawyer on the other side was actually someone who went to law school with me [at the University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and his name was Keenan Nix. And he worked in a law firm, and he had, I would have tell you, much more experience trying cases than I did. He was on the Law Review [University of Pennsylvania Law Review] as well. And he, with all due respect to Keenan, I think he underestimated me. And the reason I say that is because when you're in a corporation, you don't have to bill time like you do in a law firm, which means I'm only judged by my results and cost in that order. So what that means is that I can take as long or as little as I want to prepare for a case. Whereas if you're in a law firm, you have to account for every second, literally, of the day. And you can't just be in the shower thinking of some great strategy for your client and then charge your client for that time when the case isn't set for trial, because the client's gonna get the bill and say, "I see you went and prepared for my trial. When is the trial date?" And he said, "Well, we don't have a trial date. I just had this great idea." And so I say that to say how I prepared and how he prepared. He prepared when we got the trial notice. I prepared for trial from day one. So by the time the trial came, it was like the Super Bowl for me. I mean I was so prepared. I knew every fact cold. I knew my arguments cold. And so when we won the case, all of us (laughter) were surprised, because it was a discrimination case in which he had sued us. And, and I think he did a great job, but I don't think he had (unclear)--I don't think he had prepared for how prepared I was going to be, 'cause he said you know, "I went to law school with Gloria [HistoryMaker Gloria Johnson Goins], come on. I mean she works at a corporation. What do they know about trying cases?" But not understanding because I was in a different world, that I had an advantage over how much I could prepare--I could prepare without having to respond or account for that time. So, I'll never forget that I remember him crying in the middle of his closing argument. And I remember thinking to myself, you know, we've, we've--this is just incredible to me because, he's crying. And the case really isn't that dramatic. And I think what he was crying for was not the, the, the facts of the case, 'cause it was really just a situation where the person had alleged that we didn't give him job. He was working for the company [BellSouth Telecommunications, Inc.; AT&T Mobility LLC, Atlanta, Georgia]. He had worked for the company for many years, and was still working for the company, and had sued the company. And so he was crying. And I said, "He's not crying 'cause of the case. He was crying 'cause he was so frustrated with what he thought was a slam dunk." And I'll just never forget that. I'll never forget the pride that I had bringing home that victory and the fun I had working with my, my co-counsel, who was a gentleman by the name of Ed Rankin, who was one of the classiest human beings you'll ever meet, completely different from me. Just, he was very calm and introverted, and I was like, hyper and extroverted. And we just made an incredible team, and we just showed the company proud. Speaker 1: So you stay with BellSouth [BellSouth Corporation; AT&T Inc.] for four years. Is that right, or-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --how long do you stay there? Speaker 2: --it's a, it's a little tricky when you look at my background, because what happened was I was with BellSouth from 1992 to 2000. And actually, I was still with BellSouth technically until I left to come to Home Depot [The Home Depot, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. Back in 2000, I was in the wireless part of our business. I was a lawyer at our wireless company. And then we decided to do a joint venture between BellSouth and Southwestern Bell [Southwestern Bell Corporation; SBC Communications Inc.], where we took our two wireless companies and merged them into what became Cingular Wireless [Cingular Wireless LLC; AT&T Mobility LLC, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was 40 percent owned by BellSouth and 60 percent owned by SBC. So I didn't actually leave BellSouth. I was still working for BellSouth company. BellSouth was still our parent and our mama. So, I stayed with BellSouth, as I said, until I came to Home Depot in 2003. Story_ID: 596974 Speaker 1: Now, in 1996-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --co-authored an article on the Family and Medical Leave Act [Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993]? Speaker 2: Yes. And I had a chance to do that with Ed Rankin, who was the gentleman that I just mentioned that I tried my first federal jury trial with. And I honestly won't remember the details of the act or the article 'cause it's been awhile. But back then, I think it was President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had passed that law. And it, it was not clear as to what it really meant to employers, much less to people who wanted to take advantage of it, as to how to utilize it and what were the benefits. So Ed and I wrote an article called 'Unraveling the Mysteries of the Phantom--of the Family Medical Leave Act' [ph.] to help employers and potential beneficiaries or users of the act understand what their respective rights were. And that was a fun project working on it with Ed. Story_ID: 596975 Speaker 1: So you're still with BellSouth [BellSouth Corporation; AT&T, Inc.]. So tell me some of the other positions or the different types of cases, litigation cases that you had during that time. Speaker 2: As I mentioned, I spent a lot of time trying employment cases. I also would try some personal injury cases where people would come and I guess they'd claim they slipped and fell, that kind of thing. But one of the things that, that I did at BellSouth that I'm particularly proud of and it, it was kind of forced on me, and that's why you have to really be open to when blessings and opportunities come to you, even though they're not initially what you would take for yourself, is although I was a trial lawyer, and that's probably in my DNA, the lawyers at the time that got the most respect in the company were the regulatory lawyers, the lawyers that really went down and, and dealt with the bread and butter of how the phone company operated and dealt with the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and the, the state local public service commissions. And so, in order to get what I thought was the respect, you know, one of my bosses said you know, "It's great that you can try cases. I realize that most lawyers don't even know where the courthouse is. But you also really need to do some regulatory work, so you're gonna do both." And what I ended up doing, was I ended up designing and implementing the 678 area code for metropolitan Atlanta [Georgia]. And what brought this about is just incredible growth in Atlanta. 404 was just exploding in terms of area code. I don't think people realize that it's only a finite number of numbers in every area code. And there will come a time in this country where you will have to dial eleven digits to make a local call because there's just too many people. There's only so many numbers. And so because of all the growth in metropolitan Atlanta, if you remember back, you know, back then--I can't remember the year, but it was in the late-'90s [1990s] I wanna say--we divided metropolitan Atlanta in half. And we said, "Okay, if you live inside the perimeter, your area code is now gonna be 404. If you're north of the perimeter, you're now gonna be 770." And we thought okay, well, well, I prefer to have 404, but people kind of got use to that. So the problem became that the growth happened faster than even we planned. And so just about two years into having a 770 area, we were beginning to run out of numbers because everybody was moving up north. And so we were in jeopardy of having to do yet another geographic split, meaning we would have to take the people in 770 and cut that in half and give up, you know, gives, give half the people yet another area code. The problem with that is that we had just done that two years prior. And if you think about the impact on small business owners who'd have to change their stationery, who'd have to change their, their yellow page ads, who'd have to change their letterhead, it was just too onerous because about 1.5 million customers would have had to have done that. And so there's a technology that you can use that, up until the point in time that we did it, had been done before in other states. But the FCC had not issued any rules to say, "Okay, I know you all had been doing this before, but this is how you really do it." So I implemented and designed something called an overlay, which would allow the area code to exhaust, but it would be transparent to the consumer. So when we added 678 in, it required everyone to then begin to dial ten digits for a local call on a mandatory basis. But when 770 ran out, it became transparent to everyone else, because if we didn't have any more 770s, you just get a 678 number. Now 678 for metropolitan Atlanta is old hat. Now making a ten digit call for a local call, nobody thinks about that anymore. It's just become part of our DNA, but back then there was a lot of debate about that. So now whenever we run out of numbers of 678, we'll slap another code on top of that, and once again it will be transparent to the consumer. And we were very nervous about that because, as I mentioned, although there were other states--I want to say there were some parts of California that had it; I want to say Maryland had done it; I want to say there was a city or two in Pennsylvania that had done an overlay--there weren't any federal guidelines on how do you properly do it. And so we were the first state in the whole country to put in an overlay plan when there were actually guidelines. And we were scared because, because the guidelines were so new, the government had not interpreted what they meant. And so we took a lot of calculated risks to try to understand what was in the head of the legislator and what was in the head of the FCC when they drafted those rules. And you know, we did some smart things. We went up to Washington [D.C.], and we kind of talked to the FCC and asked them to share whatever they could without violating the spirit of, of the law. But we held our breath there for a while. Story_ID: 596976 Speaker 1: So is this the time when you are considered general counsel? Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, we had a process in the BellSouth [BellSouth Corporation; AT&T, Inc.] legal department that mirrored the process of becoming a partner in a law firm. And so when you come into the legal department in BellSouth you're an attorney. And then there's a--they changed the process when I got there, not because of me, but because the process was just changing. It used to be that if you were there for, I wanna say you be in the company at least three years and you were out of law school for at least five, you automatically became a partner. But I guess about two or three years into my tenure they changed the rule and said, "Yes, you gotta be X amount of years with the company; yes, you gotta be X amount of years out of law school, but you also now have to be voted in. So now we're gonna have to, to vote on you based on your past performance and recommendations of your supervisor," et cetera. So, fortunately for me, I was voted in as a general attorney or a partner, and so then I made that transition in my career. Story_ID: 596977 Speaker 1: Then in 2000 you served as vice president of diversity. Speaker 2: Yes. That was a transition that I made from practicing law into now being a diversity practitioner. It's one that I didn't plan; it's one that I probably would not have selected for myself; and it's one that I'm, I'm proud of because I think that I am doing what I was born to do, which is help people improve the quality of their lives and to create fairness and equity and doing it in a way that's profitable as well. But I had absolutely no intentions of becoming a diversity practitioner. I mean basically what happened was one of my clients said, you know, "We're gonna be starting this new company called Cingular Wireless [Cingular Wireless LLC; AT&T Mobility LLC, Atlanta, Georgia]. And we'd like you to consider heading up our diversity organization because the new head of HR [human resources] is gonna start one, and we think you'd be perfect for it." And I, I kind of knew a little bit about diversity 'cause I'd done some things in the legal profession but didn't really know what that was. So I spent a lot of time doing some research and talking to other people and made that transition a little bit reluctantly. Speaker 1: And, and this was the part of BellSouth [BellSouth Mobility, LLC; AT&T Mobility LLC, Atlanta, Georgia] which was Cingular Wireless. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And it's a very big company. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So there's a, a lot of people-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --employees there. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: So what were some of the things that you had to accomplish? Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I had to figure out, one, what diversity was, right. I didn't presume that as a black woman that I knew what it was, which was smart on my part, because, you know, seven years into the game and even ninety days into the game at the time, I realize it's art and science. It's not what people think. It's not just about race and gender. It's really about the fact that we operate and live in a global economy and marketplace. So, if you are a corporation and you're in a war for talent especially, or if you are a consumer, or a retailer like many of the companies that I have worked for, you want more than your fair share of everybody's wallet. And so the way you accomplish that is very different today than it was, say, twenty-five years ago, ten years ago, and certainly will be different twenty-five years from now. And so diversity is really about human capital, and how do you leverage all of the things that people bring to the table so that you can have competitive advantage, and then from a customer standpoint, how do you make sure that your customers choose you over anyone else? And so, I had to understand what it was, and then I had to understand what that meant in my business. So if you take the cell phone business, for example, what I learned was that 70 percent of the new growth in the cell phone industry was occurring among ethnic minorities. Story_ID: 596978 Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: So one of the things I had to really understand was not only what is diversity, but how does it operationalize itself in a business? So, what does that mean for Cingular Wireless [Cingular Wireless LLC; AT&T Mobility LLC, Atlanta, Georgia]? And you look at the fact that 70 percent of all cell food--cell phone users are switchers, meaning they'll switch from carrier to carrier based on the best deal. And so where do you look for the next level of growth? And we found that the majority of the growth opportunities for us were among what we call emerging domestic markets, which is primarily ethnic minorities. We also learned that, say, 55 percent of all African American cell phone users are in the Southeast, that people who are doing business calls tend to stay on the phone longer. People who are gay, or lesbian, or bisexual, or transgender tend to stay on the phone longer. So, all those things that you have to understand as you're trying to create competitive advantage for a global company, that's what diversity is all about. Speaker 1: Okay, so what were some of the things that you implemented? Speaker 2: One of the things that I did was I launched what are called affinity groups. And what affinity groups are is when people come together around one aspect of diversity. So, for example, say there's an affinity group for African Americans. And the affinity groups are open not just to African Americans, to anybody, so anybody can join them. But the issues that they talk about are things that perhaps African Americans may have in common in terms of an experience in Corporate America. And they allow them to connect with each other on an informal basis to mentor with one another. They also can get together and do community service to represent the company. They may go to a recruiting fair or a national conference and represent the company and recruit different populations. Or affinity groups can also help the company come up with new ideas, new innovations. So, for example, if the company has a new strategy for Hispanics, they may take that strategy, take that strategy to the Hispanic affinity group and say, how does this strategy resonate with you? Is this something that you think that will really speak well and connect with other Hispanic populations? So there are so many things that you can use affinity groups, from, you know, associate engagement to associate development to business development as well. Story_ID: 596979 Speaker 1: While working there [Cingular Wireless LLC; AT&T Mobility LLC, Atlanta, Georgia], you decided to go back to school again. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you know, it's interesting because one of the things that I would tell anybody is always go for your dreams. And I always wanted to get my M.B.A. And when I was at Penn in law school [University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Wharton [Wharton School], which was at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], was one of the best business schools in the country. But I didn't have enough confidence in myself to thing that, one, I was gonna get in. And then from a social side, I said wow, you know, if I do a J.D. and B.A., I'll have to stay an extra year, and then all my friends will be gone. So I didn't even bother to apply. So I could have gotten another degree with another--with just the one extra year as opposed to the two, but I didn't have enough confidence that I could do it. And so ever since I graduated from law school, I always sort of secretly wanted to get that M.B.A. And that didn't happen or wasn't made possible until I went over to work for the wireless part of our business when we actually had an onsite M.B.A. program. And so at that point, if it's in your building and the company is paying for it, all of the excuses were gone. And so I had an opportunity to get my M.B.A. and work full time as well, so it was great. It was a dream come true. Speaker 1: And what does it mean that you served as a member of the dean's advisory committee? Speaker 2: One of the things that the dean of the business school [Eugene W. Stetson School of Business and Economics, Atlanta, Georgia] did was he invited students who were at the top of the class to come in to meet with him periodically. I want to say it was every other month to talk about issues about the student body, about how to really market the school. So he'd bring us in every once in a while and say, you know, "How do we give this school more brand power? How do we make it more reputable? You know, what are some of the things that we can do as a school to make this learning experience better for you?" So basically, it was advising him on how to make the school better and how to better serve the students. Story_ID: 596980 Speaker 1: Now let's stop right here and (clears throat)--excuse me--talk about family. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: When did you get married? Speaker 2: I got married in November 9th, 2002. I met my husband on a blind date, a blind date I did not want to go on. And we were introduced by someone who I had known for probably ten years, who was like a sister to me. And when I met my husband, I honestly had reached the point where I didn't want to meet anybody. I didn't want to be bothered with anybody. It's not 'cause I was sad. I was actually very happy. I was very happy. I loved my life. I was very into my faith. I was really into God. And I really didn't want to be bothered. And so when my husband called me, I didn't call him back a couple of times. He reminds me of that from time to time. So we met on a blind date, and I want to say the second date he asked me to marry him. And I (laughter) kind of laughed and said, "Marry you? I'm not even sure I want to date you." But I prayed about it. I saw his spirit, and I knew that this was the man that God had ordained for me to marry, I mean his character. And he, he's just an incredible man. I've never met a man that honestly tries to get better. He runs everything in that household. He pays the bills. He washes the dishes. He washes the clothes. He does my daughter's hair. He takes her to school, works a full-time job, studying for, you know, to get different exams and licenses. I mean he is a phenomenal man. Had I picked him with my natural eye, I probably wouldn't have picked him. But I really believe that that's the person that God would have me to marry, and I'm just really blessed to have him. Speaker 1: And what's his name? Speaker 2: His name is Prince [Prince Leon Goins], and he really is a prince. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. And you have a daughter. Speaker 2: I have a daughter. She's three. Her name is Grace Princess Goins. She's named after her heavenly Father, God's grace that allowed me to have her healthy at age forty, and God's grace so that when she grows up that she will understand that she can't do anything without His grace, and she can do anything with His grace. And then she's named Princess after her dad. And she's is the joy of my life. She is so funny and so sweet. And even though she's three and just coming out of her terrible twos, she's a doll baby; she's an angel. Story_ID: 596981 Speaker 1: You talk about your faith. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now coming from the Episcopal church, is that right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me how your faith has brought you through the many years of school and work. Speaker 2: Sure, sure. It's interesting. I, I shared with you that I spent a lot of time in the Episcopal church and learning every hymn and prayer by rote memory. Never read the Bible though, unless it was a psalm. I mean I can probably read the 23rd Psalm or the 27th Psalm but didn't read the, didn't read the, the Bible. And interestingly, I had another cousin that had another church that was on the opposite end of town from the church that I had pretty much grown up in most of my life that was, I guess it was called a Pentecostal church or nondenominational church. And it--to be honest with you, I was afraid to kind of make the switch 'cause I didn't want to disappoint my parents [Lillian Dean Johnson and Albert Johnson, Sr.]. So for many, many years I would go to both services. I'd go to church [at the Episcopal Church of the Incarnation, Miami, Florida] with my parents in the morning, and then I'd go to my other cousin's church in the afternoon. And finally I said, "You know what: I have to be true to myself." I just felt so much more free. Because growing up in the Episcopal church, I wasn't free to cry, or to clap, or to even sway my head. And when I went to my cousin's church, I felt so free. I felt free to cry. I felt free to clap. I felt free to sing, and I learned the word. And, and that kind of just changed how I approached my faith. And in doing so, I understood that in order to really have my faith work for me, it has to give me power for living. So whereas I could tell you every prayer and hymn, if it didn't give me the power to get through the day, then it wasn't working for me. And so my faith has kept me grounded. It's kept me from hurting people, if you will, because you're, you're so challenged in Corporate America. I mean people do things to you that are not right. And you would never do them to you--do them to them, but they would still do, do those things to you. And so my faith has kept me loving in the face of hate. It's kept me humble in the face of arrogance, and it just helped me to just be really grounded. And quite frankly, I believe that I've been able to do a lot of the things that I've been able to do in the face of adversity and in the face of a lack of resources because I've been able to draw on my faith. Story_ID: 596982 Speaker 1: So now in 2003 you make a change once again. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And you join Home Depot [The Home Depot, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about that. Speaker 2: A change I didn't expect to make. You know, it's so interesting. As I look back on my life, there are so many changes that I didn't plan but all for the best. Two thousand and three [2003]--well, no, actually 2002 I came to Home Depot (background noise). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead. Speaker 1: Yes, I joined Home Depot in 2003, and that was a change that I didn't anticipate. I, I was loving my job [at Cingular Wireless LLC; AT&T Mobility LLC, Atlanta, Georgia]. I loved my boss. I loved my team. I had just gotten married [to Prince Leon Goins]. And contrary to what the doctors told me, that it was gonna take me at least twelve months to get pregnant as an older mother, it took me I guess twelve hours 'cause I got pregnant [with Grace Princess Goins] on my honeymoon. And so, at the time that I got the phone call--I'm sorry. Strike that. That's not right. That's not true. Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: Oh, I, I guess I'll keep talking 'cause you'll, you'll edit this out. I just remembered that that's not right. When I got the phone call about Home Depot, I wasn't even married yet. I was getting ready to leave the country to get married. So when I came to Home Depot I was married, and I was five months pregnant. But when I got the first call I was getting ready to get on an airplane to come over to the Bahamas to get married. And I got this phone call from my soon to be boss who said, "I've, I've heard your name. You came highly recommended. I'd like you to come talk to me about running our diversity organization." And I said, "Mr. Donovan [Dennis M. Donovan], I'm really flattered, but I love my job, and I don't really want to leave. But I'm happy to come over to Home Depot and give you some ideas of things that'll work for you." And he said, "I don't need your ideas. I need you to take this job." So I said, "Okay." Well, I don't want to burn a bridge. So I don't want to be politically unsavvy, I said, "Why don't I come by and talk to you? And let's talk about what the job is about." I said, "But I'm getting ready to get on a plane on Monday--," it was at a Wednesday--, "to leave the country to get married. Can I call you when I get back from my honeymoon?" He said, "Absolutely not. I have to see you right away." So on a Saturday morning I went down for my interview at Home Depot, not expecting to be interested, but just to be polite. At the end of the interview we were both intrigued with each other. And I said, "Wow, this company that's great wants to be greater. That's an opportunity for me to put my fingerprints on that." So after what was about an hour and a half interview, my boss said, "What are you doing tomorrow?" Which would have been a Sunday. And I wanted to say, "Well, I'm packing my bags, and I'm going to the Bahamas. Don't you remember?" And I said, "Oh, nothing. What do you have in mind?" He said, "Well, I'm gonna be giving the vision of what I want my organization to be, and I want you to come and see my vision." And so I came down the next day, which was a Sunday, and I listened to him share his vision of this incredible company becoming even better. And I said, "I got to be a part of that." So five months later to that day, I got the offer, and at the time I was married and four months pregnant. So coming over here was incredible because I left a job that I loved. My husband lived in another city at the time, because during the time that he and I met he was in the process of relocating to a different city. I was pregnant. I was by myself. I was now working in a company that had ten times as many people as my prior company. And it was, it was hard; it was really, really hard. The politics were different. It's a big company in four different countries. And trying to understand all of that, how that business works was very challenging. But I will tell you, I have grown absolutely exponentially in terms of who I am as a person, who I am professionally, all because of an opportunity I never thought I would take. Story_ID: 596983 Speaker 1: So what are some of the, the ideas that you wanted to share? Did you implement any of the ideas that you had? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, absolutely. One of the things that I'm working on right now, actually, that's been in process for a while is making sure that our associates are physically sound and financially healthy. That's my passion, is to really make sure that people are wealthy and stable. And if you look at the fact that 90 percent of our associates work in the stores, many of them, quite frankly, are the working poor. Many of them are struggling to make their, their ends meet. Many of them--some of them live in their cars and work in our stores. And so one of the things that I've been working on is creating a program that is designed to give them budgeting credit counseling, financial planning. If they want to own a home, what better company to put people in homes than Home Depot [The Home Depot, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], give them the best rates, and give them the assistance they need to get on a strong financial base, and then show them the things that are already existing in the company that allows them to build wealth. And so of all the things I've done, and I've done a lot for the company in terms of diversity inclusion from launching hiring partnerships to helping design original lines of paints for Hispanics, all of that, it's really about making sure at the end of the day that people who work for us are healthy and stable, because if we take care of them, then they'll take care of our customers. Story_ID: 596984 Speaker 1: Now there's a little controversy about gay rights in the Atlanta [Georgia] based group. Tell, tell me about that. Speaker 2: Say more about that. I don't know what that means. Speaker 1: Oh, that actually, that you're providing health benefits for same sex couples. And I think there was some controversy about that before they announced that they would, because the company [The Home Depot, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia] gave insurance to, for pets and then not for, you know, same sex partners. Can you talk about that at all? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that unfortunately sometimes when you're doing diversity and inclusion work you, you encounter people who are not about true inclusion. That they are about their sort of singular focus or agenda. And they're really not about making sure that the end of the day this company is inclusive of everybody. And so they're sort of only focusing on the things that are relevant to them. And the fact of the matter is, is that this company had been working on providing health benefit for our GLBT [gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender] associates for a very, very long time and would have done it sooner but for a personal tragedy that occurred in, in one of our senior officers. And so it, it came out as if we were responding to a situation. But if, if people would have stepped back and say, when you provide benefits to, to, to a group of people, that requires you to have a board vote, right? The board only meets on a quarterly basis. So there's no way that the company can make a decision in twenty-four hours that it wasn't already gonna make several months in advance. And unfortunately, I think that rather than focusing on really trying to work together to make this company better for everyone, in which case everyone wins, I think sometimes people get sort of stuck on their own ideas and not realize that we're stronger if everybody, everybody pulls together. Story_ID: 596985 Speaker 1: What are some of the things that you would like to implement that you--or maybe something that you, something else that you're working on now that you see for the future? Speaker 2: Wow, what is just top of mind right now is getting our associates stable financially. That's something that is, it has so many different lengths to it. So that's really my focus. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I'd also say that I think that as a global company, particularly an Atlanta [Georgia] based company, we have an opportunity to do so much more in the community. Although we're an international company, we're based here in Atlanta. But I think there are still places and events where you don't see us, where you may see other major companies, but you don't see us. So, another thing that I'm really concerned about and focused on is how do we get this company connected on a grassroot basis so that when you're traveling around the city, you see us; when the mayor travels around the world, you know, the one of the few companies that she mentions is The Home Depot [The Home Depot, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. I still we--I still think we have a little ways to go to get more connected on a grassroot level. So that's one of the things I'm working on. Story_ID: 596986 Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not talked about that you would like to talk about? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I think we've covered it--you talked about my faith, which is important to me, talked about my husband [Prince Leon Goins]. Speaker 1: And are you still Episcopalian? You said-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: --you had to get free (laughter). Speaker 2: --no, no, I got free. I, I, I wasn't being fed. And so I'm, I'm Baptist by default, but I don't think I'm really Baptist. I, I just go where I'm being fed and where I think I can contribute. I think if you walk out of church and you feel the same way when you walk in, something's wrong. It's like, you know, first of all, you should go to church fed, already fed. But then you should walk out of there just so renewed, because you are the church. I mean the church is in the four walls, and we are the church. I mean sometimes we're the only God that people will see. And so it's really important that we understand what His word is and what His purpose is for our lives. So, my faith is very, very important to me. It's how I operate and live my life. Story_ID: 596987 Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there anything that you regret or you would change? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, we all have regrets (laughter). No, because every mistake I made, every failure I made is a lesson for my development. It's a level of my armor. It's a level of my testimony. There are some things I've done that, have been things that, you know, are not good things. But I know that someone else, if they hear me talk about those things, can, can be blessed and not have to suffer the way I did. So, there's nothing that I would say that I regret. Story_ID: 596988 Speaker 1: What have you not done that you would like to do? Speaker 2: Write a book. Speaker 1: And what would the book be about? Speaker 2: The working title would be 'Spirit at Work' [ph.]. And it's about the fact that if you step back and say you spend most of your waking hours, for those of us who have to work for a living, you spend most of your waking hours on the job. And that means that most of your battles, most of your challenges are at work. And we forget, I believe, that the battles we fight are not carnal battles; they're spiritual battles. And so your true power, your true gifts come in not thinking that that person who is trying to sabotage you. That's a personality thing, and attack it from that standpoint, because I think your true power comes from making sure that you are excellent and above reproach in your work, in your expertise, how you conduct yourself. But also understand your true power comes with coupling that excellence with your spiritual strength and power. And don't show up in the workplace thinking that it's just gonna be sufficient for you to act in the natural. But, somehow we kind of turn that off Sunday morning. You know, Sunday afternoon when we walk out of church and we go to work Monday morning and we're there Monday through Friday, we somehow forget that we're spiritual beings having a human experience. And so many of the things that I have accomplished in my career are because I, quite frankly, have gotten on my knees and said I don't have a clue how to do this task that they have just given me. So I need some revelation knowledge as to how to do that. I don't have a clue as to how the outcome of this meeting is gonna go or what I should say, so I get on my knees and I pray. And I think that you have to understand if that's where the majority of your time is and if that's where the majority of the battle is, then that's where you're exercising the majority of your gifts. So don't leave them at home on Sunday. Story_ID: 596989 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and dreams for the African American community? Speaker 2: My hopes and dreams are that, first and foremost, the African American community realizes that whatever issue it is, whether it's poverty of AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], crime, everything we need to address that issue is already in the community: intellectual capital, energy, prayer, resources, dollars. Whatever it is, it's already there. And so what we've got to do is understand and believe in the power of ourselves, particularly as people who have historically been strong people of faith and who have just from the natural standpoint just overcome so much. Everything's there, so we need to look no further than ourselves and just get busy and start solving stuff. Story_ID: 596990 Speaker 1: Because this information is gonna be made available for future generations, what message do you want to send to the future generations? Speaker 2: As big as you dream, it's not big enough. You don't--you weren't sent here to think small. So whatever you have on your list as the biggest, most wild, audacious goal or dream you have, it's still too small. You've got to give your God credit for creating a purpose and a destiny for you that's even bigger than your mind can hold. And then never let anybody, and there will be people steal your dream. And you have to be really careful about who you share your dream with, because there, there are dream stealers out there. Sometimes they're people you love who haven't been given the vision you've been given, who can't see what you've been able to see. And sometimes they can't see it when you can see it, and sometimes they'll never see it at all. That's okay. You love them anyway, and you hold on to your dream. And you very quietly but very steadily work towards making it a reality. Speaker 1: One last piece of advice for someone who wants to be an attorney or to attempt to enter the corporate world. What advice would you give? Speaker 2: Three things come to mind: work harder than anybody. But make sure as you're working harder, you're working smart. You don't want to spend time just to spend time. I'm reminded of a statement that says that, "Vision without action is daydreaming, and action without vision is just passing the time." So you want to work smart and hard. Two, you want to find mentors. You want to find people who have been blessed to, to be and have done what you want to do and go and be. And third, and, and, and not last, pray. You know, you've got to, in the words of one of my mentors, make people hard pressed to deny you anything. And so when I think about the story of how I became a partner, there were people who didn't want me to be a partner [at BellSouth Corporation; AT&T, Inc.]. I had a boss that didn't want me to be a partner. But I had planned my partnership meeting and the conversation that was gonna go around that table three years in advance. So I said, "Okay, he may not want me to be a partner for whatever his reasons are, but if he decides to say that I shouldn't be, he's gonna be hard pressed to deny me that opportunity." So I planned. I said, "Okay, well, I want to be a partner in three years, so how many cases do I need to win? How many awards do I need to win? How many articles do I need to win?" And at that time I had about probably thirty letters from different clients, and I put together a portfolio. And so by the time that it was time for my partnership decision, I had a unanimous vote. Because if he had said anything other than, you know, "This woman needs to be a partner," in the face of the objective information, coupled with some serious prayer, he would have compromised his credibility. So you've gotta do both. You've gotta make sure that you've done everything you can. You've gotta be really honest about that. Because sometimes I think that we think prayer is enough. It's not. Faith without work is dead. I think sometimes we, we half do our work and expect to be blessed and expect to be promoted. That's not right. And sometimes we, we think that, that if we just kill ourselves and work harder than anybody else that that's enough. You gotta have both of those things. Story_ID: 596991 Speaker 1: What legacy do you want to leave? Speaker 2: Well, for my daughter [Grace Princess Goins], I want her to be a spiritually grounded, God fearing woman who is extremely wealthy, not just in terms of physical wealth but in terms of her heart, in terms of her spirit, in terms of her knowledge. And I want her to be an entrepreneur. I don't want her to have to work for anybody. And then, I want to do the same thing for people that I don't even know. So I want to create organizations, programs, initiatives that will change the destiny of people's lives financially that I may never meet. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there anything else? Speaker 2: That's it. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I want to thank you-- Speaker 2: You're welcome. Speaker 1: --for sharing your story with us (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you. Speaker 1: --and with the future generations. Speaker 2: It's my pleasure. Speaker 1: So thank you from The HistoryMakers. Speaker 2: Thank you...