 Story_ID: 645772 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing is Mona Stephens [sic. Mona Stephen]. Ma'am can you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Jasmine Guy, J-A-S-M-I-N-E, G-U-Y. Speaker 1: No middle name? Speaker 2: Unh-uh. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, is there story behind your name, Jasmine? Speaker 2: There is. There's a bit of a romantic story. I hope my parents don't mind me telling it. When my parents got together and they were dating, my mother whose full name is Jeannette [Jeannette Resendes Guy] but always went by Jaye, J-A-Y-E. She never liked her name. And, she asked my father [William Guy] if he renamed her, what would he name her? And, he didn't answer right away. And, the next day when she put on her coat there was a piece of paper in her pocket and it said Jasmine. Speaker 1: Well, that's a good story. Speaker 2: So, when I popped out, that's what they named me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was either gonna be Jasmine or Alison (laughter), pretty different names but, of course, growing up I didn't like Jasmine. I thought it was just a weird, odd name, and I grew up here in Atlanta, and they would massacre that name, Jamma, Jasper-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So, you know, I was like, "Why not Amy or something, just real easy to say," you know. I kind of, I think, grew into my name. Speaker 1: All right. And, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Three, ten, nineteen sixty-two [March 10, 1962]; Boston, Massachusetts, Boston Lying-In Hospital [Brigham and Women's Hospital]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Which is no longer. But, I, every time I tell people I was born in Boston and that little period, most people--it was maternity hospital. So, a lot of us were born there. Speaker 1: Okay. I've heard of that. And, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: I'm an actor, director, began as a dancer. But, my feet hurt now if I start to point 'em to hard. So, I kind of claim the actor, director part. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, that's a tricky question. Your (points) birthday was the eight. It's December 10, 2012. Speaker 1: Okay. And, where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Atlanta, Georgia, in the conference room of my apartment. Story_ID: 645773 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight kind of questions we ask as a warm up ba- basically. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They only require a short answer. First one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Oh, I like a lot of--I have a couple of favorites. Like, I'll name three; fish chowder from Legal Sea Food [Legal Sea Foods] in Boston [Massachusetts], my dad's [William Guy] barbecue ribs, and fried chicken from Paschal's [Paschal's Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I kind of picky about where I get my food. But, those are my favorites. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have favorite color? Speaker 2: Hm. Well, my favorite combination is burgundy, cream, and black. I don't have one favorite color. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer and autumn. The other half of the year is bothersome for me. I hate cold, and I have hay fever. So, when everything starts blooming I'm usually (makes sound), you know, kind of holding my eye and my nose. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: (Imitates accent) Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's easy. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite, the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Wow. Do I? What do I say all the time? I don't know. Whatever, no, not that. Speaker 1: I do. Okay. Come on. (Laughter) I do say that a lot; come on. Which expresses, you know, impatience on my part. But, I'm not use to the timing of Atlantans, they're always late. So, I'm sure I say that all the time. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: And as a director I'm sure I say it a little bit too. Story_ID: 645774 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [William Guy] side. Speaker 2: Oh (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, keep 'em separate until we get 'em together. So, so, we don't get 'em mixed up. So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Jeannette [Jeannette Resendes Guy], J-E-A-N-N-E-T-T-E. Middle name Anne, A-N-N-E. Last name Resendes, R-E-S-E-N-D-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: October 7, 1937, Acushnet, Massachusetts, A-C-U-S-H-N-E-T. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: My grandparents were Portuguese immigrants from the Azores, which are islands off the coast of Portugal. I don't--I'm not sure where my grandfather came here, came to the country. But, he was the oldest of six brothers. He was a lawyer, and the pride of the family. A lot of, a lot of my great uncles were custodians and mailmen and had kind of, you know, prideful jobs but it was my grandfather that actually went to college and law school and was kind of the patriarch of the family. Speaker 1: Now, what was his name, your grandfather? Speaker 2: Frank, or probably Francisco Resendes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Pause) He was married once before he married my grandmother, and she passed and they had no children. He married my grandmother whose name is Maria Sousa [Maria Sousa Resendes], S-O-U-S-A. And, she was considered marrying late for that time in her life. She was in her thirties. They had three girls of which my mom is the baby. And, I think my grandmother was thirty-seven when she had my mom. And, I, I remember that 'cause I was thirty-seven when I had my daughter [Imani Guy Duckett]. And, I, I know the big difference of having a baby at thirty-seven then in the '30s [1930s] and having one now where it's a little more accepted. And, my grandmother came to this country and actually worked in the mills in New Bedford [Massachusetts]. It was a big textile and whaling community. Speaker 1: Okay. Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And maybe I'm not good with percentages but maybe about 98 percent Portuguese. Speaker 1: Now, New Bedford is? I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah, New Bedford was-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, Acushnet is like a town within-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --New Bedford, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So-- Speaker 2: All my aunts were born in, in the family home, which was 80 Middle Road in Acushnet. And, when they first moved there, there were, there were no houses on Middle Road. And, my grandfather built his house and his four brothers lived on the same street. And, of course, there were more homes there by the time I came along. But, I used to love visiting my grandmother and being able to walk to all my great uncles and great aunts' homes on the same street. Speaker 1: Okay. So, was the community populated with people from the Azores, basically? Speaker 2: Yes. Azores, Cape Verde, even though, you know, that's off, off the coast of Africa, and Lisbon and other parts of Portugal. And, like most immigrant communities they kind of gravitated together because of family. So, when family would--I know my, okay, so my great-grandfather, my grandmother's father came to the country first. And, then sent for my mother, her two siblings and my great-grandmother after he got settled, found a job in New Bedford and then they came. Story_ID: 645775 Speaker 1: I know, we've interviewed, well a couple of, at least three or four people from Cape Verde, you know, in Boston [Massachusetts] that have come over. And, they talk about, you know, identity issues. Whether they are considered African Americans or Portuguese or what. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I have, I have some Cape Verdean friends that didn't really relate to the black American culture even though they were darker skin and considered black. And, they have that, that issue as well because they said, you know, "We're Cape Verdean," which is a lot of, you know, West Indies. Indian people say the same thing, you know, I'm Cuban, I'm Jamaican, I'm not--they don't differentiate the way we do with race. And, so, and they're more connected to country than, than I think we are. We don't go around saying, "We're American." Which, you know, of course we all are. And, I think that we're probably coming to that more. Because America in and of itself has its own culture that we all share. And, then within that, subcultures, like every other country. But, I know we, we hold onto how we got here a little bit more than I think other countries do. Speaker 1: I think it's emphasized more in too, in some ways (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes. Pretty much engrained. Speaker 1: So, now, so, your mother [Jeannette Resendes Guy] grew up in Acushnet [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Yes. And, she went to school there in a one room schoolhouse with several grades in one room. And, then went, went on to New Bedford High School [New Bedford, Massachusetts] which was a bigger school. Her friends were diverse from, you know, French American, Jewish Americans, and of course, there were a lot of Portuguese people where she grew up. And, I don't think my mom grew up as race conscious as, you know, of course her parents were. And, very broad minded, very intelligent. My grandfather [Francisco Resendes] was very intelligent and intellectual and so was the three girls he raised. She went on to go to Simmons College in Boston [Massachusetts]. And, my father [William Guy] at the time was at Harvard Divinity School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], which is why they met in Boston and married there and had me. Speaker 1: So, okay. So, your mother was studying education, you said? Speaker 2: She was an English major, education minor and became a teacher, English teacher after--she actually got her master's degree here in Atlanta [Georgia], the AU Center [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did she have any particular stories of growing that she shared with you? Speaker 2: Oh, lots of fun. My mother was the ring leader. My grandmother's home was where all the kids hung out. And, my mom's two closest friends were only children and they gravitated to the family, you know, that my grandmother [Maria Sousa Resendes] had created. My grandfather, when I was very young maybe five or six, had a massive stroke. And, most of the time that I knew him, he was paralyzed and had lost his speech and my grandmother took care of him for, for a decade. I remember her lifting his leg, and getting him to the bathroom, and changing the beds, and doing everything that, you know, we would now have to hire medical help to do. She was very consistent. She woke up every day with the sun and went to bed with the sun. So, if you go to sleep at ten o'clock in my grandmother's home, you're gonna wake up to a vacuum cleaner. I remember her knocking on the door and going, "You sleeping?" And, of course, I was. So, that was her way of saying, you know, it's time to get up. I remember sleep- going to bed with her while she ate, always like oranges, and fresh fruit at night, apples; and we'd watch 'Merv Griffin' ['The Merv Griffin Show'] together, 7, 7:30. Story_ID: 645776 Speaker 1: So, ah well, let's go to your father's side. Can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: William Vincent Guy [William Guy]. Speaker 1: And, what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: July 29, 1935. Speaker 1: Is Vincent spelled the usual way (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) V-I-N-C-E-N-T. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, he was born in 1935. And, so, what can you tell us, and oh, where was he born? Speaker 2: Little Rock, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Oh, Little Rock, okay. So, what can you tell us about his side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, my father was the youngest of four with my grandmother, my grandfather's first marriage. And, my grandmother's name was Nokomis, N-O-K-O-M-I-S [Nokomis Hampton Guy]. And, my grandfather's name was Frederick T. Guy [Frederick Guy, Sr.]. My father--my grand- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, this--I'm sorry. There's gotta be story behind the name Nokomis. Speaker 2: From what I've been told, well, her name was Nokomis and her brother's name was Oyama [Oyama Hampton]. So, obviously, either my grandmother's mother was American Indian [Native American] or there was a serious influence there. And, I'm not quite sure. But, obviously, there was a strong American Indian influence there. And, I believe in that part of the county, and this is just what I'm hearing from my aunts and uncles, it was the Blackfoot Indian in that area. And, I, I really could be wrong about that. My grandmother died of breast cancer when my father was eleven and I didn't--I never go to know her, obviously. And, of the four siblings, my oldest aunt [Eunice Guy] kind of took care of the younger three of which my dad was the baby. He was a concert pianist at a very young age and very smart. My, my uncle [Frederick Guy, Jr.], his older brother was the athlete. Speaker 1: So, it was your grandfather who was a concert pianist, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: My, my grandfather was the mini- was a minister. Speaker 1: Okay, a minister. And, now, who was the concert pianist? Speaker 2: At a young age, my dad. Speaker 1: Okay. Oh, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, then he became a minister. Story_ID: 645777 Speaker 1: Now, is there, are there any stories from your dad's [William Guy] side that goes back to the 19th century, to emancipation, or slavery (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, most of the stories I have were about segregated South. They went to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas]. But they remember, you know, the integration of Central High School [Little Rock, Arkansas] with the Little Rock Nine. There was a lot of fun in their lives, a lot of freedom riding bikes, visiting friends, swimming in some kind of rock quarry that was extremely dangerous. My aunt, my Aunt Claire [Claire Guy Whalum] has told me stories of watching, you know, dead bodies being pulled that, you know, had hit the bottom or had jumped off. And, I, I can't believe how kind of raw their childhood was. They had chickens in their backyard which was normal. They have a, you know--to me growing up it was a beautiful big house on Ringo Street. And, my grandfather [Frederick Guy, Sr.] was a minister, I guess, maybe fifty years and that church was a bit of an institution in Little Rock [Arkansas]. I think it was Mount Moriah-- Speaker 1: Mount Moriah? Speaker 2: --Baptist Church [sic. Mount Zion Baptist Church, Little Rock, Arkansas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Should've brushed up on my Guy history last night when I was hanging out with my dad. And, and my grandfather remarried and had two more girls. And, my aunts are, you know, therefore young, young aunts, you know, like ten or twelve years younger than I am. Each sibling had children. So, I've got, I've got cousins. There's one Guy boy though. And, so, my sister [Monica Guy] and I were kind of adamant about holding her name, because we thought we're the last Guys, you know. That was important. You know, I've heard a couple of stories of where Guy came from. Speaker 1: Oh, the, the name? (Unclear) (Simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just assumed that the name came from a plantation with a French influence because it's a French name. But, my aunt tells me a story about a runaway slave that kind of took to the woods and became an herbalist. And, they called him the berry guy. But, again this is like verbal folklore so I'm not actually sure. Speaker 1: Well, that's the, you know, that's good, well, you know, these, these are kinds of stories that, I mean, there's some truth to this I'm sure, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, they had-- Speaker 1: The berry guy. Speaker 2: To have come, it--my oldest aunt [Eunice Guy] really has the best pictures and the best recollection. Like, she would know who my great-grandmother, who my grandmother, Nokomis [Nokomis Hampton Guy], her family was. I, I do know her younger brother Oyama [Oyama Hampton] and he had eight kids. 'Cause we used to visit Little Rock a lot. And, I remember having just a bunch of cousins, second and third cousins, homemade vanilla ice cream, and fresh apple pie. And, I remember eating very well in Little Rock. And, they were all educated, all my, all the four siblings went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And, the two younger aunts that I have, Jennie [ph.] and Marylou [ph.]; one went to Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts] and one went to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. Story_ID: 645778 Speaker 1: So, your, your father [William Guy] was a concert pianist? Speaker 2: As a child (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As a child, okay. Speaker 2: And, then he decided to be a minister, went to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and then eventually, Harvard Divinity School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Columbia graduate school [Columbia University, New York, New York]. And, he got his first church in Port Chester, New York; Bethesda [Bethesda Baptist Church]. And, we lived across the street from the church. Speaker 1: Now, did he have any stories to share with you about school? Now, he was, he was younger than Dr. King [Revered Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], so would've-- Speaker 2: He was younger than Dr. King. Speaker 1: Yeah. About six years, I guess? Speaker 2: I know, they weren't at Morehouse at the same time. I believe my, my Uncle Fred [Frederick Guy, Jr.] was at, and my Aunt Claire [Claire Guy Whalum] was at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] during that time. They're a little older than my dad. He had stories about being the first, there was a fellow at Morehouse, and he was the first recipient of this fellow to study in Europe for a year. And, he has stories of, you know, loving the culture, learning a lot but feeling very alone during that time. And, I'm not sure if it was because he was black or because he was American. And, we've talked a lot about the Civil Rights Movement. And, you know, my sister [Monica Guy] and I wanted to hear stories. And, I think there--you know, they say when you're in it, when you're living it, the people that are involved like, you know, Dr. King, and Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], and Joseph Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] are your peers and you're not really looking at them as these icons. They kind of become icons as, as history continues. But, they grew up in Little Rock [Arkansas] in segregated times, with colored and white bathrooms, and segregated schools. And, my father, I remember him shining his shoes for, for church and popping that rag and getting--'cause he used to be a shoeshine boy. But, things were normal and they were well taking care of. And, there was sense of, especially at Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Dunbar Magnet Middle School, Little Rock, Arkansas], and Dunbar, Dunbar High Schools all over the country still have reunions. It's a very powerful time of education where the cream of the crop was still in the public school system. And, so, they have great stories of how they were educated and great teachers that they kept in touch with. And, I, I've been to a few of these reunions and it's amazing how powerful the Dunbar collective is. Speaker 1: That's true, that's true, yeah. So, your father, now he finished Dunbar before they, before the desegregation of the Little Rock--? Speaker 2: Yes. I believe, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. That would've been-- Speaker 2: Much before. Speaker 1: He would've been twenty in '55 [1955]. So, he would've been out of high school-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --about four years, I guess, or five years (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were--already had been to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, that's a, yeah, you're right the Dunbar people do celebrate, yeah, and all over the country. Now, let's see. Did he have a particular mentor or anything? Did you father talk about that? Someone that he-- Speaker 2: Probably had been Benjamin E. Mays [Benjamin Mays]. And-- Speaker 1: I know Joseph Holmes [ph.]-- Speaker 2: Howard Thurman. Speaker 1: Oh, Howard, okay. Speaker 2: (Pause) Those are the two off the top of my head. I know Benjamin E. Mays was very infl- influential on my uncle who married my aunt, Wendell Whalum, who ran, was the musical director at Morehouse for thirty years. And, when the glee club traveled to Africa and sang for the presidents, he was the director at that time, Wendell P. Whalum. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your, so did your father pursue any music in college at all? Or, did he--? Speaker 2: No. I think he decided early not to be a concert pianist when he decided to be a minister. And, in the beginning my father was attracted to the Unitarian church. And, I believe that he always had a wider view of spirituality and religion and he may have found in the Baptist church at that time. But, growing up in this church, the way he preached and the way he told stories and his worldview was very, wasn't as restricted, I say, I would say as other Baptist churches here in the South. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. So, now, h- and he went on to pa- to pastor (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He pastored, you know, after we left Port Chester [New York] in Bethesda [Bethesda Baptist Church], we moved here when I was eight. He taught at Morehouse and then when Reverend Sam Williams [Samuel Woodrow Williams] died, he was the successor of the Friendship Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia]; and he pastored there for thirty-seven years. Story_ID: 645779 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: My mother's roommate was an opera singer and was friends with my dad [William Guy]. And, he would come over and visit them, well, visit her. And, I don't how they started dating, but he started dating my mom [Jeannette Resendes Guy] during that time. Speaker 1: Okay. So, this was when he was at Har- at--? Speaker 2: Yeah, he either had just finished Harvard or he was still going to Harvard Divinity School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] during that time. My mother was graduating from Simmons [Simmons College, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, so, they got married in Massachusetts and (unclear)--? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In the dean's office I was believe, and, I was born there, so. And, I remember living there. I, I have memory of going to the commons [Boston Common, Boston, Massachusetts]. I have memory of the, the neighbors that we had. We lived in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]. First we lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts], I don't remember that. I was a baby. But, I remember the neighbors we had in Roxbury, you know. Very colorful people and I played with their kids. And, when my sister was born--they moved to New York and then back to Boston [Massachusetts]. So, there was a period of, you know, back and forth before we ended up in Port Chester [New York]. But, my sister, I was three when she was born, and I remember, you know, feeling like she was my baby. When I look at how young I was and how old I felt, you know. It was like, what was I, I was four or five and I felt like, you know, this baby came to--for me. Speaker 1: Is it just the two of you? Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You and your sister? Okay. And, what's your sister's name? Speaker 2: Monica Lynn Guy [Monica Guy]. Story_ID: 645780 Speaker 1: Now, I always ask this question. When you think about your parents' personalities and dispositions, and their talents, and their looks, and how they walk and talk, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I take the most after my mom [Jeannette Resendes Guy], physically. And, growing up I was very connected to my mom. I understood my mom. She didn't really have to tell me more than once. And, my sister [Monica Guy] was a lot more, you know, would stand up to my mom more than I would. But, there's something very comforting for me when I talk to my dad [William Guy]. And, I think it's because he, he could separate himself enough to hear my side. Where my mother and I were almost conjoined, you know. And, I left home at seventeen. But, all growing up in high school [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia], I would, I would tell her, I said, "We're a lot alike. So, when you talk bad about yourself, you're talking bad about me." You know, when, she would say, you know, she always regretted not sending us to private school. And, I said, "I'm so glad you didn't send me to private school because even if it wasn't the best academic education I got, it was my socialization." And, it gave me the ability, because in Atlanta [Georgia], I was in the first group to integrate, not integrate but be bused from minority to majority. And, so, we left our neighborhood schools to go a school in Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia]. But, so did everybody else. So, even if I was growing up in a middle class neighborhood, I went to school with kids from the project, kids that lived in the Buckhead area, and I got a world view from going to school. And, I was able to deal, you know, and hang with a lot of different kinds of people that that--I wouldn't have that experience in private school, especially then. There were very few blacks at private schools here in Atlanta, and they, they were isolated. I remember feeling like, "Oh, those poor kids at the private school. They don't have the same football games, and they don't have the parties we have." And, I never suffered because I was still in ballet and I still performed all the time. But, if I wanted to go to the skating rink over the weekend, I would go, you know. So, I'm really glad that I did go to public school. Story_ID: 645781 Speaker 1: One thing I didn't tell you were my favorite Portuguese foods. Okay. So, I just wanna add Linguica to the list. Malasadas which is, oh my god, I remember eating this all day long, it's a dough that's deep fried and rolled in sugar. Now, if you can imagine eating five of those in a row without getting sick. And, Linguica is a Portuguese sausage. And, Linguica pizza is, is the best. Linguica any kind of way, I love. And, sardines; grilled sardines that are about this big (gesture). I love Portuguese cooking. And, so, I, I learned a few, I learned a few things, but like how to make the pot roast. And, my [maternal] grandmother [Maria Sousa Resendes] always cooked for us. And, great summers and Christmases in Massachusetts (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, now, this is, this kind of, this is--fits into the question, the next question. The next questions is actually, well, well, the next question is, then we'll get to it. Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Earliest? Speaker 1: Going, I mean, like I said, we spent summers and Christmases at my grandmother's with all my cousins and I remember my tricycle. I remember up and down the driveway there was hump in it, and we'd, you know, we thought that was a big, a big deal to go over the hump. I remember the neighbors. My, my grandmother lived in a two family home which is quite common in Massachusetts, above and below. And, also, friends and close relationships with the people that lived above, as close as my cousins. I remember when my sister [Monica Guy] was born. So I was three. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I remember my, my nursery school teacher, Ms. Redford [ph.] who was East Indian, dark, cornrowed hair, and her husband was white. And, she taught me, or us, and she had a nursery school in her home, that people weren't black and white, they were pinkish, yellowish, brownish. And, I remember telling my parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy] that, leaning over, you know, before we had to wear seatbelts, leaning over the front seat and letting them know that. And, watching, they were bemused. And, I couldn't understand what was so funny. You know, how little kids are always like, "What's so funny?" You know. I remember making animal shaped pancakes at her school. She took us to a Chinese restaurant and taught us how to eat with chopsticks. When I was sick and missed a week of school, they came to my apartment. There're pictures of them at my apartment making those, those animals out of balloons. So, I grew up not-- Speaker 2: Is this in New York? Speaker 1: This was in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: In Boston, okay. Speaker 1: And, I, you know, basically grew up not understanding racial division. Coming from a mixed family, having so many different people in my family from Portuguese to black to Jewish, and just not getting the whole black and white differentiation and how I fit in, in that equation-- Speaker 2: So, they're Jewish, I'm sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Until we moved here. Speaker 2: Are they're Jewish family members too? Speaker 1: Well, one of my aunts, there were three. The oldest aunt [Eilene Resendes] married a Portuguese man and my four cousins are, you know, darker than me, Portuguese. The middle daughter [Shirley Resendes] married a Jewish man, and converted, and her two daughter grew up Jewish. And, then my dad--my mom married a black man, so. The cousins came together, we were all from different back--not backgrounds, but we just, it wasn't a big deal. I just don't ever remember any of that being a big deal. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And, you know, I had to learn that it was big deal for people to be different or not come from the same backgrounds, even religious backgrounds, you know. Friends of mine that have one Jewish parent, or one Catholic parent and, and mostly the families that have trouble, not, not the couple that has trouble bonding but maybe the families. Speaker 2: Okay. You grew up, you were born in '62 [1962]. Speaker 1: Two [1962]. They married in '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: So, you were--grew up basically, the Civil Rights Movement was trailing off, in term, you know the hottest part of it was going on when you were a little kid. And, then-- Speaker 1: I remember watching Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] funeral on my black and white television and being told what was going on. I remember-- Speaker 2: You were six then. Speaker 1: I remember seeing the first man on the moon and being told, "This is a monumental event." My parents were actually at the March on Washington. So, it's been later that I put together what a deep time they got married in; racial, as well as, culturally. The big shift that was happening in the early '60s [1960s], and, and through the early '70s [1970s]. Now, by the '70s [1970s] we had moved to Atlanta [Georgia]. My dad taught at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. My mother taught at Morehouse and went to the AU Center [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. My aunt [Claire Guy Whalum] ran the Upward Bound program; and we lived across the street from Morehouse on Fair Street. And, my sister and I were always on the campus. Story_ID: 645782 Speaker 1: Okay. Now I don't wanna go too fast. I wanna take you back to-- Speaker 2: My earliest memories? Speaker 1: No. To, I guess where you started school. And, did you start school in Massachusetts or New York? Speaker 2: Nursery school, with Mrs. Redford [ph.] in Boston [Massachusetts] and then elementary school at King Street Elementary School [King Street School] in Port Chester; Port Chester, New York. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, what was Port Chester, is that a suburb of New York [New York]? Speaker 2: It's in Westchester County near White Plains, Rye, New York, Mount Vernon. It's one of those, yeah, towns. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, I gotta idea now. So, so, you were in New York, until about what age? Speaker 2: Eight. Speaker 1: 'Til eight. Okay. Speaker 2: Around seven or eight. Speaker 1: All right. So, you-- Speaker 2: I think I moved here when I was seven. That was a culture shock. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us about that (laughter). Speaker 2: My parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy] believed in public education as I discussed earlier. And, they took the recommendation of our neighbors and sent us to Peoples Street Elementary School [ph.], which was in the West End here [Boston, Massachusetts]. And not, wouldn't call it a middle class school, went to school with white kids and black kids but they were--I skipped a grade. I went right into third grade. I skipped second grade. My sister [Monica Guy] also skipped kindergarten, went right into first. But, those kids, some of 'em still didn't read. And, I didn't have anything to do in the third grade. I use to, I remember fixing the, the, organizing the art closet and helping the kids learn how to read. I remember being consistently teased about the way I spoke. And, that is when I started imitating the accents that I heard. And, my teacher, who I loved, Ms. Pinkard [ph.] had a very strong white southern accent. I mean I almost couldn't understand people at first, you know what I mean. Speaker 1: You had a New York ac- did you have a New York accent at the time (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had a New York, yeah, or kind of just non-accent almost. I don't remember because I acclimate (snaps fingers) wherever I go. I just, just change up, you know. When I'm in Boston I talk like they do and I say, youse instead of y'all. When I came back home, I said, y'all instead of, you know. But, when we first moved here, my mother really couldn't understand people. I almost translated for her. We had the plumber come over, an electrician, and he mumbled and kind of took (unclear) words off or whatever. I literally had to translate for her. But, the difference is in the black and white accents at that school, from talking like this to, "I don't know, I don't know what that say." Became kind of a thing I would do for my family, you know. And, I would play these characters and, and that's where I got the accent for, for Whitley Gilbert later when I was on television. And-- Speaker 1: That's what I was gonna ask, and I couldn't help when I watching that show ['A Different World'] back in the day, thinking, this woman has a great gift for accents. I mean, you know, it just seem like (laughter), I can tell. Speaker 2: That why. I mean, we had such extreme areas of the country from Boston, to New York, to Little Rock [Arkansas], to Atlanta [Georgia], that my ear--you know, and I always wanna fit in. I mean, when I go to the, to Jamaica or Turks and Caicos [Turks and Caicos Islands], it drives my daughter [Imani Guy Duckett] nuts that I change the way I speak. When in Rome [Italy]. But, later, I mean, it serves me as an actor. But, I really didn't know what I talked like for a while. You know, when I moved to New York and I was doing--dancing at Alvin Ailey's [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] and they said I had a southern accent. I said, "Well, we'll fix that." And, I study their, study their Os and I said, (pronunciation) coffee instead of (pronunciation) coffee, I said, (pronunciation) water instead of (pronunciation) water. I, you know, I was like, "We'll fix that" 'cause I do not wanna sound like a southerner in New York. I wanna sound like you do. So, that's always been something I've done. And, I entertain myself a lot at home. I made tapes when there were tapes, cassette tapes of myself with different characters and we'd be in the, in the bathroom at school and I'd ring the alarm clock for the bell and I'd flush the toilet, you know, had my little sound effects. And, it was just natural, you know, and when people ask me where those things came from and they were always there. Story_ID: 645783 Speaker 1: And, I know I'm getting off the track here, but, I think-- Speaker 2: No, that's, that's really, that's important (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, I think when things are natural to, to kids or to people in general, we don't know where they came from and it's made it harder for me to teach certain things. Now, I, I've taught and I've done workshops and I've directed, and I find myself saying, "I don't know why, but if you pause a little bit before you say that line, it's gonna be really funny." But, I don't know why. I can't tell them why. Or, I can't tell them how to find a character. I mean, I can completely become somebody else, and I would do it by myself like for no reason. I would take cabs in New York [New York] and pretend I was something else, somebody else, from somewhere else, just to see if I could get over on the cab driver. And, I got in trouble once because I was pretending I was Puerto Rican, and had, you know, I had it down. And, the driver started speaking to me in Spanish. He's probably like, "You're Puerto Rican, I'm Puerto Rican, why we speaking in--," and I didn't know what he was talking about 'cause I don't speak Spanish, I could just do the accent, so. It's kind of how I entertain myself. I found being myself all the time actually a little boring. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, that's, this is, this is, well, this is exactly what we, we need to hear. Story_ID: 645784 Speaker 1: So, I'm just, so when you were, so when you came to Atlanta [Georgia] you said it was like culture shock. Let's see, what was, coming from New York to Atlanta, I know people from the North often say that Atlanta's slow to them, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and the culture, at that time, I mean, we're talking forty-five years ago, forty-two years ago, it wasn't open. It's, it's a lot more open to other voices now. And, northerners had a--they didn't like northerners. There was still that Yankee kind of mentality going on. Speaker 1: Even in the black community, was it--? Speaker 2: The black community was far more embracing, I felt. I mean, they embraced my mother [Jeannette Resendes Guy] who was liberal, outspoken, and--but, we had neighbors that were teaching at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and none of 'em were from the South, you know. So, there wasn't, I wasn't playing at home with kids that were really from the South. I was just going to school with them. I remember having a slumber party, the first, for one of my birthdays. I think I must've been turning eight. And, I had a little black girl I was friends with from the neighborhood, like the, the neighbor from downstairs who was white, my little friends from school, from third grade named Debbie [ph.]. And, they had trouble with sending her over to my home. And, my father [William Guy] told me later that he had to talk to the father and, 'cause it was, it was their first time, you know, dealing with a black family. And, then a black man who married a white woman, I mean, and we dealt with that little bit in, in Port Chester [New York]. I mean, the first time I, I was called a nigger was in, in Port Chester. So, it was starting to come up and I had no understanding of it. I mean, I would literally come home and ask, you know, what certain curse words meant. I would read something on the bathroom wall, and nigger was one of those things. I didn't--I knew I was being insulted. But, I didn't know what it meant. And, because it was little Italian boy that called me that, and we look the same, I didn't, I didn't get it. Yeah, there were a couple of phone calls my father had to deal with about some, "My child won't come," and some, "I just need to know what's going on over there and who you are before I send my child over there." Speaker 1: Now, did you father look obviously black? Speaker 2: Um-hm. He's not real dark but, yeah, he's obviously black. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And, because my mother is white but dark, sometimes they would just assume she was a light skinned black woman even though I never thought she--I'm just gonna have a sip of Red Bull, a little boost. Don't ever do this. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: Never. You'll never end it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's more caffeine and vitamin B in this than coffee. So, it works faster (snaps fingers). But, I have early memories of, you know, being called names and getting so much attention if my mom ever came to school, you know. That whole, "That's your mama? Your mother white." And, as an adult, I really resented it. Especially, I remember telling a Newsweek interviewer, they were doing those, you know, best picks, and who's hot now, little blurbs. And, she, she said, you know, "So, your mother's white, your father's black," which is so and what? I mean, it give--gave me nothing really to respond to. And, I said, "I just wanna ask you, why don't you or anybody ask me, how did you get so smart? Or, why you so talented? Or, where did that come from? Or, how were you raised? You know, why don't you ever ask me how smart my parents are? How well rounded they were? What they gave me and my sister [Monica Guy]? Why are they always reduced to a white woman and a black man?" And, she couldn't answer that. And, I said, "It makes me, makes it hard for me to answer your question. Because if they weren't black and white, you'd ask those other questions. You'd say, 'So, your mother was an educator, and your father taught at Morehouse, and what was it like growing up on the campus of--,' you'd ask me those questions. But, just to reduce them to race, I don't have--I don't know what to say about that." It's the most boring question you could ask me. And, to have dynamic parents. 'Cause it wasn't as if I suffered or we didn't have a good upbringing. Not a rich upbringing, but an enriched upbringing that I feel was totally discounted, you know, with those kind of questions. Story_ID: 645785 Speaker 1: Now, what was the neighborhood that you moved to here in Atlanta [Georgia]? What was it called? Speaker 2: First we lived, I guess, it would be West End, but literally across the street from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. The rest of, you know how faculty housing is, right in the middle of everything, so the rest of the neighborhood was, you know, working class people. Now, that I visit the neighborhood and I see that the houses are a little run down and you know. It wasn't like that when I lived there. But, you know, working class people, families, kids that went to school with me down the street. 'Cause eventually, I did go to M. Agnes Jones [M. Agnes Jones Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] for two years; fourth and fifth grade. I was the school president and I had friends. But, I also almost got my ass beat at M. Agnes Jones by the entire sixth grade. So, you know, I got a lot of memories from, you know, walking down that street passing that little bodega. It was called Grocery a Go-Go [ph.]. And, we'd go in there and get those big giant pickles. And, Kool-Aid that we'd put in our hands and eat, you know, 'til we stained our hands and our teeth, and SweeTarts, Pixy Stix. I liked my school. And, you know, I liked my teachers, but they always got pregnant and left me. And, I'd end up having a substitute that I never really connected with. I remember that a lot. I remember my fifth grade teacher being the first white teacher to teach in that school. And, that was before they, they bused us to white schools, they bused white teacher into black schools. I remember being called--I remember feeling like the teachers resented me and, and that teacher, Miss Lewis [ph.]. 'Cause I would watch how the teachers were friends with each other and how she was never part of that group. And, we were almost as a class kind of, I just felt it. I don't have any proof but I know what I feel. Speaker 1: So, they'd been all black teachers there before? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Except for her. Speaker 1: Now, this-- Speaker 2: And, I loved her. She was a great teacher. She was the one that drove me home that day. 'Cause we walked home from school, but she drove me and my sister [Monica Guy] home that day I was gonna get my, I was gonna get beat up. And, they were waiting for me at the corner. Speaker 1: Well, what was the, what was the issue? Speaker 2: I think they always wanted to beat me up. But, the issue came up because a little girl was beating up on my little sister and I intervened, and I threatened the little girl. But, she had a bigger sister who was--then, but, I didn't, you know, as opposed to just being between me and that girl, it was at least fifteen kids that was gonna beat me up. So, there had to be a growing, "Oh, good, we get to get her," kind of thing happening for her to have--and, my, you know, my mom [Jeannette Resendes Guy] had to come to school, and the principal had to intervene. And, so, there was always some kind of danger going on that I realized but I never knew when I would set them--that bomb off, you know. But, I changed schools a lot so it didn't--you know, it was always the starting over. And, kids didn't have a, they didn't get a chance to really get use to me, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you were at Magnes Jones? Speaker 2: M. Agnes Jones [M. Agnes Jones Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Oh, Agnes Jones. I didn't-- Speaker 2: Yeah. M. Agnes Jones. Speaker 1: M. Agnes Jones, okay. Speaker 2: And, then I went to Collier Heights [Bazoline E. Usher Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Now, what grades were you at, were when you were at-- Speaker 2: M. Agnes--? Speaker 1: Agnes Jones? Speaker 2: Fourth and fifth. Speaker 1: Okay. Fourth and fifth. And, Collier Heights? Speaker 2: Sixth. Speaker 1: Now, that's the name of the neighborhood you lived in too, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: After we-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we moved to Collier Heights when I was about ten; ten or eleven. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was after fifth grade. It went sixth grade at Collier Heights. Speaker 1: So, you were sixth grade at Collier Heights, and? Speaker 2: Then, I went to Sutton Middle School [Atlanta, Georgia] the first year it was integrated or the first year of busing. And, that was for seventh and eighth grade. Speaker 1: So, okay that's, so this is when, you know, the majority, were the majority of the students white at Sutton? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, they bused minority to majority. And, then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So, this wouldn't--I was thinking, like okay, when you were ten at Collier, you said Collier Heights? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: That's about 1974 or '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 1: Yeah, '72 [1972], okay. So, that's '72 [1972]. This is when, and by time you get to Sutton, it's the mid-'70s [1970s], and this is when Atlanta [Georgia], correct me if I'm wrong, Atlanta is really changing in terms of-- Speaker 2: It's changing. Speaker 1: It's when the CNN starts and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --seem like Atlanta--the Braves [Milwaukee Braves; Atlanta Braves] move here and it's a lot of stuff, Atlanta starts becoming-- Speaker 2: Got a lot of heroes; Maynard Jackson-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Right. Speaker 2: Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I remember wearing "Think Young" button, you know, with a lot of pride. Story_ID: 645786 Speaker 1: So, it was a time of political power for the black community. And, also, just a time where Atlanta [Georgia] just gets bigger and stronger and more world class as a city (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. It's, it's starting to spread out past the neighborhoods that we were accustom to. You know, southwest Atlanta, the Cascade [Cascade Heights, Atlanta, Georgia] area is the first time I heard the term white flight. So, obviously, it was a white middle class neighborhood that turned black and the whites spread out. But, Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia] was always a black middle class neighborhood. It was black doctors, and lawyers, and ministers that lived there built those homes. And, it was, if not the first, one of the first middle class black neighborhoods that was not originally white in Atlanta. Martin Luther King's father [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] lived across the street from us. We had, you know, we had a professional neighborhood. Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this, now, in terms of your mother's, I guess, socialization in the black community, I mean, your parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy] are obviously making a conscious effort to live in a black community and to send you to the neighborhood schools. Did you mother have, was she embraced by the black community in the sense of--I think, you mentioned it once that she, she got along all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. She, she was embraced. I don't think it was the racial differences but the culture differences of growing up in New England and moving to the Deep South. And, also, with all the cliches that you learn about each culture. That the southerners knew about northerners and that northerners knew about southerners; that they're slow, not as well educated. I mean, my mother came to that school and skipped us right away. She didn't need any proof that we were already above because she knew that the educational system was at that time inferior to the northern schools, and boom, skipped right away. I think that was harder on my mom than the, than the racial. I mean, she had, she had great friends. To this day they are friends. From neighbors to colleagues to, you know, friends she went to, went through the master's program with [at the Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]. She was a teacher. She had teacher friends that--I don't know that that was as much to problem as just, now I'm here dealing with this culture and this mentality. The black community was embracing. And, again, race was never a big deal in my household. So, I wasn't as conscious about who was white and who was black and who lived where, as, you know, other people may be. Or, the people that don't get out of their neighborhoods that much. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, if you look at Atlanta back then, you got to school and what, I mean, if we went to M. Agnes Jones [M. Agnes Jones Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], our high school is Washington [Booker T. Washington High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. If you went to Collier Heights [Bazoline E. Usher Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] your high school was Douglass [Frederick Douglass High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. So, you're talking about going to school with the same people for twelve years. It was that kind of culture until they started busing, going outside, and we were getting exposed to other places, you know. Especially, kids that were from, you know, the projects or public housing, whatever you wanna--I don't know if that's politically correct. But, we called it, we called them the projects. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's (unclear). Speaker 2: And, I have, I have friends that were, you know, that were from there that had never left that area. That coming to my house was a big deal. Like it was a palace to them, you know. Well, I like, I, I thought the coolest thing was if you lived in an apartment. Like my best friend had a single mom, living with her grandmother, she was an only child, and I loved going over there. I was like, "You got an apartment." Because it was a complex and we hung out with everybody in the complex. And, we'd go to her room and read Right On! magazine, and it was equally a treat for me to visit them as, as for her to visit me. And, Mama Nell [ph.] gave me my first chitterlings. And, I never, something about me and what I came from always made her grandmother try to talk proper around me. And, you know, adding Rs where they don't belong. And, and I remember her saying, "Oh, Jasmine [HistoryMaker Jasmine Guy], don't like no chitterlings." I'll never forget that. "Jasmine don't like no chitterlings." And, I thought, yes, I do. Of course, I couldn't, I, I took a bite and I was, you know, I couldn't handle it. But, I was there to prove it, you know, because I didn't want her to have to do that around me, you know, that--'cause I could tell that wasn't the way she--well, she didn't talk to my friend like that, you know. So, there was that switching when it came to me that I didn't want her to feel she had to do. Story_ID: 645787 Speaker 1: Now what were you interested in, in terms of school? What subject matter seemed to interest you the most, in grade school, I guess, then moving on up? Speaker 2: I was always a writer, reader. I just aced those classes. I, and I was never that great with math. But, in elementary school, it wasn't that difficult. I got into difficulty in, in high school [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia] with algebra and geometry. Dance since I was five. I went to Spelman dance school [at Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]; loved it. Kept asking for more and more classes until by the time I was twelve, I had outgrown what they could teach me there and I started going to Atlanta Ballet. And, then by thirteen I was in high school and I went to a performing arts high school and I, you know, I studied every day. And, it was at twelve when I said, "That's what I wanna be when I grow up." Because I didn't know, I always wanted to be a dancer but I didn't know that you, that it could be a job. I thought the only thing you could do is be a dance teacher 'cause that's all I saw until I saw Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. Speaker 1: Now, what did you (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, that changed my life. Story_ID: 645788 Speaker 1: Alvin Ailey. Well, tell us about that experience. You were like twelve when you saw Alvin Ailey's American dance theater [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I was younger. But, I remember at twelve is when the feeling came over me. And-- Speaker 1: Now, where did you see 'em? Speaker 2: Here in Atlanta [Georgia], and at that time, they weren't at the Fox [Fox Theatre]. 'Cause I remember, they were at the Woodruff Arts Center because there's a hill that goes down to the parking lot on 15th Street. And, I remember my father [William Guy], my mother [Jeannette Resendes Guy], and I coming from either the ballet [Atlanta Ballet] or Alvin Ailey. And, my father trying to do a hitch kick down, down that sidewalk and cutting himself with the heel of it. I mean, we would come home and try to, they would try to, my dad would try to do everything he saw, you know. They always loved dance. So, I saw a lot. But, it was during an Ailey performance during 'Revelation.' 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey] was the one piece that moved me to tears. And, I got happy. That's the only way I can identify that feeling. And, I can identify because I had seen it at my [paternal] grandfather's church [Mount Zion Baptist Church, Little Rock, Arkansas]. When someone gets happy in church and I didn't know what that was until I saw it. And, emotionally I felt it. And, I said, "That's what I wanna do." Speaker 1: For the benefit of-- Speaker 2: "I wanna be in Alvin Ailey." Speaker 1: For the benefit of people who may not know what getting happy in church is, what, described that for--? Speaker 2: Well, my, my father's church at Friendship [Friendship Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] was a lot more reserved than my grandfather's church. And, I remember going and listening to my grandfather [Frederick Guy, Sr.] preach, and -- Speaker 1: Now this is-- Speaker 2: This woman next to me and my mom had a baby, not a baby but a little kid was sleeping on her lap. She just popped up, and I remember watching his head pop up, you know. And, and started physically, like jumping. And, then wo- and I would hear people go from, "Yes, amen," to wailing. And, I was scared to death. I remember looking at my mother like, what is that? And, slowly I heard the terminology they got happy. And, I tried to get them to explain what getting happy meant. I remember still not quite getting it. Almost like when I asked them, "What's a Republican and a Democrat and which one are we?" I mean, that some of the, I just didn't get it. I didn't get how you could be that emotionally involved with the sermon and what did grandpa say to make you do that? I saw, I saw people fall out. I didn't know if they were acting or not. If that was real. 'Cause there was this whole beautiful theatrics where the ushers come and fan you and take you out and, you know. It wasn't just one person going down, the whole community was there for you, you know. Or, whatever was happening and they had those hankies and they would pass out tissue. It was a common thing that might happen. And, of course, as I'm older and I've lived life and I know that at any given moment you may be struck with grief. Or, you may be struck with gratitude. Or, you may be filled with the spirit of being saved. Saved from the worst that could've happened. Or, you child being looked over. I mean, now it makes me cry. But, as a child I, I didn't understand it until that moment I saw 'Revelations.' 'Cause there was not word for it. It was a physical manifestation of being lifted to a higher place. And, I, I wanted to be a part of that. And, I remember telling my father because my mother encouraged me actually in high school [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and I was a very smart student. I was president of the National Honor Society but I, I got a scholarship to study at Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] for the summer and that's what I wanted to do. I did not wanna go to college. My mother encouraged it. She encouraged me to take a year off, because I had skipped a grade, mature a little bit more and find out what I wanted. Because she didn't wanna send me to college and I wasn't committed. But, my father had, had trouble not with me not going to school, to college. And, I said to him, "But, daddy I think this is my calling." And, I remember him nothing--no argument with that. And, I believed it was. It focused me and drove me and that's why I know Donna Wood and [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison and Sarita Allen, and Beth Shorter [Beth Shorter Bagot], and Jia [ph.], and all of those great dancers 'cause I studied them. I watched them. And in, it was in their glory that I felt there was something called greatness in the world. Story_ID: 645789 Speaker 1: Now did you learn who they were when you were in high school [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yes. I mean, like you would buy those souvenir programs from The Jackson 5, I'd have my Ailey [Alvin Ailey] books and my pictures. And, but, I would go multiple times, and I studies their names in the program until I, I really knew them. I knew Gary DeLoatch and I knew Dudley Williams. And, so, when I went to The Ailey School [New York, New York] and I saw those people walking in the hallway, I wa- I mean, they were my idols. I never spoke to them or anything. I mean, I was completely in awe. But, I still studied them. I remember when I was in the third company, it was a third company--I was on scholarship, then the third company, then the second company. Alvin created a piece called 'Memoria' that included all the companies. So, we were able to perform with the second and first company at, at City Center [New York City Center, New York, New York]. So, any time we were there for that one number, that one moment, the rest of the concert I would sit under a light tree. So, when the light was coming out, you couldn't see me under there and I was never in anybody's way. But, I was this close to 'Cry' [Alvin Ailey] and 'Rainbow Round My Shoulder' [Donald McKayle] and 'Blues Suite' [Alvin Ailey] when I saw them sweat--that heave and fall out when the curtain came down, and rise back up for their bow from exhaustion. I saw them, like I would never see them from the audience and they don't even know it. I wrote Donna [Donna Wood] a letter but I--a card, but I never, that was, it was my gift to myself. While everybody was in their room and miss thinging (snaps fingers) and putting on their makeup, I was there, you know. And, I was--you know, it was one of the, the best times of my life. Story_ID: 645790 Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit and just kind of make sure the chronology is set. Now, you went to, what was the name of your high school in--? Speaker 2: At the time is was called the Northside School of Performing Arts [North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, it was a part of Northside High School. And, it was directed by Billy Densmore [William G. Densmore] who was pretty much my mentor and took me under his wing. Speaker 1: Okay. Billy Dunsmore? Speaker 2: Densmore. D-E- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Densmore, okay. Speaker 2: --N-S-M-O-R-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. All right. So, it was Northside school, I take it that's an integrated school situation. Speaker 2: Yeah. A lot of us came from Sutton [Sutton Middle School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, we were still bused. And, because it had the performing arts school within the, the greater school, we were on a separate curriculum. But, you know, it's kind of like being a jock within a, you're part of a subculture of the school as were then. The performing arts program was very integrated. Speaker 1: So, it would've been-- Speaker 2: You had to audition so, you know, it's just like the most talented kids from, from the city there. It didn't matter what color people were. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, your high school experience was really basically around the arts a lot, in terms of (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Oh yeah. I took two classes a day and four academics. I mean, two classes in my discipline which was dance, four academics and then any production that I was in, I'd have rehearsals and performances on the weekend. At the time, I did a lot of musical theatre because I could sing, and I could act. And, Densmore was in charge of the musical theatre department. And, after tenth grade, my schedule was so constant that my, my parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy] had a talk with me and said, "You know, if you wanna be a dancer, musical theatre isn't gonna get you to Ailey's [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. So, you need to make a decision." And, I dropped out of those musical productions, much to Mr. Densmore's dismay. I mean, he was so upset. I remember crying in his office. He said, "Why would you wanna be a dancer?" 'Cause he, he saw it as not, like on the level of things, it was on the bottom rung. And, being a star on Broadway is where he saw me. So, he, you know, that was that kind of first clash between he and my dad as far as who's, who's her father. And, who needs to intervene here. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Now, what, what information was informing your father's position on if you wanna be a dancer, you have to stop doing musicals, I mean, what was his--? Speaker 2: Well, because of the training that it took to be a professional concert dancer could not be done at the same time. It just physically could not be done at the same time. And, I was in Atlanta Ballet and I was, you know, I went to North Carolina School of the Arts [University of North Carolina School of the Arts, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] for the summer. And, the musicals were, it was time to make a choice at fifteen if that was what I was gonna be. I mean, my, my parents were in agreement on that. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: It's almost like a gymnast trying to do track. Speaker 1: Well, I just wondered, you know-- Speaker 2: Just because you can, you eventually have to make a decision about gymnastics, you know what I mean. Any child that I know, even with my own child [Imani Guy Duckett]--that came very early, that a six hour week commitment had to be made. Because it's a young athletic thing, you not gonna--you can't be twenty-five and start dancing. I can be twenty-five and start singing and acting. But, I couldn't be twenty-five and start dancing, you know, so. You know, I appreciate that they took what I wanted to do seriously. Because at any given time, I was given an opportunity not to do what I said I was gonna do at twelve. But, if you are gonna do what you told us you wanted to do at twelve, you gotta go do it, do it right. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, it seem like, so, you were really growing up then. Like, you spend the summers, did you spend every summer when you were, from the time you were a preteen through high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Once I got into high school, it was harder to go to Massachusetts. I'd do it for less time, a week or two. Always but not as long because I was either in, I was in something, you know. Some kind of dance or I usually danced all year round. Story_ID: 645791 Speaker 1: What were some of the musical production you were in in high school [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia] (unclear)? Speaker 2: The first one I did at thirteen, I played Anita in 'West Side Story' [Arthur Laurents], and, I hadn't gotten into high school yet. It was the summer between eighth and ninth grade and Mr. Densmore [William G. Densmore] would do a big summer production. And, because we were the, we were the little kids, you know, he made us go around, I guess, it was like seventy, fifty kids in this, in stadium seating and we had to do a scale by ourselves. And, I remember as it came to me I was just sweating. And, I did that scale and I'm a belter, I'm an alto in the choir kind of person. And, he heard that, that big voice come out of me and they moved me, I was still a dancer but they gave me the opposite role in 'America.' So, Anita sang, "Why would you wanna move back to San Juan," [sic.], and, the other girl that sang "I love Puerto Rico" [sic.] was my role; so excited. So, I got home, I made my, my parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy] take me to the record store at the time, we had record stores called Peaches [Peaches Records and Tapes, Atlanta, Georgia]. And, I bought the album of 'West Side Story' so I could learn my part. So, in learning my part, I learned Anita's part, right. And, I'm just--I don't read music, I'm just learning it, like singing along. And, hearing their Puerto Rican accent, 'cause remember I like my accents. So, the next day we're having rehearsal and the girl playing Anita, who is a senior, didn't know, didn't know her part. She could've been taught her part but she couldn't read music. You know, a lot of people can sing, not read music. But, I knew her part. And, it looked like I could read music and he gave me that role. Speaker 1: It look like you could read mus- (laughter). Speaker 2: I knew it. I knew the harmonies and you know, I could belt it out, I could dance already. I'll never forget that, I felt so bad for that girl. I really didn't understand the magnitude of what had happened. But, he gave me a lead role at thirteen in that musical. I mean, our Tony and Maria were seventeen and eighteen. They were even, they weren't even in high school. They came in to be a part of our production. And, we went on to do it, to do it again with, at symphony hall [Atlanta Symphony Hall, Atlanta, Georgia] with the, with the Robert Shaw and the symphony [Atlanta Symphony Orchestra]. So, it was a big deal; that production. And, that-- Speaker 1: So, you did the role, I guess, that Rita Moreno did in the movie ['West Side Story'], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's one, yeah. Speaker 2: I hadn't kissed yet, and I had to kiss Bernardo, and that's another time I got freaked out. I used to be in the wings going, "I don't want my first kiss to be on stage. That's weird." But, fortunately he picks me up, 'cause I was so small and kissed him on the cheek. Thank god. I still wouldn't've wanted my first kiss to be on stage as another person. Not that I liked my first kiss but whatever, it was mine. Speaker 1: All right (laughter). So-- Speaker 2: TMI [too much information]. No, it was true. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I think first kisses are highly under- overrated. Story_ID: 645792 Speaker 1: Well, you were pretty busy in high school [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Did you have much time for a social life? Speaker 2: No. That's why I like going to the skating rink. Saturday nights was my night. Friday night we stayed home and cleaned the house, me and my sister [Monica Guy]. And, that was my parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy] date night. Saturday was my party night. As long as I got up at eight o'clock and went to church. As long as I made good grades, as along as my side of the street clean, I could do whatever I wanted. It wasn't a lot of room to do what I wanted, but I wanted to perform. So, I never felt like I was deprived, you know what I mean. I never looked at the other kids and go, "Oh, I wish I could go to that football game," or, I went to enough. And, I have--none of my immediate or closest friends in high school were in performing arts. So, I had, you know what I mean, every--I wasn't just-- Speaker 1: I wondered if you had any allies in this, you know, just look at, was your sister involved in the arts at all? Did she, did she--? Speaker 2: My sister was a singer. She was, we were, we were only in high school for one year at the same time, you know. But, she has a strong personality. She didn't wanna be called Lil' Jas. And, she really established herself as editor of the newspaper, president of her class. She sang in talent shows. She was in the choir, I mean, and she did gymnastics. So, she had a very busy life as well. And, she was told the same thing after tenth grade; pick something. My--I think my parents' main concern with us is that we'd be jacks of all trades, and masters of none. Speaker 1: 'Cause they didn't want you to be all over the place and-- Speaker 2: Right. And, just mediocre at a bunch of different things. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's always been an issue with me though. And, I just, I have other interest and I have other things I can do. But, it's been hard, you know, I've had to accept that I'm good at a lot of things. But, I'm not great at, at one thing. I'm not Whitney Houston. I'm not Donna Wood. I'm, you know, not De Niro [Robert De Niro]. I'm just good at a lot of different things. Speaker 1: Now, so, at this time then, you're in high school and it's a lot of, you know, you're looking at all this promise of a future in front of you, who other than Mr. Densmore [William G. Densmore], I mean, who else were your mentors at school? Speaker 2: My dance teachers, Lee Harper, Barbara Sullivan, Donna Rizzo [ph.]. And, these were teachers that really took me under their wing. You know, we were invited to their home. They kept close tabs on me; Shirley Rushen [ph.]. And, my teachers at Atlanta Ballet. I was the only black girl in the, in the chorus. And, I remember doing 'The Nutcracker' [Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky] and being asked to wear light makeup on my, on my skin. And, oh, and by then I'm grown, you know. I'm fifteen or sixteen, so I'm not really holding my tongue and like I said, I've always, I've always been sensitive to racism. You don't need to come out and say it, I know for myself. And, I said to her, "Why?" She said, "You know, well when 'The Nutcracker' was created, it was in Europe and everybody was white." And, I said, "But, we're doing it now, and I'm in it." And, Linda Spriggs was in it who was ahead of me, but again, the only black dancer in that company. And, Maniya Barredo was the lead dancer in "Sugar Plum Fairy" ["Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy"] who was Filipino and she was darker than I was. And she used her as an example of--because she wore sparkles and she was a sugar plum fairy, she had on--I said, "But, that's because she's plum. Not because she brown." And, I refused. I didn't even tell my parents about that. But, the little stuff like that would go on and I always spoke up for myself because you can feel it. You can feel it from black people too. I got it from black people too. When you're being judged and you're not being accepted for who you are. I mean, I took me a long time to speak up for myself, you know. But, I did because I couldn't, I couldn't take it internally anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I knew that was, that was B.S. I mean, I'm sorry. Are you kidding me, 'The Nutcracker,' everybody's a bunch of flowers and mice and snowflakes and you want me to put, you know what I mean. Oh, I know what it was, we were in Biloxi, Mississippi, and I was laying out. I was on the beach. And, she was telling me not to get too dark. My ballet mistress. That's what it was. 'Cause I was like, "How did that come up?" Story_ID: 645793 Speaker 1: The implication of this, is that if you were a darker skinned young lady, you wouldn't even be able to be in it (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. And, that's what I knew. That, you know, I might've been the token, but I wasn't enough of a token. Because you still aren't making that statement on stage as you would with a, you know, a browner skin person. And, now at Atlanta Ballet it's not an issue. So, you know, I feel like, you know, grandma up here telling these stories. Like, my kid [Imani Guy Duckett] is going, "Why do you guy talk about race all the time? Who cares?" It is not an issue for them as it was. And, in a way, yeah, we need to teach them our history and where we came from. But, we can't dwell on it. We can't make what we grew up the state of the world today. They're living in a global society. There're a lot of mixed people in their lives. That's not a big deal. They have black and white friends. They have international friends. They're looking to be accepted for who they are and not defined in that way. And, I think music has brought our kids together. I think the hip hop generation share the same music. 'Cause even at, you know, when I was growing up it was, it was black music and white music. Speaker 1: Now, what was your favorite music growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, what did I grow up watching? 'Soul Train.' Speaker 1: Okay. So, your favorite, I mean, did you have favorite performer or (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my god. Well, I loved The Jackson 5 when I was very young. That was the first concert I ever went to. And, we were up in the rafters. They were this big. But, I'd never seen anything like that. So, my 45s [45 rpm record], 'cause I could only afford 45s, were 'ABC,' 'I Want You Back,' The Supremes. My first album was The 5th Dimension that I purchased with my own money. But, as I grew up it was Stevie Wonder; Earth, Wind and Fire; Parliament-Funkadelic. Like these are the concerts I would go to that I would save my money for, every year; The Commodores, you know. I'll never forget that spaceship coming in with Parliament-Funkadelic. And, I just thought those people were crazy. In their diapers and big old hair. I loved Sly and the Family Stone. Speaker 1: Now, would you, would you go to those concerts by yourself? You'd been in high-- Speaker 2: Me and my friends. Speaker 1: In high school [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Yeah, you and your friends would go? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, we'd get dropped off and picked up. I mean, we were not chaperoned. But, we did the right thing. They didn't have to worry about us in high school, you know. So, I had that life and then I had my little classical Atlanta Ballet world and I had my performing arts friends, and I had my high school friends. And, it, it was very compartmentalized and I, I liked that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think it's been harder for my worlds to merge in my adult life than, than to keep those little pockets of separation. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so, was there anything special about high school graduation? Speaker 2: That it was happening and I couldn't wait to get out. I danced during graduation. But, when you see me walking down the aisle like coming this way, I am beaming and everybody else in front of me was crying. I was like, "What are y'all crying about?" I was going to New York [New York] in two weeks, though. 'Cause that, my summer scholarship began two weeks after I graduated. Story_ID: 645794 Speaker 1: Okay so, you were excited about going to New York City [New York, New York] and being a part of--? Speaker 2: (Nods head) Couldn't wait to get out of high school [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Eleventh and twelfth grade was just--hurry up, come on (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. So, this is the summer of 1979, I guess, that you were--? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Turned seventeen, moved to New--went to Ailey's [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater], lived with my aunt in Princeton [New Jersey], and commuted an hour each way. My parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy] weren't about, you know, to let me get an apartment. I was on scholarship for two weeks. Of my sixth week scholarship summer thing, and then they put me in the third company, and I made $108 dollars a week. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, then I got into the second company and made seventy-five dollars a week, and I, you know, I was as--as far as I was concerned, I was a professional. If you get paid for what you do, you're professional. Two or three roommates in Harlem [New York, New York], number 1 train back and forth. Speaker 1: So, where did you live in Harlem? Speaker 2: 157th [Street] and Riverside [Drive]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, who was some of the people, now, you, we, you talked about some of the legends that you knew about, but who did you actually met, that you got a chance to know and interact with that you really--? Speaker 2: Well, Renee Robinson was my, my closest and best friends in the third and second company and now, and then she moved on to the first company. And, she's been in the first company longer than anybody in the history of Ailey company. And, still dancing. Not just using her arms. I mean, dancing with those kids. She was my closest friends. And, one that went on to dance with the first company. Now, during that time, I was at Ailey's is when I auditioned for 'Fame,' and ended up doing that television show in the middle of when I was in second company. So, that's why-- Speaker 1: So, this is 1981, '81 [1981]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was nineteen. Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-one [1981]. Now, how did that, now, I hear, from what I read, that you regretted doing that after you did it, or it, or you, it kind of disrupted your Alvin Ailey experience, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, again, if you're gonna be a concert dancer, you have to do that. You can be a dancer, I mean, you can be a dancer on Broadway or in other, you know, mediums. But, that kind of dancing is very much like an Olympic sport. And, when I got 'Fame,' I was very excited. I met Debbie Allen for the first time; went to Hollywood. But, I--after two months of being on the show, I realized that I wasn't in class anymore, my slot in the second company was about to be filled, 'cause she assumed I was gonna stay there 'cause I went from seventy-five dollars a week, to $750 dollars a week. And, I said to Debbie Allen--well, actually what happened is, we were put on extra contracts instead of actor contracts. So, instead of being in SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)], we were in SEG [Screen Extras Guild]. And, we were on day player contracts which means we weren't guaranteed episodes every week. And, in talking to the producers that wasn't gonna change. We were never gonna get credits. We would never get residuals and we were in every episode, and rehearing on days we weren't filming. And, a bunch of us said, "If we don't get X, Y, and Z, we're gonna leave." But, I was the only one that did. That was my first lesson in don't listen to other people (laughter), and do what you need to do. But, I went back to New York [New York] 'cause I--my slot was about to filled. And, I wanted to go back to the company. I had yet to do my dream parts in 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey], and, when I went back after 'Fame,' I did 'Cry' [Alvin Ailey]. I worked with [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison. I worked with Mary Barnett. I worked with Mari Kajiwara. And, that thing in me was filled; even though I didn't go to the first company, I was able to do pieces I always wanted to do. Story_ID: 645795 Speaker 1: Back to the Ailey company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] in 1981, '82 [1982] I guess? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Also, you know, at that age, I thought six months was an eternity. My relationships didn't last more than six months either. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I just thought, "Oh, my god, I've been in Hollywood for three months and I'm just rotting." I remember just feeling like the world was gonna--and I did that a lot. I mean, I would, I would quit jobs and, you know, I, I just had a limit of time. And, I felt that I was on, on limited time. Speaker 1: Just a questions about 'Fame' now, 'Fame' is an interesting-- Speaker 2: Did you watch it? Speaker 1: --TV show. I-- Speaker 2: Or, did you watch 'Magnum, P.I.'? Speaker 1: I saw--no. I actually saw, I didn't watch a lot of it. But, I did--it resonated with me 'cause I knew a lot of people from my hometown that went off to New York [New York] to try to become famous. And, they, they actually did it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, which it amazed me, you know, because you go to Dayton [Ohio] to New York and they dancing, the big, you know--and so, the whole idea and having been in theatre, you know what people are trying to do and that whole, you know, High School of Performing Arts [High School of Performing Arts; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] and they all-- Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: I mean, it just--did it seem like, I mean, and you had just come out of a high school for performing arts [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia] and it seem like life was like, art was imitating life, or life, art, or-- Speaker 2: I loved Irene Cara. I felt like if I was like anyone, I was like [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, who I saw first, you know, and Irene Cara. So, when I saw her in 'Roots,' then I saw her in 'Fame' in the movie and she was amazing. I thought that movie was amazing. And, I remember watching it and wishing I had been in it. That school was a lot more intense than the school I went to in Atlanta [Georgia]. And, I danced with kids from PA [Pennsylvania] at Ailey's. And, I've never seen anything like that. We were the same age but I could not believe on a performance level, technical level, and intensity level, where those kids were. In fact, I had to take basic classes when I got to Ailey's. I wasn't in, you know, Graham III, I was in basic Graham. I was in basic Horton [Lester Horton]. And, it was only my ego that made me go, I'm getting out of here as soon as possible. I wanna be with those kids. But, I didn't have the same training. They were almost trained to be at Ailey's or go anywhere. Some of 'em went to Joffrey [Joffrey Ballet School, New York, New York], some went to DTH [Dance Theatre of Harlem, New York, New York]. Anyway, so, I had those kids in front of me. I saw that movie, and I wanted it. And, this is before it was gonna be a series or anything. So, when, when Debbie Allen called [HistoryMaker] Sylvia Waters who was our director at Ailey's, said, "I need all your kids that can look like they're in high school." I went and auditioned for the pilot with what, 250 other dancers in that city. It was the first time I ever saw dancers outside of Ailey's. Again, amazing. I never forget, I saw this boy do six pirouettes in a row. And, I saw this other diva on pointe and then she took off her pointe shoes and did African. I--then, they had to free style and things we, we never did; I had never done. So, when I got that pilot, it was huge. The first time in front of a camera on a set learning all the intricacies, you know, being in your pointe shoes for twelve hours and your--don't take 'em off 'cause your feet are swollen. And, and, then watching those actors and those singers and knowing I can do that too. And, that's when it started; that I missed singing and acting. And, I didn't wanna be in the chorus of everything I did. I was in the chorus of a lot more things but it started burning about then. And, I said, "If I'm not gonna be at Ailey's I don't wanna be, I don't wanna be a concert dancer." Because my mom [Jeannette Resendes Guy] was like, "Well, what about Merce Cunningham [Merce Cunningham Dance Company], or Graham [Martha Graham Dance Company]," or--I said, "I only wanted to this with the Ailey company or else, I'm not gonna do it." Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to meet Alvin Ailey himself and talk to him? Speaker 2: I did meet Alvin in '79 [1979], and I was on his radar, you know, when he would watch the third company perform. And, he gave me certain opportunities 'cause I, you know, we were being groomed to go into the first company. But, unfortunately, he had a breakdown that year. He was hospitalized at Bellevue [Bellevue Hospital; Bellevue Hospital Center, New York, New York] and my heart was just broken. I loved that man so much. And, I didn't understand what was going on. I believe he was bipolar or manic de- I mean, there were terms I didn't understand. And, I didn't get to work with him again. But, I did work with [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison. And, I actually sang at the funeral for Alvin in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] because he's from California, and I wasn't at the New York funeral. But, I did--I tried to sing during that funeral in, in L.A. Story_ID: 645796 Speaker 1: So, so, 'Fame,' you were in 'Fame' in eighty--was it '82 [1982], I guess it was, 1982? And-- Speaker 2: I was nineteen. So, nineteen plus sixty-two is eighty-one. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's '82 [1982], they say here, and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the TV show. And, then-- Speaker 2: I probably did the pilot in '81 [1981] and the TV show in '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And, then I returned to the second company in '82 [9182] as well. Speaker 1: Right. And, you were just telling us before the break that you got a chance to perform in most of the pieces that you, you envisioned yourself in. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, the second company was being groomed to do classic first company pieces. So, we did 'Blues Suite' [Alvin Ailey]. We did 'Revelations' [Alvin Ailey]. We did 'Cry' and, several other things. And, 'Cry' which was that, you know, twenty-five minute magnificent, endurance filled piece that Alvin [Alvin Ailey] created on [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison was actually broken up into three parts for us. And, I was doing the third part. Now, in 'Revelations,' you know, there're many parts. There's "Fix Me" ["Fix Me Jesus"]. There's "Wade in the Water." There's, you know, and there's certain things that I wanted to do that I had been in other pieces of 'Revelations,' but I wanted to do the, the "Wade in the Water" duet. I loved yellow sections, so that was always a given. And, I loved "'Buked" ["I Been 'Buked"]. So, I got to that. And, then in 'Blues Suite,' I loved "House of the Rising Sun," and was able to do that. And, so, there was a part of me that said, "Okay," you know, "I've experienced that." So, when I left the Ailey second company, I was twenty-one. For some reason, I felt like, okay, you're grown now, you need to have insurance. You need to get rid of some of these roommates. You need to be able to care of yourself. And, I was not on seventy-five dollars a week. Did not wanna be dependent on my parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy] because it was kind of a deal. Like, you, you wanna do it, go do it. You said you could, you know, make this happen. So, I left the Ailey organization [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. And, like my second audition out in the world, I got a musical. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, that's when I started doing musicals. Speaker 1: So, is this the revival of 'The Wiz' that you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first show I got was called 'Dancing in the Streets,' and, it was Motown revue in Boston [Massachusetts]. So, I'm back in Boston. And, after that I did a show called 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell]. We toured Europe. And, then we had a two week break with no, no gigs in Germany. And, we could use our eight hundred dollars to live off in Europe for the two weeks, or we could go back home on our, on that money. And, I chose to go back to New York [New York] and I auditioned for anything that was available. That's when I auditioned for 'The Cotton Club' movie, Lena Horne's concert ['Lena Horne: The Lady and Her Music'] and 'The Wiz.' And, I got 'The Wiz.' Story_ID: 645797 Speaker 1: So, this is revival of 'The Wiz'? Speaker 2: Yeah. This was the-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --first time Stephanie Mills came back to do 'The Wiz' since the original Broadway production. She was about twenty-eight. And, we toured with that for eight months, and we were on Broadway for two weeks. (Laughter) They shut us down. Speaker 1: Now, when you say they shut you down, what happened? Speaker 2: We had bad reviews and they, they said it lack the luster that the original 'Wiz' did. And, some--I mean, it wasn't Stephanie or the, the leads, they were wonderful. It was the sets and the costumes. So, we had been on the road with that for, you know, eight months. They were touring--it should've been pumped up from what everyone remembered, you know, fifteen years ago on Broadway. You can't really do a revival that close to the original and not-- Speaker 1: And, it was as-- Speaker 2: Have a little something different or more spectacular going on, so. Speaker 1: Did it, do you think it met the standard of the original or, or should it had been, you said--? Speaker 2: Talent wise it did. And, the original, it had the original choreographer, George Faison [HistoryMaker George W. Faison]. It had [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder doing costumes and directing it had, Stephanie Mills. It had phenomenal dancers in it. A lot of it was equally exciting but I just think they wanted it more if it was gonna come back. They wanted more of something. Speaker 1: Okay. And, now, did I, did I hear you right, now you were tour with 'Bubbling Brown Sugar' [Loften Mitchell] in-- Speaker 2: In Europe. Speaker 1: In Europe. Okay. Speaker 2: Then, I did 'The Wiz.' Speaker 1: Was that your first trip to Europe? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, I remember landing in England thinking it was gonna smell or feel diff- (laughter), when I got off the plane I thought else was gonna--and I was like, it kind of smells like Atlanta [Georgia] on a rainy day, you know. But, and we toured England and Germany before I left the tour. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then I did 'The Wiz.' Then, I did 'Leader of the Pack' [Anne Beatts] with Michael Peters, which was a revue of Ellie Greenwich music from the, from the '60s [1960s]; girl groups, Darlene Love was in the production, yeah. Speaker 1: From the song, (singing), the 'Leader of the Pack.' Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, The Dixie Cups, and it was, it was like five different girl groups with different names and the same three singers. Speaker 1: So, did you sing? Speaker 2: It was the, it was the era of Phil Spector. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you sing in the, in these--? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was in the ensemble. I sang, I dance, and I understudied three of the leads. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Thinking I would never go on. But, I did. I did go on. I understudied a lot. After 'Leader of the Pack,' I did a show called 'Beehive' ['Beehive: The '60s Musical,' Larry Gallagher] which was a tribute to six, to the women of the '60s [1960s] again. So, I'm in the '60s [1960s] music from 'Motown' ['Dancing in the Streets'] to 'Leader of the Pack,' to 'Beehive.' And, I did 'Beehive' for a year. I played Diana Ross, and Annette Funicello. And, I was like the dance captain for that show 'The Village Gate' [ph.]. And, it was during that time I said, "I'm saving my money, I'm quitting in January and I'm going to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for pilot season." And, I left with five hundred dollars. Speaker 1: Pilot season. Now, this is a season when they would do the TV pilots, and--? Speaker 2: It was a lot. It was a lot stricter then because you only had three networks and they're all looking for their new season at the same time. Now, with cable and different seasons going on, you can go up for a pilot at any given time. But, January to March was pilot season. And, that's when, and I didn't have an agent in L.A. So, I had to get an agent and audition for--I really wanted to act more. I had done three small parts and I wanted more of that. I didn't wanna do musicals and I didn't wanna be in the ensemble. Story_ID: 645798 Speaker 1: So, we're at about, right now, we're about 1987, '86 [1986], '87 [1987]? Speaker 2: I'm twenty-four 'cause it was the year I got 'School Daze.' Speaker 1: So, '86 [1986], yeah, that'd be 1986, I guess, right? Speaker 2: I--yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: January of '86 [1986]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got 'School Daze' actually when I went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] even though they were casting in New York [New York]. And, then we were in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: Now, did you, had you heard of Spike Lee? Speaker 2: I knew Spike from Atlanta. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Now, in 1979 he was a senior at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], I was a senior at Northside [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. And, anytime there was coordination or a fashion show or something, they would get Reverend Guy's [William Guy] daughter to dance. I was always over there in my leotard and chiffon skirt, and I'll be like the entertainment of the event. And, I danced at the coordination. In 1979, Morehouse coronation of the homecoming queen that Spike Lee directed. Speaker 1: He directed the 1979 coronation of the--? Speaker 2: Yes, he did. And, right before I went on stage he said, "Go on. Do what you do." I'll never forget that 'cause I was like, "What does that mean?" And, I, my skirt fell off and I was humiliated, you know, in front of all of those boys at Morehouse and I was like sixteen or whatever. And, I remember it just popped off. I had velcroed it instead of using something more secure. And, I came out of that skirt and they thought it was a flower blooming, and they lost it. I mean, they were (claps hands) clapping and I thought they were clapping 'cause, you know, I was just in leotards and tights. But, that was a major performance for me. Then, when we got to New York, we're at New York at the same time. He was at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] when I was at Ailey's [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. I would run into him and I didn't understand what filmmaking was or what Spike was doing or--I really, I wasn't into the movies enough to look at it on a technical level. So, when he said, you know, "I just did my first movie; 'Bed Stuy: We Cut Heads' ['Joe's Bed Stuy Barbershop: We Cut Heads']," I didn't, I didn't see it. That was his student film. But, he, he said, you know, "You gotta see 'She's Gotta Have It.'" Now, I did see that. And, I was like "Whoa, this is a real movie." And, when 'School Daze' started casting he said to me, "You need to send me your picture 'cause you're, you're gonna be a wannabe." I didn't know what he was talking about, and I didn't send him--I don't even know if I, I must've had a picture. I don't, I think I had pictures by then. And, yeah, I did. And, then the next time he saw me, he was like, "Stop messing around. I told you to send me your picture." He, you know, he talks the way he does all the time. He's real blunt and to the point. So, I said, "Well, what is this? I don't understand. What's a wannabe?" He said, "You know how you light-skinned people are." Which I didn't. But, I didn't appreciate it whatever he was saying, I didn't think it nice. So, by the time I got to L.A. everybody was auditioning for Spike's movie that had been sitting on kind of, not, you know. And, so, that's how I ended up auditioning for 'School Daze' in L.A. even though I was living in New York. And, they almost didn't fly me in from L.A. Speaker 1: Now, this is Spike Lee's first big commercial success 'cause 'She's Gotta Have It' was kind of like a-- Speaker 2: Yeah. It put him on the map. Speaker 1: --independent film-- Speaker 2: But, was an indeed--yeah. Speaker 1: --in the black film festival during the summer, you'd see him and that kind of thing. And, I remember he came to Chicago [Illinois] and talked about it-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but, he, so, he-- Speaker 2: It was his mark as a filmmaker but 'School Daze' was the big one. Speaker 1: Now, I think he had-- Speaker 2: Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and blessed it. And, everybody was watching. Speaker 1: Yeah. I think he had made the Michael Jordan commercials. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: In the interim, between 'School Daze' and-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in between the-- Speaker 2: Those Nike commercials, when--with that character from 'She's Gotta Have It,' Mars Blackmon. Speaker 1: Right. So, that really made him a household--and this was this first big commercial movie. And, this is-- Speaker 2: And, it's about, I mean, it's like black folk dirty laundry airing, you know. And, you know, black H- I mean, HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] which people didn't even know existed including black people. I can't tell you how many people have said to me, "I didn't even know there were HBCUs until I watched 'A Different World.'" But, I lived across the street from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], so I'm not getting any of the historic moment of, of what we're doing, 'cause this is how I grew up. And, I certainly didn't understand the big deal with the light-skinned, dark-skinned thing, 'cause I didn't go to college. I didn't know about the sororities and, so, 'School Daze' for me was kind of like going to college for two months without having to take classes. Story_ID: 645799 Speaker 1: So, when you were growing up now, I mean, you tell me about a time when everybody's gonna beat you up, and-- Speaker 2: Not everybody, just that one time. Speaker 1: Well, that fifteen people were gonna beat you up-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and, a certain amount of--it seem like, I don't know, I was wondering if it was, 'cause it's something that you see in schools and stuff, in black schools where there's a tension between dark-skinned people and light-skinned people. Not a, it's not complete tension but it's some tension there and people know it who grew up in a certain era that you, to call somebody black before 1965 would get you a whooping. Speaker 2: Well, you know, we, I grew up with black pride. I mean, I remember going to poetry readings at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] with Don L. Lee [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] and LeRoi Jones [Amiri Baraka] before their name--they changed their names. So, I was growing up with Afros, Angela [HistoryMaker Angela Davis]--I mean, I was growing up where they was celebrating hair and brown and, you know, I never got that. I never got that what I was, was better than black or brown, you know. If anything I wanted curlier hair and darker skin. So, I ne- I really didn't understand what, what was doing on in 'School Daze.' 'Cause that was not my experience. Nor, did I feel like I was, I didn't feel like I was better than people. But, I didn't feel like I was treated like I was better than people, 'cause people were feeling pride around what they were. Speaker 1: Now, did, you did say at a certain point that one of your friends' mother or grandmother tried to change her speech because you were over there. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, you know, it just kind of implied that they, it was something about-- Speaker 2: Yeah. But, she was what, sixty. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: So, I mean, when my peers, that didn't happen. Speaker 1: That didn't--okay. Speaker 2: You know what I'm saying. That was just kind of old insecurities on her part that she didn't have to have with me. But, she wasn't sure, you know. And, it could've been a bunch of things. It could've been 'cause my parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy] were professionals, 'cause they were still together. Because we lived on the other side of town. I don't know that it was just skin color, is what I'm trying to say. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: 'Cause it could've been, you know, her dad is a minister, or her mother's a teacher, or you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think people, and that's part, part of why I didn't understand what the deal was at a black college [HBCU]. I mean, it seemed like a very dated 1930s brown paper bag testing mentality that I did not realize existed, especially on a black campus. Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I don't (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I mean, for 1980s. But, you know, after he did that movie, people that did go to those colleges or any college said that it still existed, that there was tension between the sororities and the fraternities, and that they were still color coded. I don't know that they are as much now. But, I think any way that people can find a way to divide ourselves, we do it. Speaker 1: Yeah. I, yeah, I hear what you're saying I just-- Speaker 2: Not just color but religions, looks, class, money, education, we find a way to separate ourselves. Speaker 1: Oaky. So, at any rate, so, he's [Spike Lee] dramatizing this, this, that part--one of the feature of film is this dramatization of this color syndrome. And, so, so, tell us-- Speaker 2: In that, you know, the, the militant fellas and the jigaboos, and the less, I guess, sociality conscious and more self-involved wannabes and Gamma Rays. Speaker 1: Okay. So, I know, seems like they had the, I guess, the socially conscious versus the soro- I mean, the fraternities of-- Speaker 2: Right. Right. I don't know, I don't know Spike's experience at Morehouse, but it seems like he was coming from a definite perspective, you know, of, you know, you, I think you feel like the fellas are right. Like you're on the side of the jigaboos. That the wannabes were less honorable. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: But, I mean, in the movie, you know. But-- Speaker 1: So did, now, there are some specific things-- Speaker 2: My daughter's [Imani Guy Duckett] here. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, from what-- Speaker 2: I just wanna say about 'School Daze' my favorite parts were the musical numbers, and the parties. We had parties every weekend for whatever. Pisces party, football party, Mike Tyson party, we had so much fun. And, it was, I, I met so many people in that movie that I've worked with all my career. From Laurence Fishburne, Giancarlo Esposito, Tisha Campbell [Tisha Campbell-Martin], 'cause it was so many of us; Kadeem Hardison, Darryl Bell, we all ended up doing 'A Different World.' So, aside from all that other stuff, it was, it was a great experience, I think for all of us. I think we all remember that movie. And, we'll, we'll never have another movie like that. Story_ID: 645800 Speaker 1: Now, yeah, it is a singular movie. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, when did you start filming 'School Daze'? Was it in the--? Speaker 2: Okay. What year did we end up on '82 [1982]? Speaker 1: This is 19--no-- Speaker 2: I was twenty-four. Speaker 1: Eighty-sev- this is '86 [1986] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eighty-two [1982]. Speaker 1: Yeah, '86 [1986]. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or, '87 [1987]. Speaker 2: I'm twenty-four-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, it's February and we film 'til April. Speaker 1: Okay, you started in February? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, filmed 'til April. So, this would, would've been-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I remember by birthday, I turned twenty-five in March during the filming of that movie. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, it's '87 [1987] then. Yeah, '87 [1987], 1987, 'cause-- Speaker 2: Okay. Yeah, thank you. Speaker 1: The movie was released in '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I know you filmed it in '87 [1987] before-- Speaker 2: And, I got 'A Different World'-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --the end of that summer. Speaker 1: Okay. But, it's ironic, I think 'A Different World' came out before the movie. Speaker 2: It did. The movie came out-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in the winter, and we--and 'A Different World' came out first. So, it looked like I did that and got, got 'School Daze.' But, that's not what happened. I got 'School Daze,' and Robby Reid [ph.] brought us into to read for 'A Different World.' Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Me, Kadeem [Kadeem Hardison], Darryl [Darryl Bell], Roger [Roger Guenveur Smith], I mean, so many of us. Speaker 1: Well, I know, it puzzled me, and it probably puzzled other people to see you in 'School Daze' with not as much of a role as you had in 'Different World.' 'Cause you seem-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: To be like the star in 'A Different World,' and, but, in 'School Daze,' you're one of the cast and you do a great job, but you're not like the prin-- Speaker 2: No. Tisha [Tisha Campbell-Martin] was the lead because she had just done 'Little Shop of Horrors.' So, actually, that role was offered to Vanessa Williams, and then to Tisha. And, I was, I was always Dina, which for me at that time was a move up, you know. I wasn't just an ensemble, I had some lines, and you know, that was good. Speaker 1: Yeah. But it, but it just seem like-- Speaker 2: I mean, and Tisha, Tisha out sings me so, "I Don't Wanna Be Alone Tonight" ["Be Alone Tonight"] could not have been the same number. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, so, now from February until April, it was? Speaker 2: Yeah, we shoot 'School Daze.' Speaker 1: In '87 [1987], and there was certain--we were talking about this before we started rolling, but there was certain rules that Spike Lee set up for the wannabes and the jigaboos, right? He had like-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --he had, he had some kind of method involved in his directions or something. Speaker 2: Well, Spike separated us in, in, where we lived, we had different hotels. The wannabes, and the Gamma Rays or, the Gamma Rays and the Gammas were at the Regency Suites Hotel and the jigaboos and the fellas were at the Ramada Inn. Speaker 1: Now, here in Atlanta [Georgia], right? Speaker 2: Here in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay, so the Regency, for those who, 'cause this may be watched like three hundred years from now, we don't know. The Regency is better than, a better hotel, considered a higher class hotel than the Ramada? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, we had little suites, like little kitchenettes. It's a smaller hotel. Ramada Inn was more of a chain and you know, but of course, I loved going to the Ramada Inn 'cause they were having more fun. They were closer together. They were more free, you know (cough), and they weren't in character all the time. I mean, some people when, you know, did that, I'm in character all the time, which is really annoying. Speaker 1: So, you don't do that, right? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Especially, if the character is not somebody you wanna be around. I mean, (laughter), but, if I need to be in character like that, I don't know that I would be out with people that I know. Like when I played a Jamaican dance hall girl, I went to the dance hall clubs and I hung around with real Jamaican girls and watched their mannerisms and stuff. But, I don't know if I would've done that like when my sister [Monica Guy] if she came to visit me, (laughter) during that, making of that, you know. So, it's just everybody has a different method. That's also to me very accessible to play; anger, I don't like you. I mean, it wasn't like--those emotions to me they are very easy to get to. Speaker 1: Now, I hadn't asked this before but outside of high school [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia], had you had any drama instruction? Speaker 2: No. I audited some classes in New York [New York], 'cause again, they were very expensive. I remember them being fifty dollars a class, and I was only making, you know, maybe three hundred dollars a week. So, I remember auditing a class for a month with Warren Robertson and I studied with Max Gutenberg [ph.] a little bit, but that was it. I only did like half a monologue before I started auditioning and going into that world. And, I don't recommend it because I don't know that I auditioned that well. I think, I au- the roles that I got were my best auditions. If that makes any sense. It wasn't like I was knocking audition after audition and then I got a few roles. The only time I did well, were the jobs that I got. So, that, I've had to work backwards with my acting training. And, I met a lot more actors and I learned from them, and I listened to their stories. And, you know, if they went to Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York] or Carnegie Mellon [Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], or what you guys do while I was dancing at Ailey's [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]; classics, plays, monologues, scenes. I mean, improv but, you know, richness of training that they got as actors that I did not get 'cause I was training as a dancer. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: At the same, what would've been the same time. Story_ID: 645801 Speaker 1: Tell us about the production nu- numbers in 'School Daze.' Those are, those are some of the great, really-- Speaker 2: Yeah. They were, they were, I mean great movie productions. Otis Sallid was our choreographer. And, you know, Otis was from--I knew him from Ailey's [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]. He had done Broadway. And, you know, Spike [Spike Lee] really studied those MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Inc.; Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc.] musicals because he had to edit them a certain way, you know, for them to flow. He worked very closely with Otis. And, Otis also choreographed 'Malcolm X.' The--all that jitterbug series. So, when we went into rehearsal for "I Don't Wanna Be Alone Tonight" ["Be Alone Tonight"] really young, Tisha [Tisha Campbell-Martin] is maybe seventeen. She's younger than I am. And, we're supposed to ooze sensuality. So, we got the steps early and we looked good. But, Otis spent so much time on bringing out our sensuality. And, at first it was so embarrassing. Like, how you gonna teach me how to, you know what I mean. And, it was something that, you know, I don't think we knew yet. We just didn't know it yet; what he was talking about, and how to emulate that, which didn't have anything to do with the steps; the music or the choreography. You're talking about an approach. You're talking about a motivation as an actor. Once you, once you access a certain emotional key then you don't worry about making a face or ooh, ooh. You just feel it and those things naturally happened when you have certain thoughts in your head. So, acting wise, "I Don't Wanna Be Alone Tonight" I think was a little challenging. And, as I said before, he let us add our little steps and our choreography in there because, I think by then, we realized that cameras were only gonna get you when the camera was on you. As opposed to being on Broadway where you can see everybody at the same time. So, we tried to get in on Tisha's shots whenever we could. So, that it wouldn't be, you know, Tisha and the three backup singers and they end up splicing a lot of our choreography out of it. So, that's why you see us, you know, traveling and doing things around her and breaking out as a rose, you know. It's like, "Otis I have a good idea, what if we stand behind Tisha and you can't see us and then we, you know." "Yeah, that's good, let's try that," so. I think ultimately it did make it very interesting, but you know, I do give Otis all that credit for letting us have our little input, you know. And, Tisha sharing the stage with us. But, that was my big lesson in that number; accessing your sensuality. And, then for "Good and Bad Hair." I mean, first of all we had musical rehearsal to learn that song for days with Spike Lee's father [Bill Lee]. And, I remember staying on cocka-bugs for about ten minutes 'cause we didn't know what a cocka-bugs was. And, he wanted to say it like a cocka-bugs, cocka-bugs, and we were like, like Coke--cocka-bugs. (Imitates accent), "No, cocka-bugs, cocka-bug." And, now I know what they are. They're those little our spiky seeds, I guess, that fall from pine trees. Speaker 1: That stick in your-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that stick to you. And, our line was (singing), "Where you got cocka-bugs standing all over your head." I mean, every line that we learned, it's not like learning a pretty song. Every line is so derogatory and, and vice versa, you know, back at 'cha kind of thing. But, when we did it and we were in each other's face all day, I think we had fun on "Good and Bad Hair" 'cause by that time, we had gone through the worst filming day, which was the day of the big fight. And, it was the step show. Gammas [Gamma Rays] come on and the fellas bust in and do their own kind of mocking step of what the fellas believe. And, at the end of it, and we didn't know what they gonna do. They made up their own thing; the real actors. They unzipped their pants and hot dogs came out of it, in our, our faces. But, we didn't know that was gonna happen. It was not scripted. It was so profoundly offensive that one of the actors actually hit another actor, or grabbed him. And, a real fight ensued. And, Spike had it on film. The tension was so high because all day we had been going back and forth with the wannabes and the Gammas against the jigaboos. And, it was improv and people were saying horrible and nasty things. And, they were saying, you know, you're, "You're just an ape in the zoo." And you're just a, "You don't know you're black and you're a white--." I mean, and I couldn't improvise anything. I could say the lines that were scripted but I, you know. And, I felt like maybe I'm not a good actor 'cause I can't do this. I can't go there. I can go there, if you tell me what I'm supposed to say, but you know. And, then at the end we started, when we went to the parking lot to get on the bus, we started crying. 'Cause a lot of my friends were on the other side, and it was just very hard for us to do that with that kind of intensity. Story_ID: 645802 Speaker 1: So, by the time we did "Good and Bad Hair," it was almost a relief, you know, just to have fun with it and be sassy and you know, choreography was all exciting, and people really get to dance that had just been like wearing weaves and blue contacts. It's like, "Aww finally, all our divas can really throw down." And, so, that was a, I think that was a two day shoot. Speaker 2: Yeah. I didn't realize that the Gammas [Gamma Rays] show, the step show was filmed before the "Good and Bad Hair." Speaker 1: Yeah, "Good and Bad Hair" was the last thing filmed because they let all the other actors go. It was just a couple of us doing it, so. And, it was a two day shoot. So, that was the last thing that we did. And, by then, we knew each other. We had gotten used to each other. We weren't paying that story line a lot of mind, like taking it too seriously. So, we really had a good time. Speaker 2: Yeah. It looks like, you all have a good time in that one. Yeah. So-- Speaker 1: I worked with a lot of those people already. 'Bubbling Brown Sugar,' [Loften Mitchell] 'The Wiz,' you know, after being in the musical theatre circuit you just start knowing each other. So, in between takes, you know, I used to play gospel. I only know two gospel songs, and we'd all harmonize around the piano. And, they were always making up songs and dancing. So, it was a lot of fun. Speaker 2: Now, something happened, seem like I remember just from read- from those days that the, that the production was kicked off of one campus and they had to finish on another. Was that, was that--? Speaker 1: We were kicked off of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] 'cause Spike [Spike Lee], well, I was, I was on the outside but I don't think Spike would let them read the script; the board or whoever lets you on campus. And, he stuck to that. So, we ended up doing things at other locations towards the end of the shoot. Speaker 2: So, did you--why was, was it because he wouldn't let 'em see the script that-- Speaker 1: And, they weren't sure what he was doing on the, you know, what the movie ['School Daze'] was about, what scene were being shot, and how. Even though it was a fictitious college mission, it was maroon and white. If you use those exteriors there's kind of no way to, you know, to not know what college that was, so. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was an alumnus, yes, Spike's an alumni of Morehouse, right? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you finished on another campus. Was it--? Speaker 1: I don't know, we were all over the place. I think Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and I don't really, I don't really remember. Speaker 2: But, it was another campus right there in the complex [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wasn't really aware of that kind of stuff. I was just like, "Where do we go? What do I do?" Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: It was still shot within Atla- Clark Atlanta Uni- Morehouse (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean, he got it done. It was kind of like, he will get it done, you know. Story_ID: 645803 Speaker 1: So things start moving--so you move on to another college show right after 'School Daze,' right? Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't right after. I took a job in Paris [France] with Otis. Otis Sallid was choreographing a '60s [1960s] show in Paris and took a bunch of us there. And, when I came back from that show, I was really kind of lost 'cause I'd been on role, so much has happened, and then there was nothing. And, I remember kind of just being down, calling my dad [William Guy], my mom [Jeannette Resendes Guy], crying and, you know, I, I kind of go through this every time a job is over. This kind of depression and what next, and. So, I went to Massachusetts to be with my mom and my grandmom [Guy's maternal grandmother, Maria Sousa Resendes] and we were on the (clears throat), and I gotta call--oh, before I went there I had an audition for 'A Different World.' But, I had already been in twice for different roles, and I, obviously I didn't get them. So, I didn't have a whole lot of faith that they were gonna--I'm glad they called me in but I didn't think--for whatever reason I got that I looked too much like Lisa Bonet. I got that I was too old to play a college thing. So, those things weren't gonna change, you know what I mean. So, I took--I auditioned and I went up to, no I, I auditioned and I went up to, I don't know, Massachusetts. And, that's when I found that accent because I thought, "This isn't funny." I mean, I don't know what a black southern belle is. But, just reading it plain was like, "It's okay." But, when I did it like this, and I acted like Ms. Pinkard [ph.], my mom fell out. So, that's how I did it. I got a call back. I flew out to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] from Massachusetts. I didn't have any clothes. I remember, I didn't have time to go back to my apartment. I went in for my call back with the network on a Friday. Somebody didn't want me. Somebody wanted another Whitley [Whitley Gilbert] candidate. So, they made me come in the next day and do a three page monologue. And, I told you I didn't have any training. So, I didn't, had never done a monologue on my own. But, it was a phone conversation. But, she was also trying to knock me out. Her argument was that I didn't--I was a dancer (clears throat). And, I had done a show with her before. But, I didn't work with her. She was the writer. I was in the ensemble. It wasn't a good experience for her. So, she kind of clumped me in with all those people. Then, Monday I had a third audition and it was down with me and that girl. And, they said to us, you know, "One of you will go to the reading, the table read, and one of you will go home." It was down to the wire like that. I didn't even have time to call my parents and tell them that I got the part, you know, 'til like five o'clock in the afternoon. I went right to the set and started. Speaker 1: Now, when, so the part was written for a black woman that was a southern, I mean, a student that was a southern belle? Speaker 2: That was the description. A black southern belle, you know, in the character description. And, I was like, "What is that?" Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: 'Cause again, I'm not understanding the differentiation. And, really it was a class differentiation with Whitley (clears throat). She went to a private school. She rode horses. She had tennis lessons. She was a debutante. I didn't do any of that. I didn't know, I didn't hang with anybody like that. Even though those are true southern traditions. And, it goes back to my mom being a Yankee. She was not of that culture. So, I basically emulated something I didn't know; I didn't have experience with. And, I really thought I made a lot of it up until I started meeting those girls that grew up like that. Speaker 1: So, you didn't meet anyone like that until after you--? Speaker 2: Yeah. And, I remember the feeling like, "Oh, my god," that's a real Whitley. She was speaking in terms of us and them. And, I didn't know who us were or them were, but it would, it was other black people that had not gone to college, that were not, you know--she was talking in the, the, like the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] Penningtons and the, "Do you know the Philadelphia Dunbars?" I'd be like, "What the hell is a Philadelphia Dunbar?" And, why would I know a person that way. But, I noticed that's how they are--like, she would've been a Virginia Gilbert [ph.]. She would've been a Richmond [Virginia] Gilbert [ph.], which is how she saw herself. But, I really, I thought I made up that kind of girl. I'm just glad that some of it was on the nose. You know, that people said, "Oh, I know--I went to school with a Whitley or I know a Whitley." That--'cause my, my first fear after shooting seven episodes without any of them airing was that that character would be rejected as not being realistic. Story_ID: 645804 Speaker 1: Now the, the show 'A Different World' was a spinoff of 'The Cosby Show,' which was the most popular show on television. Not just in the black community but the most popular show on television. Speaker 2: Right, number one show in the country. Speaker 1: Yeah. And, so, this was supposed to be Lisa Bonet going to college, I think but-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I think, but, now, I'm trying to remember this now, I don't know if you can help me? But, I think Lisa Bonet, it would've featured her basically. She would've been the lead character in the show. Speaker 2: Yeah. It--oh, Speaker 1: But, it was supposed to be-- Speaker 2: Let me do this-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The, the show was a triangle of Jaleesa [Jaleesa Vinson-Taylor], played by Dawnn Lewis; Maggie [Maggie Lauten] played by Marisa Tomei, with the star being Lisa Bonet as Denise Huxtable which is of course the role she had been playing for six years and had a huge following. She also had just done 'Angel Heart' with Robert De Niro. She was the, she's the star of the show. And, they shot some episodes before they brought me and Kadeem [Kadeem Hardison] in, 'cause they wanted us in for comic relief. They wanted the snooty, nasty one. And, then they wanted to boy that had the crush on Denise. And, so, it was very formulated and we're kind of brought in to spice up the show. And, the episodes we weren't in, they put us in after, I don't know, they put a hat on us and put us in there so they could establish a--so, it was still finding it's legs, you know, as new shows do. But, it was definitely her vehicle and you know, in Cosby's [Bill Cosby] brilliance it was set on an HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] which gave huge awareness to black colleges. Speaker 1: Now, I don't, I don't expect you to say anything about this necessarily or even--but, as I remember 'Angel Heart' created a contradiction to the innocent college student for Lisa Bonet. And, it almost made it impossible for that character to fly in the, in the TV show for a lot of people, you know. Speaker 2: I think, I mean, I definitely understand as an actor why you would do that. I had that same urge after playing Whitley [Whitley Gilbert] for six years. Do something completely out the box. So, you can accept that I was acting; that's not me. And, I can act again, you know what I mean. So, from her standpoint, and she was a beauty. She was on the cover of, covers of magazines. She's, she's going out with Lenny Kravitz. She's bigger than TV. She's, she's a Hollywood star now, you know. And, I think, I felt that they used that fame to, to boost the show, you know. But, that was just me at that time. I think younger people thought that was cool. And, maybe the older, parental audience that looked at Cosby as a kind of familiar role model didn't appreciate it. Almost like the wayward kid. But, as an actor, I understood it. And, then, she was more famous. She was like, the most famous Cosby kid after doing that movie, you know. So, it went, it went from Denise, "Why the Denise character?" To, "Wow, Lisa Bonet is gonna be doing her own show." Speaker 1: But, now, now did she stay with--she didn't stay with that the whole time, did she? 'Cause I don't, I don't think I watched the whole (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She did the first season and le- and left in the second season. Story_ID: 645805 Speaker 1: 'Cause I think it, it, it be- it sort of became your show, I would say. I mean, Dawnn Lewis was, was very--but, it sort of became yours. Everybody associated you with the show ['A Different World'] more than anybody else. Speaker 2: But, you know, I grew up on 'Mary Tyler Moore,' ['The Mary Tyler Moore Show'] and 'All in the Family,' and some of the greatest, I think, sitcoms, Norman Lear's work. And, there's a certain, well, Rob Reiner did MT- 'Mary Tyler Moore.' But, she was to me our Mary Tyler Moore. And, I was Betty White and you know, Kadeem [Kadeem Hardison] was Ted [ph.] and, you know what I mean. We were the spokes and she was our hub. And, I was very concerned with how the spoke was gonna work without the hub. I knew Whitley's [Whitley Gilbert] place, and I knew my place as an actor, what I was supposed to do, and, and that I was able to service that. But, to be the main character with such a neurotic off the beat kind of character, it's not usually the anchor of a show. Because the anchor is the person that the audience relates to. We're watching the world through Mary's eyes. So, we can have a crazy Rhoda [Rhoda Morgenstern], and a crazy Phyllis [Phyllis Lindstrom], you know what I mean. And, I know these are old references, 'cause I'm fifty but, I'm just saying I understood that. And, I was really nervous about how to keep her funny and out there and still be an anchor. But, I was an anchor with Dwayne [Dwayne Wayne]. And, Kadeem's character was more normal and relatable. And, the two together I think that's, that's how that anchor was able to, to stand on its own. Speaker 1: Okay. That makes sense. That makes sense. Speaker 2: And, I think, Dwayne's character normalized Whitley. I made a deliberate effort to be different when I was with him than I was with everybody else. Almost, well, you know when you're in love, you're only that way to that person, you know. Sweeter, softer side, you let him be the boss. So, that bossy, cra- nagging, kind of Whitley that we see with other people, I made sure she would be different with him. Story_ID: 645806 Speaker 1: Now, did you, did you have, now, I don't know, in TV shows is direction, I mean, is a director really, do they really have a lot of influence on what the actors do (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Debbie [Debbie Allen] was, was crucial instrumental to the survival of that show ['A Different World']. If you look at our first season versus our other five that Debbie produced and directed, there's no comparison. She gave the show specificity. She went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. She understood the importance of the pit and the older people in that school that were more maternal and parental than originally in the first season. The first season was based on a show called 'Square Pegs,' which was a high school show that our, our producer had written years ago. And, she basically just had black people doing 'Square Pegs.' And, the more specific Debbie and Bill Cosby were, the more real it was. It didn't alienate, I mean, it was more universal when we were ourselves, that what that would be like. I remember language the first season that we just would never use with an, an elder black person. I used to go, "Who are we talking to?" It just wasn't done culturally. I remember humor, humor issues. Things we didn't think were funny. And, it would be funny, especially with Sinbad, he's a comedian; that they would fight us against and make, make sure we did exactly what was on the script. Where Debbie opened it up. She respected us. She broke the wall between the writers and the producers and the actors, and she gave us a voice. She encouraged me to write episodes for the show, and direct episodes for the show. And, she understood this was an amazing opportunity for us at any time in our career. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Are there any, is there any, are there particular stories about the show that, that you remember that you can share with us? Speaker 2: There're a lot of stories. I mean, we had so much fun off camera. And, it was certain things I couldn't do. I had trouble working with Cree Summer 'cause she always made me laugh and I could not get back into character. I used to look at her forehead when I acted with her so I wouldn't have to look at her face. Lou Myers [HistoryMaker Lewis Myers], Glynn Turman, great actors. One--well, Debbie, you know, she held us together. And, it was her hum- you know, it starts at the helm. She had so much fun with us, as long as we got our work done. I mean, you know, I worked with her in 'Fame.' We get our work done. But, one day I had a scene where Whitley's, Whitley [Whitley Gilbert] thought everybody forgot her birthday. So, she buys a little red bottle of chianti and she's gonna have her own party by herself. So, she takes Denzel's [Denzel Washington] picture off her bulletin board and pokes it into the pillow and talks to Denzel, 'cause it's just their night together. So, the more tipsy she gets, the more infused her, her conversation with Denzel gets, and the girls walk in on her and catch her, you know, talking to the pillow, drinking wine. So, we did a take of it. The audience fell out. And, one thing about Debbie if you nailed it in one take, she'll make you do it again, okay. So, they said, "Okay, we're gonna do it again." And, I hate doing jokes again 'cause you've lost the surprise, right. So, I said, "Why?" I'm saying to the stage manager, "Ask her why." And, he said it was a lighting thing, it's not you. So, I go back a do it again, and I'm trying to make it funnier the second for the live audience. And, I really go into it, and I'm just calling Denzel's name and I'm weaving back and forth, and when the girls walk in I get a tap on the shoulder and it's really Denzel. I mean it was horrifying. First of all, I thought I was seeing things--that I had concentrated so hard on Denzel that I, that Dawnn Lewis looked like Denzel. And, I get away from him, like you see me scramble back like it's a ghost. And, then, of course, the camera crew, everybody's ready to film it. You see Debbie's reaction, you see me, you see Denzel, like, you know, and I hugged him and I was holding my heart I was like, "You scared me." He was like, "You scared me." I don't think anybody expected that I would react that way. I had such, had such a crush on Denzel and I did not wanna met him like that. I, I did not wanna met him as Whitley. I wanted to meet him as a peer, you know, doing a smaller role on one of his movies. But, she--you know, Den- Debbie and Denzel were friends so she asked him to do it. And, that audience went, I mean, they loved that. So, and then I, you know, I've had, I had many birthdays on that set; and one, one day they bought me a stripper in front of the audience. So, yeah, we had a lot of fun. Story_ID: 645807 Speaker 1: So, the show ['A Different World'] went on-- Speaker 2: There're some not so good stories. I mean, stories about fighting for certain episodes that the network didn't want us to do. Speaker 1: Now, what did they have a problem with? Speaker 2: Our anti-apartheid show. Our AIDs [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] show. Our Aunt Jemima show, the reclaiming of mammy. Our date rape show. I mean, basically anything political, valid, or current. They just wanted to keep the show light. And, that, that--those were times when, you know, Dr. Cosby [Bill Cosby] and Debbie [Debbie Allen] would go toe to toe with the network and fight for those shows. And, I think, those are our best shows. I also think they're funnier 'cause the more rooted you are in reality, the funnier you can be. Speaker 1: Okay. And, those were made, you know, was there anything that did not, that the network would not relent about? Speaker 2: You know, all the scripts went through Dr. Cosby, Alvin Poussaint [HistoryMaker Dr. Alvin Poussaint], and the network. So, even the scripts I wrote, some things would be rejected or redlined, as we called it, and we'd have to make adjustments. Whether they, they might have been too sexual or overt, or not the direction they see the show going in, so. In general, everything was, was looked at. But, that, those shows were definitely about those issues. It wasn't about how it was written, it was always gonna be about those issues. And, it was the issues that they didn't want us to do. Story_ID: 645808 Speaker 1: Now, during the time that you were on 'A Different World,' you were also making 'Harlem Nights.' That was in '89 [1989], well it was released in '89 [1989] so you must've been shooting it in '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I guess, almost the same? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm not good with dates. Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about 'Harlem Nights.' Now, this is one of the big hit movies for Eddie Murphy, Richard Pryor-- Speaker 2: Yeah. It was great. I mean, everybody was in it. Eddie wrote it, directed it. So, it was really important. And, then he was working with a lot of his idols. Like Richard Pryor, Redd Foxx, and Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett]. I didn't have any scenes with them, but I went on the set one day when I wasn't working, just so I could see them. 'Cause I always thought, you know, I'm not gonna be in a movie with Richard Pryor and I don't see him. So, I went to their trailers and, you know, met him, hugged him up. And, then I, I remember all this laughing coming out of Della's trailer. And, she was sitting in there with Redd Foxx. And, they were just talking and laughing and I said, "Can I just sit here?" And, I sat on the steps and just kind of, sat with Della Reese and Redd Foxx, making, you know, he was making all his nasty jokes. He asked me to go to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] with him and it was, it was great. I grew up on 'Sanford and Son' and I loved, I loved those comedians. Speaker 1: And, I thought, well, when I saw it, and I think other people did too, they thought that it probably was more fun to be on the set of the movie than actually watching the movie, with Redd Foxx, Richard Pryor, Eddie Murphy, Della Reese, all these people, you know. Speaker 2: Well, definitely for me because my scenes weren't funny. So, you know, I, I enjoyed doing the work, but I was missing the, you know, the fight and the pinky toe, "You done shot my pinky toe." I missed the scene where he was wearing those Coke bottle glasses and couldn't--you know, I wasn't on the set with them. So, yeah, I would go on the days I wasn't filming just to be around that, and see what was going on in between the scenes. Speaker 1: Okay. Any story about Richard Pryor? Speaker 2: No. I didn't talk to him as much. I met him several, you know, several times in Hollywood. And, I was just, I was just amazed that he knew who I was. You know, every time I step to him it was as a fan, never as a peer. It just, you know, same when I met Carol Burnett; so nervous to go up to her. And, she was like, "Oh, you're so great on that show." And, I said, "I like doing characters because I use to watch Carol's show ['The Carol Burnett Show']--," I mean, I was, you know, just a fan. And, just excited that they were in the same room. You know, [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, or Stevie Wonder, or you know. Award shows were amazing to me, when everybody's in the room. Like the Image Awards [NAACP Image Awards] and the Oscars [Academy Awards] and it's just, you know, it's almost like a poster coming to life, or a set, or a scene, scenery that, that comes to life; almost like they're not real when they're all together like that. Story_ID: 645809 Speaker 1: All right my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer tod- interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Jasmine Guy, J-A-S-M-I-N-E, G-U-Y. Speaker 1: And, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born March 10, 1962 in Boston, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: And, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an actor, writer, and a director. Speaker 1: And, what is today's date? Speaker 2: I don't know. No, it's--and today is October 2nd, okay. Nineteen, I mean, 2016 (laughter). Speaker 1: And, where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Right now we're in Atlanta [Georgia] where I now reside with my daughter [Imani Guy Duckett]. And, after having lived in New York [New York], and L.A. [Los Angeles, California] for thirty years, you know, between the two cities, I decided to move to Atlanta about nine years ago. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So, we're completing an interview we started about four years ago, I believe. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And, so, we left off around 1994, you know, with you meeting Afeni Shakur. Can you tell us about that? Speaker 2: Well, you, when I was doing 'A Different World' I learned a lot about production, direction, writing. I was, I wrote several episodes of 'A Different World.' I directed a few. And, a lot of that was encouraged by our producer Debbie Allen, who wanted to make sure that we maximize the opportunity that we had to be on this wonderful show. And, I was fascinated with the story of the female participation in the Black Panther [Black Panther Party] movement. And, I started reading a lot of biographies. [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis who was not a Panther, but I read her biography, Elaine Brown, Kathleen Cleaver, and Assata Shakur who now lives in, in Cuba. So, that was already brewing when I met Tupac [Tupac Shakur]. Tupac did, Tupac Shakur did an episode of 'A Different World.' That's when I met him. And, then, later on that year, I'm, I'm not really sure of the timeframe, but, you know, he was getting a lot of notoriety as a rapper. But, he was also being noticed as an actor after his role in 'Juice,' and, I think I read in a Newsweek article something about Tupac. And, they said, "And, he is surprisingly handsome." And, I was, I was so enraged by that. I don't, it was like, "Why surprisingly?" I just, anyway, it just, sometimes, you know, it touches a nerve. And, the, the bias in the reporting on this talent to me was, I don't know, I felt it my duty the next time I saw him to let him know how much I respected him as an actor. I thought he was extremely talented. And, I just said, you know, kind of big sister to little brother, "Don't let these people tell you, you can't act. Or, that you're getting over before of your music fame and your looks." 'Cause he was really good. And, I recognized it, and I just wanted him to know that. Story_ID: 645810 Speaker 1: And, maybe, I don't know, a couple months later I ran into him again at the Image Awards [NAACP Image Awards], and, people were protesting that he was nominated for an Image Award, and they asked me about it in the press tent. I'm trying to remember the sequence of events because it threw, the questions threw me off because it's, this was when I won my sixth Image Award for 'A Different World.' And, I was just prepared to go into the tent and hold my trophy and, and talk about, you know, maybe the ending of the show and what the show meant to me. So, that, that questions threw me off. It seem like it was kind of out of nowhere. And, I asked the lady, or the girl that asked me, what song was she talking about that they were protesting about? I really didn't know anything about any of the protest or anything. And, she said, "Well I don't know." I said, "Okay. Well, the songs that I know, 'Brenda had a Baby' [sic. 'Brenda's Got a Baby'], 'Keep your Head Up,' and 'Dear Mama,' I find very pro-women, pro-community, pro, all of that." So, I said, "When you do your homework then maybe we can talk about it." Because how you gonna ask me about an album you ain't even listened to, right. And, when on about my business and the next day it was in the, in the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times]. And, only mentioned that because when I did finally meet his mother, Afeni [Afeni Shakur], she thanked me for that. She thanked me for speaking up for him. When we met, it was under very stressful circumstances when Tupac [Tupac Shakur] had been shot for the first time in New York City [New York, New York] in the foyer of that building. He was going to a recording session and was shot, I think four or five times. And, I flew to New York. I was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] when I heard the news. And, I thought I was going to visit him in the hospital, but he left the hospital in the middle of the night. And, I ended up seeing him at the courthouse with his family and his friends surrounding him. He was bandaged up, wounded still, but he didn't feel safe in the hospital. He was like, "Whoever shot me," you know, he didn't think that was a random shooting. So, he was like, "Whoever shot me, I just feel like," he just felt like a sitting duck, you know. And, that was the first time I met Afeni. Later that day, I got a call from Afeni, this was before cell phones, as I always have to tell my daughter [Imani Guy Duckett], "This is pre-cell phones." I had a voice machine, and I had message from her. And, she came over to my New York apartment and we talked and she needed help helping him. And, through that period of time as Tupac was recuperating from the bullet wounds, I got to know Afeni. And, I told her that I want, first I wanted to tell her story because she was fascinating to me and highly intelligent, well read, very warm, very loving. And, I said, "You know, we just don't have like that female Panther story." Because, you know, there were women that were around the Panthers [Black Panther Party] that were almost like groupies. They were cool, and they were hard, and they were smart. And, then there were those women that were really part of the movement, and Afeni was one of those women. Part of the breakfast program [Free Breakfast for School Children Program], speaking on behalf of education in her area, in Harlem [New York, New York]. And, as we began to talk, I encouraged her to go out and, and speak, you know, on, on the speaking circuit. I said, "So, let's, let's tell your story and let's talk about the Panther 21." She was one of the, there were two women arrested with the Panther 21 in New York. So, it was, it was nineteen men, Afeni, and Joan Bird. And, I said, "Let's start with that." And, she kept wanting to go beyond that because she was nineteen years old. Story_ID: 645811 Speaker 1: When I met her [Afeni Shakur], she was forty-eight. And, she was like, "You know, this isn't the only part of my life." She wanted to talk about her addiction to crack cocaine. Her recovery was very important to her. She was a very honest person, you know. Because, I said, "Wow. So, basically, Tupac [Tupac Shakur] kind of blasted you in 'Dear Mama.'" You know, 'cause how can you be anonymous in your recovery when he's got this in the record? And, she said, "Well, that's his story. That's part of his story. He has a right to that story." And, to make a long story short, I ended up writing her book about her life ['Afeni Shakur: Evolution of a Revolutionary,' Jasmine Guy]. But, I always remember that she said that. That she believed her son had the right to his story, as she does to hers. And, tried to honor her in telling her story. There were times, I began, well, first of all, I wasn't the writer on the book. I really wanted [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez. And, I wanted to focus on the movie, which was just a segment of her life, not an entire biography. During that process Tupac was shot again. Well, he was incarcerated, shot, and he died. And, he died-- Speaker 2: This was 1996? Speaker 1: Yes. Around the time when I started to shop the movie about his mom. So, needless to say, not only was it not appropriate, you know, part of my joy in writing her movie and her story, was that I knew he was gonna take care of his. You know, my vision for my friend was that he was going to, of course, continue to do this music but that his movie career was gonna take off, you know. And, I'm pretty sure it would have. He was a profound actor, and thinker. And, I said, you know, I said, "Tupac," I said, "I promise her movie's gonna end when your story begins." And, as I had framed the movie in my mind, it ended with her being acquitted after eleven months of incarceration and defending herself by the way. But, she was pregnant with him when she was freed. And, that was the end of her movie. And, I knew he was gonna do his story, you know. It was just funny to me, there, there's no way someone that young, he was about, I guess he's like ten or twelve years younger than me, you know, could've done that much and had it end before--he died at the age I got 'A Different World.' He died at twenty-five. I got 'A Different World' at twenty-five. I didn't not see my life as being that short as he did. And, he was prophetic in that way. But, he was also in a, in a world that I wasn't familiar with, you know. Ever since he died I realize how easy it is for us to lose our black men before they're twenty-five. How common it is. Story_ID: 645812 Speaker 1: Anyway, there was a seven year gap between the last time--I stayed friends with the family but the last time I talked to Afeni [Afeni Shakur], when we were interviewing for the, for the movie and the book, there was a seven year gap. So, I said, "Well, you know, I'll have to revisit this." And, in talking to her, the stories didn't change but her, her, her perspective on it changed. And, I was like, "Wait a minute, you know, you said, you were mad at your daddy. And, you, you were angry with your daddy." She said, "Well, I'm not angry at him, I'm not angry anymore. I understand." She, in those seven years had gone back to North Carolina. Had revisited her own roots, and in some way had healed. So, some of the facts of the story were the same but her take on it was different. And, there was forgiveness. And, there was forgiveness because she understand--she understood her mother's [Rosa Belle Williams] story, and her parents, and her father's [Walter Williams, Jr.] story, and his parents. And, in that healing, I said, "You've evolved. In the short time that I've known you. You've evolved." And, that's how I came up with 'Evolution of a Revolutionary' ['Afeni Shakur: Evolution of a Revolutionary,' Jasmine Guy]. My other title was, 'The Nine Lives of a Panther' [ph.]. I thought that was pretty cool. And, I was gonna have, you know, all the times that she came back from something. But, that was also before her son [Tupac Shakur] died. So, there was a, there was a, there was a big difference in my early transcripts of interviews with her and the latter ones. And, I realized that the story of evolution, of her evolution was very important to the healing of a broken spirit. And, I, I think of her often. I think about her a lot because, you know, I watch documentaries, not just about the Panthers [Black Panther Party] but about social change, and sometimes I'm like, "Wow. Are we moving at all?" 'Cause I feel like as a country we're, we're not healing, we're not growing, and we're not progressing. And, how in the world are you going to bring health and fairness to other people, other countries, if we can't do it. I think everyone looks at us to take care of our own laundry before you can tell other people how to do it. And, it's very discouraging, you know. And, she's someone I would've called, you know, in the wee hours of the morning when I'm watching CNN over and over again, and I get very frustrated, I would call, you know, Afeni. And, she's someone that was always very honest and truthful, and giving, and loving. Story_ID: 645813 Speaker 1: So, the book ['Afeni Shakur: Evolution of a Revolutionary,' Jasmine Guy] was published in 2005 by Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.]; and now, had you ever, had you, when did you decide to make it a book instead of a, a movie? Speaker 2: Well, I still, you know, wanted to tell the, the story of the Panther 21, and Afeni [Afeni Shakur] still wanted to tell her whole story. So, I started to look for, for writers, you know, [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez. I thought of [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni. And, she said, "You know, you write it 'cause I don't, I don't wanna talk to nobody else." And, I said, "Okay. Two problems, I'm not a writer, and I didn't even go to college," and I really didn't want the task. I mean, I couldn't imagine. But, she was right in that I did know the content and she wouldn't have to repeat certain things. There were some stories that are in the book that were very hard to even listen to and I'm sure very difficult for her to talk about. And, she didn't wanna have to do that again, you know. And, she trusted me. And, she knew that I would do my best. But, also, I would honor her story and her truth. She didn't trust a lot of people that were, were writing about either her family or Tupac [Tupac Shakur] or her because they always put their, you know, their take on it. And, she's very articulate. So, that's the, that's aggravating to do with somebody who knows how to, how to talk. I don't need you to interpret what I said. I said what I said. She owned her truth. And, she knew I would represent who she was and what she said. And, I did. Speaker 1: So, what was your process? Did you have, you record interviews with her and then go back and try to outline 'em and, I mean, and did you have any consultation, you know, that's a, I mean, writing a book is not an easy thing. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Yeah, it's very difficult. Speaker 1: --you know, you had to consult with some people. Like I said, one time or another by how-- Speaker 2: I called my mother [Jeannette Resendes Guy] who is an English teacher and a great writer, and basically taught me everything I knew. I'm sure I learned more from her than I did at school. And, I said, "Mommy, if I do this, would you, would you edit my work?" So, before it went to the publisher, it went through my mom. And, she literally made me a better writer. I had an idea, you know, first I went through what voice is the book in, you know. Literally, look out the window of an airplane at the clouds and say, "Muse, muse," 'cause I heard y'all have muses (laughter), writers, painters, you know. So, I was calling on my muse. I thought about doing it in the first person, and really because I was most comfortable probably with a--as a long, you know, monologue, narrative, as an actor, I would just, you know, get into her, her character and write in her voice. And, that was one thing I had. But, the idea came to me (cough) excuse me, I had a, some kind of cold this, this weekend. Anyway, I loved the book 'Tuesdays with Morrie' ['Tuesdays with Morrie: An Old Man, A Young Man, and Life's Greatest Lesson,' Mitch Albom] which my father [William Guy] had given me to read. So, I chose to do it like that. Like, I would be, you would get to know Afeni like I did. So, you know, we didn't have the chronological narrative that we might have had if, you know, I was born in Lumberton, North Carolina in 1948. But, you kind of met her in stories and the conversation comes as naturally as it would, you know, when we're, when we would talk. I mean, we don't, we don't talk in a linear, we talk more in topical ways more than, you know, in 1978 I did this, 1979. But, if we're talking about men, we're gonna talk about whatever man is relevant to, you know, the subject. Not necessarily in the order that they came in. So, I got to know her in that way. Story_ID: 645814 Speaker 1: Then my, and then my issue was, you know, how do I organize this so that the reader can, can flow, you know? So, I wrapped it around the times I would see her. Because I, you know, I lived in New York [New York]. I had an apartment in New York and a, and a house in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] But, I didn't always, we weren't always in the same city. So, some times those conversations were in New York. Sometimes they were in Marin County [California] where she lived and had house boat. Sometimes those conversations were in Atlanta [Georgia] where she lived in Stone Mountain. So, I tried to wrap around where we were in our real lives and what was going on. I think the greatest compliment that I have from people about the book ['Afeni Shakur: Evolution of a Revolutionary,' Jasmine Guy] is that it just sounds like me. Like it just, my, my friends that know me say, you know, "I just felt like it was just you talking. Like, it didn't feel like you were writing." And, that to me was the greatest compliment because I wanted it acceptable, you know. But, during the course of writing the book, I would sidetrack. Like she would mention something to me, and I didn't wanna stop her, her flow. But, sometimes I didn't know what she was talking about. Like, what was that, bembe? I think it was bembe. They were the drummers that would be in Central Park [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Djembe, yeah, djembe. Speaker 1: Well, the djembe, but it began with a B. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: And, I don't, I, you know, but I didn't wanna stop her. Speaker 2: Was that the name of the group that--? Speaker 1: Yeah. And, then, another time she said her husband's father was a Garveyite. And, I didn't know what that was but I didn't wanna stop her. So, I go back and do research about Garveyites, which of course are from--followers of Marcus Garvey which--also, Malcolm X and the Nation of Islam and the Panthers [Black Panther Party]. So, now I'm starting to see this. Speaker 2: See the lineage of all the groups-- Speaker 1: The lineage, yes, of these three ways of thinking; Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], Garvey, and Wash- and Booker T. Washington. You know, 'cause people think all black people think the same way, but it depends. And, it depends on class and culture and, you know, I just saw a documentary about the Panthers and it feature Stoke- Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and how bright he was, and how brilliant he was. And, you know, what, what his friends were saying is that they missed that you don't see his personality in the footage. It's always him, you know, speaking in a public way. But, you didn't get to see how funny he was, how witty he was, how easy he was to be with, you what I mean. And, I wanted to, to make sure I gave Afeni [Afeni Shakur] that flavor that, you know, when I visited her home, and it was her first home, it was the first home that she owned and Tupac [Tupac Shakur] had bought it for her and, and they were in this area in Stone Mountain where the family was all near. And, she had this huge screened in back porch that overlooked woods and she was so happy. And, she talked to me about land and the importance of owning land. So, then when I got home, I started looking up landowners, black landowners and what happened. What happened to shar- why, why did we become sharecroppers? What happened during Reconstruction? So, all of that is just to say that, she would say something to me that I now have to ex- tell other people, so I had to do my research so I knew what I was talking about. I couldn't just throw, you know, he was a Garveyite in there and not know what a Garveyite was, and what that meant for that time of that generation. Story_ID: 645815 Speaker 1: It's interesting, I keep thinking about the title of the show, 'A Different World,' and that you're like actually stepping into a different world and learning about all this, all the cultural activities and politics that surround. Like, a person that becomes a Black Panther [Black Panther Party], and trying to understand, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What--yes, it was a different world for me in that I read, but I didn't get a lot of this in school. It wasn't a, there wasn't a conversation and I think that's one thing I might've enjoyed. Had I gone to college, would've been a classroom where you can have thought provoking conversations. That's what I imagined college would be, you know. I would have that with my parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy] who are both teachers. But, she [Afeni Shakur] taught me, you know, growing up in rural North Carolina like barefoot, is not how I grew up. So, you're also talking about a class difference, you know. Speaker 1: So, she grew up in Lumberton [North Carolina]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Which is a place a place that David Lynch writes about in his movies. Yeah-- Speaker 2: Oh, he does? Speaker 1: In North Carolina, right. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's says it's, it's the poorest, Robeson County is the poorest county in North Carolina. And, her parents, you know, her father [Walter Williams, Jr.] was a truck driver, her, her mother [Rosa Belle Williams] was--she, she told me, in the book ['Afeni Shakur: Evolution of a Revolutionary,' Jasmine Guy], I--she says, you know, "My great-grandmother was a slave. My grandmother was a sharecropper. My mother was a domestic, and I was a, I was a revolutionary." Every single step of, of African American history is in her lineage, you know. And, and very, you know, highly intelligent and well read as, you know, most of, most of the Panthers that I've met are very smart and well read, you know. And, if you don't agree, that's different than not knowing, you know; so those conversations were always, always deep. Story_ID: 645816 Speaker 1: All right, so, so the book ['Afeni Shakur: Evolution of a Revolutionary,' Jasmine Guy] was published by Simon and Schuster [Simon and Schuster, Inc.], how did, was it difficult to find a publisher or was it, you know? Speaker 2: Atria Books, she--was already working with Afeni and Tupac [Tupac Shakur]. I think the 'The Rose That Grew from Concrete' [Tupac Shakur] was on Atria [sic. Pocket Books]. So, Afeni basically already had a book deal which was another reason why I needed to rise to the occasion. Because I knew how hard it was to get a publishing deal or to, you know, I basically had a deal and all I had to do was delivery. Speaker 1: So, I take it, your book is the definitive biography of Afeni Shakur? Speaker 2: I think it's the only one. I mean, she's mentioned in 'The Briar Patch' ['The Briar Patch: The Trial of the Panther 21,' Murray Kempton] and there's another book about the Panther 21. But, not that really talks about her, you know, her life as a--and like I said, she really didn't wanna just stay on the Panther [Black Panther Party] part. Because if you think about it, if you're forty-eight you're like well, okay, from nineteen to twenty-one I was a Panther. What about those other twenty years. She really wanted to inspire and encourage other women that are like her. And, to let them know that they can get to the other side. That was very important to her because there was parts of the book that I wanted to cut out. I just, they were just too harsh. And, I didn't want people not to like her or not to--or to judge her, you know. And, she told me, she said, "Look, we either gonna tell the truth or we don't have to do this." 'Cause it's those hardest stories that made her do what she did. Speaker 1: Yeah. I met her years ago at the retreats for the Black Holistic Society [National Black Holistic Society]. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: So, I saw her in that context. But I often wondered is some of those kinds of things her son, you know, writes about and raps about, you know. I mean, she a, you know-- Speaker 2: Doesn't-- Speaker 1: Yeah, doesn't, doesn't jive with that. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But, I knew that there was an affinity with the African names and the things of, of the people I knew who sponsored the holistic society. Like, [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti, (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: You know, it's, so, yeah, so, your book was well received. Like I said, received some critical acclaim and have you, have you considered writing anything else? Speaker 2: I have. But, it is very difficult and it's very--what's difficult for me, it was easier to write about someone else. And, I've been asked to write about my story and I have found it extremely difficult. Almost like I can't be, I feel, I'm so subjective in the process that I can't even tell if this is interesting or not. Speaker 1: Well, it is you know I'm sitting on the side and I'm listening to you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know what I mean? Like, I feel like, this doesn't, this isn't-- Speaker 1: --and, I think it is. And, I think this interview and probably in the other interviews you do if you could collect them and you could inform your writing-- Speaker 2: I would love to work with somebody. I would love somebody to do what I did with Afeni for me. Somebody that I know. That I'm comfortable talking to that can actually compose and structure. But, like I said, my mother helped me a lot with organization. And, you know, and maybe these are things that I would've learned, you know, in school. 'Cause if you think about it, I never really written a paper even. If you don't go to college and you don't write long, you know what I mean, a thesis or things like that. So, I think that would've, it might've been easier for me. But, everything was on a learning curve when I wrote, when I wrote her story. And, just--oh, I tried to quit three times, writing that book. I didn't care how much I had written. Speaker 1: I don't think that people would be surprised that you wrote a book. But, they would be surprised to find out you never went to college and all that. I mean, you know, I, that's the strange thing about it-- Speaker 2: But, the thing is, my parents [Jeannette Resendes Guy and William Guy], I mean, my parents, my mom would correct--I made an, I remember I made an A plus plus once on my composition paper. She said, "Let me see that." And, she corrected it and made me write it over. So, there was a lot of learning going on in my home, you know, just, you know, discussions and like my sister's [Monica Guy] also an excellent writer, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had a strong preparation. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, I think really it's not even fair for me to say that I wasn't educated because I feel like they, they educated me at home. Story_ID: 645817 Speaker 1: Now, your writing this book ['Afeni Shakur: Evolution of a Revolutionary,' Jasmine Guy], now--one has, has to be, this is a story in its self is a discipline that it would take to write a book considering you were trying to work all during this period, in as, in acting jobs, from '90 [1990] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was still working and-- Speaker 1: There's a couple I wanted to mention just see what you're--now, you were on 'Melrose Place,' 'Touched by an Angel.' You did an animated film called 'Cats Don't Dance.' You were, let's see, you were, you were in the documentary, 'Unchained Memories,' in 2003. Based on the slave narratives in the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that was taken in '30s [1930s] during WPA [Works Progress Administration] period of time. So, during this period you're working. And, but it's a, it's a different situation than having a regular role on a sitcom, you know. And, 'A Different World' ran how many years? Speaker 2: Six. Speaker 1: Six, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the kind of, you know, work, had I done 'Chicago' [Bob Fosse and Fred Ebb] yet? Yeah, I was on Broadway, I did 'Feast of All Saints' ['The Feast of All Saints']. I'm messing up with my time. But, yeah, I had to keep working. But, I did, you know, I probably wrote the book over a year period, you know. 'Cause it was a whole process going on where I--the other thing is I don't, I don't type. So, I literally hand wrote the book. Then, I gave it to my friend who typed it for me. Then, it went to my mom [Jeannette Resendes Guy]. Then, she corrected it. Then, it came--so there was this little circle thing that would go on, you know. And, of course, by the, by the time I think computers, you know, everybody was doing everything on computer. But, I couldn't think the same way when I was typing as when I was handwriting. So, I was like, "Well, Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] hand wrote. So, maybe I can hand write my," (laughter)--it was very time consuming; the process of it. 'Cause I couldn't just slice things out, you know, it had to be--but, working as an actor, and working as a writer are two, just different heads. And, so, sometimes it gets a little confusing when I go, "Okay, I'm, I'm directing this play. I'm not in it." Or, "I'm acting, I'm not directing." Or, "I'm writing." I mean, everything to me begins with the word. Speaker 1: Did you have a particular time of day when you write? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm a, I'm a morning person. So, you know, and--oh, and I had a kid. So, (laughter), you know let's not forget Imani [Imani Guy Duckett]. So-- Speaker 1: You were married [to Terrence Duckett] at this point, right? Speaker 2: I was, yeah. I was, I was, let's see Imani was born in '99 [1999]. I got married in '98 [1998]. Yeah, so, that was going on too. So, I used to write when she was in, in preschool. When she, she was little. But, you know, I hear everybody had these rituals. Writers have these rituals that they do, and I didn't really know what mine was, you know. You see it with James Caan in 'Misery,' and you hear about Ernest Hemingway. And, you know, not to compare myself to Ernest Hemingway, but I felt I need some kind of, you know--when is my peak creative time, you know. And, I don't know, I did listen to Terence Trent D'arby's [Sananda Maitreya] version of 'A Change is Gonna Come.' What--I don't know the name of, it was a soundtrack to some movie. I don't know if it was 'Many Rivers to Cross.' Anyway, I would listen to that, write on my bed, spread all my papers out, I guess that was my little ritual. People would say go to coffee shops. Go to libraries, and things like that. But, I really need, I really like to spread out. Story_ID: 645818 Speaker 1: And, I usually have something in the background. I don't like silence. So, the thought of going to a library was not good for me. So, either music or, you know, the television. I remember--and I'm also not a great sleeper. So, I might be up at three in the morning, you know. I was up when the Oklahoma bombing first happened. And, the television was on, so I, I saw it in live time. And, I'll never forget the first report blamed the Nation of Islam. 'Cause they didn't know who bombed that building [Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma], you know. And, even when it happened I said, "Y'all don't know that. Why would you even say that?" I mean, now that doesn't even seem like a big deal because people say things they don't know all the time (laughter). But, back then, I thought it was just horrible. Not even their MO [modus operandi]. Speaker 2: No. It's not. Speaker 1: You know what I mean. And, then I was also awake when I saw the, the first tower [North Tower, World Trade Center, New York, New York] get hit. Into--and I remember I was watching Bryant Gumbel on CBS 'cause he had just left 'The Today Show' ['Today'], and wanted to see how he was doing on his new show. That's the only reason why I was watching. It was almost like, when I think of 9/11 [September 11, 2001] and everybody knows where they were, I feel like I was with Bryant Gumbel because he was also confused 'cause it looked like a movie, you know. And, when things aren't even in your, your psyche to understand it takes a minute, you know. I don't, I don't blame Bush [President George Walker Bush] for that pause he had in front of them kids when he found out, let me just say that. Speaker 2: When he kind of froze? Speaker 1: Yeah. I thought he was, you know, kind of unfairly made fun of for that because it wasn't, that, what are you telling me? It, there's a moment of, and then, and then it was in front of a bunch of kids reading a book, you know. So, I have those moments when, you know, I'm alone experiencing something for the first time. And, I think about how different my daughter's [Imani Guy Duckett] world is than from what I, I knew because she's growing up post-9/11. Story_ID: 645819 Speaker 1: So, so do you have a favorite role during this, this period of time? I see you're on Broadway, 'Feast of All Saints' ['The Feast of All Saints'] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I loved, one of my, like my, yeah, I have a couple of favorites. 'Dead Like Me' which was a series on Showtime. I loved that show. It was very smartly written. I felt very, to me that character of Roxy [Roxy Harvey] is the closest to my real personality. Like, I, I really didn't even feel like I was acting, you know. 'Cause all the other roles were a little over the top for me, you know, 'cause I play the bitch so well. But, I don't really walk around like that. But, this kind of just--I didn't have to smile. I didn't have to dress up. I could curse. I could, I just loved it. And, I loved the ensemble because we were all so different, you know. Speaker 1: So, you had Mandy Patinkin, Ellen Muth, and, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Callum Blue and, and--well, Ellen Muth was a wonderful actress, and of course Mandy as we know is a wonderful--so, I would, I'm just around all of these talented actors, great writing, and I didn't have to do nothing. A lot of time, you have to work on making something work, you know. Like, "Hm, that's not really funny. How am I gonna make that funny?" Or, "Well, that's not real. How am I gonna make," 'cause you have to do what you're told to do. You have to do what's written. And, I didn't have that kind of stress with, with that show. It was just fun and innovative and I looked forward to seeing it, you know, when it aired. And, another movie I did for CBS was 'Stompin' at the Savoy,' which was directed by Debbie Allen. I had a great time on that movie too. I liked, I liked the character I played. I loved, you know, that it was about these five women; Vanessa Williams, and Lynn Whitfield, Vanessa Bell Calloway. And, I played these, you know, maids, or domestics, and we were all roommates. And, it was just about that period in the '30s [1930s] in Harlem [New York, New York] when, you know, going to the Savoy [Savoy Ballroom] was the highlight of your, your week, and your life, you know. And, I loved the clothes and the fashion. I had a great time also, you know, doing 'Chicago' [Bob Fosse and Fred Ebb]. I loved that role. I played Velma Kelly in 'Chicago' over--I did it for about two years. But, in between that, I got married [to Terrence Duckett] and had a baby [Imani Guy Duckett]. So, it wasn't like every day for two years, (laughter) obviously. But, I liked that because it, it just combined everything. I didn't have to compartmentalize, like, "Okay. Now, I'm a dancer. Now, I'm a singer. And, now I'm an ac- ." At any given moment I'm gonna be doing one of those things, you know. And, it brought me back to my roots, you know, which--'cause I did, I don't know, I don't know, I've done like a dozen musicals in my life. And, so, including 'School Daze.' A lot of us were from musical theatre that did 'School Daze,' because you have to be able to sing, dance, and act for the audition. Speaker 1: Yeah. I love the musical numbers in 'School Daze,' too. I think they were so well done (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Awesome. Speaker 1: I don't know why Spike Lee doesn't do more of 'em. I mean, it, you know, unless he has like somebody else that would help direct it. But, if that's his directing of a musical, than it's, it's really good. Speaker 2: Well, you know, he wanted to do a musical, and studied musicals. And, he had, you know, he said he watched like Fred Astaire and like the old Busby Berkeley musicals, you know, to look at how to shoot it. And, oh my god, we rehearsed so much. We were either filming or in rehearsal. When I think about it now, I don't think I could do that. But, I was young. Speaker 1: Was that that an intense experience? Speaker 2: It was like (laughter), it was, it was constant. I think we shoot that movie in a month. And, we would leave the set and go to the recording studio to, to sing 'I Don't Wanna Be Alone Tonight' ['Be Alone Tonight']. And, get the song when we're there. What did we know? I mean, now, I mean ignorance is bliss 'cause I was like "Cool." We're gonna learn the song and record it tonight, all four of us, you know. And, so, you know, everything you saw, we recorded--that's us singing. So, when were we recording it? We were recording it after we filmed that day. Story_ID: 645820 Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, it's interesting-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --his father's music and I don't know the way it's, it was done, it has a timeless kind of quality. If anybody's ever been a black college student, you know, I mean, I can relate to it and I'm much older than Spike [Spike Lee]. But, you know, it's (laughter), it really resonates with anything you experienced in college. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember when we would have music rehearsals with Bill Lee, Spike's dad. And, there's a line in "Good and Bad Hair"--first, the other thing that was going on was, I was going, "What the hell are we--what is this? What is this light skin, dark skin thing?" I didn't get that. I didn't--I thought it was antiquated at best. Speaker 1: Had you been--did you come to the conclusion that you were sheltered form this or something? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't go to college. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I didn't have that. And, I grew up in Atlanta [Georgia]. So, I just didn't realize there was that light skin, dark skin tension. Speaker 1: I mean, it's, at one time to tell the truth, I'm maybe a little darker than you maybe because of the sun. But, there's a time that I thought it was over. Speaker 2: I thought it was over. Speaker 1: And, and-- Speaker 2: You best believe I thought it was over by the time (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I got on a bus and I heard people talking, I couldn't believe it, people are still talking like that-- Speaker 2: You know, and, so, so that was going on in my mind. "Why is he dredging up this paper bag mentality, you know. This doesn't happen anymore." 'Cause I'm, I'm growing up '70s [1970s], black power, black is beautiful, so, I'm not, you know. So, that was going on while we're filming the movie ['School Daze'] that I felt like. But, since then and since I have, since he did air our dirty laundry, I have heard otherwise, you know. And, and it just--that was kind of amazing to me. But, we're doing "Good and Bad Hair" in rehearsal, in the rehearsal room and the line was, "Well, you got cocka-bugs standing all over your head." And, I knew what cocka-bugs were, 'cause I grew up in the South. Do you know what they are? Those little balls and they're all spiky. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They're seed of, I don't know if they're, I don't know what they're seed of, but whatever. They're about that big. You step on 'em barefooted, they hurt. Well, a lot of the northern girls didn't know what they were, and they weren't saying it right. And, he made us rehearse (imitates accent) cocka-bugs, and people were saying cocker bugs and cockle bu- it was just, he was very particular about his music, you know. But, you know, Spike had a lot of talented people in that, in that movie. Them kids could sing and dance. I mean, Tisha [Tisha Campbell-Martin], you know coming off of a 'Little Shop of Horrors' and it was a very, you know, exciting time. But, I did, I did wonder about that light skin, dark skin thing. I think maybe I just didn't, I didn't hang out with women, people like that so I didn't know. I wasn't in exclusive groups. I'm not gonna mention any names. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: And, I wasn't in sororities either. So, I didn't have, I just thought, wow, are we still--for real, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's, it arises and falls like a tide, you know. And, it's not completely gone yet. Story_ID: 645821 Speaker 1: But, who knew we would be able to wear our, our natural hair on television--that's a revolution, you know. Viola Davis, wears her own, wears her own hair and it's like this big deal. Because there was a time when you had to be wigged or you weren't, you know, in my case it was always, I wasn't, I wasn't dark enough for certain roles. And, that used to bother me too. And, then my brown sisters were getting, "Can you be more," I mean, some of the things casting directors say to your face is really appalling. Like, one of my friends was told to be more nigger-ish. And, "Can you do that head thing? Can you be more ghetto?" And, then, I'm getting, "Oh, you're, you're too, you're too light for this part." I'm like, "Do you think light skin people don't live in the ghetto, and have babies, or do drugs?" You know, so, there is this, it's like the trends of fashion. Speaker 2: Yeah, we-- Speaker 1: Our skin color (laughter). Speaker 2: We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Tim Reid, he had a story. He was constantly told, "Could he be more ghetto?" And, he was raised in the ghetto in Norfolk, Virginia, and he knows everything about being ghetto. But, he, so, he thought it was astonishing that white directors were trying to tell him how to be, because he couldn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah! And, that's because they, they don't understand, you know. You have to have an understanding of the subject that you're doing. Some kind of understanding. Story_ID: 645822 Speaker 1: Okay. So, now you were in, you did a lot of theatre in the 2000s, 'Blues for an Alabama Sky.' That's, is that here in Atlanta [Georgia], [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage? Speaker 2: Yeah, Pearl Cleage. And, I also did another play of hers called 'The Nacirema Society' was a, which was about this Nacirema is American spelled backwards. So, it's a fictitious name for a real society in Birmingham [Alabama]. Like a Links [The Links, Incorporated] I would say, you know, educated, upper crust. And, her play was so much fun because while they're, they're planning their ball and their--what do you call it when you're coming out? Speaker 1: A Cotillion, or something, or? Speaker 2: It was like a cotillion, debutante ball for their daughter. The march was going on, and it was, actually an inconvenience for them, like (laughter). But, yeah, and I did, I directed 'Colored Girls,' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange], 'Colored Museum,' George Wolfe's [HistoryMaker George C. Wolfe] 'Colored Museum' ['The Colored Museum']. That was interesting. Well, they both were for different reasons. But-- Speaker 1: Well what, go on explain-- Speaker 2: (Cough) 'Colored Museum' was written in the '70s [sic.] and had, and came out, you know, so, at a time where it was revolutionary as, as the 'Colored Girls' in '78 [1978]. 'Cause it had never been done, and you know, theatre is the place for that. But, doing it in 2000 with younger act- with actors, you know, that are thirty and under. And, I had to explain, I said, "Before we spoof," 'cause 'Colored Museum' has a lot of, it's right on the edge, you know. I mean, it's spoof 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] mammy images, Vietnam [Vietnam War] soldier, I--so, I made them do research. And, I brought books in for them and movies for them to see. I said, "You can't make fun of something that you don't even understand yet." Because they didn't even know, one of the actresses was playing like a, like a Sambo minstrel and she didn't, she didn't know what it was. The pickaninny thing, and all that. Because you're talking about really images from the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: And, beyond. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: Until the turn of the century. Speaker 2: It's so, that was, that was interesting, you know. And, they, they did a, they did a wonderful job. I mean, I have to say. It was very, very moving production. I also did 'Broke-ology' [Nathan Louis Jackson], which is [HistoryMaker] Kenny Leon directed. I did 'Fool for Love' [Sam Shepard] with Kenny Leon. We acted in that together. And, I did 'God of Carnage' [Yasmina Reza] at the Alliance [Alliance Theatre, Atlanta, Georgia]. So, yeah, I did a lot of theatre when I moved here, which is good. Story_ID: 645823 Speaker 1: Do you enjoy live theatre better than film, or does it make any difference? Speaker 2: It does, it does make a difference. I do love live theatre. There's certain things I love about it. I love rehearsal. You can get a lot of rehearsal in movies or on television. I love, where somebody might say, "Oh, my god, doing the same thing over and over again," I love that. 'Cause every day I get to be different or better, you know. I love the rhythm of it too, you know. Places, go, and then we're done. Now, film has a totally different energy. It's a sustained energy. And, it changes every day depending on what scene you're doing. And, I'd never really know if I did, if I did well or not. I never leave the set going, "Oh, we nailed that." Speaker 1: Did you watch your films, and TV shows? Speaker 2: I have trouble watching, yeah. I wait for other people to watch it. I have, like, you know, my dad [William Guy], or my sister [Monica Guy], or my agent, you know. I'm like, "Was it good? How did I look? Was it real?" Duh duh duh. And, then I'll watch it. 'Cause I do, I have trouble watching myself. Makes me very self-conscious. It never, let me just say this, I never look like I feel (laughter). I'm always--I'm always a little disappointed. But, I think it's, I think it's completely unnatural for you to watch yourse- like to look at yourself. Like, people, I don't have a lot of mirrors in my house either. My sister says, I'm a vampire, 'cause I don't have no mirrors. But I'm like, who needs to look at themselves all the time? It's just, I don't know. I remember when I did 'Fame.' That was my first television experience. And, Debbie [Debbie Allen] invited some of the dancers to come in and watch dailies, and I didn't wat- I didn't wanna watch it. Theatre is, even though it's rehearsed and it's the same thing every night, it's more organic. You're, you're really communicating with the audience. On film, it's very private. It doesn't feel public. Like right now, I feel like I'm talking to you. And, if we were in a, you know, like a talk back situation, I would feel, I would feel the audience out there, you know. So, and I guess, because that's where I started, that's probably my--you know, I had to learn. I had to like, learn, on the job training; television and film. I didn't know about marks. I didn't know that when I did 'A Different World,' I didn't know that when the red light was on the four cameras that meant that was my camera. I, I was a, I just performed right passed the cameras like I was on stage. So, they'd be like, you know, "Get on your mark." And, then I was like--so, and then you can't ask people 'cause you already have the job. You need to act like you know what you're doing (laughter), even though you don't, you know. So, it's kind of on, on the job training for me. But, I did, I did read a lot too. I read a lot about film acting-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --just to give me some tips. Story_ID: 645824 Speaker 1: Let me move on to directing. You directed, in 2010 you directed 'I Dream' [Douglas Tappin] a musical about Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], right? Speaker 2: Yes. That was, actually, it was an opera and when it came to me I was, I was directing 'The Bluest Eye' at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], a production of 'The Bluest Eye.' Speaker 1: Based on the Toni Morrison novel? Speaker 2: Yeah. Lydia Diamond [Lydia R. Diamond] wrote it, wrote the play version of 'The Bluest Eye.' And, the composer, Douglas Tappin came to me and he wanted me to direct this opera. So, he gives me a tape of like some demos, the music, which was phenomenal. And, when I read the script (laughter), I went back to him, I said, "There are no scenes. Where are the scenes?" He says, "It's an opera." 'Cause I'm, I was thinking musical; sing, talk, dance, talk, you know. You have to tell this whole story through song. And, it was phenomenal. It was very difficult. But, part of the difficulty was that the music, I didn't have the full orchestration until they learned it and then came into rehearsal and sang it for me. So, I heard the song, but I didn't know who was singing what part. I would be like, "Oh, there's a flute there. Oh, you're gonna have some drums," you know, because as you're directing and choreographing--so that was the first time I really kind of created on the spot. And-- Speaker 1: It seem like a very tough assignment to direct. I mean to, yeah, this isn't your directing assignment, but this is--? Speaker 2: Yeah. But, it was, yeah, this was different 'cause it was an original piece so there was nothing you could've seen about it. I had forty people in the cast. Some were opera singers. Some were musical theatre people. Some were dancers. Some were, like, gospel. Some singers didn't even read music, you know, 'cause they sang, grew up in the church or whatever. So, you had this like learning curve going on. And, then we had the responsibility and honor of doing it in Atlanta [Georgia]. And, Douglas Tappin is British. And, he, he wanted to do it in Atlanta, in the home of Martin Luther King because he said, "I'm sure I could pull this off in London [England], but I wanna know if I can pull it off here," you know. And, so, I sat right behind [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young and his wife [HistoryMaker Carolyn Young], next to my dad [William Guy], at the premiere. And, I tried so hard not to look at him every, you know, but at, but at one point he, he was full. It moved him. And, I hugged him afterwards and I said, "Did we do okay? Did we do good?" 'Cause that meant a lot to me that, you know, Reverend Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery], and Andy, and those people felt honored and not exploited, you know. Because this was a different take on Martin Luther King's life. It showed his vulnerability as far as maybe, you know, he didn't, you know, there, there was that moment in, at, in, in Gethsemane that I, I imagined where he didn't want to do this. I just wanna, I just want my own church, and take care of my family, you know, I don't wanna, I don't wanna do this. And, and, his wife [Coretta Scott King] had a lot to do with his, his motivation. You know, I met with, with Bernice King [HistoryMaker Bernice Albertine King]. We called her Bunny when she was little. I almost called her Bunny, but Reverend Bernice King. I talked to her aunt [HistoryMaker Christine King Farris], you know, 'cause getting the story right was very important. And, the music was just phenomenal; so, yeah, that was very, I was very proud to have been a part of that. Story_ID: 645825 Speaker 1: Was the music in a, like a, traditional operatic style, or was it more like African American music (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. It was, it was more contemporary, and, you know, it's the kind of music that--like my friends were like, "Is there an album? I just love the music. I wanna hear that song again," you know. And, then the singers were tearing it up. There was this cell block scene where King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Hosea Williams, and Ralph Abernathy were all locked up in separate cells. So, I staged it where there's, you know, just flat side by side with the bars in front of them. And, those three men, that song that they sing. I mean, it did not have, I wouldn't call it a gospel musical but it had such soulful inflections, and the--I begged him for a couple of songs though. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'We Shall Overcome' wasn't in there. 'Cause he was trying to do something that hadn't been done. He said, "Oh, that's done so much" and stuff. I said, "Come on. I need it. I need 'We Shall Overcome.'" Because after the death of King at the end of the musical ['I Dream,' Douglas Tappin], I was devastated. You know, I tried to explain that to him. "I understand you want all original music but we do need, you know, some freedom songs in here if possible. Can I have two?" Speaker 1: So, what was the second one (unclear)? Speaker 2: 'Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me Around.' But, he did not, and I understand that 'cause that's what I grew up watching and that's what we grew up seeing, the same, you know. But, I said, "You have to understand that there's a comfort to that. There's a healing in those songs that we need, especially at the end of the, the musical." Story_ID: 645826 Speaker 1: And in, well, there's a, you've appeared in a number of different films, 'October Baby' in 2011, was one (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, 'October Baby.' Speaker 1: Yeah. So, do you have a favorite film that you've been in, over the past few years? Speaker 2: Well, let me see. I did a, I did a short film here in, here in Atlanta [Georgia], and it ended up on HBO [Home Box Office]. It was like three films they choose or something. Anyway, in was in their HBO short film festival [HBO Short Film Competition] last year, I think it was. About a woman's return home after being estranged from her family and being on drugs and coming back over Thanksgiving dinner. I enjoyed that a lot. We just shot that in two days. But, it was with a lot of Atlanta talent. And, the writer Gabrielle Fulton is very bright. She's also a playwright. And, then I've done a couple of movies for TV One, I'm trying to remember; 'Chasing Waterfalls' was the last one I did. And, it was about a woman that owns her own fashion empire. Kind of like 'Devil Wears Prada' ['The Devil Wears Prada'] meets, you know, 'Empire,' (laughter). Speaker 1: Were you, were you the devil in this one? Speaker 2: Of course. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I'm never the good girl. I'm always the bitch with a heart. Speaker 1: All right. Okay. Now, it's other movies here, 'Big Stone Gap.' Speaker 2: Oh, 'Big Stone Gap,' yes. So, Adriana Trigiani was a writer on 'A Different World.' We've been friends since. We've actually worked on other projects together. She wrote this show, she was a writer on this show called 'Linc's.' Do you remember this show? It was a bar, and Pam Grier was in it, and Steven, I think it's Carter [sic. Steven Williams], was the lead. Anyway, Linc [Russell "Linc" Lincoln] owned this bar and Georg Stanford Brown was on it and they, they brought me in to play Georg Stanford Brown's wife. Anyway, around that time, it was [HistoryMaker] Tim Reid's show. He was the producer. So, they filmed in Virginia and in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] When they filmed in L.A. Adri told me that--Adriana told me that she had written a screenplay. And I was like, "Wow, that was fast. Since the last time I saw you?" She said, "Yeah. But, I wanna write a book because I think people would get the screenplay better." I said, "Isn't that backwards?" Now, don't you write a book and then you write a screenplay based on the book?" So, she did it the other way. The book took off. Fifteen years later on The New York Times bestselling, fifteen novels and fifteen years later she decides to do this movie. And, that's 'Big Stone Gap.' And, that's where she grew up. [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg, Ashley Judd--yeah, I had a, I was scared. I was scared to go to Big Stone Gap [Virginia], though. All I could think of was 'Deliverance.' 'Cause in the hills of Kentucky it's like, where all those states converge, Tennessee, and you know, and I was like, "Do they have people like me up there?" And, she said, "Yeah, you're a Melungeon." Story_ID: 645827 Speaker 1: Oh, a Melungeon, now that's an interesting--anybody (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Have you heard that term? Speaker 1: Yes. Anybody watching this, it's been alleged that [President] Abraham Lincoln was a Melungeon, Elvis Presley, there're other, there're (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, you, oh, wow, I never heard of that term (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Discover magazine actually did a study to find out how (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can see where Elvis is a Melungeon. I've always wondered about that. Speaker 1: So, people who are darker than white but, and live kind of isolated in the mountains-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the population, and there's another group in New York called the Jackson Whites, they call 'em. They had a similar look and people are what, who are they? What are they? They're not white people. But, they're not Indians [Native American] either. So, what are they? But, they, the DNA study, you know, shows that they were a mixed of, white people, Asi- I mean, Native Americans and Africans (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that just about called my family out, right there. Black, white, and, and Native American, that's it. Speaker 1: The similar look is 'cause they're in the mountains and they, you know, so much-- Speaker 2: Right. In--so, I'm a Melungeon and that, in the, in the mov- I look horri- I mean, I don't even have any teeth on the side of my face, but-- Speaker 1: That's interesting-- Speaker 2: I had never heard of it until I did 'Big Stone Gap.' Speaker 1: There's another term too. It is Jackson Whites, Melungeons and another group. But, the-- Speaker 2: Jackson Whites? Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Why they call 'em Jackson Whites? Speaker 1: Ramapo Mountains in New Jersey. Yeah. 'Cause they, they treat 'em like they're white people, but they know they're not really white. Speaker 2: Well, there're the Lumbees 'cause Afeni [Afeni Shakur] told me, you know, and she thought, she just assumed her grandfather was a Lumbee. And, I'm like again, "What is that?" You know, and they're, they're in that Lumberton [North Carolina] area. But, they're the native, whatever that is. That Creole mixture, you know, once that happens. But, I guess, it's the isolations that get you your own-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the Lumbees would be another group that were of similar-- Speaker 2: So, you've heard of them? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You've heard of Lumbees? Wow. Okay. Speaker 1: It's interesting. So, you, I think you may be the first Melungeon-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --actually cast as such in a movie. Yeah. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And, they actually called me a Melungeon. Like Whoopi [HistoryMaker Whoopi Goldberg] has a line saying, "You know, I don't like them Melungeons." And, then at the end of the movie, you know, somebody cusses somebody out and then they're like, you know, "And, you're prejudiced 'cause I'm a Melungeon," and all these people at the party saying, "Well, I'm a Melungeon." And, then I met some of course when I was at--in Big Stone Gap [Virginia] filming. I met real Melungeons. Speaker 1: Do you find that, you know, since the '70s [1970s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know in a minute everybody's gonna be a Melungeon. I mean, how you, because we're not isolated anymore. So, there's more and more and more mixing, whatever. Speaker 1: We're gonna be like Brazil maybe, I don't know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Where there are racial designations (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Like the rest of the world. Speaker 1: Class will be more important than race. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah ma- perhaps, we just--we just don't know. I mean, there may be a way to still call people racial names without, without race (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. If you have a one sixteenth-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Story_ID: 645828 Speaker 1: So, now you've, you've been, you were featured on 'Unsung' recently. Was it this year, 2016? Speaker 2: Yeah, it just, it aired in March of this year, March or April. Speaker 1: And, you thought it was good, right? Speaker 2: Yes. I thought they did a good job. I also did 'Being,' and I was concerned. 'Being' is on BET [Black Entertainment Television]. 'Unsung' is on TV One. I was concerned that they were too close together. So, I tried to, after seeing 'Being,' and what, you know, because you don't really know, well you're talking for five hours. So, you don't really know what they're gonna use, or what their angle is going to be. And, so, when I saw 'Being' I tried to do what they didn't talk about in 'Being,' you know. Speaker 1: In 'Unsung' (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause some producers are, yeah. So, I tried to give 'Unsung' different story, or a different angle than--and, I, I liked both of them but they were, they were different. They definitely have different tones. I mean, somethings, you know, of course, what I've done is what I've done. But, I think that producer for 'Unsung' really liked him some Whitley [Whitley Gilbert] because he kept asking me, you know. I said, "You know what, do you miss her? Do you want me, do you want me to go home and change and come back as Whitley?" And, then I popped into Whitley, and I said, (imitates accent) "Would you rather I be her? Through the whole interview? I can do that for you 'cause I think you like her more than me." And, he was laughing so hard, and they used it in the, in the thing. I, you know, of course, I thought it would be off camera. But, we had a good--and they used a lot of clips. Like, a lot of photos and stuff that I hadn't even seen, and they interviewed, you know, different people (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you get, I mean, people, sitcoms as they come and go, people, really become attached to the characters. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, I'm sure that people, there were even some people probably in love with you as Whitley. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, I, I think there's, you know, probably people that are disappointed that I'm not more like that, you know. And, I can understand that. I fall in love with characters. I mean, I love Ray, 'Ray Donovan,' do you watch that? It's on Showtime. Okay. All right, you don't have cable. You, you do? Speaker 1: Well, I see some things sometimes. Speaker 2: Do you have cable? Speaker 1: I can see cable when I want to. Speaker 2: I know you don't--I have another friend that don't have cable. So, all my references, I'm like, "Well, can you stream it, or can you--?" Have you seen 'Queen Sugar'? Speaker 1: I saw some of it, yeah, I did. Speaker 2: That is good. Speaker 1: And, what's the other one, I can't think of it. But, there's a--'Greenleaf.' Speaker 2: 'Greenleaf.' Speaker 1: Have you seen 'Greenleaf?' Speaker 2: I've seen 'Greenleaf,' yeah. Speaker 1: That's seems to be well done to me and this is, are they, are they shot (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it's very well done. I like, I like 'Queen Sugar' better but-- Speaker 1: --here in Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yeah. No. 'Queen Sugar' is in Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. But, they're both OWN, they're both Oprah [Oprah Winfrey Network]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And, Ava DuVernay is exec producer [executive producer] of 'Queen Sugar.' Speaker 1: Right. But you, you were-- Speaker 2: But, 'Ray Donovan' I just, you know, and then I watched it was a marathon with my sister [Monica Guy], and we could not leave. It was awful. That's all we did, all day. Because I said, "You wanna see the next one?" It's hard when you have three seasons back to back. But, anyway, I can understand people falling in love with a character. But, and I, I also see that kind of look in people's eyes, like waiting for a moment of Whitley, or a moment of--but, when you're, when you're playing a character that broad like Carroll O'Connor with Archie [Archie Bunker], right. You know, when I met Arch- Archie, when I met Carroll O'Connor I didn't expect him to act like Archie. But, there is this moment of, oh he doesn't talk like that. Especially with, with you know, Jean Stapleton, who really, that whole--when I heard her in an interview, I was a kid. And, I was like, "How come she's not talking like Edith [Edith Bunker]?" So, I think that's why it's important for me to do other things that are equally bold. Story_ID: 645829 Speaker 1: Do you see yourself as primarily a character actor? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, that's interesting because a lot of people that are don't necessarily say they are, but. Speaker 2: Oh, no. I always felt I was a character actor, absolutely. But, that was the, now I don't have the problem as I did when I was younger in playing, girlfriends, and lovers, and all that. I was like, I just, this isn't--I love Carol Burnett, you know. I love, I would lov- have loved to been on 'SNL' ['Saturday Night Live'], or--I played character all my childhood. I used to make little tapes with my, you know, playing three different characters on my little cassette tapes, and constantly, constantly coming--I came up with a character last year for my sister's [Monica Guy] birthday. Well, it wasn't for her birthday but we were, we went on, we went away to a beach, me and three friends. And, I just, I came up with this dude and I started, doing, doing him, and I was like, (imitates male voice), "I need a name. I need a name." And, she was so disturbed. I don't know it was the physicality of it or the way I was talking or--meanwhile, the other two were cracking up. They were laughing so hard, nobody would, you know, 'cause I did a whole scene, you know. He was like some little like, I don't know, I can see him with a Kangol and long nails and gators, and just think he cool, I mean, you know. (Unclear), she was like, "Stop it. I don't like that. Stop encouraging her." I do that all the time. I come up with a character. I love Moms Mabley. I mean, these are, when I would watch, you know, [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg's one woman show on Broadway, Lily Tomlin. That to me was the ultimate actor, that you could be at least five different people in one night. And, I've written, I've written a show that would allow that, but I haven't finished it. Speaker 1: It's a, there's a black actress named Anna Deavere Smith? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. She does all these characters on stage but I would contend having been in the theatre, there are a lot of actors that just do that to entertain each other. I mean, they do characters all the time, you know. I mean-- Speaker 2: Let me tell you, actors act, singers sing, dancers dance. It just, you know, if we are blessed enough to be able to do it as a profession, but, we would be doing it anyway. My girlfriend just loves hanging out with me and my friends, 'cause she's like, "Oh, my god, it's like," you know. Like one time I was telling them how I wanted to die on camera in 'Harlem Nights.' And, Eddie [Eddie Murphy] was like (shakes head)--I said, you know, 'cause of the positioning that I had on, on his body when he shoots, shoots me in the head, I was explaining to him how I wanted to fall back and fall off the bed. He was like, "Oh, no, we're not, we're not gonna see you get shot." I said, "What do you mean?" I was looking forward to that, right. He said, "Naw, naw, we're cutting to the pool table when it goes pow, it's gonna cut to the--." I said, "Come on, let--Eddie please let me. Okay, can I just show you?" 'Cause I had worked it out, you know, in slow mo [slow motion], and everything. So, I was showing my friends that one night when we were hanging out. And, I did it in regular time and then I did it in slow motion. And, it's like, I don't know, it's entertaining but it's like how people think. My singing friends sing all the time. You know, I did a show with Brandy, she, she did a show for BET [Black Entertainment Television] and she's getting her makeup done, humming. And, I feel like, "Oh, my god. This is the most lovely thing I've heard," (laughter) you know what I mean. Just gifted, just (gesture)-- Story_ID: 645830 Speaker 1: Now, we, we forgot to talk about your singing career. And, you did make a couple of albums, right? Speaker 2: Yes. And, I toured, and I had three videos or four videos. I think I did three videos. And, I love singing and I loved the, like having a, a band and dancers and that whole thing. But, I just didn't like the record business. I mean, and I've been, I mean, I've been in all the businesses and that was the one I just was like, and it was like the turn of music from--I mean, when I came out with my album ['Jasmine Guy'], Celine Dion came out with her first album, and Mariah Carey. And, I was on the tail end of like the dance albums, like Janet [Janet Jackson], and Paula [Paula Abdul], and that, you know. And, then rap was coming in. So, it was a shifting from, like new jack swing into--and, I really wanted it to show another part of me or the real part of me. And, I felt like I was kind of just acting like they just gave me a lot of songs and couldn't really find my identity. I wanted to be Mother's Finest. I mean, I wanted, I wanted a funk band. I did. I love funk. Con Funk Shun, Brick, Dazz [Dazz Band]. I mean, all of that. And, I wanted to be part of the group, like Rufus, Chaka Khan. Not that I can sing like Chaka Khan, but you know. Mother's Finest was kind of what I was feeling. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I got to meet them. Story_ID: 645831 Speaker 1: Did you kind of feel that you don't have enough time in your life to do all the things that you can do. I mean, all the, to display all the talent you have? Speaker 2: Well, you know what, I'm glad that I got married [to Terrence Duckett] and had a baby [Imani Guy Duckett] at thirty-seven. I don't know that I could've done that, I mean, I had twenty years of really just doing me, you know what I mean. And, I'm just, I'm just happy that I was, you know, healthy enough to have a healthy baby and be able to have that in my life. But, I can understand where it's hard to do both. I mean, to be a mother and to do that. I mean, now my priorities are completely different. I don't wanna be out of town, that you know, I'm traveling, when I'm traveling it's more like--and before I used to just love it. I hated being at home alone. But, that's age. I'm fifty-four. How old are you? Speaker 1: Sixty-seven. Speaker 2: Sixty-seven? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Are you kidding me? Speaker 1: I'll pay you later (laughter). Speaker 2: I thought you were gonna say like fifty-seven. I thought we were the same age. Speaker 1: Don't worry, I'll pay you. There'll be a check in the mail. Speaker 2: No. For real, you look good. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: You must not do nothing bad. Speaker 1: Not too many things. Speaker 2: Okay. Right. 'Cause you (laughter), shoot. Really. So, okay. So, you were, oh, my gosh, okay. Kudos. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, thank you (unclear)-- Speaker 2: But, it changes, you know, it's not like, it's not like it's not fun. I still love working. I have a ball going to work. I really enjoy it, once I learn my lines. Speaker 1: And, this is--I wanna ask you about this because, I know, my son lived in Atlanta [Georgia] for a while and he used to call it the Negro Hollywood. 'Cause he said, that's what it's becoming. And it seems like that, can you speak--I know you were in one of the Tyler Perry movies, at least. Speaker 2: I was in, yeah, I did an episode of-- Speaker 1: 'If Loving You Is Wrong.' Speaker 2: Yeah, 'If Loving You Is Wrong.' Speaker 1: Or was it, for TV--? Speaker 2: Yeah, you gotta do your head on that one. Speaker 1: Well, he's, he's really, and it's not just him but Oprah's [Oprah Winfrey] in town doing things. And, Atlanta really emerged in the '70s [1970s] at this golden age of opportunity for black people and all kinds of businesses now, it's become, as he say, a Negro Hollywood, a black Hollywood. Speaker 2: Well, okay, you gotta lot of factors happening. The tax incentives, which also Louisiana has and other states have. But, the, the big movies that were--I mean, 'Hunger Games,' ['The Hunger Games'] I think is here, 'Walking Dead.' I mean, they're like big productions that are done here. Of course, Tyler and his presence and actually building his own studio [Tyler Perry Studios, Atlanta, Georgia], and now he has a huge studio. Speaker 1: You got game shows produced here, there's lots of things. Speaker 2: And, reality. All the reality shows. You see that Georgia peach, after so many of these reality shows. And, then you got the music business which actually started in the, in the '90s [1990s], you know, when LaFace [LaFace Records] was here. And, you had TLC, and Goodie Mob, and Outkast, and Usher's from here, and Ludacris, and--so, you do have a real celebrity Hollywood element I think with the music business. And, you know, Atlanta housewife ['The Real Housewives of Atlanta'] is the number one housewives franchise. So, they're big stars when they're here. And, thing the other thing is, I'm trying to think. 'Cause when I first got here, they kept saying that. And, I was like, "This ain't Hollywood, and this ain't--." But, there is a presence, it's just different because it's not as concentrated. Because Atlanta is kind of spread out. Story_ID: 645832 Speaker 1: Okay. Let, let me just, we're, we're getting at the end of our time. I just wanted to make sure I ask you a couple of questions that we always ask. And, you can never ask everything. But, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community here in Atlanta [Georgia] and in the rest of the country? Speaker 2: I love, I love Atlanta because I feel like it gave me a well rounded upbringing, you know. But, you know, I grew up across the street from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] so I had the Morehouse, Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] campus, faculty and family, my church, Friendship Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia]. I went to a performing arts high school [Northside School of Performing Arts; North Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. I just feel like I had, I was, I had, I was happy. I was getting fed. What I would love to see for our schools and our community is, is arts, and sports, and music, dance, brought back into our school. I went to public schools all my life. I hate that, as a parent, I have to supplement her [Imani Guy Duckett] education by going all over the place. I think it's impossible to raise kids in this time, unless you have a chauffeur. 'Cause if you're working, I don't know how you do all that. I took the bus to school and home. So, to go, to kind of have one stop shopping. We can't expect our children to be whole human beings if we take arts and sports out of the, out of school. Who would wanna go to school? That's the only reason I liked school (laughter). The other thing is, our history and how we're taught our history. We go from Harriet Tubman to Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. And, we talked about this a little earlier. We skip, Reconstruction. We skip the Harlem Renaissance. We skip our, anybody other than Martin Luther King. You mentioned Malcolm X, but it's not taught, you know. We are a part of the American fabric. It should be a part of American history, you know. I think if we're taught our truth we might stop going forward two steps and sliding back ten. 'Cause we're sliding back ten right now. I mean, what's being unleashed now, thank god for, for the millennials, 'cause they're not having it. They don't get it. They, they look and see what it is for what it is and they are not, they're not going down that route. The hip hop generation isn't having all this racism. That's old school, redneck, ignorance. And, so, you know, I feel the rejections from the young people. And, I really wish Bernie [Bernie Sanders] was still in the race some kind of way. Even if, you know, if we--I wish he was in the debate at least. So, that we can deal with the issues that are important to me, you know, my kid's college. The distribution of wealth in this country I think is grotesque. And, that, you just find a way to get around the laws that are already there. And, Trump [President Donald John Trump] even said, he was smart. He didn't pay taxes 'cause he was smart. He was smart enough to get around it. I think we're, we're just being clobbered, you know. Anyway, didn't mean to get all political but, that's what I wish for my country. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I can stay here. Story_ID: 645833 Speaker 1: Is there anything I haven't ask you about that we need to cover before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No. I don't think so. Speaker 1: Probably a million things we'll think about tomorrow, but. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 1: The last question, the compound questions. When you look back at the body of work you produce today, I mean, as of today, and, well, naw I can't ask that yet. I just wanna ask you one more question before we--what, do you have, just briefly what project are you working on now, or do you have like a dream project that you see for yourself? I gotta ask you that. Speaker 2: I'm actually writing (laughter). Which I, I have to say is the hardest thing of all of the things to do, you know. Because you're just starting with nothing, you know. Speaker 1: So, you're writing a movie or a play, or what? Speaker 2: I'm writing a play version of Afeni's book ['Afeni Shakur: Evolution of a Revolutionary,' Jasmine Guy]. I'm writing a short film about twelve to fifteen minutes. And, I go between the two. And, I'm also writing a musical version based on a children's book that I like, called 'Jazzy Miz Mozetta' [Brenda C. Roberts]. So, I've got those three going. I just want you to just like ask, ask the muse to let me finish it; something. Not all of 'em. But, I've started so many things and I haven't finished them. Speaker 1: Well, you've done a lot of things too? Speaker 2: Yeah. But, the-- Speaker 1: And that last question, leaves the last questions which is, 'cause I'd be careful about your time. But, the last question is compounded, you look back at everything you've done, what today would you consider to be your legacy, and how would you liked to be remembered? Speaker 2: Wow! I don't, I don't know. I'm sure that the two HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] that I went to Mission [Mission College] and Hillman [Hillman College], will be part of my legacy, even though I don't have a real degree, okay. But, of course, did I know that at that time that these were gonna be kind of iconic voices of, of the black college experience, you know. I'm very proud to be a part of that. And, I'm going to hopefully be a part of another HBCU. They're filming a show here called, 'The Yard.' Wait a minute, no, I think they're changing it to 'The Quad.' I don't know. Anyway, Anika Noni Rose is playing the first female president of a black college. Of this particularly, it's like a FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], kind of, you know. And, I'm a history teacher at that college. So, I will be attending yet another HBCU. Well, now, I'm working there but whatever. Speaker 1: What is the name of this one? Do you know? Speaker 2: It's either 'The Yard' or the 'The Quad.' I don't-- Speaker 1: I mean, the school itself? Speaker 2: Oh, the school. Speaker 1: Don't ponder on it long 'cause we're, I have to be concerned about your time. Speaker 2: I think it's Georgia--I don't know, 'cause it, and it could change. It was something Georgia, like instead of FAMU maybe it was--I don't know. I done for- I forgot the name of it. Story_ID: 645834 Speaker 1: Don't forget the second part of the question: how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, I would like, I would like to be remembered as--it's hard to answer that because I feel like I have--I think about all the things that I wanted to do that didn't do as opposed to all of the things that I did do. If that makes any sense. I think about, you know, maybe opportunities that I had that I, I don't know. It's kind of pointless to do that. But, I want to be remembered as caring, as being socially relevant. One of the things I miss about 'A Different World,' is that it gave, it gave us a voice. It was current and it was topical. So, we could speak about, like, I'm sure if we were on the air now, we'll have a lot to say about the election for example. We had a voice on that show. And I, I miss having that kind of organic exchange with people, you know. When they said, "Oh, that date rape show," or, "Oh, the divestment show," or the, you know, 'cause it's something we all have in common. And, even though these are fictitious characters, they were dealing with real problems. So, I would like to be remembered as, as that. Obviously, I would like to be socially relevant but I would like to make a difference in somebody's life. Not just black, not just girls, but just human to human, and find something in me that you can relate to and hopefully my work will, will bare time well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Hopefully better than I'm baring it. No, you're baring it really well (laughter). I wanna bare it like you. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Thank you, thank you so much, all right. Speaker 2: I'm like okay--..