 Story_ID: 79078 Speaker 1: Well, we're starting right now. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing are Gloria Coleman and Linda Wheeler. And, sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: My name is Junius Gaten, J-U-N-I-U-S, Junius, G-A-T-E-N, Gaten. I was born in a little town, little village, not a town, in Smithdale, Mississippi in Amite County, right on the Amite River. Speaker 1: How do you spell that, the name of that river? Speaker 2: Amite, A-M--A-M-I-T [sic, A-M-I-T-E]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Amite River. That's the name of the county, Amite County. Speaker 1: And when were you born, sir? Speaker 2: Nineteen hundred [1900], so they say. Speaker 1: Okay, and your birthdate is-- Speaker 2: February the 28th. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen hundred [1900]. My folks lived in, some of 'em lived in McComb [Mississippi]. Well, you know, I was born right close to slavery. And my folks came out of, my grandfather had 14 children born enslaved, and I knew quite a few of 'em. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna get to that in a second. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I just wanted to make sure that we slate this first. And, sir, what is your nickname? Your nickname? Your nickname was-- Speaker 2: They called--well, I had so many of 'em. The young ladies, when I was young, they told me I was good looking, and they called me "Sweet Patootie Red" 'cause I played the piano for 'em. And we had a good time, back in the early '20s [1920s], Roaring Twenties, you called 'em. Then later on the boys started, and they nicknamed me "Red" and "Ice Man Red". Then the boys got smart, and they called me "Dirty Red". Then they called me "Washington Park Red", like she told you, Washington Park Red. So I had all these names. And it didn't bother me, didn't bother me at all. I lived in Chicago [Illinois] in what is known as the Black Belt; don't say nothing about Bronzeville yet because it was long before we had anybody thinking about Bronzeville. And-- Speaker 1: Called it the Black Belt then? Speaker 2: Called the Black Belt. Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: My occupation, way--back in them days, you had plenty-- Speaker 1: Hold on one second. He's gotta adjust the light. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Oh, yes, right. We'll get rolling again. Mr. Gaten, is the reason they called you "Red", does the reason have something to do with your hair color? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had real red hair, a big head of red hair like my daddy, red hair, and as caveman (unclear). I didn't think about putting gunk on it till way later after I lost my head, and I started--but I had--it'd stand up straight, and I didn't half comb it, didn't do nothing much. The girls would take care of it, so I wouldn't bother it. Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation? Or what was your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I was an ice man. In this community where I'm living right now, when it was all white, rich people, no poor folks in here. I was the poorest man in here, and I was the ice man. Speaker 1: Okay, now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: All rich people. Speaker 1: You had some other occupations too, but we'll talk about those. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: But tell me this, like what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Today is the 6th of March. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, and the year? Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're in my house, 3642 King Drive. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We're here at home. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 79079 Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, we always ask five kind of lightweight "People Magazine-ish" kind of questions. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: They just require a short answer. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is catfish fillet, steaks. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When they have fish fillet, you know, you know, they fix it up, slice it. Speaker 1: Catfish fillets. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, now, sir, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: I think gray would be my favorite color. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Let's see. I don't have--I had such a good time all my life, till any time I was having fun was my favorite time. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite vacation destination was San Diego, California. I love to take my vacations in San Diego. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Gotta go see my kinfolks at the zoo (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's a joke. All right, tell me, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I, you know, I belong to church, and I'm in a, what they call the "Torch Bearers Sunday School Class". That means the kind of old, older folks, you know. And that means you're carrying a light. You know what torch bearing means, you're carrying a light. So I carries the light. And I always--they have me always singing some of the hymns. And my favorite hymn is "Blessed Assurance, Jesus is mine, oh, what a foretaste of glory divine, heir of salvation, purchase of God, born of his spirit, washed in his blood. This is my story. This is my song, singing his praises all the day long." Story_ID: 79080 Speaker 1: Okay, sir, let me ask you about your family history. Now, I want you to tell me about, like where your family comes from and how much you know about your family background? Speaker 2: Well, my father, my grandpa was a slave, my mother's father. And he had 36 children, 14 born in slavery. Now, the other part of my family is mixed up with (unclear) Cajuns, Creoles and Haitians and Nigerians, a mixture come out of Louisiana. And so we, we got some of everything in my family. And I only had--my mother, on one side of our family, we had 12 children. Eight of 'em I remember. On the other side, my father had 12 children by that lady, and I, my grandpa, at least, and he had four girls and three boys that I can remember. And one of my aunties that helped to raise me, Ella and Mary. That's the one brought me to the City of Chicago, Mary, Aunt Mary. Then I had a--she had two brothers. I only remember them when I was a little fellow, they were about teenagers. They didn't live to get fully grown, I don't think. They were Sylvester and Peter. But on the other side of my family-- Speaker 1: This is on your father's side or mother's side? Speaker 2: On my grandpa, my grandpa's side. That'd be my mother's side. Speaker 1: Mother's side, okay. Speaker 2: And they had two brothers--three brothers, Frank, Bennie (ph.), Freddie (ph.) and Crebbie (ph.). That's four boys. And my mother was the fifth child. She was, it was Hattie, Beulah, Myrtis (ph.) and Ena (ph.). They were that bunch of that side. And that was, left out of that 12 that was born, I didn't know, none of, before, I didn't never see 'em. And I left home, they brought me to Chicago [Illinois], my Aunt Mary brought me to Chicago. And I was from the old [Cook] County Hospital at 15th and Paulina, 15th and Paulina, back to New Orleans to the Charity Hospital there. (Unclear) back with some problems for quite some time because they had trouble with--saying I was going blind. And one doctor said I had a heart condition, that there was a hole in my heart. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is when you came to Chicago-- Speaker 2: When I was a boy, a kid, when I was a kid. Speaker 1: I don't wanna get that far yet. But, just can you tell me some more about your family history? Speaker 2: Well, it ain't too much. I had a brother here, and he went to World War I. I tried to get in, but I was a little bit late. Story_ID: 79081 Speaker 1: I'm talking about like back during slavery, back in the 19th Century. Are there any stories in your family of what happened in those days? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: What life was like? Speaker 2: There's some stories about fighting and going on. You don't wanna hear that. Speaker 1: Well, I don't know. Are they good--are they stories that will teach us something? They might. Speaker 2: Well, you know, during the time of slavery, we had God knows how many different slave masters. One slave master belonged to this group, and another slave master belonged to another group. Another slave master belonged to another group. Well, it didn't make any difference to them how they treated us, all of 'em was our boss as long as he was white, he was our boss. So this is the problem that we had because religiously, we had some Catholic slave masters, some Episcopalian slave masters, some Methodist slave masters, and some Baptist slave masters and some who didn't belong to any kind of religious organization at all. And we had several out of all of 'em because they all didn't like one another and they'd get to fighting once in a while. We were involved in all of that. And as you know, in my father's bunch there were some pretty smart black fellows in there. And my father, my grandpa was one of 'em. So when he got grown, they sold him three times from Baltimore [Maryland] to New Orleans [Louisiana]--Baltimore to where, another place. They stopped him somewhere. Anyway, the last stop was in New Orleans. He was sold to a man in New Orleans by the name of McNulty. That man was from Mississippi. And he bought my--they had--this man that owned my grandpa and his three sisters was a poor man. So he didn't have enough money to keep slaves. So he had to sell 'em. So he drew up a contract that you have to keep these "niggers"--you know what they called us, "Keep these niggers together", six of 'em, three boys and three girls. And my grandfather who was pretty smart, he remembered quite a bit. One of them slave masters he liked 'cause he'd give him a drink every once and a while, (unclear) and that's how we got the name Green Pujons (ph.). He didn't take the master that bought him and ask him what he want, who he want--what name he wanted so he took Green. That was one slave master, and Pujons (ph.) was another. He liked them two different slave masters because for some reason, I think they both drank a little whiskey. And they'd give him a shot every once in a while. But he got to be what is known as the main man around there. He was a good blacksmith. He'd do all the work in the blacksmith shop. He ran the blacksmith shop. He could repair the harness, fix the wagons, run the gin, run the molasses mill, make the molasses. He did all the killing of the hogs for the plantation and everything. So his brother was the basket maker, so they made all the baskets. Now, everything they made, you--if you're the owner, the boss gets the money for it. You don't get nothing. You know that. So they ran the basket shop. They made all the cotton baskets, market baskets, any kind of basket. They made what is known as the cradles for the women who're having the babies. They'd make the little baskets with little holes in 'em, you know, so the baby won't smother, made all of that kind of stuff. And so when they were freed, my grandfather was deeded the land that he was on, which was 88 acres of land. The old man, McNulty, deeded that land to him and his family. Story_ID: 79082 Speaker 1: Now, is there a reason why McNulty did that? Is there any-- Speaker 2: No, McNulty didn't like, he didn't like his neighbors for some reason. He was all, calling--they all looked just alike, but he called 'em all crackers, you know. Them crackers ain't no good, they ain't no--they didn't like him, and he didn't like them. So I tell you a story, he told his wife--so I was told, "That when I die, I want Green Pujons (ph.) to preach my funeral. So his wife said to him, Grandma Sarah--I remember her 'cause I went to her funeral. They said, she said, "Green's no preacher". That's all right, he preach about as well as them crackers, say, I want him to preach my funeral. Well, you know the boss always had the say so. Whatever he said, went, whether you liked it or not. That's what you had to do. So grandpa preached the funeral and negroes was wondering what was he gonna say, you know, preaching the slave master's funeral. You gonna say anything good about him? If you say anything bad about him, we'll get you. If you say anything good about him (laughter), we gonna have, have kill you. If you say anything bad about him, you know the white folks gonna hang you, you know, that, all that kind of stuff. But my grandfather being pretty smart, having a good head on him, he got up that morning, and he said--this is what they say he said. My grandma and all of 'em were there. He said, "Good morning, white folks, niggers and the rest of y'all. Mr. McNulty is gone. Brother's, Uncle Sam is in the--Grandpa Sam is gone. And we're sorry. We don't know where he is. But the one thing I wanna tell you before you get to worrying. He ain't where you think he is, but he is where you think he ain't. Amen." Stepped down (laughter). See that was something you had to be smart enough to do without getting a whipping or getting beaten up or called in, you know. It's up to you to figure out the place he's at. Wherever he went, to Heaven or hell, that's up to you. "He ain't where you think he is, but he is where he think he ain't. Amen." You couldn't beat that. It's a good sermon. Speaker 1: That was a good sermon. Speaker 2: But I was 12 years old, when this old master's wife died, Grandma Sarah, they all called her. And Grandma Sarah, my grandpa, we went home. We weren't living here. And so my grandma said, "Here, the horse and buggy boy." (Unclear) went out and hitch old mall to the buggy, said, we're going to Grandma Sarah's funeral. And I was trying to figure out which Sarah is she talking about, course she was talking about the slave mistress as they called her. So I was 12 years old, drove this woman to the white folks' church up there in a little place called Auburn, Mississippi. That's not too far from where we lived in Lincoln County, joined Mid County. And we drove to that church, and they had the funeral, and I was there with my grandmother and a few more other people there to see this old white lady put away. Now, that was in about 1912, somewhere along in there. So that's one experience I had. Now, another experience I had down in Mississippi, every time I'd go there I'd do something I didn't have no business down there, you know, what they call it? And I'd get into some kind of trouble. And they'd always tell my auntie, Mary, keep that boy up there. Don't send him down here no more because he gone get us all killed 'cause he ain't scared of white folks. So my grandfather didn't want nobody to wait on him when he was sick but me. I was the oldest grandchild of that last family of his. And so he wanted nobody to--he died in '17, 1917. So he wanted me to wait on him. So I'd go down. And then when I'd go to town where my Auntie Alma lived, I'd always get into something, meddling somebody or somebody meddling me, and I'd curse 'em out, you know. And they'd, the old folks down there didn't like that because the boy is in Chicago [Illinois], and he don't know how to talk to nobody. He curse you out and all that kind of stuff. We ain't used to that kind of stuff down here, you know. I'd tell 'em right quick, "Tend to your damn business", 'cause they'd ask you all kind of questions, some you never heard of before. But this is part of my life. But most of my life is lived in the City of Chicago. Story_ID: 79083 Speaker 1: Now, let me just go back to childhood for a minute, growing up in Mississippi-- Speaker 2: I didn't grow up there now. Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't grow up in Mississippi? Speaker 2: No, I grew up here [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: I'd go back down there, you know. Speaker 1: So, well, before we get into that I just want you to tell us about your mother and father. Can you give us the name of your mother and spell it for us and tell us when she was born and where she was born? Speaker 2: Well, my--I don't know exactly when she was born. My mother was named Myrtice Turner Perkins. Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us, Myrtice? Speaker 2: What is it, M-Y--well, I think they spell it, M-E-R-T-I-C-E, some of 'em, and the others spell it, M-Y-R-T-I-C-E. It depends on what you take, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Myrtice Turner Perkins. She never was married as I know of. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause she went to New Orleans [Louisiana] and got mixed up with the hoodoo and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: Now, that's your mother, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother, well, the lady that birthed me. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, Myrtice Turner Perkins. Now, tell us about her. What was she like and-- Speaker 2: She was very pretty. And I thought she was my sister. And when my brother would tell me, said, there come your mom, boy. That ain't none of my mom. She's my sister. She ain't none of my mama, very pretty. Speaker 1: So she was very young then, I guess. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was 16 years old when I was born. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sixteen years old. And she wanted to take me to New Orleans, but they were too--they wouldn't let her take me because they said she was a little wild, and ain't no telling what would happen to me. But after they brought me here-- Speaker 1: Now, so when she left for New Orleans, you stayed with your grandparents or is that-- Speaker 2: My auntie, my two aunties, her two sisters. Speaker 1: All right. Now, did you ever have communication with your mother after that? Speaker 2: Not, but about once or twice, 'cause I left and came to Chicago [Illinois]. And she stayed in New Orleans, and she got mixed up with that hoodoo stuff and all that mess from Haitian--Haiti-- Speaker 1: Well, tell us--what do you know about that? Can you tell us a little bit about-- Speaker 2: Well, I know it's pretty bad 'cause I went--you know, I went over to Haiti after I got grown here. What do you call it, the Works Progress Administration [WPA] sent me over to Haiti, me and two fellows from the Chicago Defender, pretty bad over there. And it ain't much better over there now. It's pretty rotten when you see the young girls, young kids waiting to get some man, you know, to buy 'em something to eat and that kind of stuff. Story_ID: 79084 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about your father then too? Can you give us his name and spell his name for us? Speaker 2: My father was--I was born out of--what do you call it when your kin folks is your daddy? What do you call it? My father was my mother's uncle. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was a very smart man. And I didn't find out he was my daddy till one day we were down home. And they all were drinking and they got to fighting out there in my auntie's yard. And then just raising hell. My grandpa playing the guitar, and somebody's playing the accordion and they, they're just raising hell and fighting and going on. And so my auntie that bought me here, she say, "How come they always beating up Uncle Charlie?" That's what I called my daddy, like everybody else called him Uncle Charlie. And they, (unclear) how come they beating him all the--every time I look over, they whupping Uncle Charlie. And I thought they whupping him 'cause he was pretty smart. He was a pretty smart man, could do most anything. She put on two kettles of water and a big pot of hot water, told you she gone scold Uncle Charlie. So I happened to come in the door. She said, I'm a--I ain't forgot what he done to my baby sister. And I'll get that son-of-a-bitch. That's what she said. I'm gone get him. Instead of throwing the water on Uncle Charlie, (laughter) she scolded her husband, called him, Uncle George (laughter). But they would always jump on Uncle Charlie, and Uncle Charlie was a smart man. He's the only one--he could build houses and sell 'em and set 'em afire and collect the insurance. He looked like a white man, had the flaming red hair up top of his head, and they--my other kinfolks would always say, "Oh, Charlie got away with that 'cause he looks like he's a white guy." Any of us do that, they'd put us in jail--the insurance company put us in jail right away. So finally, my uncle got caught. He built some houses in the other part of the town, nine houses and he set 'em all afire at the same time (laughter). And that's when they got him. Speaker 1: He got arrested? Speaker 2: Yeah, and they ran him out of town. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: (Laughter) So he went to Jackson, Mississippi and stayed there for a while. He never did come here. So when my auntie died in 1946, I went back down home to her funeral to bury her, and when--my mother took me up because he went back down there several times, but I didn't. And see Uncle Charlie. So I went to see him. He still got that red hair sticking straight up on his head. He looked at me two or three times. He said, boy, do you know who I am? I said, yes, sir, Uncle Charlie, I know who you are. No, I asked you do you know who I am? I said, yes, sir, I know who you are. All right then, you act like you know who I am. So I walked up to him, and he hugged me, and he said, "I'm your daddy, now, you know that, don't you?" He the first one had a car. He always had a car. He bought a car when the cars first started. He the first one I know had a player piano in the house. Most folks here didn't have pianos. He had a player piano in his house. Speaker 1: So he did pretty good with building and burning up the houses? Speaker 2: Yeah, he did pretty good. You know, they didn't do nothing to him. He, even after--he moved back down there, and he had a little place of business when I went there in '46 [1946]. He had a little store, selling hot dogs and all that kind of, other kind of junk they sell in them little short-order places. He lived to get, to be seventy-some years old. And my aunt--where I got my name from, the Gatens, my uncle, my Aunt Alma's husband, he lived to be about 79 or 78. My Aunt Alma lived to be 79. Speaker 1: Okay, so their name was Gaten? Speaker 2: Yeah. Their name was Gaten. And I took my Aunt Alma's name, the Gatens 'cause Aunt Mary, I didn't know what her name was half the time. She wasn't married but once, but all the rest of them dudes was her boyfriends, you know. She was married to an old man. She left home--she married an old man in order to get away from home. She was 13 or 14 years old when she married the first husband. And he was about 50-some years old. And she got--her first name was a--she was Carter. And she left--but she was good to me and nice to me. She brought me here, and, you know, and I don't think her and Uncle George ever married. They called their self husband and wife, you see. But I know that she would get a pass for all the kinfolks riding up and down Illinois Central Railroad. Every time we go there, we didn't have to pay, get a pass and ride free, go all the way. So, that's--and the rest of my family, a lot of them, they'd come and stayed a while, and they'd away--they'd go back, stayed a while. My brother went to World War I from here, and he came back here. And his family was born here. He didn't, his two children were born after he came out, back from World War I. And, 'cause I don't know nothing about, no town, but Chicago, as a city. Speaker 1: You came to Chicago when you were a baby? Speaker 2: Baby, yeah, baby 'cause I grew up here. That's why I told the guy, man, look, hold on a minute now. I was here then, and I'm here now. He (unclear), I was here then, Buddy, long before your ma and pa was born. I was here, and I'm here now. And I wasn't crazy then and I ain't crazy now. So I know what's going on. Story_ID: 79125 Speaker 1: Can you tell us what it was like in Chicago [Illinois] from your, your earliest memories? Can you give us a sense--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, yes, I'm gonna give you simple idea. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had playgrounds where we all played. Now, I grew up, got grown at 23rd and State Street. We all grew up in, from 18th--from 16th Street to 23rd Street. And we stopped there, right in front of (unclear) Mattress Factory. The building is still there on the East side of the street. And we would play softball, football, everything in the vacant lots and things. And we--in the neighborhood I grew up in, we had Jews, dagos, negroes, one or two Mexicans. Everybody got along, was no fighting and no arguing. You wouldn't use no bad language. They didn't allow that then, so you didn't use it. You'd get your mouth caved in with somebody's fist. Or one of them old women hit you a back hand lick, you know, now, that's bad. That's a tough lick. So they didn't allow that. We had a good time. We played together. And I started to working with Mr. Ming and Mosley, nice business. Story_ID: 79126 Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute now. I don't want you to go too far past childhood yet, you know. I wanted to ask you about some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood, what was going on in the neighborhood, you know. What did it look like? You know-- Speaker 2: Well, our neighborhood, our neighborhood down there don't look too much different other than the projects down there. Where you see them projects on the East side of the street, with all stores like up on 71st and 79th Street, you know, all stores. You had neighborhood stores. You didn't have any shopping centers. You had neighborhood stores for your groceries and things. You didn't no further. Every block you got a store, and every block had a--one or two pool rooms. We couldn't go in there until the year--till you got pretty good age. We'd slip in there, you know how that go. And Quinn Chapel Church was right across from Mosley School. It was there before the school was. Quinn Chapel Church was built in '84 [1884], 1884-- Speaker 1: Eighteen-eighty four [1884]. Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty-four [1884], built there, and when I got big enough to go to Sunday school, I started going to Sunday school at Quinn Chapel. Bishop Caray was our pastor. He wasn't--hadn't made bishop yet. Speaker 1: That's Caray. Speaker 2: Yeah, Bishop--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: C-A-R-A-Y? Speaker 2: Yeah, Archibald J. Caray. He was our pastor then. Well, Cook, was the first, was our first pastor. But he was at Bethel [A.M.E. Church]. And so my family belonged to Bethel Church. I would go to Sunday school at Quinn Chapel because Bishop Caray had three pretty girls, and I love pretty gals. And I went to Sunday school because Ms. [Anabelle S.] Prescott and the other girl, I forget her name. One of them girls was the second principal at--Ms. Prescott was the second principal at Wendell Phillips, black principal. She was the second one. The lady from Kansas City [Missouri] was the first one. I forget her name, Bousfield (ph.). See, and these people, we had--and I grew up going from church to Sunday School to church, you learned quite a difference between going to this church and that church. Yet, they were both Methodist churches and both A.M.E. churches. And Bishop Caray was from Georgia, originally, and he looked like [President Theodore] Teddy Roosevelt. Any yawl know how Teddy Roosevelt looked. I ain't talking about FDR [Franklin Delano Roosevelt] now. He looked just like Teddy Roosevelt, looked like a bulldog, and you know how--that mean look he had all the time. But he was a very nice man. And I also, when we went to go to regular church service, I'd go to Bethel at 29th and State Street, 29th and Dearborn, not State Street, 29th and Dearborn, right down there where Silas Purnell has got his office, where our church at. And I went to church service there. Dr. Cook was our pastor. Now, Olivet [Baptist Church] was having trouble with their pastor. So I'm, I'm still a teenager. Speaker 1: That's Olivet Baptist Church. Speaker 2: Olivet Chapel was having trouble. Story_ID: 79127 Speaker 1: So later on I started to working with the ice folks, and Olivet [Baptist Church] was in my district. I would go from 31st Street--see, when you went, from 51st Street to 35th, you was on the boulevard. This was Grand Boulevard [formerly South Parkway, now Martin Luther King, Jr. Dr.] from 35th to 31st. Speaker 2: What is now King Drive, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, the South side of 35th Street to the South side of 51st Street was the Boulevard. That was Grand Boulevard. When you got on the other side of it, that was South Park Avenue, not Grand Boulevard. Some people tried to make it that, but it wasn't. South Park Avenue. When you got on the other side of it, (unclear) going South, that was South Park Avenue. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So you see the difference between them, and a lot of people didn't--they never did kind of get out of calling all of this South Parkway until they finally, when they named it, changed the name to South Parkway, South Park Boulevard first. So it stayed that way about two or three years. Then finally put on South Parkway. And this was a beautiful street. I liked it because I liked the way they was taking care of it. They had a man working, taking care of the flowers and the grass from here, from 35th Street to 39th Street. Another man take it from 39th Street to 43rd Street. Another man take it from 43rd to 47th. Another man took it from 47th to 51st. Now, them men worked every day, and that-- Speaker 2: Like four blocks-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, three or four. Speaker 1: Every four blocks, and they had pretty grass, and this is before the lights came. You policemen, you had--everybody had a traffic cop, you know. And you didn't have no lights down here. You had just a, just a--some man down here sometimes working the traffic. Other than that, you had to get by the best way you could. So, if you got a wagon like a double-team with a tongue in it and you'd pull out there and pull the horses back, and their tongue still out. Guys see that, they'll slow down and let you by. Well, 1925, they put up the lights. But during that time, I had a good time as a young man. I got grown fast by being an ice man, working, meeting all kind of ladies-- Speaker 2: Now-- Story_ID: 79128 Speaker 1: --Let me go back to grade school, and just ask you where you went to grade school? Speaker 2: I went to grade school at Haven [School]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and Moseley [School]. Speaker 1: Haven is H-A-V-E-N. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh--Haven and, and Moseley. Speaker 1: Now, Haven was across from the [Chicago] Coliseum? Speaker 2: Right across from the Coliseum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Moseley was right across from the Quinn Chapel Church. Speaker 1: And that's like 14th and Wabash is where Haven was? Speaker 2: Haven, and 24th and Wabash was where-- Speaker 1: Quinn Chapel. Speaker 2: The Quinn Chapel. Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were going to school there, were they--were there events going on at the Coliseum? Or was it still open? Speaker 2: Oh, the Coliseum was always, that's where all the events happens, at the Coliseum. That wasn't no school there. The school was, Haven across from the Coliseum. Speaker 1: Sure, yeah. Speaker 2: Coliseum is where you had your prize fights, your wrestling matches. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I remember, I went to see [Ignacy Jan] Paderewski there when I was a youngster. Speaker 1: Now, who is he? Speaker 2: You don't know who Paderewski is? Speaker 1: Well, I've got--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Paderewski was the Polish--he was head of Poland for one while. Then he got--he was a hell of a musician, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Paderewski. Speaker 1: The piano player? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Paderewski. What is his first name? He got one of them long names, Paderewski. I also went--I was a grown man though when I went here, when they first built the Opera House downtown. I went to that with one of my--I worked with Samuel Insull brothers a little bit. And then you know, Samuel Insull had an Edison Company. You all know that? Samuel Insull had an Edison Company and also had a Midwest Utilities. Speaker 1: How do you spell his name? Speaker 2: Samuel Insull, I-N-S-U-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Samuel Insull, and what is his brother's name? I forget his brother's name [Martin Insull]. We were talking about him not too long ago. Samuel In--we had two great men who was helping us out. Julius Rosenwald was the head of Sears and Roebuck. Samuel Insull, the head of Edison Company. Edison Company was helping all the small businessmen out with electrifying everything here and there. We also had a man who worked for Edison Company, way back here in the teens. I got his picture here somewhere. His name was Lewis [Howard] Latimer. He came to Chicago when I was, during the time I was an ice man in the '20's [1920s]. He lived down here around 35th and Calumet. And he was always monkeying with a telephone and a typewriter. He had, he was trying to do--I don't know what he was doing. But he was an inventor. He represented Edison Company before I was born, he represented Edison Company in Europe and England and in Russia and all them other places they went. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, that's the famous Lewis Latimer. Speaker 2: That's right here. I got his picture, I got his picture here. Speaker 1: Yes, sir. Speaker 2: But I happened to see him and talk to him. And, you know, he would always stop when he'd see you doing something. He wanted to know what my alderman's name was and everything, you know. Speaker 1: That's when you were an ice man? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna get to that. But I wanted to take you-- Speaker 2: I'm still a boy now. I'm not a grown a man. I'm not a full--I ain't 20 years old yet. Speaker 1: Oh, you were an ice man before you-- Speaker 2: Well, certainly, yeah, you start that business when you big enough to work. Story_ID: 79129 Speaker 1: But I wanted you to tell me something about school though first? Speaker 2: I, that's the only school I--I didn't have no big schooling. Speaker 1: Okay, but grade school, what was grade school like? And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, just like when you-- Speaker 1: --(unclear) (simultaneous)--was it integrated or-- Speaker 2: No, no, well, yeah. Whatever was in the neighborhood, they went to school there. That's the way your schools was. Speaker 1: And this is the Haven School, right? Speaker 2: Haven or Moseley [School]. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you finish up-- Speaker 2: No, I ain't finished nothing. Speaker 1: Okay. In those days, did a lot of people finish, or did a lot of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of, a lot of 'em finished. My class finished. But I got in trouble. So I didn't finish. Speaker 1: Okay, now, you mentioned, while we had a break, you were talking about a great, big truant officer-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, see that was--she was a big lady down at--they say I was a bad little boy, you know what (unclear). And she was always after me down at Haven School, but I was always meddling somebody, the girls, you know, especially, meddling the gals, with long, pretty hair. And the girls would have them long bows. I'd wait till I catch two of 'em together, and I'd catch 'em, pull 'em back. I was always meddling and doing something I didn't have no business, like all bad little boys. The truant officer, you a bad little rascal, you (laughter). She was Irish, had an Irish brogue. But when I got to Quinn Chapel, I didn't go to--I mean I didn't go to Moseley too long because I went to work. Speaker 1: Okay, now, how--now, what age were you when you went to work? Speaker 2: Oh, I started to carrying ice when I was about 16 or 17 years old. But I was working before then. I was washing dishes downtown when I was 13 or 14 years old, washed dishes at John R. Thompson, Tip Top Inn, right by the--you know where the Art Institute [of Chicago] is? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: The Tip Top Inn used to be right in front of, where Baird and Warner is over there. Speaker 1: Now, tell me this, when you were at school, did you have a favorite teacher or was there any--were there any teachers that took time to try to develop you? Speaker 2: Yes, they took a little time. They didn't bother you too much because, you see, we didn't have play blocks and all that kind of stuff back then. They didn't have kindergarten like y'all got it now. We had primer classes. We had one book, "Blue Black Webster". It had everything in it you needed. And if you got that, you was a done--you was a slick dude. Speaker 1: Had one book for the whole, grades? Speaker 2: One blue back "Webster's Blue Back Speller", that's what they called it. Speaker 1: That--(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you had the times [times tables] on the back, (unclear) one, five to 10 on it, how to work your long division and short division on the other side. So this, I think--Noah Webster helped to get them books together. I don't think Daniel [Webster] had too much, he'd help us out, but I think Noah got most of them schoolbooks together. Then after that we had a company here would make all the schoolbooks. I forget what their name was. They made all of 'em, all those books, ship 'em all over the country, made schoolbooks, for everywhere you look, just whatever class you wanted them in. And they made 'em all, but I loved--what I loved about school mostly was history and geography. And back in them days, you didn't have no play stuff. You had to get your lessons. They didn't have all that mess y'all gon' make, do you think the blocks can do this and take this and do that. You--they'd give you a lesson. If they give you a lesson, I want you to bring me--I want you to learn the times by heart. I want you to--and don't, you got one foot to stand on. They'll make you stand on that corner of that stage with that one foot until you got that right. You had to get to the blackboard and show the teacher how to--if we're studying addition, and I learned that quick. So teacher what you think that is? That's fast, that's fast addition. Said, what it mean? That's, that's multiplying. That's all it is. Adding is fast multiplying. Instead of adding two and two is four, you say two times two is four. And keep on going. I learned that too, quick, what it was all about. Then I started to working downtown as a dishwasher. I learned how to do porter work, how you had to clean up the floor. I learned to take some coffee grounds and put on the floor and sweep it and you got it clean. You don't have to mop it all the time. Speaker 1: That's something. And a lot of people don't know that, I guess. Speaker 2: Naw, they don't know that now because they don't have to do that now. They ain't--got all this other kind of stuff. And when you go to work early as I did, you--it's so much you learn. And being a young boy, the younger men, older men, a little older than me, didn't run you away like they do now. I got all the help I needed 'cause I was kind of smart. I was active. And I wanted to learn. Story_ID: 79130 Speaker 1: Now, were your aunt [Alma Gaten] and--was your aunt and your uncle, were they good parents for you? Speaker 2: Well, they were pretty good, but what I mean, they, when they went to work on the railroad, I'd go with 'em. That's when we learned to travel. He was a shack-bully, they called it back in them days. When you went out, we had about maybe 10 or 12 cars, box cars. Well, you got the barbershop, the pool room, you got the cook, you got the kitchen room and you got the dining room. Then you got the sleeping quarters for all the fellows you carried and yourself. So we went several places. I went to a little place called Whitely (ph.), North Dakota. You never heard of it, have you? Okay, everything there is white. The dirt's white. Everything was white. That's on the CB&Q [Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad]. And it's cold up there. I went up there in September, and I like to froze to death. They had to send me back to--well, some grown man sent me back down to the commissary to get some clothes. So I got his underwear and a couple of suits, overalls and shoes and everything. Up there, the cactus grew just about that high. That's all you would see cactus all the way around, white. And the people, the white folks from Russia and Germany and places and the Russian prisoners they were sending over here to keep, that's who multiplied out there in the Wyoming, Montana and them places. They are the children and grandchildren of all them prisoners. The brought 'em here from Siberia because it was cold weather out there, and these people wasn't used to it. But they could, they was building--in 1920, they were still building mud houses. And I watched 'em, see how they build mud houses-- Speaker 1: It's called a dug out or something, right? Speaker 2: Nah, nah, they was building a house. They're building mud, a house completely out of mud. And now, I learned that from my grandpa. My grandfather built their houses, my mother [Myrtice Turner Perkins] said they were born in the mud house. They build, know how to build the house and get the bushes and put on there and then put on the mud on it, with the bushes so the water would run down, never run on them, when they dry. Now, out there in North Dakota, we--I watched them fellows, how they would do it. Every day they would put up--they would spend one day pulling up them cactus bushes, 'cause that's what they gonna lay between the mud. And then the box cars, the trains would bring all the water 'cause there wasn't no water you could get out there. You didn't have nothing. You ain't never bored no wells yet out there because the water was, the ground is 10 or 12 foot frozen down. So they brought all the water by cars, and you had one engine stayed around there and kept everything warm, kept the water warm and everything else. So this is the way you lived long years ago. And in this city, most everybody had coal heat, no steam heat, no hot air heat, particularly, everything coal heat. You had chimneys all over. They called Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] the smoky city. Every house, this house had five or six chimneys till I just took one of 'em down two, two or three years ago 'cause you had--see my uncle bought this house--now, my house, I had a big house on Prairie. I had a big house, big as the one next door there. I had two big fire places like that, and I had a chimney for the kitchen, a chimney for the dining room, chimney for the two rooms upstairs, chimney for the bathroom. You gotta have all of that to stay warm. And that's why I wonder they didn't call this the smoky city. They all called Pittsburgh the smoky city. But it's more smoke here than ever was--there's more smoke here than in all of Pennsylvania almost because of the--we had, this is a bigger, bigger place. Every house had chimneys, four or five chimneys to it. It ain't been too long, ain't been too long. I was living here when we got gas, got the permit to put the gas in. You had to get, you had to wait a long time. You had to wait till all the business places got gas before you get anything. Story_ID: 79131 Speaker 1: Sir, I wanna go back to when you were a youth, and I know you--I wanna talk about the ice company. But I wanted to ask you when you started to play the piano 'cause you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, that was, that was just coming, and, you know, just as you go along, you know, just play a little bit, listening to other guys. We had a guy up and down 35th and they called "Toothpick". He was a pimp, go in and let him play the blues. Then I learned, just by him playing the blues. Speaker 1: How old were you when you started playing? Speaker 2: I was monkeying with it from three or four years old, from four or five years old. Everybody had a piano. I'd be in there banging on it if they had one. When I go there, I'd play the organ too. You know, they had the organ, pump-- Speaker 1: So you, so, sir, you're saying that you kind of picked it up as you went along? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, didn't nobody teach me-- Speaker 1: Somebody'd show you one thing and somebody'd show you something else? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, all right. Did you have any famous teachers or any--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, I ain't had nobody teach me nothing. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I learned from--before you go, I'm gonna play you a record, one of the old-time piano players. You'll hear how we played. Y'all heard of this boy, what this boy play the guitar from down in Indianapolis? Montgomery, what's his name? West Montgomery, his uncle. His name was Little Brother Montgomery. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: We all lived in, down in a little place called Kentwood, Louisiana where it's a big sawmill town. My folks (unclear) lived. Then when it burnt down, so we had to get away from there. And he got to be one of the good piano players of that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, Little Brother Montgomery played with Val [Gray] Ward [HM] in Kuumba Theater when they did the "Bessie Smith Show" here-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --back in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: That's right. He died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Little Brother Montgomery. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Did you ever hear him? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Did you? Speaker 1: Yeah, Little Brother--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, he got a gal singing with him on one of these records. She was (unclear), singing a song, "You got a sweet, sweet mama every night, and you can't see mama at all", one of Mamie Smith's songs. Now, Mamie and Bessy [Smith] were not sisters. Bessy came from Chattanooga [Tennessee] and Mamie came from New York. Speaker 1: And there was a Clara Smith too, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, she came from down South, somewhere in Tennessee. Speaker 1: So, so you were already playing the piano, and you-- Speaker 2: I'm just, little banging on it, you know. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But it done me some good during the days of the Depression. I made a pretty good living at it, play for the parties. All you gotta do is play two or three songs, two or three pieces. You sang on anything. They gonna dance, cut up and drink whiskey. So what the heck? It done me some--did, 'cause everybody was out of work, and had no jobs. We had a good time. Story_ID: 79132 Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me about--I know you got some stories around piano playing, but when did you start with the ice company? Speaker 2: I started when I was about 14, 15--and I've been playing the piano at the same time. Some of them played it--some of them, my cousins 'cause I'd be playing the piano with him. Speaker 1: Well, tell me about the ice company 'cause you were getting ready to get into that at one time when we were trying to get you back in school. But what about the ice company? Speaker 2: Well, the ice company, you know, they--you worked for them. And there was a Peabody outfit from, they were from Tennessee. They were from Memphis usually. And they had the concession of all of these--they built all these, mostly all these ice plants in Missouri, Indiana, Chicago, Illinois, and they folded up during the Great Depression. They had all the ice plants in--all the wagons was just alike, yellow and white. Yellow color and white writing. Speaker 1: So you drove a wagon, right? Speaker 2: Horse and wagon. Speaker 1: And did-- Speaker 2: Sometimes a big Mack truck. Speaker 1: So how long did you work for the ice company? Speaker 2: Well, I worked for 'em for about three or four years. Then I quit, did other jobs here and there. And I went back to the ice company after I left the Palmer House. I went back to the ice company, and I stayed until I retired. I went back to the ice company and got the job, engineering in the plant, running, operating the plant 'cause I knew how to run all the machines in there. And so the boss who owned the ice plant knew me because I taught his daddy how to work. So I went to work for him, and he was head of what is known as Lincoln Ice Company. And he sold out to, what's the man's name? Jefferson, Dick Jefferson. He's the only man on the North Side got anything to do with ice. And the one on the South Side is Lang [Ice Company], on the South Side and Jefferson on the North Side. All the ice things belong to them, whatever they got. Speaker 1: Now, you were like 16, you said, or 17 when you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah, I was working with them. Speaker 1: So what was it like? You were telling us, I think off camera that you would have to get up real early in the morning. Speaker 2: You'd get up and go get the horses and get ready 'cause you're using a horse and wagon, you know. Speaker 1: So when would your day start, and tell us about a day? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it started about 4:30. And it depend on where you was at, where your plant was. Now, my plant was at 26th Street, and my barn was at 30th and Cottage Grove. So I didn't have too far to go. Thirtieth and Cottage Grove, and Cottage Grove went this way down to 26th Street. And right around--Cottage Grove used to go right across 26th Street to Wabash and go downtown. So, you see, you had--when they first start to building Lake Meadows, to build the thing over there, they began to make that, cut that road out, going right down by what they call--what's the hospital over there? Michael Reese [Hospital], right down behind it. Story_ID: 79093 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about--well, finish telling me about the ice business. So you had to go get a horse early in the morning-- Speaker 2: Yeah, go to the horse, and go roll up your wagon, and go stop at the restaurant and get you some coffee and some, you know, get on your route. Speaker 1: Okay, that sounds like the best part of it (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, now, you must understand this. You've got some horses. Your horses know your route as well as you do, whether you think that or not. Your horses know where you gone stop every time you get in that wagon, anywhere you're going. You don't have to tell 'em. You get 'em--you load that wagon up in the morning, and he know you going to, going to your route. They head that way. If you gone go a little different one, you gotta pull 'em, you got to change him, change the route. He know where you're going. And when he gets to the route, he knows everyone of your customers. Some of 'em, he know 'em by sight. They come out and bring, pet him a little bit, pet the two horses a little bit, play with 'em. And I had one horse that sometimes I would drive her--especially in the wintertime when you wouldn't need no double team, not in the wintertime-- Speaker 1: Because of the snow? Speaker 2: No because you don't need--it ain't that much business in the wintertime. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: You go along, she--now her name was Flora. Flora knew everywhere you're gonna stop. When you got to where she take, gets some water, she'd let you know [horse sound]. And when you got to eat (unclear) [horse sound]. Let you know. Eleven, about 11:30 in the morning, you pass that place, she ain't gonna let you go by there [horse sound]. That's, she want the nose bag. You know, that's her feedbag, put her feed bag on. See, your animals teach you and they help you quite a bit to make your route 'cause I didn't have to get back up on my wagon, off--jump off and on and off and on. My horse get in the alley, he know where I'm going, and he know how to get by the other wagons and things without--unless they too close to him. Hard, if you ever had to go and get them horses from hitched up against somebody, they take their time and come on across. Speaker 1: So you can just let 'em loose and do your route and come out and your horses would follow you along the route? Speaker 2: Well, they'd, like when you go in here and in this gate, they know you going in the next one. They go pull up. See, what I mean. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: They know where your next customer is on every, whatever alley you go in. See, they, and they work--when they work the route every day, see what I mean, just like you. And they ain't as near as dumb as you think they are. They got far more sense than we taught them to have. We just begin to find out that animals have plenty of sense, just like we have a little sense. They got some more too. Your animals teach you in the country even. They teach you--I used to go down to my grandfather's house. The dogs and the cats would teach you just what bushes to eat. They know what bushes to eat for their laxatives. Horse knows that too. So you learn from them. Now, my horses, when I took 'em to the barn, I don't do nothing but unhitch 'em the wagon. He goes and get his water and go up to his stall. The barn man take the harness off and hook 'em up, and hitch 'em right by--hang 'em up right by him. And the horse knows his stall from anybody else's. He ain't going in the other fellow's stall. He going in his stall. And he'll stay there until the man come and hitch him up to the stall after he get his water. He know how to get his water and go on to his stall. And when he get out the next morning, the first thing he do, go get him some water. Then he come out to the wagon. He know what side, if I'm driving a double wagon, Bill know what side he's on, and Dick know what side he's on. (Unclear) you tell him, he go there. When I--sometimes I get there, they both be standing (unclear) so they can be hitched to the wagon. All I gotta do is hook 'em, buckle 'em up. So you have a lot of, you see a lot of people don't like to give credit where credit is due, like your animals help you out. They forget about that. (Unclear) Them animals can save you a lot of steps going up and back and getting on the wagon, up and back getting on the wagon. They know where you going, and I go to the end of the route, and they go to turn, and go back and go down this alley, and then we wanna--they know where you going. And this is the way life is. You learn and if you got any kids--we had kids riding with me sometimes. They knew my route, they knew just where me and the horses gonna stop. And they liked to ride and see which way the horse is going. They said, Bill knows just where you going, don't he? Yeah, they both know just where I'm going. So that's the way it was. Now, you see back in '28 [1928] the ice business began to get kind of slow. And I got a job working at Congress Linen Supplies, a business that just opened up. Story_ID: 79094 Speaker 1: Now, before we get into that, I want to take you back to nineteen teens, and, yeah, I wanted to ask you about the riot of 1919, the Chicago Race Riots. Speaker 2: The race riot started, 1919, was it June [sic, July]? Well, I forget now the date. Anyway, the boy [Eugene Williams] that came back from France and been in World War I. And they knew all about it. Well, this boy that they knocked in the head, they killed him out there in the lake-- Speaker 1: Well, tell us about it 'cause people are-- Speaker 2: He was a good swimmer. Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is a black boy that was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, a black boy, was (unclear) I forget his name. His name was in the paper. But he was a heck of a swimmer. And at that time, they had a big wire fence, go way out in the lake to separate the blacks from the whites. You, you at 31st Street, but your beach is this side, and my beach is that side. Speaker 1: Okay, so the beach was segregated-- Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, the beach was segregated. We crossed at 29th Street or whichever street was the closest. But we would go cross at 26th Street. Illinois Central had a roundhouse over there at 26th Street, and we'd cross over there most times and go up the track 'cause the track and the lake was right together almost, and going swimming in there. This boy was a heck of a swimmer so he kept, the boys kept telling him to stop going around there. So he went off to show off, and he showed out and showing all the boys how he could swim. And they kept throwing at him, and he would duck. Well, they'd miss him, you know. Speaker 1: Now, these are the white people were throwing rocks at him? Speaker 2: Yeah, throwing rocks and bricks, whatever. Speaker 1: He was swimming towards their part of the beach? Speaker 2: He done went around, come around in there where they're at, yeah. And so, you know, if you hit a fellow in the water with a stick or a club or anything, pretty hard, that's it. That lick is multiplied, God knows how many times. So this boy got hit with a brick, and he went down and he never come back up. So the riot was started. They didn't bother any white folks. They started arresting, whipping Negroes, the police was, whipping Negroes, said the Negroes started the riot. So we had the riots what from about, that was on a Sunday evening, well, that night they supposed to have a big meeting between the blacks and the whites. They gonna fight, have a big fight under the track, between--the Rock Island track was the dividing line between what y'all call--what do you call it over there now in the white neighborhood? Bridgeport, between Bridgeport and the Black Belt. Came a storm that night so they never did have, they never did get, get the battle, the fight over. The race riot was ended. People on the West Side didn't know they had a riot, know nothing about it. Newspaper didn't carry too much of it, and then when they started to carrying it, they told all lies about it, as many lies as they could. And they didn't bother nobody, but the Negroes who were here, they started going into these buildings throwing the white folks out. They wasn't throwing nobody out but the Jews 'cause they was the only ones living in, in our community at that time. The big white folks was getting away. Some lived on Michigan, but we didn't get that far over. Michigan Boulevard, two men from the First National Bank helped me out, Mr. Melvin Trailer (ph.) and Allen Shepherd (ph.), I think the man's name Allen Shepherd. They were trustees and big officers at the First National Bank downtown. They lived at 37th and Michigan, and I could drive between the two houses. When I'd get ready to take ice in there, I drove right up between them houses and get both customers, drove the wagon right up in there and turned around when I get ready to come out. Mr. Melvin Trailer gave me my first bank book that I ever had, had $50.00 in it. That was a lot of money back in them days, 50 bucks. And my first bank book. Then as you know, we were already on King Drive. They had already bombed our church in 1924 and burned it up, said we were making moonshine in our church at 42nd Street and Grand Boulevard, 1924. There was a Jewish Athletic Club. We bought that for the church. And they said the Negroes in there making moonshine so they set it afire and bombed it, tore it down, set it afire. That was in 1924. Story_ID: 79095 Speaker 1: I wanna go back to 1919 for a minute. And just where were you when you found out about the riot [Chicago Race Riot of 1919], and what did you do? Speaker 2: I wasn't too far away, somewhere on State Street, somewhere around-- Speaker 1: And how did you find out about it? Did somebody like come and-- Speaker 2: Somebody telling you. The police were out--you could find out everything when you get over there. Police whipping all the Negroes (unclear) well, what? There' a race riot, race--well, what, what you mean? Who did it? What started, who started it? It take you a long time because most, we hadn't had no trouble. They didn't know what a race riot was. What you talking about a race riot? Nobody know what you're talking about. Then after they started arresting Negroes, putting 'em in jail, and Negroes fighting and going--Negroes beat up four, three or four policemen over there, and they finally cut some that beating out, whipping out. Negroes likened to kill three or four them, beat the hell out of 'em over there, took their guns, didn't kill none of 'em. Speaker 1: Now, you were almost--you were almost killed at one point, I think, right? There's a story about them targeting you, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So what happened? Speaker 2: Well, they--they wasn't targeting me about the riot though. The riot was over when they started targeting me. They were targeting me after I--I was a grown man then, after I was working for (unclear) Al Capone [?]. Speaker 1: Well, wasn't there an incident in the riot where they, they were confused about who you were or something? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, this is--the, what--you see, during the riots, the news got out that the white folks coming down in motorcycle teams, about six or seven motorcycles gone come down State Street and some guy got the message, and he told me about it, and I told two or three other guys. They all said, Ole Red is the one that told 'em, you know, the ice man. Get him, you know. Well, anyway, they were supposed to come down to State Street, and the Negroes who had been in the [U.S.] Army heard all about that, so they knew how to make a barbed wired fence, you know, took some barbed wire and stretch it across from one light post to the other, you know, like this, and run your motor and put out the lights. Come on down with your motorcycles. You gonna run into them lights and you all--them, six guys, they was all on top of one another. And the guys beat 'em almost to death. The paper didn't put too much of that in there. Speaker 1: No, you know, I heard about that before. I heard about it once from John Henry Clark [John Henrik Clark, HM]. He told the story. But he didn't tell where he got it from, but he knew the story about them stretching the wire across the street-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. But all them fellows who was in the Army or them who was working, you know, had the government, National Guard and all that stuff, they knew all that kind of stuff, you know. They knew all that, and, and that was part of their work. And they laughed. (Unclear) That was a big deal, stretching the wire across there, and a guy kill himself, you know, come down like, rolling like a bat out of hell on a motorcycle (laughter). Story_ID: 79096 Speaker 1: Now, do you--I think you described in an earlier conversation about the, about breaking in the stores and that sort of things. Speaker 2: Oh, during the riot [Chicago Race Riot of 1919]-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, during the riot, you see, the guys were breaking into stores, throwing the stuff out in the street. I said, man, are you crazy? You better carry some of this mess upstairs. Ain't no bread men coming in here doing, until this thing is over. Milk man, bread man, nobody coming in here until this thing is over. You maybe have two or three days of it. It happened to come that storm, but I carried--I got me some ginger ale, I got me, you know--back in them days, you had big bottles of ginger ale and big bottles of, what you call that, the stuff we drink gingersnaps with. Ah, I forget what it is. Ginger ale-- Speaker 1: Root beer or-- Speaker 2: Root beer and, you didn't have no fifths. Everything came in them quart, big quart bottles, and I told a guy, I said--he had two or three shakes of cheese, I said, man, I'm gone take one of these upstairs with me. I took one of 'em upstairs to where we lived. Auntie, where you get that cheese, boy? I said, downstairs. Then I got some coffee. A&P used to send coffee in the bags and they buy 'em all and put out in front of the steps, out in front of the door. And you'd smell that bread and stuff early in the morning before they came and unlocked the store to put the stuff inside. You couldn't do that now. They parked the stuff outside, well, then, we broke in the boxes, took the bread. Then we got in the store, got some, you know, bologna and all that stuff, whatever we can get. Speaker 1: Now, did you encounter the police at all? Speaker 2: Well, we wouldn't, we didn't care nothing about no police. Speaker 1: But did the--or did you encounter any of the white rioters that were coming into the black community at that time? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, we were fighting 'em, you know. But they didn't come in till late in the evening. They never would come in, in broad-open daylight. They like to catch you off guard and everything else. We'd fight, you know, we (unclear) a couple of 'em, but the main things you--after the riot's over, this is what you got to be bothered with. You got to go to their neighborhood sooner or later to get something. And that's what you gotta worry about. If you was caught after 6:00 o'clock over by the Sox Park [White Sox Park], your behind gonna get whipped. Story_ID: 79097 Speaker 1: Now, do you know anything about the groups? It's been written, I think Mike Royko, when he wrote his book "Boss" about Mayor Daley, he talked about Richard J. Daley being a member of Hamburg Social and Athletic, Hamburg, as they called it. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that was a gang on-- Speaker 2: That was in Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: And then the Ragan's Colts, another gang. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know anything about those gangs? Speaker 2: Well, you know, they, they had them. You knew 'em by name. That's all, and you didn't get bothered with them unless you went over in there. But, you know, they never did bother me 'cause that's where my plant was, in Bridgeport. And so I'd go over there and play horseshoes all the time. And I lived with a Irish family for a while on 37th and Lowe, right across from the Catholic church, Daley's and them's church. The church, I forget the name of that church, right across--Daley, and them, where they had her funeral at. Speaker 1: You're talking about [Eleanor] "Sis" who just died? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Where they had her funeral. This was their church. It was right around the corner. It ain't too far from where she lived. And they, she lived what, thirty--right close to--I forget the street she was on. It was that close to Lowe. We crossed the street at 37th and Lowe, but I lived with a white family called Hussey (ph.). They had, the mother was named Mary. She had three boys. The oldest boy was Tommy and Billy. The oldest girl was named Mary and whatever. I forget the other two or three girls' names. And they all were, liked me pretty good. They all liked me. The old man, he was--he loved whiskey. And we were making moonshine back in them days, and so you could find it anywhere where--if you'd been around a little time, you could know, you could smell the stuff and tell where it was at, almost, just like the police. Speaker 1: Now, that was after Prohibition, after 1920, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was back in the '20s [1920s], yeah-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Nineteen twenties [1920s]. See after they broke whiskey out, that's when everything began to happen. Speaker 1: Now, what did you think about Prohibition? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know too much about it, but it was a good time for me because I was just getting grown. I voted, that was my first voting. Speaker 1: Did you vote to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was 21. I voted to get, close up, and sell all--close the saloons up and everything. And vote the women in and whiskey out (laughter). Speaker 1: That's when women got to vote too. Speaker 2: That's right, that was--and that's what it was. The Women's Suffrage bill, they called it. Mrs., what's the lady's name? Mrs.--white lady that preached that sermon all the way, all, about all the saloons everywhere. Speaker 1: Oh, Carrie Major [Carrie Chapman Catt] and her companion, I forget her name. Story_ID: 79098 Speaker 1: But anyway, that made the bootleggers famous. That's why Al Capone and all of 'em got rich, selling whiskey and beer. They didn't bother nobody now, but only the folks who stood in their way. And they didn't go round meddling with other folks, bothering other folks, didn't bother nobody but people in their way. We had a gang over here, Jimmy Colosimo, had a restaurant at 22nd Street. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, [James] "Big Jim" Colosimo. Speaker 1: Big Jim, Big Jim Colosimo. And he was the boss 'til they sent Al Capone here to get him. And they told Al Capone not to kill him himself, but have somebody to kill him. And that's what he did. But I was in the midst of a killing by the gang- by the gangsters on Van Buren Street in 1924. Dean O'Banion, the next man to Colosimo, he was a florist. He had two florist shops downtown. I was carrying some milk cans--I was working for Joe R. Thompson's restaurant, some milk cans to be sorted. I think I was taking 'em over to (unclear) Hardbest over there, somewhere on Van Buren Street, 'til them gangsters come in there. And I could hear 'em when they shooting, shot the man down, and they said they went in there to ask him when he'd be making some wreaths, said, "Well, you make one for yourself now." Dean O'Banion, that's Colosimo's right hand man. They killed him in there, and that's when Al Capone really got famous. But I met him through a mistake. He had one of them boys, skid row back--like any street you see was bad, they called it skid row. And he would take his laundry up. On Saturday, I was working the laundry the Saturday evening, so the people could come there and get their bundles and get their (unclear). So this guy didn't show up to carry Al Capone's clothes, shirts and things to him. I did. I went on and carried 'em, and I was smoking my cigars, and I went in there. And so he--Al Capone's kind of short, stubby. He wasn't much taller than me, about like me. He said, "What kind of cigar that you got, boy?" I told him. He said, "I'm gonna give you some of mine. Now, go on." Said, "Well, have the girl--if you like 'em, you tell her, well, she gonna send you a box next time." So he'd always leave ten dollars on the dresser for you. And I got my ten dollars and six cigars. He was a very nice kind of guy to deal with. He didn't have too much talking to do. He gave me two shirts he didn't like, classy shirts and things. He just liked ordinary shirts. And he didn't want no white shirts. He wanted all them blue shirts. So I married my first wife in one of them shirts. I also married my second wife thirty years later in one of them shirts. Speaker 2: Those were good shirts, I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, you know, when you don't wear nothing, like, you know--I got some stuff in there I been had over thirty years (laughter). When you got a whole lot of stuff, you don't wear it too much. See, you will pick out something you like every day and wear it every day. You know, how that--until you wear it out. That's what happens to you, why you keep stuff so long. Story_ID: 79099 Speaker 1: And anyway, that was the time when you could make--I could make a little money playing the piano for these house rent parties. They called 'em rent rags, no jobs. The mills all closed, and all jobs related to the mills, they was closed too. So you just, and like everything is now. They got everything out of whack, and it's getting worse and worse and worse, till everything gonna be shut down pretty soon if they don't start something. And this is what was happening then. But you see, we had a--this was a big country, and everybody was working doing something. You had a, 37 million farmers back then, still in the country 37 million. It had been 47 [million], it was 37 [million] then, by that time. They were still producing food and stuff (unclear), if you needed any. They ain't producing nothing now 'cause ain't nobody on the farm. So that's the difference. So this is what we had then. We had a good time. Nobody didn't tell us all we were poor, didn't nobody worry about being poor. The poor folks who had any sense was enjoying themselves every (unclear) they got. And our people just released from slavery, they wasn't exactly free, just turned a loose, but it was better than somebody kicking you off the sidewalk and all that kind of stuff, although you wasn't exactly free. They couldn't do what some of 'em think that you could do. You could go anywhere you want--ah, you couldn't go anywhere you wanna. You couldn't say what you wanna anywhere you wanted to. It was always something you had to clamp down on, something you had to keep your mouth shut about. Then you'd lose your job or 'cause somebody some trouble and all that stuff. So we had to learn that, as you go by, but other than that, we had a wonderful time from say about '22 [1922] to '27 [1927] or '28 [1928]. We had a big--they had a big thing here in '28. We had a harvest day in 1928. We were, the first, first time we got in Comiskey Park as a group. Old man Comiskey didn't want no blacks in the park as a group. But his son let us in there. We went in, and we had what is known as, in 1925, we went into Comiskey Park, and all they were talking about Jack Dempsey and Harry Wills fighting. And what the man name, was our promoter back in them days? I forget his name. What is Yankee Stadium named after--not Yankee Stadium. What's that big place in New York where-- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Ebbets Field? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Ebbets Field? Speaker 1: No, no-- Speaker 2: Madison Square Garden? Speaker 1: Huh, Madison Square Garden, the man [Tex Rickard] that built Madison Square Garden, he promoted Jack Johnson and James Jeffries fight, 1910. Jack Johnson, knew his wife. So Jack Johnson got a, borrowed $20,000 from his boss, went and got the boss's wife, and they went to Canada. Story_ID: 79100 Speaker 1: Jack Johnson borrowed the man's $20,000 and took the man's [Tex Rickard] wife to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. He said the man said--he was a promoter, they had been talking about the Negro fighting. He said there'll never be another Negro fighting for the championship as long as I live, be no more Negroes fighting for the championship. They was trying to get him--Harry Willis and [Jack] Dempsey. Nah, ain't gone be no more fight. If he hadn't a died, there probably--Joe Louis never would a got chance to fight. But after he died, the Jew took over, [Mike] Jacobs, took over and got the Louis fights. But Tex Rickard didn't want nothing to do with no Negro fighting for no championship, none whatsoever. And that's the reason. Jack Johnson was a--the white women said he was a wonderful man. They wrote all kinds of nice things about him. He lived at 49th and Vincennes for a long time before he moved away from 34th and Wabash. You know, we had a--we, we had a varied condition here in this city [Chicago, Illinois]. You moved here and you moved back, and you moved here, and you moved back. But they tried to keep you from spreading over to the lake [Lake Michigan]. And all this territory in here was under the guise of a Chicago University [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] real estate department and, because all this property at one time was under the real estate guide of the Chicago University. And they had what is known as restricted covenants. You could only move certain places where they tell you. And that was done by all the mayors, no matter who they were. But what else--you wanna take me back to something? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I wanted to ask--well, while we're talking about Jack Johnson, can you tell us about his place? He had a club right, at-- Speaker 1: Well, it wasn't during--he had a place called the Champion, "The Champion". And, of course, I couldn't go in there. I was too young, for me, I was too old, a little younger. That was at 29th, 30th and Dearborn, right near 30th and 31st Street called "Cafe de Champion". And after he went to the, got the troops, went to the [U.S.] Army, went to the War [World War I], and got through fighting down in Cuba and other places, come back and went to the War and stayed, he came out of Leavenworth, I think in 1923 or '24 [1924], along with that time or '22 [1922]. Anyway, Jack Johnson's partner was named Bill Bottoms, the man who opened up the "Dream Room Cabaret" [sic Dreamland Cafe], cafe and night club at 3501 and 35--3521 or 20, no, 20 and 26 on State Street. And this man had, let's see, what'd he have? Jack Johnson, Bill Bottoms opened up a night club, and he was a cook, a real good cook. And while he went--Jack Johnson had borrowed $2,000 from Bill Bottoms. So in the meantime, he said, well said, Bill, you take care of my wife while I'm gone now. Oh, Bill Bottoms said he'd take good care of Ms. Johnson. So when he come back, he asked Bill for his money. He said, pay you for what? Didn't you have my wife all the while I was gone? He said, what do you mean? He said, man, I know she worth $2,000 (laughter). But he didn't pay him. That's his buddy. You got all them kind of stories come up and they say they're true 'cause he never did pay him. He said, well, it was there for you. If you didn't get it, it wasn't my fault. So, you see, you got all these kind of stories come up. But he came back and got a, tried to get a little arena started down at 30--he did get a little amateur place down at 30th and Wabash, going south. But (unclear) fought in there, two or three other amateur prize fights, they fought in there. They fought for the Golden Gloves and all that stuff, you know, couldn't fight professionally, amateurs. So that's--and he was, he was a good businessman, but he was crooked 'cause he would get everything on credit and close the place up and move off and don't pay nobody. He'd do all them kind of things too till they finally stopped, stopped him from doing anything like that, wouldn't nobody trust him. But if he got a toe hold, that's what he'd do. Other than that, we had a pretty good going here. Story_ID: 79101 Speaker 1: Now, you met Marcus Garvey once? Speaker 2: Well, Marcus Garvey's place is 33rd and State Street. And he had some good friends of mine was in there, the Gordon family. They were in there. And a lot of people didn't understand what Jack Johnson was doing, especially the black folks who he was trying to help. Speaker 1: You mean Garvey? Speaker 2: Yeah, what Garvey was trying to do. They didn't know what Garvey was trying to do. They thought sure Garvey was trying to take them back to Africa. And that's all he's after. But Garvey wanted you to do something before you got to Africa because the people that told him, don't send nobody over there unless you had a trade. You know, we wanna see doctors. We don't wanna see no preachers and no lawyers, none of them slick dudes. Send us some engineers, people who can help us to build and do so on and so forth. And this is what Garvey was after. Well, the other folks picked up what the white folks had already said, Garvey gonna carry you Negroes down and gonna be holes in the ship and they gonna drown all y'all, all them kind of stories, all kind of lies about Garvey and Garvey this. And [W.E.B.] Dubois and them picked it up, and they carried it on that way. Everybody lied about Garvey, what he was gonna do and what he wasn't gonna do and this, that and the other But that's what he was trying to get, and we had a lady, the Gordon family. Ms. Gordon went, she went for--they put her in jail. They arrested her out there in the park where we were. Speaker 1: In Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, arrested her out there and carried her to jail. Speaker 1: Because of something to do with the UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Then her husband got into it. Then they carried him there, and sent her home. She lived out, right back over here, 35th and Prairie. And they, they had all kind of people against your movements, whatever you were trying to do. They had every kind of little clique of watchers, watching you, whatever you say, whatever you're gonna--copy it down, whatever you gonna do, what you're gonna say, what you thought about this, and what you thought about that. Garvey had a place at 14th and Jefferson too on the West Side. And Garvey spoke at Quinn Chapel Church, and I think he spoke, and I think he spoke at Olivet. I don't know--but he spoke at some other church. I'm trying to think of another big church out South here, Negroes first moved out there. But we had a tough time when the Negroes began to move out into these other neighborhoods. First place, they was bomb would be the churches. They bombed Ebenezer Church at 45th and Vincennes. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Speaker 2: Nineteen twenty-five [1925]. Speaker 1: Twenty-five [1925]? Speaker 2: Um-hum, they bombed Ebenezer Church. They knocked all the steps and things off of Bethesda, somewhere along back in them days. And they bombed Oscar DePriest's houses at 45th and what is known as King Drive now. That was still Grand Boulevard then. They bombed the houses all the way around the block, all the way around until it got on 45th Street. Speaker 1: Now, you say these houses were bombed because of-- Speaker 2: Racial, racial tension. They didn't want no Negroes moving in. They wanted to get out and don't come in there. You see, we couldn't go to the Metropolitan Theater. We couldn't go to the Twentieth Century, 46th and Dearborn, I mean 46th and Prairie. You couldn't go to the Atlas down here at 35th and Cottage Grove. You can go to the Avenue, 31st and Indiana. You couldn't go to the Isle, 58th Street, what few Negroes was living out there. And-- Speaker 1: The Oakwood over on 39th? Speaker 2: Yeah, you could go over there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Wasn't no, wasn't (unclear) no use going over there 'cause that was just like going to 35th and Wentworth. Speaker 1: (Laughter). You would be in physical danger if you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. You could go over there at your own risk. Now, they didn't want you in these communities, and the big white man, the big bosses who run things, actually, would hide his hand and throw the rock and tell you, well, it ain't us, it's them. You know them po' crackers over there, they the ones bothering y'all, you know. But we all found out, if the big man spoke, they listened. No matter who he said, or what you wanna do, if that big man said, no, you gonna do what he say do. Story_ID: 79102 Speaker 1: And that's the way it was. We had a big riot downtown in the Palmer House. Nobody never wrote about that too much. Speaker 2: So what happened? And when, when was it? Speaker 1: Twenty, in twenty--rioted in '27 [1927]. They had elevators then. Girls was running, the Dolly Models (unclear) a lot of 'em working down there then, them girls, Dolly Models working at Marshall Fields, I think. It was two of them girls that worked in the Palmer House. And they didn't want no Negroes to ride the front elevators. You had to ride the back, with all the help, Palmer and them didn't want nothing--no help, all the help was counted as what, you know, and beneath the bosses and things and other folks. They didn't want you to go--they didn't want you to walk, didn't want no Negroes walking through the Palmer House from Wabash and State Street. And that's where I got into it at. I was going through there one day and the man told me, said, "If I catch you in here again, I'm gonna--," and I knocked him down and stomped him. I caught him by the, I hit him one of them hard rights, 'cause I could box. I was pretty good, pretty good in the dukes. And I let him have one, and down he went. And I put my, buried my feet right in his belly. "I helped to build this damn joint. Don't you tell me where I can't walk." So they sent the guards and told the guard to, I said, "Look, I helped to build this place, and don't you or no damn body else tell me where I can't walk or can't do. I don't give a damn about the mayor and no damn body else. I helped to build it, dammit, to hell, and I'm a walk in it when I get ready." They took me to jail, but they turned me a loose right away. Potter Palmer was running it for his daddy, and he told him, "Leave him alone, let that man alone, leave him alone. He did work here. He helped, worked here and helped build the place. You don't mess with him." Well, anyway, they wouldn't let these two, the politicians go up on (unclear) to [Mayor William Hale] Thompson. Thompson was having a meeting up there. Oscar DePriest and Louis B. Anderson-- Speaker 2: So, this is Thompson, the mayor. Speaker 1: Yeah, Thompson had got the mayor back. Speaker 2: He (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, he went back in in '27 [1927]. Oscar DePriest, Louis B. Anderson, Bob Jackson [Robert R. Jackson] and somebody, one or two, three others, big Negroes in there, Dan Jackson, I think. He wasn't an officer, but he was a Negro who had some money. They went, they was gonna meet up there. So the bell captain said something to Oscar DePriest and Oscar DePriest knocked him down and kicked him, stomped him. They called the police. Oscar DePriest said, "Well, you gonna take anybody to jail, you take me to jail, but you gonna catch hell when you do. You put them handcuffs on me, we gonna be--we gonna do some fighting in here. And you ain't the only son of a bitch got a gun. What the hell you think I carry this one for? For just some son of a bitch like you. Take your hands off me before I blow your damn brains out." Well, they got to arguing, and somebody got the news upstairs. Thompson come down and got, said, "Turn them men a loose. Leave 'em alone. I've been waiting on these fellows a hour, and you got 'em down here," said, "what the hells the matter with y'all?" That broke up all of that mess. You could ride the front elevators after that day. The next day, you could ride 'em. White folks quit they jobs 'cause Negroes riding the elevators. They want you to ride the freight elevator. I don't care who sent you here, the florist or whatever shop, whatever, you got to ride that back elevator. You see, you had all of these kind of things happening and folks didn't put too much attention on it because the man didn't want you to know that he was that rotten. They still didn't want you to go, through--especially, no Negro, they didn't want no Negro walking in there, through to go from State Street to Wabash through there, looking at all that stuff they got in there, didn't want you in there. What you looking for? You ain't gonna buy nothing. Well, most wasn't gonna buy too much, 'cause they didn't have nothing (laughter). Palmer wasn't paying that much for you to buy anything. Mostly, before the unions got going, Palmer House didn't even have a union. You worked on tips, little fifty dollar a month salary they give you wasn't nothing, worse than the Pullman. So, you see, you made progress slow, and you only made progress where you began to stretch out and fight. If you fight, don't demand nothing, you don't get nothing. And that's the way it was through all of Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 79103 Speaker 1: Now, were you ever a member of any of the Civil Rights organizations and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was member of the, what, I was--they called me a "red". I was a member of the Communist Party. Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did that start? How did you get involved with the Communist Party? Speaker 2: Well, because I was a activist. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, but what happened? I mean who--you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Nothing, (unclear) they were out there in park. Speaker 1: Okay. Was this when you were young or-- Speaker 2: No, I was a grown man. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: During the days of the Depression, I joined--I joined it before World War II. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We all out of work, joined it about end of the '20s [1920s], the latter part of the '20s. But we wasn't too much active right then. We got active as the things went on. We got organized. It's takes a little organization, and somebody gotta lead you. So we got a real good leader named Bob Ware. And-- Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name? Speaker 2: W-A-R-E. Speaker 1: That's, (unclear), okay. Speaker 2: Ware, Bob Ware. And we got, we started to getting along with--you had all kind of people coming in that--Christian churches, especially our black churches come out and tell us we ought not do this and we ought not do that, and we ought not do this, but they wasn't helping nobody, didn't help nobody. I told one of the preachers, I said, Reverend, I said, all the people out here got, you got--you sitting on your behind, waiting for them to bring you some money so you can eat. And if they stop bringing you some money, you ain't gonna have nothing to eat, ain't gonna have nowhere to live. They gotta go and take all these insults and things and all these things from white folks, wherever they work. And back in them days, you had some awful, mean, hateful white folks, 'cause a lot of 'em from down South. They had migrated here, and them Europeans didn't like one another so, you know they didn't like you. And this is what we had to learn. We thought that folks just hated us. They hated each other. They hate each other like, like dogs. I'll never forget. I worked with a Swede and Irishman when I was in the ice business. I worked with a Swede and Irishmen (unclear), I worked with a Swede and Irishman. Every time that Irishman get drunk, he wanna whup that big Swede, but he couldn't whup him, but he wanted to whup him, you know. So finally, he caught him drunk one day and beat him up pretty good. But they didn't like one another. I don't know why. But (unclear) I think because somebody told them, you know, the ethnic stuff, that you're better than him or whatever the case may be. You ain't made out of what he's made out of and the good Lord didn't make you like he made him and all that ole kind of stuff, trying to put men against each other. And they still doing that all kind of ways now. They did that then, they're doing it now. They're still--the devil got many ways to come in front of you and front you. But you don't have but one or two things, well, about three things if you can get to tell him, you'll run him away. He'll flee you. But gotta find 'em. Just like I told a lady yesterday, I said, the word of God is in the bible, but it ain't the only thing in there. Mankind wrote the bible, so mankind got to have something to do with it. And if you think God told that man to put something in there, you a fool 'cause God ain't told him to put nothing in there. I said, but you'll find the word of God in there because you can't write it without writing something about Him. I said, and--she said, well, how will I find it? I said, well, it's line upon line, word upon word, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little. That's where you'll find it. And I said, what you got to do is learn to practice it, not teach your children by precepts only. But you got a bigger action. You got to be doing what's right, saying what's right in front of 'em, not just tell him to go to church or something and learn all that. You gotta practice that stuff at home. These folks practice their hatred at home. Story_ID: 79104 Speaker 1: I told these folks when [Mayor] Harold Washington won the election, I said, Harold fixing to hurt his self. Instead of going on to his office, he went to a party, having a great big party. These other guys went to the office and they got (unclear) coat on him. And so they organized. [Edward] Vrdolyak and [Edward M.] Burke and them, they got the organization and they built the organization against him, right there and then instead of him being in the office. That's the biggest mistake he ever made in his life. He should a went right on, when they declared him mayor, or go right on when they ended up, head, you head for your office downtown. Get in your office, so you'll be in on the meeting whenever they meet. They can't take your office over if you in it. See, so this is one of the things that people beat you to the draw when they got things at a disadvantage for you at the start. You're disadvantaged at the word, say "go". Just like you got two strikes on you at the word, say "go", now. You got two and a half now, got another half was added to it since the Republicans got in. And this is where we at today. We're at a disadvantage, but I lived a long time in the City of Chicago [Illinois], all my life. And I wouldn't wanna live nowhere else. Now, you can go wherever you wanna. Story_ID: 79105 Speaker 1: I lived in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. And I never had no whole lot of trouble. And I lived good. I hollered loud, squawked loud and cussed loud and do everything else. When they got ready to build the South Center, I stood out in that mud hole out there and cussed everybody that come along. Speaker 2: This is, the what now? The South Center? What's that? Speaker 1: That's where the Regal was at one time, the Regal Theatre. That was in the South Center building. They got ready to build that because we couldn't be--the people who lived south of 47th Street had to come to 35th Street to go to the stores and things. They couldn't go to--half of the stores on 47th Street didn't wanna serve 'em, couldn't go to the restaurants and eat. You couldn't go to Walter Powers' restaurant. We had to throw bricks in the window to get there. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's a story too. Tell us about that story. What happened? Speaker 1: When Walter Powers had a restaurant at 35th Street on Michigan Avenue between--next to the Pickford Theater which was called, they called it the Joe Louis Theater later on. These girls, well, they all they know is Joe Louis. But it was the Pickford Theater, named after Mary Pickford and her brother. They had a restaurant at every "L" stop, 39th Street and Cottage Grove, 43rd Street, 47th Street, 51st Street and 61st Street, at all "L" stops. Now, what made 'em throw the bricks in this one down here, we didn't have to do nothing at 43rd Street. They opened that up for us. Forty-Seventh Street, we had a little fight, not too much. It got opened 'cause Negroes was at 47th Street, opening up pretty wide, and they got things pretty good. Had a little mess at 51st, not too much. But you had to fight. If you don't say nothing, you don't get nothing. We didn't have the right to assemble--and this is what they held on us because we were meeting, and if three or four of you get together somewhere, the police wondering what you--what are y'all talking about? What you doing standing up here? I liked to got fired off my job before I retired. One of the superintendents came in, and we--I was standing up on the platform talking to two or three of the men. And they were, they couldn't hear what we were saying. So he come out, "What are you fellas talking about?" I said, well, that's, that's, that ain't none of your business. What do you mean it ain't none of our business? It means what I said. What the hell you think I mean? I said it, didn't I? It ain't none of your damn business. So he gets mad now. I knocked him, I hit him with them ice hooks and knocked him down. So he went to the boss, big boss. The big boss said, well, didn't he tell you it wasn't none of your business? Why didn't you leave him alone? Leave Gaten alone and don't go in there bothering him. Leave him alone 'cause he runs the plant, which I did. Gaten runs the plant. He know, he helped to build that plant, so he's the only man that actually knows where everything is without reading the blueprint. He can go put his finger on everything in there you need to know about the plant, which I could, which I did. Speaker 2: So you did, you were, all along, from the time you were a teenager, you worked at, on contracted jobs too as well as-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, wherever you could get one, you know. You know how them contractor jobs, you work here until that is out. When that's over, you go to the next one. Speaker 2: So you worked on the Palmer House. You worked on the ice plant, other jobs, I guess, around town? Speaker 1: See now, by the time the ice plant closed down, we built out Lincoln Ice Plant at Schubert and Halsted in '29 [1929]. Everything was dead. And lucky, I was lucky to get a contracting job. And when I got the contracting job, we was just about ready to finish up. So I went through the office, and I said, well, well, sir, I would like to come in here and get a job when you get this thing fixed up. He said, you kidding? I said, no. He said come back through here when you--I did. I went out to the garage where I was going and come on back. He said, you interested in getting a job here? I said, yes, sir. He said, what is your name? I said, Gaten. He said, we like the way you work. We all been noticing you. We like your work, we like the way you work. Come back through here Tuesday morning. Said, all right; come back Tuesday morning. He said, we gone get some machines in here, and the engineer need some help. So you gone be the engineer's chief helper. Story_ID: 79225 Speaker 1: Do you remember where you left off? We were talking about-- Speaker 2: Talking about Marcus Garvey, wasn't we? Speaker 1: No, we had gone past that. We were-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Couldn't get a contract on the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, contracts, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, well, I--I got ready to get this job, working the contract, and I went in the office [at Lincoln Ice Plant] and told the man I'd like to get a job. He said, we like your work, come on by here Tuesday morning. So I went on there Tuesday morning, and they hired me. So worked right, (unclear) working and clean up around here and fix this up, said, well, I'd like for you to fill this tank up full of water so we use the water till we get everything put in. I said, all right. And I said, I'll put it up today, and let it out day after tomorrow, put it up again, and let it out before the weekend. And put it up again for the weekend. He said, that's good. So anyway, I got to help--Olie (ph.) was the machinist. He was a Sweden. He was an engineer. So he told me, says you gonna work with me? I says, right, I'm gonna, I'll be your helper. He said, all right. So he's giving me all the tools that he thinks I would need and all that stuff. So they brought, rent the machinery and they brought in the big, heavy machines. We got 'em put out, taken down to the ground, you know. We had the hole, you got to drill the holes, put 'em in, put the stacks in, got all that done. He told me, he said, I'm gonna teach you all I know about engineering. You won't need to worry about no permit. You can get one for nothing when I get through with you. I said, all right. So I listened to him. He told the boss, he's a good worker. The boss said, Olie say you a good worker. I said, well, I hope so. I learned how to work long as he (unclear). So he told me, said, now, I like for my machines to be clean all the time. So he told me how to get the oil and the ammonia and mix them together and take the rag and go over the machines all the time. They'll stay clean. The next three or four days, you just dust 'em off. That's all you gotta do, and they shine just as pretty. And he liked his machines to be shining, pretty and clean. So I got the job. When he left, that was my job, running the plant. And I learned how to run it and learned it from him. I ain't had to go to school (unclear) day. I got it from the horse's mouth by training, and working right with him, and know just what to do, know how to put the ammonia in and everything, how to take it out. That's my job. But I wanted to know why. See, that's the way you learn. Why do you do this or why do you do that? Why do you do this? How come this? He'd tell you. Story_ID: 79226 Speaker 1: Well, what is it--I don't know if I should ask you about the process of making ice? You use ammonia, huh, to make-- Speaker 2: You use a tank of ammonia. Now, that ammonia goes through your compressors, and you know, the compressor is built just enough to let stuff, to come--steam to come through. They go through hot, them compressors, and they go through real hot. Then it goes and freezes the ice into the ice house. That, that stuff--all that stuff becomes ice, and it's frozen into the ice house. After you get it all frozen, you got a little machine. You cut this off and you put this, took this machine, about a 15 ton machine, you put it on the thing to the ice house and it keep the ice house cool so it don't melt down. Now, there comes a time, you got--I know you've been to, saw a ice house. You go look or go look and see them, snow covered them pipes all over. You go there and look, by looking you see snow all on all them pipes, running through the ice house. We found a way you would have to knock them off every once and a while. They can get too heavy. You'd have to defrost. You turn all that off, and that ammonia condense back--that ice will con--that ice, that frozen stuff condense back into ammonia, go back into the tank where it came out of. You use that until it evaporates completely away, you know what I mean? Eventually, it would--you're gone lose it by evaporation. Every time it go down, go up and go down, it comes back, you lose maybe three or four pounds or 10 pounds of it, whatever the case may be. Do that, you defrost, clean them pipes off, and you start back up, turn your pipes on and you got your tank about half full of ammonia. You wanna keep it that way. Pretty soon, them big machines, you put them on, and them big rascals, and they're pumping, ain't gonna be long before you got, before you got ice in your--all over your place. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And after you make it, when you take this off and turn these machines around, they will--you got one machine will defrost the whole thing. You don't have to use all the machines for defrosting, just one machine, a 20-ton machine will defrost that all down. Now, after you do that, they found a way to not use the ammonia in that light. We gonnna cut the--we gonna use the ice. We gone freeze the ice house by electric. If, you know, everything gone be done by electricity. You got your fans and your machines to make the ice right away, quick; not like we gonna use, using the steam and that kind of stuff no more. You're making the ice quick, and it freezes everything, and everything is clear. You don't have the pipes full of snow no more. But it's cold as hell in there. You got, say where you had down to zero, you got 15 and 20 [degrees] below all through there. And it's dry. You don't see no water on the floor nowhere. Everything is dry. And then they make the ice faster. They make it a little different. That's when you see a, when you see a cube of ice with a hole in it, like you see, like you get your, buy them bags of cubes, you see them holes in there? That ice is, has been set on a pipe. Then that hot pipe cuts them holes and go down just like that, they cut down, cut 'em, cut-- Story_ID: 79227 Speaker 1: Now I wanna get away from the ice for a minute and get back to the community--the neighborhood and--now, you say you joined the Communist party and when did you join the Communist Party and-- Speaker 2: About in, about in, '27 [1927] or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, and we were talking during the break that you met Paul Robeson at one point, and can you-- Speaker 2: Well, we--we used to have our meetings in the park. So we had been getting Paul Robeson to speak for us and sing. So he had had this falling out with the President, you know, for what [President Harry S.] Truman did, he didn't back that. And so we was gonna have him to speak at Tabernacle Baptist Church, where the preacher ain't been too long died. He died now, not too long ago at 42nd and Indiana. But the bank, Continental Bank told the (unclear)--I forget what his name now, came from down there in Mississippi, I forget his name. What's that boy that sing, sing with, with a school thing, the college? He was on last night, can't think of his name. He raised that boy. Speaker 1: Oh, Lou Rawls. Speaker 2: Lou Rawls, Reverend Rawls was the pastor of that church I'm talking about. And they told us, or told him, the Continental Bank told him, you let that nigger come in here and sing anything, we'll foreclose your mortgage, so we got the [Chicago] Coliseum. So the Bishop went to Daley, old man Daley [Mayor Richard J. Daley], told him, say, well, you know what to do. Well, we got a easy job. Just send some man up the back there and pull them things out of the transformers, pull the plug--pull the switch off on the transformer so we wouldn't have no lights in the Coliseum. So we couldn't have nothing. Then we went to Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois], went around and told all the police in Washington Park--Donahue (ph.) was the man in Washington Park at that time, Captain Donahue. He said, you done told the police what to do over the crime, say you can't have no loud speakers, you know. So nobody won't hear him, can't have no loud speakers, nobody gonna hear Paul Robeson. So I didn't get Paul Robeson. I got, what this girl just--the man just died? Girls, what that guy's name just died, the opera singer? Speaker 1: William Warfield [HM]? Speaker 2: Warfield, we got Warfield. Warfield came and sang for us. Paul Robeson came the next day. We got him out there. He could talk a little bit, but he wouldn't sing, wasn't--didn't, couldn't do too much talking or nothing and wanted to do that. Now, this is because the man spoke to Truman and told him, say, you send troops 15,000 miles this way and 10,000 miles that way to go over there and stop them people from doing whatever they were doing. You couldn't send two men, two of your men down in Georgia to stop from lynching that lady and her three sons down in Monroe, Georgia. So, he snatched the boy's, everything off of him, took all, took the passport away, took everything away from him (unclear). And that's what brought that down. And it's just, and we got harder and harder against 'em then than ever. We actually got--after we begin to get organized, we got a law passed, just before we got organized. We got, got--one of our senators, Senator Paul Douglas and his wife [Emily Taft Douglas]--they were teachers at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], to get the law, help it to get on the books, get the right to assemble. That's a right we didn't have, nobody. Policemen catch you, three or four of you together, they wanna know what the hell you talking about. Story_ID: 79228 Speaker 1: Was there a lot of, a high-level police brutality in those days or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, quite a bit, not as much as it was back in those days. Back in these days, you see. See, you got a whole lot of this stuff brought on by the guys themselves now. And after these guys brought some of this stuff on by their selves because they thought they had a right to speak when they didn't. See, you don't call somebody puppies and dogs and horses and all that other kind of stuff just because you got a right to speak out. That's why I told--my wife sitting right back there, when that boy--when that, burnt that boy up and killed them boys over there on the North, on the West Side, Clark--what's that boy's, them boys' name they kills, Clark and that other one? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they killed them two boys-- Speaker 1: The one over in the Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah, they killed Clark. [Mark Clark and Fred Hampton] I told my wife, I said, he's on--the police got him marked now. He done upstaged them on TV calling 'em pigs and so forth and so forth. He's half drunk, full of that stuff. Speaker 1: I know who you're talking about. It's not Clark. It's-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Mark Clark. Speaker 1: Oh, you're talking about Mark Clark. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's who it was, Mark Clark. Speaker 1: Fred Hampton, Fred Hampton and Mark Clark. Speaker 2: Fred Hampton and Mark Clark, that's right. Mark Clark was the one doing all the talking. He's the one doing all the cussing and talking. And so two weeks later they found them boys and went in there on him, shot 'em. They knew just when to get 'em. They had--see, now, see one of the things you couldn't hardly tell a Negro--he was so dumb and stupid, they would have people out there with walkie-talkies, listening to you all out there in the park, all around you. (Unclear) tell me what you got--Harper, was one of our presidents of our club out there. Me and him went to the North Side, over there, I forget where we went, somewhere over there on Larrabee, Larrabee Hall on the North Side. And that hall, called Larrabee Hall over there. We went there, and I told him, he was talking about the Chinamen and the Japs and all that. I said, you gon' keep on and--he was on pension from the Post Office--you gon' keep on and gonna lose your job. I done told you to stop talking about that mess on your job. You're hurting yourself. They took his pension away, done everything. When he got his pension, you know, it was just about time for him to die, took everything. He had a little bookstore on 35th and Indiana, took everything away from him, took him--it was about seven or eight years. And it don't be for--these fellows--I forget the name now. They worked at the Post Office, and they were pretty good activists. They got, got it back for him with a couple of good lawyers. But he didn't live too long. So you see you can't fight the other man with your arrogance. You got to wait a little while. I told my wife, I said, now, they marked. You don't upstage the police. You gotta take it easy. You don't upstage 'em. So, just like Fluky (ph.), got to acting a fool, and got on the air telling folks what he was thinking, the police wasn't no damn good and so and so (unclear). I said, he'll get it. He showed off out there and don't know how to talk out there, during, (unclear) when his son was in the casket. I said, but he'll get it sooner or later because all these people out here with these walkie talkies and listening to him, they gon' carry all this stuff back. And they gon' and they gon' add something to it. There's always a little more carried back than you put in it, than what you said and what you didn't say, what you should have said, all that kind of stuff. All of it's in there. And they gon' big on what you did say, not what you should have said. They going big on what you did say. And sometimes they gon' leave out what they thought you should have said, leave all that out. Story_ID: 79229 Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell me, what was Paul Robeson like? Did you get a chance to meet him? Speaker 2: Paul Robeson was a big, great, big tall guy. He was a big, nice fellow. He had a big smile on his face, always talking to you. I was talking about football, you know, 'cause he was one of the big ends. You know, back in them days, you had left end and right end and all that. But y'all call 'em something else now. Speaker 1: The tight end and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And all that-- Speaker 1: --wide receiver. Speaker 2: Yeah, all that kind of stuff, yeah. We had a left end and a right end and all that kind of stuff. And Paul was a good football player. Oh, yes, it's something I was intending to tell you I saw. I forget what it was now. But anyway, these are the things that comes up, and nobody ever says anything about it. We had all kind of heroes. If I could sit down here and name the men I know who are heroes, I'd be talking from now on. Speaker 1: Who were some of those (laughter)? We can't go long, but who--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, well, you can start with Nat Turner, then Mark Greeson (ph.). Speaker 1: You're going all the way back to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and come on up with, well-- Speaker 1: What about Chicago [Illinois]? What about-- Speaker 2: Well, Chicago, you had Mosley, [William Robert] Ming. What's my, my uncle up in--oh, you had two Negroes here. One was a pimp. His name was Sug Burrows. During the riot, the white folks would throw rocks at the Negroes going to those jobs over there in stockyards. Speaker 1: This was in 1919, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, even before that, even after that. They're throwing rocks at Negroes. They let Sug Burrow ride one and what's the other one? I done forgot. I forget his name. Anyway, he'd ride the next bus over. They didn't bother them Negroes when they know these two or three Negroes was gon' be on there, ride them buses. You had to get somebody, say ole crazy nigger, you know what I mean. That's what they called him, crazy nigger ride the bus. They won't bother him. Say, but nice, soft-talking man, they'd run him off that bus. But they know if they get foolish with Sug Burrow, some of 'em gon' get killed 'cause he sure gon' shoot somebody. I told a guy, yeah, if I was on there, hell, yeah, I'm gon' shoot somebody. What you think, I'm gon'--got a pistol and ain't gon' use it? Speaker 1: Now, in those days, could you just carry a pistol around with you? Speaker 2: Yeah, most of 'em, a lot of 'em carried a pistol, if you wanted-- Speaker 1: It wasn't illegal then? Speaker 2: No, yeah, it was illegal. Speaker 1: It was then, okay. But it didn't make any difference. Speaker 2: No, some of these guys carried pistols wherever they went, all at--some of 'em had two, one under here and one in the back, every time you seen him. This guy called St. Louis Kelly--you know, remember him. He carried a pistol, carried two pistols with him everywhere he went, all the time. He didn't care who he met. And Two-Gun Pete and them didn't bother him. Story_ID: 79230 Speaker 1: Now, Two-Gun Pete, now tell us about him. Speaker 2: Well, his name was Sylvester Washington. He was a nice guy, till the Club DeLisa fellows got him a permit to carry the pistol. And he thought they gave him all the rights to use it. And he carried the pistol, so they--whiskey just come back, hadn't got back. But [Mayor William Hale] Thompson was in as the mayor, and the Negroes thought when Thompson got back in, they could just do anything they wanted to do 'cause they heard all them lies about what Big Bill [William Hale "Big Bill" Thompson], you could do this under Big Bill, you could do that under Big Bill that you couldn't do under Diver [Mayor William Emmett Devers] and Cermak [Mayor Anton Cermak], you know. And so they did open up things, didn't have no--opened up what they called sporting clubs and all that kind of stuff. You knew what they got in there, everything you ain't supposed to have in there. Whiskey hadn't got back, so you got a joint. You're running with a halfway whorehouse and whiskey house and everything else. And you gon' get mad 'cause the police come in and break it down? You crazy. You ain't supposed to open it up. You ain't got no license to run nothing. Whiskey ain't back yet. Yet, you don't think you've done anything wrong. That's because you don't know the law. You do everything, you're ignorant. You don't want--see, just like going to buy a house. Story_ID: 79231 Speaker 1: I told my niece, you gon' buy a house, get you a lawyer first. Don't go out there buying no house by yourself. Get you a lawyer, whatever you do. Go look at the place first, look it over, take him with you when you get a--look it over. Get you a bank to go out and see what they, the okay with the loan folks. See if the place is good enough. The loan people gon' come out and see is this place good enough for you, for you to borrow any money on it. And even sometimes they may let you buy it if one of they buddies is selling it. You know what I mean, let you buy, and they know it ain't no good. You know what I'm talking about. You gotta know, you gotta know who you dealing with. They'll let you buy a dead chicken (laughter). Now, that's all right. Go head on and take it and the roof caving (laughter). You guy, everything fall out in the next two or three weeks (laughter). But you get your lawyer, get everything set, go get your--you get you somebody to go see about this house and everything before you put your money down. You get you somebody who you can trust to go and see if they can find anything wrong with it. Don't go out there trying to buy this house by yourself. You don't know all the laws. You know, I never will forget, I went downtown--we'd just bought this, took this house over. I bought--I had that back porch put on here before I had it. My auntie was still living here. I had the back porch put on, and had them little--had one bathroom on the second floor. I had this thing put up on the first--third floor and one here 'cause she had to go up the stairs to go to the bathroom. And that was too much for her, and she was sick. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But I was living next door, and I had all that fixed for her. But anyway, when I finally took over, they sent me a whole lot of old silly letters. So I went down to see the inspector and agent, the inspector who, the head of inspectors who come out to see about the house and this, that and the other. So they told me, well, he won't be here today. And I'm talking to him. So one of the fellows already done told me that's him over there with that checkered coat on (laughter), sports coat on, just like he--I went over. He said, well, he won't be here today, and he won't be here till the day after tomorrow. So I backed off a little bit. I said, do you know one thing. Do you think I'm a damn fool or you crazy? What in the hell's wrong with you? He said did--I said, well, what you lying for? You're who I'm looking for. Ask that man. No, I don't need to ask nobody a damn thing. You lying son-of-a-bitch, you. I'm looking for you. And I hope you get mad about it. I ought to burn and set your ass on fire. He looked and he said, what? That's what I ought to do. I ought to kill you. You need to be killed. You ain't got no business being in here waiting on nobody. You tell that lie. People come looking for you. You say you ain't the man. You done sent your folks out here to tell me the house ain't no good and this and --this is wrong with it, and that's wrong with it. I know what's wrong with it. You don't have to tell me that. I'm living in it. I'm, at least I'm gon' live in it. I'm moving in it. I know what's wrong with it. Anyway, you see, then finally we got calmed down. My wife got scared, and she just know they was gon' put me in jail (laughter). And she said, you gon' get sent to the penitentiary yet. They gon' put your behind in jail, cussing and talking. I said, well, that's the way you gotta talk to them kind of people. See, you go up there talking that church stuff, them folks don't (laughter), they'll make a regular ass out of you (laughter). Well, the Lord's gonna do this (laughter). Nope, the Lord ain't gon' do that. You got to do this. You got to take care of this. The Lord's already done what he said he was gonna do, and give you sense enough to do a little something for yourself. But see, if you can't do it, find the folks who can do it for you. Get you a lawyer. That's what you got to do, and you can't do nothing without him, if you ain't one yourself. And if you one yourself, you may have to have a lawyer because a doctor sick, hell, he can't--he got to get a doctor just like you. That's funny, don't it, the doctor got to have a doctor to doctor on him when he's sick, just like you. Story_ID: 79232 Speaker 1: Mr. Gaten, now, you've seen this neighborhood change. Where we're sitting now, you were delivering ice as a teenager when it was all white? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: And you've seen it change from predominantly African American community and now it seems like it's changing back again. Speaker 2: Yep, it's changing back again. Well, now this change here, let me tell you this. I went down to the "Tribune" office ["Chicago Tribune"] on Michigan Avenue--this is back in the early '40's [1940s]. It must have been about '43' [1943] or '44' [1944]. Me and my wife had just got--we got married in '44' [1944], me and that girl up there. And we had been shacking for a couple--we had, but we got married in '44' [1944]. And I was off on a Monday. So I said, I believe I'll go--I'm gon' go downtown and walk around. She said, what you going downtown? You wanna go with me? She said, naw, I ain't going down there. I said, well, I'm going, I'm going down there--I'm going over to the "Tribune" building. Where you going? See, I used go up there and look. I went in the "Tribune" lobby. Just by chance, they got a map in there, telling you when, how they gon' take over the South side back to where it was, showing the map of all the, 1920, how it was and everything else. They gon' the subway--this is during the, just before they got the subway built. They gon' run the subway under State Street, all the way to 95th Street instead of going up on the "L". Well, they ran out of money. So they couldn't do what they said they was gonna do. They was take all this back. So that's why I tell 'em, all this is planned. And I told my wife, I said, she--I said, well, oh, you just--you didn't read that right. I said, the hell I didn't read it right. So when they built Sear Tower, they put the same thing in Sears Tower, only bigger. So I took her down there, I said, come on with me. On the first floor of the Sears Tower on the Southwest side, see, that I told you this is the map that O'Connor and them put and made this, and put it in the "Tribune" for the other big contractors and dealers, that they got to get the Southside back. The lakefront is what they want. They make you believe that's all they want is just the lakefront. But you know what goes with the lakefront, everything behind it. So, they say--so I said, now, if you don't think--people, business folks don't do like we do. They make plans to do something in the long run. They say, this is what we gon' do, and what--the way we gon' do it, then we'll see what is the aftermath, what will come of it. I said, and you see what they're doing to us now. They're buying everything you got, taking it away from you, buying all your stuff up. All that they ain't buying, they're foreclosing on you, taking it. They're closing all the places down where you work, getting you out of all them good jobs, state jobs downtown and everywhere else, getting you out of them jobs. Story_ID: 79141 Speaker 1: Well, my hope is that some day or somehow, rather, I don't know how it will happen, things will come back to the glory years that she's talking about, when we did have all our own things. And this didn't just happen when Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] came in. We had our cabarets long before Bronzeville came in. The Eli (ph.) Number 1 and Number 2, Dreamland [Ballroom] was the best ballroom we ever had in our lives at 35th and--3531 State Street. Our bands came. We didn't have to go nowhere to hear nothing. We had all the music we needed, blues players. We had the Lincoln Ballroom down at 31st Street, where you could do anything you wanna. You could dance. We enjoyed ourselves because we were by ourselves and nobody trying to tell us what to do. So we learned how to do what with what we had. See, what the old phrase say, "You got to use what you got". So we had to use what we had. And we did that, and then the--in the mornings, Monday morning, even when Club DeLisa opened up, Monday mornings, after the show was over, who you thought come out for breakfast? All the actors downtown. What his name, John Barrymore and all the whole bunch, all of 'em come out to the Club DeLisa. Well, before we had Club DeLisa, they all come out to the Dreamland, all come out to the Sunset, around there where the hardware, where you just come from, the hardware? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: That was the Sunset. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's where Cab Calloway learned how to dance, right there. He lived at--his--Blanche--his sister lived down at 38th and Calumet, and he lived with his sister. He worked down to Tip Top Inn. Earl Hines and the whole--Harold Porter and Hines, [Louis] Armstrong and them, the band at the Sunset, this boy's sister--I forget what her name was, Calloway's--what was his sister's name, Blanche, she would choreography for Armstrong and that bunch. Now, I hope that someday--not only that, we had our grocery stores too, you know. We had, we had a, four good tailor shops. Nobody couldn't beat these Negroes making clothes, the Star Tailors, the Monarchs and the boys that worked for Eli. They know how to make clothes. They could make any kind of suit you want, whatever you wanted. We had our grocery stores, our tailor shops, whatever we--and we had carpenters and bricklayers and contractors to do anything we want done. You got that did for you. Now, what happened is that, somebody--I don't know how they got it, these young folks who went to school two or three day, not knowing what school really is, what school is for, they thought, especially, the black man is the cause of this now. The women wasn't the cause of this. They got in on it, but they wasn't the cause of it. This was the black man's doing, integration. He wanted to get next, sit down beside some of them white women because he had--that was his forbidden fruit. The man would hang him even if he didn't rape her. He'd go rape her, black (unclear) and go rape the woman and say the Negro did it. That's the way most of 'em got hung. He didn't even get to the woman. These are things that was forbidden fruit. So this made this man--it's just like you. Your mama tell you to leave that alone, boy, don't bother that. Soon as she turn her back, that's the first thing you gon' bother. So, you see, and this is way it was. But we did have a good time. When we got our Regal Theatre built, for us, we didn't have to go two miles. They built some stores around there. I told the man, I told the man in the parking lot before they got the Regal built, I said, if you don't hire no blacks in there, we gon' burn the son-of-bitch down. And I wasn't joking. We was gonna set it afire and burn it up. Story_ID: 79142 Speaker 1: Now, that raises a question too about ownership. Did we really own, did black men own the-- Speaker 2: Well, you did own some of your property and some of your stores and things. But you see when the man make it hard for you, you see, they make it hard for you to--when you can't do business for yourself. The banks and the black businessmen never got together on nothing. You see, you understand what I mean? The black banks, and we were running the black banks, and the black owners never got together on nothing. Speaker 1: Now, who were the--do you remember the early black banks? Speaker 2: The early black bank was Binga and Overton. Speaker 1: Binga--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Binga and Overton was the first one. Then Binga. Speaker 1: And Overton, yeah, and Jesse Binga. Speaker 2: And Jesse Binga (ph.) was an arrogant fellow. Nobody liked him. And that made it bad. And you didn't--you really didn't have no good Negro bankers after you left Dr.--Mr. Overton. And Mr. Overton couldn't do it by his self because, see, the people who furnished the money for you to open up and operate, and you ain't got nothing, they wouldn't furnish you no money, if you couldn't open up. So the best thing you could do, you gotta do, you got to give the man half of your stuff in order to do you a favor. You got all these kind of problems that come in because you never did stick together on nothing. You never did--whatever, you see, the main thing, they didn't organize. And you couldn't get our folks to understand that part. Every guy was trying to do what they could by himself, for himself. And he didn't know what organization was. I told the man, look, after the Depression, the steel mills organized together to hold--this is why they even holding up this long. The, this would never happen if we were organized together so we--you got one another to lean on. You go down, we help you. We went down the first because we was (unclear) "Every man for himself and the good Lord for us all." Now, comes the Depression. We wanna get into schools where we ain't allowed to here and ain't allowed to go here. We don't wanna go to no black colleges. I got a scholarship for $14,000 for my niece, down by Silas Purnell, right down there, 29th Street, for IT and T. Well, she wants to go--she don't wanna go to no--well, we go to--she don't wanna go. We got plenty blacks--you don't wanna go to no black school. She wanna go, she want to go (unclear) and pay the rest off. All right, go ahead. Now, she been running from school to school. I said, you could have been out of school with your profession, whatever you wanted and gone on about your business. Now, you're running from pillar to post. See, this is the point. Our churches and our organizations never taught us that we had to organize. We tried to teach, but we didn't have no degrees. And Negroes, especially Negroes that got these big heads, he don't think you got no sense if you ain't got a degree. So I've been--you know, what I tell 'em, is look, the man downtown don't give a damn about your degree. Your face is black. And as long as you black, that damn degree don't mean shit. You can take it and wipe your behind, but it don't mean nothing, long as you stay black. And he got the power. He got the money, and you got the degree. You keep that damn piece of paper. He got the money. He ain't gon' loan you nothing on no damn degree. He buy all your property, steal all your property, buy it from you for nothing, and you gon' depend on a damn degree. You're crazy? You can't buy nothing with that--you can't go to the damn grocery store and get nothing on no damn degree. You gotta have some green money. You can't tell the man, I've been to school here and been to school here, and I've been out and got a degree, and I got one over here and one over--get all of 'em together. See what you gon' get on 'em. Nothing. Story_ID: 79143 Speaker 1: Now, what about the political power of the black community? Speaker 2: It's gone dead. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You ain't got too much in it because we--I keep telling you. We disorganized. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Can you say that with, you know, so he knows--he says the subject, the political power's gone dead. Speaker 2: The political power subject is that we're disorganized. As a group for ourselves, we are totally disorganized. Well, Jesse Jackson [Rev. Jesse L. Jackson, HM] don't speak for me. Dorothy Tillman [HM] don't speak for me. So and so don't speak for me, Jesse Jackson, Jr. [HM] ain't got nothing to say for me. I don't believe nothing he say. Well, what the hell is the good for you to have some political people, if they can't say something for you? Well, you can't get organized. The churches are disorganized. They don't like one another. This church here trying to outdo this one over here. They done bought--well, what they bringing into the church now is all the poor entertainers who can't find a job. We got a guy play the piano just like the honky--he play the honky tonk. (Unclear) he's playing gospel songs, play anything, sound just like boogie woogie. And he playing in the church 'cause he ain't got nowhere else to go. Now, them--I said, you-- Speaker 1: Not because of his religious convictions or anything? Speaker 2: Hel no, religious conviction. He got to eat (laughter). Damn convictions (laughter). When you got to, when you got to live, need more, forces you to do something that you thought you would never do. Speaker 1: Now, tell me the political strength of the black community, was it ever any better--I mean I guess prior to [Mayor] Harold Washington getting elected, was it ever any better? Speaker 2: Yes, it was much better and stronger leading up to Harold Washington. See, but the folks got--see, the people got mixed--see, Harold Washington was a, almost a total leadership by himself, the way he handled himself. And he built him a coalition. He built him a coalition by having all the good friends he had and knowing how to talk and smart and everything else, and not arrogant, not--he didn't go in there with a bullhead, you know. He knew who--the kind of people to pick. But you see, our big leadership years ago was men who knew more than we did, about everything, and you didn't have a chance to say nothing. See, that's why I, I told the man, said, I wouldn't join your party. I wouldn't give a damn what you did, and what you said. What do you mean? I said, 'cause you ain't got no damn sense. Now, you one of the biggest damn fools I ever seen in my life. Story_ID: 79144 Speaker 1: I'm a country boy. I came out of--my folks came out of the country. But we did own something. We did have something. I bought four buildings with nothing, sold them and got rich off 'em, and bought and drank 'em up. Speaker 2: Drank up the money (laughter)? Speaker 1: Well, had a good time. What the hell (laughter). I had a good time, yes, sir. I enjoyed myself. I worked hard and had a good time. That's better than not having a good time. It's better than letting some other son-of-a-bitch drink up your money. The preacher is taking your money and go down to Florida with his wife and two women, other women, leave his wife and kids at home and then finally, he send them down and they all get to squabbling. I didn't have no wife at that time, so I could, you know, take anybody. I used to take, line up folks, and take 'em to the cabarets, night clubs. I, because I had plenty money, spend it, wasting it up. I had plenty--when I was working for Al Capone, I kept a pocket full of money all the time, $400 or $500 in my pocket and spend it any time I get ready, sometimes, $1,500, $1,600 in my pocket. I'd spend it, didn't make no difference to me. I'm gon' get some more in the morning. I come out the next day another pocket full of money. It was easy for me to get. And it's easy for me to throw away, when you get it that way, it's just that easy. But we just didn't build no power up because our political machine, the men--our three aldermen--we didn't have but three wards, second, third and the fifth. Speaker 2: And part of the fourth [ward]? Speaker 1: Fourth, part of the fourth, yeah, part of the fourth. Well, had part of the first, the backend of the first, we had that too. I said, now, they didn't want--they seemingly didn't like each other, you know, because this guy trying to outdo me, you know what I mean? They seemed to get that point of view on each other. And they kept them from doing anything. You know, I'll never forget. I was sitting back--let me tell you this before I close. I was sitting back there the day [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and them was coming to Chicago. [Kenneth] Campbell was our alderman, what is his name, used to be alderman of the sixth--Fifth Ward? He died. Campbell was our alderman. [Ralph] Metcalf, Campbell and this little--what that little guy we just, you just called the name a few minutes ago? [Mayor Richard J.] Daley's man, got on-- Speaker 2: Holman? Speaker 1: Holman. Speaker 2: Claude Holman. Speaker 1: Claude Holman, got on TV. And they were--Campbell was almost dead then. He was sick with cancer then. Got on TV on a Saturday morning. I was sitting back there. My TV's back in the dining room where I'm sleeping back there. My wife's in the kitchen. I said, come on here, baby. Listen, these niggers talking about "Dr. King don't need to come to Chicago [Illinois]. We run Chicago. We don't need him here." What the hell we want with him here. We don't need him here. We run Chicago. That's when Metcalf's son fell out with his daddy and told him, say you ain't fit to live. I'm gone disown you as my daddy. Don't you never call me your son no more. Metcalf got busy. He got busy then. And he sure built his self back up, didn't he? Got back in there fast. Daley got somebody to run against him in Congress, that old France, and he beat him like he was whupping a snake. So, you see, you got to some time or another, get organized and build a thorough organization and don't--but, you know, you can't be a good leader if you ain't a good follower. And our folks didn't never learn that. You got to be a good follower and a good leader. That don't mean you just gon' follow somebody just to be following 'em. You gotta also keep up with what--I learned this from being a union steward in the mill. I learned this at--during World War II, I worked in East Chicago [Illinois]. And I was a union steward. You never could get them guys, them, the blacks to understand their jobs, what they were doing. One of come to me--now, when you pouring furnace, you got to have somebody on overtime all the time. You got several furnaces to pour. We got to pour two furnaces tomorrow evening, and I need twelve men, six men for each furnace, one extra man. Each man I got, I need one extra man. Three men extra, to fell off somebody when they get too hot. So they say, well, mark me down. If you need, I, I need the money. Mark me down. I say, okay. Now, remember, when I call for you, working overtime, you, you know, you got to be here. Every time it's time for him to go, he, you know, I forgot that I can't be there. I should a told you. I'm got to go so and so. My wife is sick, and you all, some kind of big story. And this is how come--if you can't accept responsibility on nothing, small things, you won't be able to be--that's why our family--we ain't taught that family-wise. Story_ID: 79145 Speaker 1: Do you think it's because families are--so many families are broken up? Speaker 2: Yeah, because of--you see, you ain't taught that. The poor man never was taught that, white or black. And the white man always thought he was the boss, so he do whatever he wanna do. Negro man follow suit. I'm the boss here. I never will forget. My own, my auntie's husband, when they named--the name I call Gaten, that's my name. Uncle Nat came in and spoke to my auntie and told her, said, you shut up. I'm the god that rule this kingdom, and slapped her upside the head. She ironing, and that show you how big a damn fool he was. She was ironing with a iron, ironing clothes. She stuck that iron right here [pointing to right side of face]. He left there running, and you know what else he (unclear) (laughter). Yes, sir, took a hot iron to him. He never did come back no more 'cause every time that he come back, she told him, got this same iron. Get the hell outta here and stay out. So, you see, we never, we never was taught to--any, well, the man didn't allow. He didn't teach us responsibility. Our folks was turn out--slavery was no kind of, learning no kind of nothing, how to do anything. Just a few of us learned a few things. So we doing pretty good to be, to be in the shape we was in when they turned us a loose. Story_ID: 79146 Speaker 1: Sir, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Well, they got to organize some kind of way. There ain't no hopes. This man done taken every--pulling the rug out from under all of us. You take all the jobs away, what the hell else you got? You done sold out, you done sold everything you got to him. All your hairdressers and stuff going to him. The undertakers going to him, graveyards is going to him. All your little businesses is going to him. Now, he gonna open up a barbershop for the Negro men so there won't be a Negro barber in town. All of 'em go to that mub (unclear) shop, let the white folks cut their hair. We think that'll be a big deal. Man, I let a white barber--he thinks that's a big--(laughter). He thinks that's a big deal (laughter). Like a guy told me, he told, say, man, I got a--I said, look, white girls out there where I go to my rehab, they take care of me. They wash me, clean me, just like I'm a little baby, wash me and wash my feet and my toes, everything, fix my hair, put my stockings on and everything. And they're white, young girls. Them colored girls, well, I ain't gon' fool--I ain't gon' be doing all that. There you go. See, so you see it's just having the knowledge of, knowing what your responsibility is and keep 'em. Do what you're supposed to do. This is why the--we have such a time in our churches. You got to commit yourself to whatever, whatever you're doing. If you got a wife and a family, commit yourself to taking care of your wife and your family. Your bible tells you, you are the head of family. It didn't tell you to boss though. Told you, you the head of your family. The first thing the Lord told Adam, nah, I didn't give the articles to your wife, I gave 'em to you. The article of God was given to you." You're supposed to teach your wife, not her teach you. But he didn't do it, so they say. I wasn't there. But that's what they say (laughter). And we've been, we've been going backwards ever since that happened. Mankind has always been--mankind always wanted to be the boss of something because he was strong. I think that's the main thing he thought. He was strong and bigger and stronger, usually bigger and stronger than his wife. And he thought he's supposed to rule her with an iron hand. Some of our women had to learn the hard way. They fix that dude up at night. He go to sleep, they put a spider in his dumpling. My auntie sewed one of my uncles up (laughter), one of them old homemade sheets, them cement bags to make the sheets out of, sewed him up in that, went out and knocked the ax, ax off the handle, come back there and beat that dude to death almost. And I was crying, Aunt Mary, don't whup him, don't whup Uncle Rodney no more. I was gon' get a quarter the next morning (laughter). Don't whup him no more Aunt Mary, don't whup. Go ahead, I'll whup him. He ain't gon' jump on me no more. He's begging, Mary, don't kill me, please don't kill me, Mary. She broke one leg and the one arm. So he was in a bad shape. These are the things we got to learn and we never seem to wanna learn because we think we are above somebody else. And you ain't. The best way to be above would be humble and don't let the other fellow know. He think you scared of him. You ain't afraid of him 'cause you're acting nice. He thinks that. But Solomon said a cool word, a nice word, a soft-spoken word is better than all the guns and the knives and the bricks you can throw, a nice-spoken word. Keep it easy, and it's--and I'll tell you one thing. It is much easier to smile than it is frown. Story_ID: 79147 Speaker 1: And I notice going up in the streets some times--when I walk the street all in the summertime, the little cats and dogs, I meet 'em. And by me being, smiling all the time, and laughing, they come to me. I don't call 'em. They come. And I say, hey, what you say, Tony, come on over here, buddy. They see you frowning, all mad and your mouth poked out, he'll go across the street, get out of your way (laughter). So this is what we got to learn. And I learned this by living a long time. I've had a lot of good friends, a lot of 'em. Mrs. Sadie B. Waterford, one of the ladies took good care of me. She--and Mrs., what's our lady, what's that gambler's--what's that woman's name? I forget her name. She was one of--she was a member of St. Mark's Church, and my lady is a member of Bethel A.M.E. Ms. Sadie B. Waterford--the church is at 79th and Wabash. What's the name of it? Williams is the pastor over there. He's a bishop now. Ms. Sadie Waterford, that church used to be 43rd and-- Speaker 2: Carter Temple? Speaker 1: Huh, Carter, yeah-- Speaker 2: Carter Temple. Speaker 1: Yeah, Carter Temple. It used to be at 43rd and Parks, somewhere over there. I forget now. And this, Ms. Sadie B. Waterford was a big member over there. And this girl used to be our secretary. Her mother, Ms. McCoy. Ms. McCoy had a bunch of boys, and she always took a lot of--a lot of liking to me. She say, you a nice young man. You're mannerable 'cause I'd always clean, put in and put ice in the box, and she always tried to get her boys, say you ought to be like the little red boy, little fat boy, 'cause I was kind of chunky when I was coming up (laughter). They took a lot of liking to me, and they helped me out a lot by giving me the wise counseling that mothers usually give boys. Story_ID: 79148 Speaker 1: Oh, I wanted to ask you about Ida B. Wells. You were mentioning the women in the neighborhood. Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. Ida B. Wells was an activist. And she was a very important lady in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. She lived right down the street, 3624 [Calumet]. That was her home down there. And they a, we used to have a hotel right straight through here called the Vincennes Hotel, right straight through here. And they bought that she and her children did. Her husband was already dead then, Mr.-- Speaker 1: [Ferdinand] Barnett. Speaker 2: Barnett was already--a lawyer, was already dead. And she was a very nice lady, and she used to tease me all the time. I was a young fella, putting ice in there (laughter), and she'd be pulling my jaws and teasing me, meddling me, teasing me (laughter) 'cause I was--me and her son was about the same age. And she would say, I wish my boy was like, nice, nice boy like you. Oh, Sonny was low downed (laughter). He worked at the Palmer House. (Unclear) Sonny, by having a mother and father with--he didn't have to work if he didn't wanna, you know what I mean. And that made him feel good, and he could do anything he want. They get him out of trouble and all that kind of stuff. I didn't get in no trouble, so nobody have to get me out. Well, see, but she was a very nice lady. She had one boy and four girls, one boy and four girls. Them girls, one of them girls is married to them Dusters. You hear about them Dusters? That's part of that family. All of them died kind of early. But she died in 1931, right down the street there. Story_ID: 79525 Speaker 1: Now, you said, what did I figure is my legacy? Well, I think what I would like to figure as my legacy, I was striving to help my people. And I done everything I could to help 'em physically, mentally and spiritually. So I don't consider giving somebody two or three dollars helping 'em. That's not helping 'em. And our folks is figuring on--and we still got that bad mentality. I can get anything I want from him. I can go to him and get two or three dollars any time I need it and all that kind of stuff. Well, that's not the point. What they say, "If you teach a man to fish, you--ain't no (unclear). He'll be a fisherman from now on. He can free his self, can't he? Okay. So, if you can give somebody the incentive to go get a job and get up and work and be somebody--clean yourself up and get out and do something for yourself, and stop panhandling and begging. And learn how to cooperate with one another. Sometimes, somewhere, that's gonna have to be done. And we ain't did it, we ain't did it. We let somebody come between us every once in a while with some kind of big promise here and there to split us up here and there. You split up on the church, you split up on this. I told a lady yesterday, ain't none of y'all going to heaven. All of y'all and nobody's going--I said, don't nobody know nothing about where hell and heaven is. You look at all these people, they crazy. I said, now, you got seven heavens. Which one are you going to? Said, what you mean? I said, you got seven of 'em. Well, I didn't know--I say, that's--I'm trying to tell you, you got seven of 'em. You just tell me which one you going to. I wonder which one you going to? Which one the furthest up? I don't know. I ain't been up there yet (laughter). So, you see, we got all of these screech heads here and there that somebody tells us, they read something out of the bible, that's out of some Good Book that somebody wrote. I say, I want you to read "Pilgrim's Progress" about 10 times and see if you can't get something out of that. Read it about 10 times and see what a hard time you gon' have, trying to do what you say you gon' do. And you know you ain't gon' do--you know you're lying from the word say, "go". Everybody's taught by somebody else to get what you can while you can and can all you get. Can--get what you can and can all you get. Just everybody for himself and the good Lord for us all. I said, now, that's not the way you're supposed to get along down here. But as long--if everybody can keep you from ever getting together with anything, or on anything, to amount to anything, you gon' continue to be down and struggling. You got to mount (unclear) and hook up with somebody somewhere. How come you can't hook up with your brother? How come y'all can't get together? Well, he said so and so. Damn what he said. You know, worrying about what somebody else said, what somebody said about me and somebody said about you. I had a girlfriend one time. She always worrying about what somebody said about her and her folks. (Laughter) I told her, when you and your folks love me and my folks, like me and my folks love you, and your folks, wouldn't (unclear) else to talk about the rest of us. She said, what you mean? I said, well, stop worrying about what folks say about you and go on and do your thing. [siren] Don't let, don't let nobody crush your dream about what they say about you. I ain't never give a damn. The people called me everything they could. I didn't give a damn what they say about me. I lived. I had a good time. I enjoyed myself. Yeah, I guess you had a whole--yeah, I had a whole lotta women, a whole lotta drinks, a whole lotta whiskey and done a whole lotta of everything. But I didn't whup nobody and kill nobody up and beat nobody to death or send nobody to jail, lie on nobody and all that kind of stuff. I just had a good time. I enjoyed myself. And everybody like me, almost everybody that know me, been knowing me a long time, likes me. That's the way I carry myself. Story_ID: 79526 Speaker 1: That's our last question, actually, is how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a man who tried to tell everybody who he talked to try to get themselves together with somebody and organize and build up something. I don't know what they gonna do, but I would like to be remembered as somebody trying to tell you to get yourself together with somebody 'cause you can't do nothing by yourself. You're not gonna ever be able to do anything by yourself. You got to get organized. You can't--look, because you don't like peas or black-eyed peas, that don't make me not, not eat what I'm gon' eat. You don't have--I don't have to eat the peas 'cause you don't, you know what I mean. You ain't got to eat 'em 'cause I eat 'em. You gon' get mad and say, you gon' get mad at somebody 'cause you got a good friend. And he don't like her 'cause she don't like his friend. I ain't got nothing to do with what this other fella don't like. To hell with him. I ain't gon' hate you 'cause somebody else dislike you. This is what we--we got problems with this kind of stuff all the--well, if that's your friend, me and you is out 'cause, you know, he ain't no good. Well, you got all these things facing you. And the thing--the little bitty things that don't mean nothing, stop you from progressing. Every little--people put--the devil everything in everybody's mind to stop you from making any kind of progress if they find you a little bit weak. And you ain't gonna make no progress 'cause you don't wanna get along with nobody. You don't wanna organize. You want, you want--well, my grandpa was this. My grandpa was a Baptist, mine was this, and mine was that. They didn't do this. Well, you can't live off of what grandpa did. Grandpa been gone a long time. God bless his soul, all of 'em. I've lived a long time. I'm glad I lived a long time. I'm glad I'm able to talk to you young folks. I put the, put an "s" on the end of that folks (laughter), make it a whole lot of people (laughter) 'cause I know that, I talk at churches and schools and everywhere else. And I don't hate education. But I like for you to use your education to the best advantage if you got it. If you ain't got it, go get it. Then use it to the best advantage. Don't use it to hurt somebody or kill somebody or down somebody else. You--I've been to school, and you ain't and so, you know, you ain't got no sense, and I have, all that kind of stuff. This is where this--this is why we in the shape we in. We were taught to dislike one another. That's easy to do. And to start out with a little bit of something just like this. That old nigger over there, he got three mules. You ain't got but one. You got a old mule, piece of mule. He got three good mules. He better off than you. And you take it from there. Mr. so and so said so. Now, you go, you gon' get mad at this fella over here because he got something and you ain't. Find out how come you ain't got nothing. See what I mean. That's what you got to find. Don't worry about what that fella got. Well, this, you know, you know, we used to have a lot of problems with our, in our community about renting to our own people. They don't belong to me. I don't care what happen. Or, like a nigger told me over on Prairie, "I'm helping you buy your house." So when he come back the next morning, there was a notice put in his house and you got a five-day notice to get the hell out, so you won't have to help me no more. See, if you come to me with that kind of stuff, you can go to hell 'cause I ain't never asked no nigger--I ain't never had to need no rent to pay for no house. I bought--I paid for this, what little I--what I mean been had my money on this one for a long time, helping the old lady out 'cause I didn't have to give too much to get it. I didn't want no house no way. If my wife hadn't a wanted this, I wouldn't want no house. I didn't want no house. I done sold two houses. I wanted to enjoy life a little more. Let's (unclear) [gambling nights?] a while. (Laughter) We wouldn't a had nothing (laughter). I enjoyed myself. I have no (unclear) no squalls. I've been here a long time. Thank you, Lord, for--and all of y'all. Y'all have a good time, enjoy yourself. Wherever you go, you tell 'em you met Red, Washington Park Red. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you, sir. Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you. Story_ID: 79527 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: Now, that's me and my niece at her wedding ceremony. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What year did that take place, sir? Speaker 2: About three or four years ago. I don't know where. I've forgotten now what year it was, about three or four years. I was still crippled. I was, she got--made me get up and hoot-nanny with her. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter) And tell us her name? Speaker 2: Her name is--what do you call 'em? She's got one of them funny names, Chantel (ph.) Lambert. And that's her maiden name. She's married. I forgot that guy's name. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, Larry, next. Speaker 2: Now, that big picture up top there is me on Bud Billiken Day down at 42nd Street. What does that--let me see what that--is that me in that little one, that little small one there? Who is that in that small one? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That's you. Speaker 2: That's me. Oh, that's me at, coming out, that's me and I'm big and fat, ain't I? Ain't I a big guy in that? Look like I'm big and fat there? Do I look like I'm big and fat there? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Um-hum. Speaker 2: That's me on a Sunday morning, coming out of here going to church. That's a Sunday morning picture. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great, next. Speaker 2: I think that's, bottom picture is 1945 at 45th and, I guess, Vincennes [Hotel]. Speaker 1: Now, you were 45 years old. Speaker 2: No, that was '45 [1945]--yeah, in '45 [1945]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think that's me and my wife up there on 47th Street in 1944, right there, right down by the South Center. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Mr. Gaten, can you lean back a little bit for me? Thank you. Speaker 2: Is this '47 [1947] or '44 [1944]? Speaker 1: That's in, I mean that was on 47th Street. Speaker 2: What was your wife's name? Speaker 1: Mary Felicia Gaten. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Pretty gal, very good-looking lady and very nice and sweet. Everybody says Aunt Mary sure was crazy about you Uncle Junius. And I can't help it. I run 'em crazy (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: That's down the street, that top picture, right down the street there, taking a picture, smoking my cigar. That's me. Now, there's me--now, there your buddy in there, buddy. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah. Speaker 1: You see Love in there? Speaker 2: Eugene Love, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, these our neighbors down the street there. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, that was me--that was taken during, just around my birthday, my first birthday, 101--I mean 100th birthday. That other picture was taken about 20 years or 30 years ago, that big picture up front there. Speaker 2: Now, at the 100th birthday, can you name people going left to right? You know who they are? Speaker 1: Well, there's Love, and I can't--and Love and-- Speaker 2: Eugene Love. Speaker 1: And Eugene Love. I--and Brown, one of men named Brown. I can't think of his name. And the other one named Gilmore. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Now, that's--you can get over there where them other women is. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Top first. Speaker 1: That's me and my wife, the same wife. That was taken in Gary [Indiana], I think. That picture must have been 1955, something like that. Speaker 2: Now, this is--that's Ms. Love down there at the bottom with that dark dress on. Speaker 1: On the left, the immediate--the far left, right? Speaker 2: Ms. Love. Speaker 1: Yeah, far left. Speaker 2: And I don't know, I forget the other two ladies. They're neighbors. They live across the street. Now, one of them ladies, that dark, little dark lady, first lady you get to going that way, little dark lady, her name is Ms. Winters. She's a school teacher too, and she belong to Wright's church [Trinity United Church of Christ, Reverend Dr. Jeremiah Wright, HM]. I don't know, what the name--Jeremiah-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Trinity. Speaker 2: I believe, the others, they're neighbors. The others are my neighbors. I can't think of the names. Speaker 1: Those are your neighbors coming down to honor you on your hundredth birthday? Speaker 2: Yeah, my hundredth birthday. And we would--that, them picture--that picture down there was taken in, them two pictures taken in Jill's house. Speaker 1: Ain't that a man holding a baby? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Ain't that a man holding a baby? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-FEMALE): Yes. Speaker 1: That's my, one of my preachers over at Lawndale Community Church, and that's Reverend Joe Joe what? I can't think of his last name, the preacher holding that little girl. That's his little girl he's holding there. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 1: That's me and my wife's baby sister was here, with that coat on. That's me. I was big and fat. I know, I got my cigar. Speaker 2: Now, you went from being a fat little boy, and you lost weight, and then you got fat again? Speaker 1: I'm trying to get fat again. Speaker 2: You're trying to (laughter)-- Speaker 1: It look like. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, next. Speaker 1: The Eastern Star. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): Speaker 1: Go ahead and describe it. Speaker 2: She was a Eastern Star. That's Mary Felicia Johnson Gaten. She was a Eastern Star. That was, she was a worthy matron of what--I've forgotten what you call 'em, Number 7, whatever it was, Chapter Number 7. Speaker 1: That smaller picture is her also? Speaker 2: That small picture, I think-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-FEMALE): That's not her. Speaker 2: One of 'em is aunt--you got two pictures there? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): See the little one at the bottom. Speaker 1: The little one on that side is her when she was eighteen years old, the one to the right. This one over here is my niece, the one--my little adopted niece. I adopted her, we adopted her. She's in, she's going to school in-- Speaker 2: There's only one on here now. Speaker 1: Only one? Speaker 2: Yeah, you wanna see it close? Speaker 1: Yeah, let me see it. No, I got another--this ain't the one. This, no, this is her, this is Mary here. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE-FEMALE): Oh, that's Mary? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Mary. That's Mary right there. That's her when she was eighteen years old...