 Story_ID: 369845 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My full name is Michael Theodore Glenn, M-I-C-H-A-E-L, T-H-E-O-D-O-R-E, G-L-E-N-N [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn]. Speaker 1: All right and, sir, do you have any nicknames? I know you do. Speaker 2: Yes. My nickname is the Stinger, S-T-I-N-G-E-R. Mike "Stinger" Glenn. Speaker 1: And how did you get that nickname? Speaker 2: I got that nickname when I was a member of the New York Knicks. After practice I would always go through all these shooting drills after everybody was showering and leaving, and some of the guys there were watching me go through these drills. Pop Green [Gregory "Pop" Green], a guy from Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] who was in camp at that time. Micheal Ray Richardson, who we called Sugar Ray, and Ray Williams, and they just were marveling at my accuracy and they said, "Man, this guy is stinging the nets, man. He is just stinging the nets. That's the Stinger," and they just started calling me within their little group. Our guards were calling me Stinger, and before long, the forwards and the centers got it, and then one day I was sitting on the bench getting ready to go into the game, and Red Holzman, "Hey Stinger, come on in the game," (laughter) and it was like official when Red Holzman called me Stinger, and Cal Ramsey, who was doing the color work for the TV at that time, started calling me Stinger on Knicks TV, so it became official and everybody liked it. I never had a nickname that stuck, but it stuck even beyond my playing days. Even when I was a stockbroker with Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.], I would call some guys and say, "This is Michael Glenn," and they would talk to me a few minutes and they say, "Is this Stinger?" (laughter) before they would actually realize that I had another name. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us--give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Yes, 9/10/55, September 10, 1955. I was born in Floyd County Hospital [Floyd Medical Center] in Rome, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a commissioner for World Basketball Association, which you might call minor league professional basketball. I am an independent business owner for Youngevity, which is a mineral nutrition company. I also do speaking and camps and clinics as an entrepreneur, and a few occasions I get a chance to serve as an analyst for basketball games on television. I'm currently talking about that and I expect to be doing that again this year. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're a retired NBA [National Basketball Association] basketball player? Speaker 2: I'm a retired NBA basketball player and a retired broadcast--no, not a retired broadcaster--retired NBA player, but I did a lot of NBA broadcasting on various stations from CNN to TNT to TBS to Fox Sports South and et cetera. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is October 9th, 2006. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are on Auburn Avenue, 476 Auburn Avenue in lovely Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 369846 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask everyone, and they on- the questions only require a brief answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the first question is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Boy, a favorite food. My favorite food would be steak. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Yes, spring. Speaker 1: Okay. A favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Yes, blue. Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Feed him and fan him. A phrase I use for basketball when a guy is hot and you just want to give him the ball and continue to feed him and fan him (laughter) 'cause he's hot. Story_ID: 369847 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of your family and your father's [Charles Glenn, Sr.] side. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Can you tell us--first of all, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes. Annye, A-N-N-Y-E, Ruth, R-U-T-H, Wilkes, W-I-L-K-E-S, Glenn, G-L-E-N-N [Annye Wilkes Glenn]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born August 15th, 1920 in Roanoke, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace your mother's life? Speaker 2: Pretty far back to the 1800s, around the time right around the Civil War, and my mom came from a very prosperous family that owned their own farm and one of the first people in the area to own their own car, had a Model T [Ford Model T] car. Very prosperous, hardworking family. She was probably the hardest working of her brothers and sisters whom all were hard working, who stressed education a lot, but her dad particularly stressed hard work, education, examples and he really instilled in her a desire to succeed and be successful and have certain morals and use your head to think for yourself. So, all of those things came from my mom and her side of the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Now are there any stories from the aftermath of the Civil War or Reconstruction that have passed down through your family about how they got their land, or what happened after the war and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: There are, there are some people that have done some research that I'm not completely so aware of, but I do know that right after the Civil War that one of my ancestors found his way to that area as many were roaming about trying to find family, and find their place, and landed in that area, stopped in that particular area, and started a family and, and started a--you know, a line or a legacy. But I don't know so much about prior to the Civil War and exactly why and how he got to that destination. Speaker 1: Okay. And no stories of, you know, old stories at all that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. I don't know. Speaker 1: --can think of about on that side? Speaker 2: Sure don't. Sorry. Speaker 1: Okay. Rome, Georgia is like northwest of Atlanta [Georgia], right? Speaker 2: That is correct. Rome, Georgia is northwest of Atlanta. Speaker 1: Where about? Speaker 2: About seventy miles or so (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 369848 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Annye Wilkes Glenn] have any stories of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, a lot of stories. I mean, stories mainly about on the farm, working hard and following right behind her dad and wanting to please him and working so hard on--if she was hoeing cotton or for vegetables. She would work so hard and be able to help her brothers and sisters finishing what she had to do, and so she always knew the value of that hard work and she often told me so many things that her dad told her. All the stories of how you need to be successful, how you need to think for yourself. Mom particularly never believed in drinking anything alcoholic. She said her dad told her he could never see where it made any kind of sense where somebody would want to drink something that makes them lose their full consciousness and abilities that God has given them. So, she never did and I never did and she kept telling me all the stories all the time. She would have sayings that she would use constantly. My mom was a teacher for over thirty-five years in the classroom, but she was a teacher all her life outside of that classroom (laughter). She would even tell this one--she would tell all kinds of stories like parables, man. She would tell one about not waiting until the last moment. She would tell a story about the farmer that had a lovely daughter, and this man wanted to marry the daughter and so the farmer said, "All right, let me give you a test and I'll ask you a few questions and I'll see if you can marry my daughter." And he said, "There were three cows and he wanted him to pin the tail on this cow, or pin something on this cow on his back side." And so the first one came through the man looked at it and said, "What, that one looks kind of mean and he's kind of fast. I think I'll wait on the next one." And the next one was even meaner and faster, so he said, "No way I can do this to this one." And then the third one he said, "This is it. I'm going to get this one." And this third one was walking all slow, and he thought that he had just the one that he needed and when he got to the back, it was a bobtail cow. There was no tail there, so he couldn't fulfill the mission, which was either pin something on it or grab his tail, but the point of the story was that you can't wait until the last time because that time may not be fruitful, so you have to take advantage early. But that's how mom taught. She taught through parables and stories and she constantly had them for almost any situation and she gave them to us over and over. Speaker 1: Okay. Now as a teacher, I know she went to school. Do you know where she went to school in--? Speaker 2: All I know is in Roanoke, Alabama, and I know that some of my early descendants were in some of the first classes at Tuskegee [Tuskegee State Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. They had Booker T. Washington school, and I know that mom stressed education so much she had sayings and quotes all around our house pinned on the wall, and every day in school we had to recite a quotation. I was in my mom's room in third, fourth and fifth grade [at E.S. Brown School, Cave Spring, Georgia]. She was my teacher at school and of course at home, but she thought it was so important that we learned all these quotes and sayings and these famous people and how they succeeded, and mom always made us read and we even had this study period in the summertime which of course none of us wanted to do, but we had an hour in which we could read a book, a newspaper, a magazine and mom would say, "Okay, now at the end of this I want you to tell me what lesson you learned from what you read." She thought that you couldn't just read a book or read a magazine or newspaper and not learn a lesson, and she thought as we go through life we should always learn lessons and be able to verbalize and articulate those lessons. So these are things that have stayed with me and will stay with my son [Michael J. Glenn] as it's a part of my legacy now. Story_ID: 369849 Speaker 1: Give me your father's full name and spell it for us. Speaker 2: Okay. My father's name is Charles William Glenn, Sr. [Charles Glenn, Sr.]. Charles, C-H-A-R-L-E-S, William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Glenn, G-L-E-N-N, Sr. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Dad was born on September 29th, 1918 in Wedowee, Alabama. Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: I think that's--you might have to double-check that. W-E-D-O-W-E-E, I think is how you spell Wedowee, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side, how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Couple of generations, too. They owned a lot of land also. Dad's people owned their farm and loved sports. Dad's dad [William Glenn] was a great sports player and dad used to always tell stories about him hitting this one ball so far that they could hardly ever found--they never found it, and so he loved sports. He was strong. He worked hard. They owned lots and lots of land, enough that they've left down that even the grandkids owned quite a bit of land now. So they owned several hundred acres of land, but I never really found out how they were able to acquire all of this land that all of the children were able to benefit from. So dad's dad and his dad actually owned land. So it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it goes back a couple of generations? Speaker 2: Couple of generations. It sure does and we still own a lot of land in Alabama that our--everybody kind of takes care of all together, and we've sold some and everybody's got nice checks from it. So, very progressive family, very hard-working family. Dad of course talked about working in the sawmill and spending time in World War II [WWII], being a sergeant in the [U.S.] Army, and dad played basketball in high school [Randolph County Training School, Roanoke, Alabama] and became a coach. So like his dad he loved sports. He played sports. He became a teacher, a math teacher, majored in mathematics. Dad's teachers at Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama]--he and my mom [Annye Wilkes Glenn] both went to Alabama State--said that he was the best math student that had ever come through Alabama State, and so dad passed his legacy down of being a great mathematician to me. That's the same thing that I heard coming through high school that I was the best math student that had ever come through my high school [Coosa High School, Rome, Georgia], and I was a math major in college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and matter of fact, I was a junior in college before I ever made a B in a math course, so I think an aptitude and a love for math is a part of the legacy. Also the love for sports and, and just working hard to be successful. Dad, of course, was a--got his master's degree and-- Speaker 1: Where did they go to school? Speaker 2: They both went to Alabama State (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Oh, Alabama State in Montgomery [Alabama], right. Speaker 2: In Montgomery, Alabama, they sure did. And later went on--dad went on to teach at Georgia School for the Deaf [Cave Spring, Georgia] which started a whole another legacy for me. In the '50s [1950s] after coming, you know, out of World War II he was looking for a job teaching and he came to Cave Spring, Georgia. That's this little city in northwest Georgia that's built around a cave that has a spring that runs through it, and of course it's the home of Georgia School for the Deaf where all the deaf kids from the entire State of Georgia went to school at that time. So dad was a math teacher there and they were just starting some sports programs, so dad coached basically everything. They had-- Speaker 1: Now were all the students there--I mean, all of them deaf students (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All the deaf students. Speaker 1: Black and white? Speaker 2: Not at the same location. They both were in Cave Spring, but they were segregated. Their white kids were at one campus and the black kids were at another campus. So dad taught at the black school--this was in the '50s [1950s] and as the case in all of America at that time, they had less facilities, less money, bad--poor books, so they were dealing from a very, very difficult time and situation. But dad coached a track team. He coached a basketball team. They had softball teams. So for eighteen years dad did that, and at the end of each year the principal, Mr. Eugene Perdue, would shake his hand and say, "Thanks very much, Mr. Glenn. You did a good job, coach." But that was the only pay that my dad received for those eighteen years, and he spent countless hours of traveling and coaching and teaching and--but it was his passion and he loved it and I inherited that passion and that connection to deaf culture and to basketball. I learned it from my dad and from deaf kids, and ultimately it helped me to become an NBA [National Basketball Association] player and a broadcaster, and a lot of success that I've had has been through the legacy of dad's involvement with hearing-impaired people. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now was your, your father a World War II veteran? Speaker 2: Yes. My dad was a World War II veteran. Yes, he was. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he serve over here or did he serve overseas? Speaker 2: Served overseas, and he would often tell us stories about World War II and being in the Army. Dad did a lot of preparing us. He thought that we were gonna surely have to serve some time in the Army. So even when we were getting up for school he would say, "You gotta be a soldier now, you gotta get up, you gotta get up, make your bed, you gotta get up, it's time to get up, you gotta move." So just preparing us for the possibility that we may be drafted or may even choose to serve some time in the armed service which never happened, but I think he knew that we had to be prepared in case that was the case. Story_ID: 369850 Speaker 1: So your parents [Annye Wilkes Glenn and Charles Glenn, Sr.] met at Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] or did they know each other before then? Speaker 2: I think they met at Alabama State. Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind how they met? Did they tell the story? Speaker 2: I don't know the story behind it. My sister [Teresa Glenn] may know, she pays more attention (laughter) to those kinds of things, but I don't know of how they met. But I know that they--you know, that they both were at Alabama State at the same time. Speaker 1: Okay. Those family histories--there's a story there somewhere about some land. Any time black people have land in the South, have some land-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --or really anywhere else, to tell the truth, in those days and allowed to keep it-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, or able to keep--hang on to it. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --there's a story of perseverance and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely. Speaker 1: --a whole bunch of luck and a lot of other things. Speaker 2: Absolutely right. The time was such a challenging time to own land and have property and be in control of your own destiny to a certain extent. But both mom and dad both--they were both good farmers and planters and cultivators of crops, and both tell similar stories how people in the community would come and ask them and get pointers from them on how they were able to so successfully have great crops and have a great harvest, and do okay financially with those endeavors. Speaker 1: Okay. So I think maybe you, you mentioned your mother's, or was it your father's family was at Tuskegee [Tuskegee State Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]--had a Tuskegee legacy? Speaker 2: My mother's family has some people that were in some of Booker T. Washington's first classes at Tuskegee. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a reason--when did the family move to Rome [Georgia]? Speaker 2: They moved when they were looking for a job. It was right around the early '50s [1950s], about '52 [1952], right around in there, maybe '53 [1953], yeah. My dad moved and mom moved with him. Mom was teaching in, in Alabama. She was teaching elementary school there and they moved to Georgia. They got the job at Georgia School for the Deaf [Cave Spring, Georgia]--my dad did. And then mom got a job teaching at an elementary school which she taught. It was a segregated elementary school at that time, but she taught there for years until, I guess it was about 1969 when the black elementary schools were integrated in Georgia, and then she taught at Coosa Elementary School [Rome, Georgia] for another, I guess, fifteen years or so after that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, when you think that your--about your mother and father's personalities, which one do you think that you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I take most after my mom. Mom was a hard worker. She was an idealist. She believed that we could be successful. She had that drive and she instilled it that you can be the best, that you can be better. What's the biggest room, the room for improvement? She had all these sayings and all this inspiration that she just constantly, constantly, constantly pushed us with. So I think ultimately the success that I've had has been mainly a result of my mom. But my dad also, he was less vocal but he was not any less successful 'cause dad almost had his doctor's degree. He's had much above his master's degree. Dad, even after he retired, would go and audit classes, math classes, in college. When I was majoring in mathematics at Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], I would come back home and dad and I would sit around the table and work some advanced calculus or something so dad--and he loved sports. I mean, we would go to the gym, work out together, so it's really hard. They had different kinds of motivation. Dad was there. He was an example. He had the legacy of the positions that he was in, and mom had the inspiration and the motivation and the drive. So, I've tried to take the best of both of them to continue today as I go today. It's still very much a part of me and I'm very much aware that they're present in everything that I do, and I even talk to them and let them know that I'm still proud of them and I'm still carrying out their missions and their legacy. Story_ID: 369851 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Wow, I have a lot of great childhood memories. Earliest is very hard to think of, what was the earliest. I remember one particular thing though. We had these fine arts where students would go and recite poems and different things in Rome [Georgia], you know, I grew up in Cave Spring [Georgia] and in Rome, which was the--a bigger city and my brother [Charles Glenn, Jr.] and sister [Teresa Glenn] were involved and you would always get like an excellent or you would get a superior or you would get good. You get these grades, and I can remember being--before I started to school and I had done something and mom [Annye Wilkes Glenn] complimented me and said, "Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn], you did an excellent job." And she looked back a few minutes later and I was just crying my eyes out in the backseat of the car and she said, "What's wrong?" And I was crying saying, "I wanted to make superior," because I knew that criteria was the highest when they were doing these speeches and so she kind of told me, "Well, you did superior. You don't always use that as a criteria or judging standard, but you did, you did a wonderful job," and I was happy all over again. And I kind of have had that quest. It's a quest of a certain level of perfection. It allowed me to go twelve years of school without missing a day. Speaker 1: Now that's quite a--I was reading about that. That's quite a record, twelve years of school without missing a day. You were never sick or anything? Speaker 2: Was never sick. Speaker 1: Never felt like "I don't wanna," you know. Speaker 2: It was fun. It was exciting. I liked school. I liked my classmates. I liked my classes. I was driven. I was trying very hard to be valedictorian. I was through elementary school [E.S. Brown School, Cave Spring, Georgia] and finished in the top five--I think was about third or fourth, somewhere in the top in my high school [Coosa High School, Rome, Georgia], but I was driven and I wanted to have that perfection and I wanted to make straight A's. I didn't ever want to make any Bs, but that was just a part of the drive that I got from my mom. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 369852 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: The most--the things that stayed with me the most are my times at Georgia School for the Deaf [Cave Spring, Georgia] because that was the joy of my life was going to the deaf school. They had these tournaments that were so much fun. They would have schools from--my dad [Charles Glenn, Sr.] coached Georgia School for the Deaf, Alabama School for the Deaf [Alabama Institute for Deaf and Blind, Talladega, Alabama], Florida School for the Deaf [Florida School for the Deaf and the Blind, St. Augustine, Florida], South Carolina School for the Deaf [South Carolina School for the Deaf and the Blind, Spartanburg, South Carolina], Mississippi School for the Deaf [Jackson, Mississippi]. All these deaf schools would come together and they would have these basketball tournaments and dances and concession stands and fun and shooters and competition and cheerleaders. That was so much fun to me. Now the deaf kids, of course, could not talk, so there were a lot of noises and sounds that they were making, but it was getting attention. It was making utterances, so it was very different than going to a basketball game anywhere else, but it was my background. It was my heritage and I loved it, and that was just so passionate in my memory now and it led me to start a basketball camp for deaf kids 'cause it was such a wonderful reunion. There were so many great players and excitement that that was some of the--some of my best memories are the hot dogs with their onions and the slow dogs and the (laughter)--and the basketball and the cheering and the jump shots that--those were some of my most fun-filled memories growing up. Story_ID: 369853 Speaker 1: Did you live at, actually in Rome [Georgia] or--? Speaker 2: I lived in Cave Spring, Georgia, and it's a very interesting story about kind of how I wound up going to high school in Rome. Cave Spring, as I mentioned, is the home of Georgia School for the Deaf. I lived about a mile from the campus, so I spent countless hours on the campus of Georgia School for the Deaf, all weekends, after school, playing ball. My best friends were deaf, so I have--I grew up basically as a kid that could hear and talk but in a deaf world. And I loved that world and I still love that world, they're still some of my closest and dearest friends. But at the end of my elementary school [E.S. Brown School, Cave Spring, Georgia], seventh grade, the school was no longer going to be in existence. I was graduating anyway and integration was happening all across that area. And the school in Cave Spring--there was a high school in Cave Spring, and mom [Annye Wilkes Glenn] who was an excellent, excellent teacher, the best I've ever had. Mom would need to teach at a different school, so she was looking to teach at Cave Spring School [Cave Spring High School, Cave Spring, Georgia] which was two blocks from my home, but the principal there and the administration said, "No, no, no. We already got a black teacher. We don't want any more black teachers here. She needs to go Coosa [Coosa High School] in Rome and teach or something," and they didn't even have a black teacher, they had a librarian, but they--that was the feeling of the people in power at that time, the white people in power. Speaker 1: They only required one. Speaker 2: That's right. They only required one and they didn't want any more, didn't want that one. So mom was kind of, she wanted to stay in Cave Spring and teach two blocks from home as opposed to driving thirteen, fourteen miles to school every day, so she told me she said, "Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn], I'm not going to be able to teach at Cave Spring." All our friends were going there. We were looking forward to going to Cave Spring. She said, "I'm gonna have to teach in Rome and you can ride with me. I've talked to the principal, who's a wonderful principal named Mr. James Payne [James S. Payne, Sr.] in--at Coosa High School in Rome and you can ride with me and go to school with me in Rome, but your friends are mainly going to be going here, so I'm not going to make you go." Dad [Charles Glenn, Sr.] wanted mom to make me go. He said, "Just let Michael go with you." He didn't want her driving that way by herself every day. But she didn't want to do it that way. She said, "I'm going to let him decide, so you can stay here and go with your friends," and I thought about it for a couple of days and I said, "Mom, I'm going to go to school with you." So I went to school at Coosa in Rome. It was a great decision. It was a much bigger school, we had a great coach named Bob Brannon. It allowed me to take my basketball game to new heights. We were playing in the next largest high school division of competition in the state where Cave Spring was the lowest division, so it took me to better competition, to a better coach, to better enjoyment, bigger school, bigger opportunities, bigger relationships, and by the way, we crushed their team (laughter) when we played them, and so for the first couple of years that revenge factor was good for me, but all in all, I wasn't--after that it was just another game. Story_ID: 369854 Speaker 1: What was the name of the school you attended in Cave Spring [Georgia]? Speaker 2: It was E.S. Brown Elementary School [E.S. Brown School, Cave Spring, Georgia]. Edward Samuel Brown Elementary School and it like so many schools--we've lost that whole history of E.S. Brown, of exactly who he was, but I know he was somebody who was very significant in the community in establishing that school. But of course, with integration, so much was lost of our history and our culture and our legacy as we were integrated into another system, and now you mention the name E.S. Brown, it has to be someone that's at least around forty to fifty years old to even recognize the name anymore. Speaker 1: That's what really makes this project so important. You know, that's a question I always ask. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you answered it without me even asking it. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But you say the people still don't know who-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --he was. They don't know who he was. Speaker 2: That's right. Oh, and in today's world they, they don't even know the name E.S. Brown. They just know Cave Spring Elementary School [Cave Spring, Georgia]; it's not a high school there anymore. But it's not even named after an individual so the school has been torn down and I don't think there's even a marker. There may be since I've left. I'm not really sure that even it's--you know, gives some legacy (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Often it's the first principal of the school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Maybe the person that donated the money for the school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It could be any, you know. Speaker 2: I'll bet that is. Speaker 1: Yeah. It's someone like that normally, but I--but that's a shame that nobody knows it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. We have to keep that legacy alive. Speaker 1: Okay. And that was--that was the black school? Speaker 2: That was the black school--that was the black school. Speaker 1: And then you went from there to Coosa High School in Rome [Georgia]. Speaker 2: C-O-O-S-A, Coosa. Um-hm. Speaker 1: And Coosa is--was integrated, right, by then? Speaker 2: That's correct. Coosa, predominantly white school, was integrated. But like in my senior class there was about a couple hundred people and we had three blacks, me and one other guy and one other lady. So, it was 90 percent white even after integration (laughter). Speaker 1: Where did--did most of the black students go to school in Cave Spring or some place, or someplace else in Rome? Speaker 2: Yes. The people that lived in Cave Spring went to Cave Spring High School [Cave Spring, Georgia], which is no longer there. Now they go to Coosa, but at that time the people that lived in Cave Spring in that area went to Cave Spring High School. And there's East Rome [East Rome High School, Rome, Georgia] and West Rome [West Rome High School, Rome, Georgia] at that time which were big high schools. They had large black populations, may even have been predominately black or very close to it. But Coosa was a little further out and didn't have many black students that lived in that area. Story_ID: 369855 Speaker 1: Now you were growing up, you know, during the Civil Rights Movement-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and are there any stories that your family has or that you have about the Civil Rights Movement in Georgia during those days? Speaker 2: Oh sure, and you know, being in Montgomery [Alabama], mom [Annye Wilkes Glenn] would see Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] at several times in Montgomery and knew all about the Dexter Church [Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama] and they always told me all about the Civil Rights Movement that, you know, the areas that they were so familiar with even before the--a lot of the things really started transpiring in those areas. So, I have vivid memory of those times, even of the time when Dr. King was assassinated, and they had great love for Dr. King, just like all black Americans, I guess, most anyway, had great love for him, and I remember those times pretty well even though I was young. I was born in 1955 and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. They were in Georgia about the time that the bus boycott started around. I guess they were in Rome [Georgia]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But they certainly would have known all those characters-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Dr. King and Ralph Abernathy and Rosa Parks growing up. I mean, being--going to Alabama State [State Teachers College; Alabama State University, Montgomery, Alabama] and being around Montgomery. Speaker 2: Absolutely right. And we still--at that time, we took a lot of trips back because she had--mom had brothers and sisters, dad [Charles Glenn, Sr.] had reunions in Alabama so it--we were constantly going back and forth from Alabama to Georgia, and most of our relatives were in Alabama. Speaker 1: Did any of your relatives have stories about the bus boycott that they shared? Speaker 2: Mom would just tell us how it was. Not so much about particularly being involved with the boycott, but how you had to go to the bus and then pay your fare and get off and go to the back, and how rude and how nasty the bus drivers were to them, and so she let us understand all of those things. But, you know, it was--I guess I was probably in school or maybe nine or ten before she really would share a lot about segregation with me. It was probably during a lot of those times 'cause I would hear them talk about W.E.B. Du Bois and there was always these intellectual discussions going on in my family. Dred Scott, and all of these things, and I always wanted to know what all of it was and sometimes they would include me as I was the youngest and some time they would say, "Well, you'll learn about this a little bit later." But as I got older they, it was a part of my dialogue and conversation, too, so that the things that happened during that time and prior to that time we had knowledge of. Story_ID: 369856 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? How many siblings? Speaker 2: Okay. Got one brother and one sister. My brother, Charles Glenn, is five years older than I am. He was born in 1950 and my sister was born in 1952. So, I have an older brother, Charles Glenn, Jr. and a sister, Teresa, T-E-R-E-S-A, Glenn [Teresa Glenn]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, so when you were growing up you were very impressed by your parents, and you were striving for a certain amount of perfection. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: From what I gather? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: You were saying. Okay. Speaker 2: Even on the court. I mean, even as a shooter and, for example, my expertise was shooting, and I had all these places I would go on the court that I had to make so many consecutive shots or so many out of ten, or so many out of fifteen before I would leave. And I was a reader. I'd read one of Bill Bradley's books, 'A Sense of Where You Are' ['A Sense of Where You Are: Bill Bradley at Princeton,' John McPhee] where he would make a certain amount and I had to make more than Bill Bradley made, so I would go to these spots (laughter) and I would just practice and practice and practice until I could make as many as I thought that I should make. And sometimes I would even have a little challenge. "Okay, I'm finished but before I can leave, I need to make so many from here." And sometimes I would stay two more hours just trying to fulfill the goals that I had set, and even in high school sometimes I would have games and the ball was not going in as I thought I should and I couldn't sleep at night, so I would wake up or just get up about two o'clock in the morning and go and knock on dad [Charles Glenn, Sr.] and mom's [Annye Wilkes Glenn] door and say, "I can't sleep, mommy. I've got to go to the gym." So dad, of course, had a key to the gym and we would go to the gym at two o'clock in the morning and I would shoot, dad would rebound, mom would stand at various spots and hold her hand up and I would just go up there and shoot my shots until the ball felt good, the shot felt good and the ball was going in, and sometimes that would be an hour or an hour and a half and I'd say, "Okay, we can go back home now," and that was fine with both of them. They were glad to do it. Mom always said she was glad to support me and we had a little--a contract, it was a verbal contract. She said, "As long as you make all A's, I'll take you anywhere, any practice, any time you want to go night or day," and she fulfilled her part and I fulfilled my part. Even though being at Coosa [Coosa High School], which was in Rome [Georgia], you know, about fourteen miles away, practice after school, games. It was a lot of traveling back and forth waiting after school for the girls to practice and then for us to practice. So, there was a lot of traveling, but I had tremendous support at all times from both of them. Speaker 1: That is remarkable support. They actually would go to the gym with you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the middle of the night? Speaker 2: Middle of the night. Any time. That was tremendous support and sometimes that's what's missing and I recognize I was so blessed with that, and a lot of individuals, that infrastructure, that stability because when you don't have that, when you're struggling with all of these variables and, and I had a tremendous advantage, an advantage of expertise and example, an advantage of support and travel and food and transportation, so everything was really just laid out there for me to make the most of it and it was just kind of up to me to accept all of these blessings that were just there for me. Story_ID: 369857 Speaker 1: How did you deal with the change of school? I mean, did you get along well at Coosa [Coosa High School, Rome, Georgia]? Speaker 2: I did. It was really strange in one sense. First of all, I was an athlete though. I'd played Little League ball and we'd won the state championship. I was the star pitcher and hitter and all those things and some of the people that I had played against or even with on all-star teams were going to Coosa and I was so surprised when I got there I said, "Hey! Hi, how you doing? You go to school here?" So I had some friends right away and sports kind of does that. Sports connects almost at a subconscious level. You forget about differences and things because you're playing sports or even in cheering for sports. This guy is on our team, I don't care about anything else. I don't care about his religion (laughter), his race and any other orientation. He's on my team, so I had a lot of friends that way. I was a very friendly person so I met a lot of other friends as well. Even very much outside of the sports arena and, of course, I was president of the class and president of the math club and the much--teammates or classmates always said I could have won all the superlatives in high school, but it was--it was that I just, I liked people and people liked me and they didn't have to be in sports or they didn't have to be intellectuals. They could be kids that hung out in the smoking section, but I--we got along and I still threw out whether they could be hearing, they could be hearing impaired (laughter), but I like people, and I did not personally witness face to face a lot of the racism that was so prevalent at that time, and I didn't personally witness that because of the relationships that I had, and the support that I had from my classmates and from my schoolmates. Speaker 1: Okay. And your favorite subject was math I take it? Speaker 2: Oh, very much so. I loved the challenge of math. I loved working problems and solving them, and that stayed with me even through college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]. It got a lot more challenging when I start dealing with abstract algebra and linear algebra (laughter) and theoretical calculus, and I was oftentimes walking around the campus daydreaming and reciting theorems and trying to figure out how to make this problem work, and I even had this board, I was tutoring. I had planned to teach math my senior year. I'd thought about maybe graduating early, but I was going to teach entry level math, and almost all the guys on the basketball team were encouraging me to do that so that they could take that mandatory math class and I would be their teacher (laughter) and I could explain it to them. But I never taught the class, but I did have a big chalkboard that I kept in my room and I tutored countless students in math. They would come in my round and I would explain a lot of math to 'em including the teammates as well as just regular students. Speaker 1: You sound like a--you sound like you were very fortunate in those days. I think even now they say that black schools, if they fail at anything, the worst is probably math. I mean, the kids may not be reading at a level they ought to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --but they certainly--usually are not performing math at the level that-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --is considered successful or a way to a job. Speaker 2: Yes, and I think that there's a fear of math, and I talk to young students about that and older students about that. First of all, you can't be afraid of it. It's like learning to swim. If you're gonna be afraid of the water, you're gonna have a much harder time learning how to swim. So, and I tell them that their people created math. I tell them about building the pyramids that were over, you know, forty stories high and how they built them perfectly and that they created math and that there's no need for them to be afraid of math. And I even tell athletes, I say, "If you're so wonderfully built athletically, you're so wonderfully built, then your mind is a part of your body also." I tell them, "Just as Egypt is in Africa, your mind is in your body, and if you got a wonderful body, you got a wonderful mind, too. It just didn't stop here and say, 'I'm quick and smart and I'm here, but my mind isn't.'" It's like saying my right arm can lift, but I can't lift with my left. Yes, you can. That's a part of your body; it's not a separate part. So, it's just the question of your developing that part with that same kind of energy and determination that you use to develop the rest of yourself. You can do that with your mind, too. Story_ID: 369858 Speaker 1: Was there ever a time at Coosa [Coosa High School, Rome, Georgia], where it was like a bad day where you just said, "What am I doing here," and, or-- Speaker 2: Um, man. Speaker 1: This is new, integration and all this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: I just wondered, you know. And teenage life is rough any way. Speaker 2: It is, but you know there were integrated classes much before me. I came in '69 [1969], but there had been classes for four or five years that had integrated before me. So, I think the guys that went before me had it much rougher than I did. You know, so you just see a few things that happened at a high school just like any kid growing up, and basketball-wise as an eighth grader practicing, went to varsity right away and having to run miles and bleachers and stairs. You get a little challenged physically, but your love for the game and your passion carries you through. So, I never had a day that I can remember where I just said, "Man, I don't know why I'm here," or even that I wished that I had gone on to Cave Spring [Cave Spring High School, Cave Spring, Georgia]. I never looked back one day. It was--it was just a great experience, and I think I did a lot for the school and vice versa. One thing that stands out in my mind also, which was the greatest compliment that I've ever received, my coach as I mentioned was named Bob Brannon, who was a very good coach. I was very fortunate to have him, and Bob Brannon, when I was a sophomore had a son and he named his son after me. Now, here's a white coach and a predominately white school and I'm not even a senior yet. You know, in senior year we go to state tournament and to the state finals and all that. This is when I was a sophomore, he thinks so highly of me that he named the only son that he's had--that was his first and only son that he named after me. And, it was another guy on my team that was a very good friend of mine, a white guy named Jimbo Bragg [Jim Bragg] and he named his son, Michael James Brannon, so he named his son after us. He was a very high character guy. We were great friends throughout, but to have your coach, a white coach to name his son after you, is a pretty high compliment, so. Speaker 1: That's remarkable, yeah. Story_ID: 369859 Speaker 1: I know that you were considered at one time, was it, one of the best or the best basketball player in the state, I think-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. And that's pretty interesting, too. Yes, I was. Mainly 'cause of growing up at the deaf school [George School for the Deaf, Cave Spring, Georgia] and practicing and all this legacy that I had. I was voted number one player in the State of Georgia. I was in the top ten my junior year, and number one my senior year [at Coosa High School, Rome, Georgia], and had choices of colleges all over the country. So, it was really a wonderful time, a wonderful experience for me to go to that level that you recognize where it had come from. It had come from deaf kids, basically. It had come from a place where people didn't even want to go down to the deaf school and couldn't even--were afraid of these deaf kids, and I had so much joy and opportunity that came through my experience with deaf kids. So, I do that as a basis of my talk a lot of times, too. When I talk about having friends from all diverse cultures that all of the blessings I received basically emanated from my relationship with deaf kids. Speaker 1: Could you sign? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Of course I could sign before I could talk, you know. The girls really started teaching me first. I remember dad [Charles Glenn, Sr.] had this one girl on his team. Her name was Mildred, M-I-L-D-R-E-D, and her last name was Nelson, N-E-L-S-O-N. She was the best player on his team. Matter of fact, Mildred was the best player in the history of Georgia School for the Deaf. Mildred was a beautiful girl. She had smooth, dark beautiful skin. At that time, I thought she looked like a Hershey's bar (laughter). So, Mildred would start teaching me my ABCs and she started teaching me sign language and lessons on inclusion and lessons on sharing, and I would go to the games and I would clap for Mildred. Mildred was knocking down those jump shots and everybody always talked about Mildred Nelson. She was such a great player. And there was another player on dad's team named Lois Smiley. Now, these were the girls on his girls team, obviously. Lois was his best student. Lois was a brilliant math student. He'd teach her separately. Dad--I would go to dad's classes and do the multiplication tables before I started to school and I would do 'em in sign language and I would just compete with his students, and--but Lois was his brightest student by far and he would take her separately and teach her. And he really encouraged and pushed Lois, and Lois went to Gallaudet College, and now it's Gallaudet University [Washington, D.C.]. She was the first student from, black student from Georgia School for the Deaf, a segregated school and less of everything, to go to Gallaudet College, and dad was so proud of her and I was so proud of Lois 'cause she was a great student, great math student, went to Gallaudet, represented Georgia School for the Deaf. So, all that education and basketball was just coming together, and even today, I've had those ladies to come back to a basketball camp [Mike Glenn's All-Star Basketball Camp for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing]. I've started the nation's first basketball camp for deaf kids, and I've had Lois and Mildred to come back now, and I tell all of the young deaf kids, "This is why I'm here now, because of these deaf girls." This is how I learned how to play and I want them to respect them and love 'em and learn the legacy from them and carry forth the message that I got onto future generations. Story_ID: 369860 Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you a question. You probably forgot the answer to this, but do you know how many points per game you scored when you were a senior? Speaker 2: Yeah, I averaged thirty--I averaged thirty a game pretty much in my last two years. We had very good teams, and a lot of times I wouldn't play much of the fourth quarter, but we got all the way. In my senior year, we went to the state championship game. It was the biggest defeat I've ever had in my life. It was the most disappointing defeat because al- since the eighth grade, Coach Brannon [Bob Brannon] had always been taught--he put a dream and I should say, "Boys, we're gonna work hard. We're gonna do this, and this, and this, and we're gonna go to the state championship by the time--," so it was like a long-range goal and we were able--we worked so hard. We really worked hard. We fine-tuned our game, and we got a chance to come from Rome, Georgia. I mean, all the teams in Atlanta [Georgia] thought, there's nobody that can play any ball in Rome, Georgia. They thought they would just crush us, you know and--but they didn't. We were so disciplined. We played so well. We pressed, we trapped, we executed our plays. I mean, they used to joke and they would sit and screen for me all the way down the court (laughter) and it's probably true, but, and I probably knocked down the shot and we went all the way to the state championship. We were the Cinderella team. So many people came out to see this team from Coosa [Coosa High School, Rome, Georgia], and we went all the way there and I was just so disappointed that we got so close. I fouled out of the game on some controversial calls I might add (laughter), but nonetheless, charging foul, guys falling down. So anyway--but we got all the way there to the state championship game and so, I was very proud of that and as was coach. Speaker 1: Who won the championship that year? Speaker 2: It was Southwest Atlanta [Southwest Atlanta High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. They had a tremendous couple of players, but one named Anthony Flanagan who was one of the greatest high school players in the history of the State of Georgia. He was All-American at football and basketball. He, he could throw a football seventy yards almost with either hand, and there was a tremendous passer, a tremendous athlete, and they beat us in the state championship game. Speaker 1: So this is 1973? Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973], exactly correct. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: But I was named unanimously the Most Valuable Player and the number one player in the State of Georgia. We had some great athletes that year. We had Wayne "Tree" Rollins [Wayne Monte Rollins] who went on to play many, many years in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. We had Norm Nixon who played many years with the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers] and the Clippers [Los Angeles Clippers]. We had Mike Mitchell who was an NBA All-Star also, and a lot of other guys like Robert Haygood, who went on to the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and played football, and got hurt and didn't play basketball, but he was there on those great teams with Dorsett [Tony Dorsett]. So, we had some athletes and great guys that year (laughter), so we were raking it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They are people--Mike Mitchell went to play with Cleveland [Cleveland Cavaliers], I think. Speaker 2: Absolutely, he played with Cleveland in those times. Speaker 1: Mike Mitchell, Tree Rollins who played here in Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: That's right. Mainly in Atlanta, absolutely. Speaker 1: Norm Nixon who was a tremendous guard out of-- Speaker 2: Ah, tremendous-- Speaker 1: He married Debbie Allen, right? Speaker 2: He married Debbie Allen, exactly, right. And they had a tradition in Macon [Georgia], Southwest Macon [Southwest Macon High School; Southwest Magnet High School, Macon, Georgia] had a squad, too. And the other guard might have been faster than Norm. So, they had this tremendous backcourt (laughter) in Southwest Macon, and they were--a couple of years after that with Jeff Malone named the national team of the year, the best team in the country. Speaker 1: Jeff Malone, too? Speaker 2: Yeah, Jeff Malone went to Macon, also. Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He had a nice shot. I mean, he could score, you know. Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely right. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, I mean, all the--now all the while, just to follow this story, one day, you're shooting like--what was your percentage in high school? Speaker 2: In high school I was shooting about 57 percent and, you know, about 87 [percent] or so from the free-throw line. So, I was shooting-- Speaker 1: You're playing guard? Speaker 2: Playing guard. Speaker 1: You were 6'3"? Speaker 2: I was about 6'2" at that time with, yeah, 6'2". Um-hm. Sure was, but shooting was my thing. Speaker 1: Shooting mostly jump shots? Speaker 2: Almost all jump shots--almost all jump shots. I rarely drove--a few times drove, but coming off screens, even off the dribble a lot in high school, but I was the ultimate jump shooter. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, that's just an old school, may not be in the sports world watching this, that's tremendous for a jump shooter to shoot. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Over 50 percent. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And 57 percent is almost--that's like a center would shoot, you know-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. As a matter of fact, I continued that kind of percentage through college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and even in the pros. Lou Hudson was one of my early heroes, and I had a chance to work out with Lou Hudson later in the NBA [National Basketball Association] and Lou told me, he said, "Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn], you shoot the ball better than anybody who played before or now. You're the best shooter I've seen." And that was coming from my idol--my hero (laughter) and I didn't know him. Speaker 1: Who had a wonderful shot himself. Speaker 2: A wonderful shot himself, who I spent many hours emulating, and trying to shoot like the great Lou Hudson, but percentage-wise, there's never been a guard in NBA history who had shot a better career percentage than I have. I'm about eight shots short of being listed among the leaders. You have to shoot so many shots, which is really incredible that I played almost ten years and I'm still eight shots short of that, but percentage-wise irregardless of that, there's never been a guard that has shot as high a percentage from the field. Speaker 1: I think in 1984, I was reading, '84 [1984], '85 [1985] season you shot .588 from the field? Speaker 2: That's correct--that's correct. All jump shots. Yes, sir (laughter). Speaker 1: That's hard to do. That's very hard to do (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes, indeed. Story_ID: 369861 Speaker 1: You chose to go to school at SIU, Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois]. How did that come about? Speaker 2: I was recruited all over the country. I was--and interestingly enough, I came from a very educational family as I've told you and some of mom's [Annye Wilkes Glenn] sisters, one of her nieces like has a doctorate in inorganic chemistry, and so all these educational influences kind of came together and they would say to my mom, "Ruth, why you letting him play basketball?" At that time (laughter) they say, "Why isn't he doing something else? Why is he playing basketball," because they knew I had done well intellectually and it was such a drive and an emphasis all the way back from the Booker T. Washington days, you know--education, education, education. And, they thought that I was kind of wasting; they thought that I was surely going to an Ivy League school or somewhere, you know, because I'm making all these great grades, all this leadership abilities, and they couldn't see why I was playing basketball. And even one of mom's sisters, named Murdice [Murdice Pitts (ph.)], even she would-, lived in Chicago [Illinois] and she would come and see me every time we played the Bulls [Chicago Bulls]. She would bake a cake for us, but after I finally retired she was glad. She said, "I'm so glad you're not playing ball anymore 'cause you're not going to get injured," and so it was just a mentality of, you really could be doing some other things, but I had--I loved basketball. I loved basketball. This was before the million dollar salaries and all of those things, of course. And I visited many colleges, North Carolina Chapel Hill [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] which probably was my second choice. I considered Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] very strongly, and I loved Dean Smith. Dean Smith came to the house. Mom liked Dean Smith a lot. Just a class guy. And Dean would see me for years afterwards and would say, "I still don't know why you went to Southern Illinois." (Laughter) But anyway, I fell in love with Southern Illinois. It was the last place that I visited. I had visited all over the country--schools all over the country. And I really loved it. It had a good racial mix, a lot of black and white students, a lot of opportunity, a lot of upside, and I just fell in love with Southern Illinois University. Story_ID: 369862 Speaker 1: So SIU, Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois]. So what actually was the attraction for Southern Illi- I mean like, was there a personality, a person, or a relative that brought you there? Speaker 2: It was a combination of things. First of all, Walt Frazier, who's from Atlanta [Georgia] had gone there and put it on the map and I was--he was my hero and idol also. So in one sense, I was kind of following in Walt's footsteps, but that was just a part of it. I liked Coach Lambert [Paul Lambert] a lot, the head coach who was--I liked him. He treated people with respect. I never wanted to have the kind of coach that did all the yelling and screaming and the degrading. I didn't want that kind of coach. He wasn't that kind of coach. It had a lot of black students at Southern Illinois. You felt comfortable. It was not the South. The South was still just coming out of segregation in '73 [1973]. I kind of wanted to get away from the South and just experience something different. Just to feel different and freer, and that's what I felt when I went to Southern Illinois. And I wanted to have a mixture of peoples, and I experienced that at Southern Illinois. It had a good math program, obviously, and most colleges do, but they also had a good math program and a good opportunity. We had a 6'11" center named Joe Meriweather [Joe C. Meriweather] who would later go on to play in the NBA [National Basketball Association] and they were building an opportunity around Joe Meriweather. So, I liked being part of something that was building and growing and an opportunity rather than to go a place where you're expected to win at every game and if you lose, what's wrong with these guys, you know. (Laughter) So I liked that opportunity. I loved Southern Illinois, and it just worked out well for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what, what was your major? Speaker 2: I majored in mathematics. Speaker 1: Mathematics. Okay. Speaker 2: Sure did. Had a minor concentration in computer science. I took all of the education requirements except student teaching. I observed. I took all the prep classes, so in case I decided to be a teacher I could be one very easily. Speaker 1: Okay. In terms of basketball, now you played, did you play shooting guard or point? Speaker 2: Shooting guard mostly. I played a little point but most of the time, I've been privileged to play shooting guard most of my career. Speaker 1: Okay. So how did you do at Southern and how, how did the team do? Speaker 2: The team did well. We always were winning right at nineteen, twenty games a year. We went to the NIT [National Invitation Tournament] my sophomore year. Just missed going to the NCAA tournament [NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament] in my junior year, and my senior year we made it to the Sweet Sixteen, which is the first time Southern Illinois had gone to the Sweet Sixteen. Now back in Walt Frazier's era, they won the NIT, which was a very prestigious tournament at that time. It rivaled the NCAA tournament (laughter) you know, and it's hard for people to imagine that now. And at the time when I went to--when we made it to the NCAA tournament, there were only thirty-two teams that made it also. So, it was very competitive, and the Missouri Valley Conference was a very good conference and so it was a fun time. I loved every minute of Southern Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so when--so did you play through your senior year and graduate? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Graduated. Speaker 1: You did. Okay. Speaker 2: I did. Graduated, received a post-graduate scholarship. There are not many--NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] gives very few post-graduate scholarships, but graduated and did well. Honor student almost all the time and had an opportunity to go to grad school on a scholarship. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's 1977? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. So I raise that because so many, you know, students now that play basketball don't graduate (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) True, true. Speaker 1: Go right into the NBA. Speaker 2: Have a fifth year and all kind of things, yes. Speaker 1: As a sophomore they might go or freshman, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, sure. Sure, sure. Story_ID: 369863 Speaker 1: Your expectations after you graduated, did you expect to be drafted by an NBA [National Basketball Association] team? Speaker 2: At that time I did. Now as a sophomore, I didn't know for sure and I was really just planning on utilizing my education to have a career through my studies, through whatever area--something related to math as I knew I wanted to go that way. And in my sophomore year, Joe C. Meriweather made it to the NBA. And that was kind of inspirational for me, too. I said, "Man, you know, I might actually make it to the NBA," and then I was a preseason All-American and getting all the notoriety and publicity and playing against guys that indeed did play in the NBA, and it was then I recognized that I could surely play in the NBA. So in my junior year, I thought I probably would play and I was pretty sure that I would be drafted and get an opportunity my senior year. Speaker 1: So how many points did you average your senior year? Speaker 2: Averaged right around twenty-one points a game, and again shot the real high percentages, and so it was what--my junior year I was the most valuable player in the Missouri Valley Conference. Thought I would be it in my senior year, also, which I think [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson, at that time, was the only person that had won back-to-back MVPs in the Missouri Valley Conference. But I didn't win that honor even though our team did really well and could make a strong argument, but Phegley, a guy from Bradley [Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois], Roger Phegley won the most valuable player for the Missouri Valley Conference. But I had a great year, we had a great team, and we made it as I said all the way up to the Sweet Sixteen that year. Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell me about the NBA draft. I mean, was that a (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You knew the day it was coming and all that, and I guess. Would your family get together and how did--what happened? Speaker 2: Yeah, we sat around the phone because in those days they didn't have where everybody flies to New York [New York] and waits to hear their name called. It wasn't on television. You just sit around the phone and wait 'til somebody calls you. So, I remember waiting and I had heard that the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers] may draft me. I'd heard that Chicago [Chicago Bulls] may draft me. I didn't really know who was going to draft me. I'd heard a couple of other teams, so I was just sitting around the phone and I remember waiting and during the draft one of my friends called and pretended he was somebody else and, "This is Philadelphia [Philadelphia 76ers]." I was so mad at him. "Man, if you don't get off this phone. I'm waiting to hear from a real team, not you." So (laughter) I got off the phone and true enough the Bulls called and Ed Badger, who was coach then, was saying, "Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn], congratulations! We're glad to have you. You were just drafted by the Chicago Bulls." I was the twenty-third player picked, which was the first pick in the second round. There were twenty-two teams in the NBA at that time, and so I was the twenty-third player picked and I went to the Chicago Bulls. Speaker 1: Well, that's quite an honor, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Being the twenty-third player of all the college players available in the-- Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. And I was looking very much forward to that having played at Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], and I had so many friends that were from Chicago [Illinois], so I was very pleased to go to Chicago. Of course, Artis Gilmore was there. Scott May was there. Had a good team. I was looking very much forward to being a Chicago Bull. Speaker 1: Yes. Yep. Yeah. Bulls had, I just, the name just--Jerry Sloan and-- Speaker 2: Sloan was assistant coach at that time. Speaker 1: Oh was he, okay. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Norm Van Lier was still on the team, though, but Sloan had just ended his career. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Yeah, was it--I guess Clifford Ray had left by then, too, I guess. Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, yeah. It was the Artis Gilmore era then (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, all right. Story_ID: 369864 Speaker 1: Well, what happened? Did you get to the--what happened when you went to Chicago [Chicago Bulls]? When did they require you to show up? Speaker 2: Well, I was working out very hard, running miles, working out in the gym and I was going back to Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] to work out in August and I was in a car wreck. And in this car wreck, I had fractured my third cervical vertebra, so it was a tremendous setback. I was not sure what my future would be. I doubted that I would even play again for a couple of days and thought I may even need--require some kind of surgery on my cervical spine. So, I wasn't a big fan of that, so got tremendous prayer from all the real spiritual, religious people around me and, but anyway--and I healed and was healed and was able to come back and play that year. I mean, I had to wear the big brace that--from my neck all the way down to my hip and I couldn't turn for a long period of time and lost all my conditioning and everything. So, it was a time that I was just not sure if I would be able to play again, but I was able to and that was in August and by-- Speaker 1: That's sounds pretty depressing for a young man just drafted in as a-- Speaker 2: It was. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Very depressing, very lonely, coming back, just at home every day. Can't move, you know. Everybody's going to school and places and you're just kind of like sitting at home unable to move, so it was a tough time for me. It was a tough time. Speaker 1: I can imagine. Here's a young fellow that can't sleep because he misses his jump shots. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And here--now you can't do anything. Speaker 2: Can't do anything. Can't do anything for a long period of time. So, finally I got the big brace off and had the soft collar on, and finally I could jog a little bit and start working my way back, and at that time the Bulls wanted to really put me on the injured list in which would have not been bad, but they only wanted to do a one-year contract. So my agent and I talked about it and we got the Bulls to release me 'cause there was really no point--the timing was bad at that time. So I wind up getting released. Speaker 1: So they gave a release? Speaker 2: They released me. I asked them to please cut me, just release me. I have some other opportunities and I understand your position, you know. Here I am with this broken neck and you went in, you got some, you know. So they released me and I got a chance to go to the Buffalo Braves [Los Angeles Clippers]. Cotton Fitzsimmons, who had coached the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] when I was there--I always loved Cotton, this charismatic coach, prancing around the sidelines, and he was coaching the Pistol Pete [Pete Maravich], Lou Hudson, Hawks, and he was a good friend of my college coach, Coach Paul Lambert. And they talked and he said, "We'll take Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn] with the Buffalo Braves," so I was able to spend the remaining part of that rookie year with the Buffalo Braves and had a wonderful year. It was cold. The snow was everywhere. The snow lived in Buffalo [New York] (laughter), but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you were able to come back in the wintertime? Speaker 2: I was able to come back from that injury--from that injury. Speaker 1: August to--? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --when was it that you came--? Speaker 2: I came back the latter part of December. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's pretty good healing. Speaker 2: It was great healing, man. I tell you I received a whole lot of prayer for it. I mean, I went to various churches. I came up to Chicago [Illinois]. I had a real spiritual aunt, Aunt Murdice Pitts [ph.], and she had been a part of all kind of healings and was in a Pentecostal church and had seen all kinds and had some in her life. I received a lot of prayer. Called Oral Roberts [Oral Roberts University, Tulsa, Oklahoma] for prayer. We had beat them when I was in college. They had--so--I mean, I got a lot of prayer and lot of healing, lot of nutrition. Everything came together for me. You know, it was just a blessing any way you look at it. It was a short period of time. It was a fast recovery, all things considered. I was able to for the first time, so I still couldn't move my neck. I was still concerned about my neck even all throughout that rookie year. I didn't want to just go diving on the floor and everything. I still knew that I had a little limited motion still in my neck, but I was able to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That is--I know people with those kind of injuries-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --and some people can't really turn their head all the way around. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Did you have full range of motion with your head? Speaker 2: It was a little limited. I mean, I was about 90 percent there, but I was aware when I turned so far that I had had a broken vertebra back there and I needed to kind of be aware of that. Story_ID: 369865 Speaker 1: So, I was, but I was able to play that rookie year at Buffalo [Buffalo Braves; Los Angeles Clippers] with NBA All-Star, Randy Smith, he was the MVP of the All-Star Game that year. Played with Marvin "Bad News" Barnes [Marvin Barnes] and Swen Nater, and just a lot of guys, just: "Welcome to the NBA [National Basketball Association]." It was just everything I thought it would be and I loved, I just loved being on the court with so many guys, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and all these kind of people (laughter). Speaker 2: Was Bob McAdoo at Buffalo then? Speaker 1: McAdoo had just left to the Knicks [New York Knicks] and I played that one year in Buffalo, and my contract was structured so that I was a free agent at the end of that year, which I'm very thankful for. Cotton [Cotton Fitzsimmons] gave--Cotton really negotiated a good contract with me, and so I proved to the NBA that I could play and I had an opportunity to sign a three-year contract with the New York Knicks. So that next year I played in New York with Bob McAdoo, with Earl Monroe, Spencer Haywood and Jim Cleamons, Butch Beard, just had--Micheal Ray Richardson and Ray Williams. Had a great time in the city. Speaker 2: Now. So, when you were playing with the Braves, what was your role basically? Did you--now you're 6' 2 1/2", 6'3"? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Great shooter, obviously. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: But, you know, what--and you're not a point guard though? Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Even at 6' 2 1/2" and 6'3", that's tall for most people, but for a basketball player-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --It's small. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was a little small for a shooting guard. They've gotten bigger since. When the Magic Johnsons and all those guys started coming in the size and guards (laughter) start growing. But even George Gervin, there were some guards that were 6'7" or so at that time that I came in (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just a few--but a few, but you know. Speaker 1: Oh, but most--yeah. Speaker 2: A shooting guard is usually a little taller than the point, but-- Speaker 1: Yes, this is true. But it's all about what you can do. In the NBA, it's about that. If you can score, you can get your shot off. You can be effective and efficient. You can do it at any size. Of course, we had guys to prove that a lot later and even some before me like Calvin Murphy who was a little guy. Murphy was basically a shooting guard himself. Speaker 2: That's right. He was 5'10". Speaker 1: 5'10", and Murphy had such a quick release on the shot that yeah, he could have been 6'9"--didn't matter, you couldn't block it (laughter). So, and Gail Goodrich had been another guy who was kind of a small shooting guard who had actually led the Lakers [Los Angeles Lakers] in scoring when they had that great team that won the championship with thirty-three games in a row they won, and they had Jerry West and Wilt Chamberlain on the team, and very few people realized that little Gail Goodrich at 6'1" or 2" was the leading scorer. And so it's about having guile and deception and knowing how to really play your game and get your shot off and score it, so. That's what I could do and we have all these drills and we'd be going up and down and Cotton [Cotton Fitzsimmons] sometimes would say, "We gonna keep going until Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn] misses one," because I was just making shots every time. I mean, I could really, really shoot the basketball, so that kept me in the league and that was my claim to fame and my meal ticket. Story_ID: 369866 Speaker 1: You go to the Knicks [New York Knicks] in, was it--was it '78 [1978] or--? Speaker 2: That was '78 [1978]; that's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. And was Walt Frazier still there at that time? Speaker 2: No. Walt had left. Walt had had a kind of disappointing departure where he was traded to Cleveland [Cleveland Cavaliers], so I got a chance to play against him a little bit, but Walt was injured toward the latter part of his career. He was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember he never played much for Cleveland. Speaker 2: No, he never played much for Cleveland. Didn't--I don't think he, he and the coach [Bill Fitch] never--maybe didn't see eye-to-eye and it's a big step down from New York City [New York, New York] to anywhere, but it certainly was to Cleveland [Ohio] at that particular time. Speaker 1: That's true. That was the nadir of Cleveland, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, okay (laughter). Speaker 1: One of the great cities but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --probably, probably the lowest ebb during those days. I think that's-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --about the time the lake caught on fire? Speaker 2: (Laughing) Okay. Okay, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, but Earl Monroe was there? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: He was in his latter-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: At the end of his career, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I played two years with Earl and Earl had some pains and he was getting older and Earl didn't really, really go out and try to score twenty-five a game. He did a lot of counseling and coaching, and every now and then Earl would get mad though. Earl would be in a game and maybe Red [Red Holzman] would take him out and he would begin to feel that he would get frustrated and he'd decide, "I'm going to come back to practice tomorrow and I'm put it on." And Earl would come back and start spinning and shooting (laughter) and I was just like a kid. I mean, we were both coming off the bench at that time as Ray Williams and Micheal Ray Richardson were starting, and Earl and I would be playing against them, but I would just, "Go Earl, go Earl!" and Earl would be spinning and fading and Marvin Webster couldn't block him and Cartwright [Bill Cartwright] couldn't block him and it was just like he had a flashback and he would do his thing, man, and he'd get in the games and do it sometimes, too, and the Garden [Madison Square Garden, New York, New York] would just erupt. There was such a love for Earl Monroe that still exists because Earl was kind of like John Coltrane, he was creative. He came from somewhere that they couldn't describe, and so it was just great playing with Earl. (Laughter) It was just great playing with Earl, learning from him and seeing him when he really got excited. It was something special. Speaker 1: Yeah, just what you said. Marvin Webster couldn't block a shot. That's the Human Eraser. Speaker 2: That's right, he was the Eraser. Right, Human Eraser 'cause Earl would get to that free-throw line and fake and fade away and shoot that thing real high and Marvin would swing two or three times at it before it falls through the nets (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have any insight as to how Earl Monroe was able to seemingly, he seemed to hang in the air and he couldn't jump that high 'cause his knees were arthritic (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. That's right. That's right. Absolutely. Knees, feet--. Speaker 1: So, I don't know how, how was he able to kind of float through the-- Speaker 2: He could without jumping that high. And Earl would teach you. Earl had--it would be called unorthodox. Earl could pump, fake and hold the ball right in front of his face and he could just flick it with his wrist and he could--he had all kind of weird moves, you couldn't time him because Earl had a different rhythm to his game. So it was undescribable--the spin moves, the fades, the herky-jerky movements, the little hang in air and shoot off rhythm. Earl had all of that, man, and Earl even had one move that I got from him that helped me a lot, and Earl would share it with you. He'd teach you everything. But he had one move where Earl would kind of look down at your feet and a defensive player, it would just freeze him 'cause he would give you this little look and then he'd say, "Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn], just step, and just go and shoot right in their face. They're not going to block it." You just kind of freeze 'em and shoot it. And so I kind of perfected that where I got a lot of points off that move. Man, I'd even do it in Milwaukee [Milwaukee Bucks] where Terry Cummings was my teammate and he used to say, "When the Stinger looks down at the shoes, it's over for him, he just looked down at the shoes and he's gonna shoot it!" (Laughter) And it was an Earl Monroe trick that I got from the Pearl though, but it was fun learning the little tricks and nuances from one of the great innovators in basketball history (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, that's a great story, that's a great story. Story_ID: 369867 Speaker 1: Now this Knick [New York Knicks] team--now, you're coming off the bench, Micheal Ray Richardson and Ray Williams are starting? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now this is a Knick team that--don't know how much you want to talk about this, or if you do-- Speaker 2: You can go there. Speaker 1: It seems as though these guys got in some trouble in New York City [New York, New York]. I mean, with substance abuse and that sort of thing. From what I understand is this, what was it like being on the team with--did you have any sense of that when you were playing with them? Speaker 2: You know, it was very different when we were playing. We were very close, the three guards particularly, I, Micheal Ray Richardson and Ray Williams. And I had grown up with a background where even to this day I just have never had a beer or a glass of wine. I'm just--I'm a teetotaler and Micheal Ray even was living with me for a while. I had an apartment, a co-op in Flushing, Queens [New York] right near Shea Stadium [Flushing, New York] and he was staying with me and there was nothing alcoholic in my house at any time. And at that time, Micheal Ray--we were real close. We would go to Ray that lived in Mount Vernon [New York], his mom would cook for us. We called ourselves the family. We were very close and none of that thing was not going on at that time. And I think what really happened, the downfall was we got to where we wanted, fifty and thirty-two. My last year in New York, we were the youngest team in the NBA [National Basketball Association]; we were fifty and thirty-two. We were on our way back up. I think the Knicks got greedy. Championship again! So I went to Atlanta [Atlanta Hawks], Ray went to either the Nets [New Jersey Nets] or Kansas City [Kansas City Kings; Sacramento Kings], and Micheal Ray was left there all alone, and I think Micheal Ray felt abandoned and he got into some bad habits, and started doing some things that he had never done when we were there. And that's when it really started to crumble. And Red Holzman, later in his book, said that he made some mistakes in making those moves. They brought in Randy Smith and Mike Newlin. They brought in veteran, older guards thinking that they could get over the hump, because we got to the playoffs, lost in the first round to Artis Gilmore and the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] that year. But we were young. I mean, Micheal Ray was challenging Gilmore and Gilmore was playing at a whole another level at this time. Now this was playoffs! It's not like the gentle giant during the season. I mean, he was jumping (laughter). So not only him, though. It was hard on Cartwright [Bill Cartwright]. Cartwright was young then also. So we were just growing but they basically broke that team up and they went from fifty and thirty-two to thirty-two and fifty the next year. Just trying to make changes prematurely, trying to get over the hump 'cause sometimes our young backcourt was a little erratic at times trying to throw alley-oops--just growing pains. But rather than stay with that, stay the course with this young team, they tried to make some aggressive moves that backfired and the Knicks went all the way down and didn't rise up again until Patrick Ewing came on the scene. Speaker 1: Now, was Bernard King playing on that Knick team? Speaker 2: No. No, that was before Bernard King, too. You're right. But anyway, Bernard came actually and kind of resurrected them right in that Ewing era, too. Speaker 1: You're right. Okay. Okay. So how many years did you play for the Knicks? Speaker 2: I played three years for the Knicks. Three years for the Knicks. Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Bill Bradley? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think, did I ever meet him. It seems like I've met him before because I just know so much about him (laughter) when we were Knicks, but I can't remember actually having met him. Having read his books, having studied some of his film about how he would get open. I even talked with guys that played with him, like Earl [Earl Monroe] and Butch [Butch Beard] and he would even tell me that Bill used to do this, Bill used to do that and the trainers were there. Danny Whelan, we called Big Time, was the trainer, so I mean, I knew these Knicks. I knew Frazier. I talked hours with Walt Frazier even when I was in college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]. So I don't think I actually met Bill Bradley, but I got his books. I read his books. We share that commonality of being former Knicks, so it's kind of like that I know him even though I didn't meet him-- Story_ID: 369868 Speaker 1: After the Knicks [New York Knicks] now what happened? How did--were you traded or what happened that day? Speaker 2: I was a free agent and I-- Speaker 1: Free agent, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, free agent, so I went and signed with Atlanta [Atlanta Hawks] and stayed four years in Atlanta [Georgia] which was nice, too, because it was back home. My parents [Annye Wilkes Glenn and Charles Glenn, Sr.] could see me play. My high school [Coosa High School, Rome, Georgia] teammates, my deaf friends could see me play, so it was nice. It was a different city. It wasn't the kind of excitement and energy that Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], the world's most famous arena has, or opportunities off the court because now I was still going to graduate school. One year in New York [New York], I went to Baruch College in Manhattan [New York] and in another year, I went to St. John's [St. John's University] in Queens [New York], and then I actually started working on Wall Street my third year there where I got my stockbroker's license and I was hanging out on Wall Street and had friends that worked on the floor. I was really beginning to network and grow and met Don Gaston who was a good friend of mine who later bought the Celtics [Boston Celtics], so he was like a mentor for me. So, I was on a very strategic path when I was in New York and was very disappointed in leaving New York and all of that, that energy and leadership to come to Atlanta which was a totally different experience. The best thing about it was it was home, it was family, but it was slower. The opportunities for me were not near the same as they were in New York, and in many ways, I was set back by coming to Atlanta for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now free agency in the NBA [National Basketball Association] is--I mean, the NBA is interesting in the sense that it's probably the freest of the sports leagues-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Yes. Speaker 1: --in terms of opportunity for an individual player? Speaker 2: Absolutely, and it has had a history of that. I mean, baseball and football have had so many struggles, it's almost non-existent in football. I mean, and baseball has had some--now, but they had to go through some serious pains through guys like Curt Flood and all to really get a certain amount of freedom. But you're right, basketball has had that freedom. We have great opportunities as free agents and it's very beneficial. I personally would like to see the day when trades are only made with the approval of players. I think--I'd like to see the NBA progress to that from just a humane, individual view of how the game, I think, should ultimately be played. But I like the free agency. I like freedom for players, too. You have a contract, you play it out, and I was blessed that I was never traded. So, and that's a pretty dramatic time, too. You know, seeing guys traded obviously and, you know, the fans kind of take it for granted, but it's pretty traumatic just saying here you are one day and the next day you're cross-country somewhere. Good luck to you. Speaker 1: Now, do you remember who the player rep was with the Knicks? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. Marvin Webster, who was my seatmate and my roommate for a couple of years in New York. Marvin and I were very good friends and Marvin had Larry Fleisher [Lawrence Fleisher], the head of the Players Association [National Basketball Players Association], representing him, and so he was our player rep, Marvin. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, he left that same year you left, right? He went to Seattle [Seattle SuperSonics; Oklahoma City Thunder], I think, right? Speaker 2: No, he came from Seattle. Marvin came from Seattle-- Speaker 1: Oh, he came from Seattle. Speaker 2: --to the Knicks. So, we actually came the same year to New York. Marvin came from Seattle, the year before they'd gotten to the NBA Finals, and it was some kind of weird deal where Lonnie Shelton wound up leaving the Knicks and going to Seattle and some kind of a--it was a multi-player compensation, all kind of things were involved in it. But Marvin Webster wound up in New York. Story_ID: 369869 Speaker 1: Who was on the Atlanta [Georgia] team with you? Speaker 2: Played with Dan Roundfield, John Drew, Tree Rollins [Wayne Monte Rollins], Charlie Criss, Eddie Johnson, Armond Hill, Tom McMillen, those were some of the guys when I first got to Atlanta. James McElroy and later of course, John Drew was traded to the Jazz [Utah Jazz] basically for some money--they needed some money very badly, and the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] were able to get [HistoryMaker] Dominique Wilkins and that was a new era for the Atlanta Hawks. So I played three years with Dominique as the small forward, so it was small forward city because John Drew had been a huge star and the star of the team, star of the city, and then Dominique Wilkins came and even took that position to higher heights. Speaker 1: Well, I would say, yeah. Dominique Wilkins is considered one of the most exciting players ever played. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: The game, yeah. And so you were basically playing part time, coming off the bench and--? Speaker 2: Yes. Played pretty much my whole career coming off the bench. There were always periods of time where I started some games almost the entire season and always played well, but I was ultimately seen as a reliable person that could come off the bench. Could give you some instant offense, that wasn't going to turn the ball over, that was going to make some shots, and I pretty much played that role. I saw myself in that role. I practiced to be in that role and that's kind of the role that I played all of the almost ten years that I was in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay. So, now did you have--did they run plays for you? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. I had set plays that they would run for me. It never was as fluid as New York [New York Knicks] though. Playing with Micheal Ray Richardson and Ray Williams, both who could handle the ball really well. Anytime I was in the game, whichever one I was in which would be the point guards 'cause Ray could which switch over or Sugar could switch which over and they would handle the ball and Red [Red Holzman] told me, "Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn], don't even worry about handling the ball. Just give it to one of them guards, they'll run and get open." So I did that, they were very athletic, they would look for me on the break. I mean, Micheal Ray would wave guys bye to give the ball to me because he knew he'll get the assist, we were close friends, and I wasn't going to dribble it or mess up his opportunity to get an assist. Same thing with Ray Williams. We were very fluid, we worked very well together. It was a--I had to nurture and build that in Atlanta. It never got quite to that point. It'd get to a point where guys like Eddie Johnson, Wes Matthews would really look for me and had some good games, some good times, but never quite flowed the way that it flowed in New York. Speaker 1: Now, there was a story out of New York. I guess maybe it had been the last year you were there, I'm not sure, about you winning the game, you know, following up on Micheal Ray Richardson's shot. I was reading the material. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a couple of games that I was actually able to win with last second shots. And we beat Cotton's [Cotton Fitzsimmons] team one time. He was coaching the Kings [Kansas City Kings; Sacramento Kings] like that, and, you know, it's just about being in the right place at the right time, ready to hit the shot, hit some big shots in playoff drives. So, hard to remember all the specific instances (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think in this particular story he was saying that Micheal Ray Richardson, who you all called Sugar, right? Speaker 2: Sugar, absolutely. Speaker 1: Was hitting for the--he had a layup over by himself. He said he had missed one the game before, so you were going to follow him to make sure-- Speaker 2: Okay. Okay (laughter). Yes, Sugar would miss those lay-ups sometimes. He was going ninety miles an hour always, so Sugar would go in and he miss it, and you're right, I'd follow him up and I did hit a couple of big shots (laughter) like that by following Micheal Ray. So, it was one that was actually a game winner like that. I forgot the team that we were playing but it was a very important basket. Speaker 1: Now this Atlanta team you're on, it sounds like--I mean, there were really not any poor players in the NBA anyway. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But all of these guys can play (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, sir. Speaker 1: Sometimes the coach and the chemistries--you were saying that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in Atlanta the chemistry never seemed to get right. Speaker 2: Right, right. But we're a very good team now, and with Roundfield and Tree, we very strong inside, the defense, the rebounding, the protection of the lane was solid. We were physical. We were a very good team, and sometimes it's the era that you play in, and that particular era the Celtics [Boston Celtics] were great, the Sixers [Philadelphia 76ers] were great, the Washington Bullets [Washington Wizards] were great. So, it was hard to get too far (laughter) in that Eastern Conference with a very good team 'cause you were going to run into Elvin Hayes (laughter), you were going to run into, you know, one of those great teams of course--Bird [Larry Bird], Parish [Robert Parish], McHale [Kevin McHale] teams were really great at that time as well, and then you had Moses [Moses Malone] and the Doc [Julius Erving] in Philly, so you ran into one of those and, and you were beaten. The people forgot that you had a good team and that's always like that. I mean, whether you're in the Jordan [Michael Jordan] Bulls [Chicago Bulls] era or whenever you are, those teams that really dominate that era really kind of keep everybody else subordinated and people forget that they were some very good teams. Story_ID: 369870 Speaker 1: Of all the people you've named and some you may not have named, is there any player that in a game where you just couldn't believe what they did? I mean, you know, you played in an era with Dr. J, [Julius Erving], [HistoryMaker] Dominique Wilkins comes in later, but like--is there any story about just-- Speaker 2: There are just--there's a lot of 'em (laughter). There's a lot of 'em. You know, once or twice a year you're going to have those kind of phenomenal games, experiences that some--you have some yourself and you see other players have it. I've seen--oh man, I've seen a lot of them. I've seen--of course Dominique had some tremendous games where he just gets on fire and nobody can stop him. I've seen Larry Bird have a tremendous game where he went for almost sixty on us and we're trying to put everybody on him, and it got to the point that it got comical, you almost cheered for the guy because you're putting everybody on him and the ball keeps going in and it's always funny. It's never funny to the coach, but you just realize that he's in that bubble, and I remember Cliff Levingston was laughing so hard that Bird was hitting all these shots falling out of bounds. I mean, Antoine [Antoine Carr], Kevin [Kevin Willis], me, everybody guarding him and actually it was funny because there's nothing you can do when somebody gets like that. I can remember situations where even like Albert King would get red hot on us, and Don Nelson who is one of my favorite coaches would just look on and say, "We got anybody who can stop him? Anybody can guard him." I mean, he just guarded (unclear) (laughter)--ask anybody, can anybody stop him? I mean, I like that creativity. It was fun at those kinds of times, you know. You try to come up with a strategy, a double team or something like that to stop him, but there were a lot of instances like that. Bernard King would get on a roll, and just knocking out shots, and you kind of forget about some of 'em. But there were a lot of great performances, and players live for that to get in that what they call a zone where they're hot and the basket just gets big and all you want is the ball. You don't even have to look, you just catch and you just let it go and it's gonna go (laughter). Speaker 1: Now you being a great shooter already--I mean, do you have--is there any like particular game that you remember that you--you know, where you really impressed yourself? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah, yeah. There were a few of them, man. I remember a game particularly with the Knicks [New York Knicks], we were playing Cleveland [Cleveland Cavaliers]. I always shot good against Cleveland for some reason. They had some stat that I have the highest field goal percentage against them for a career. Even maybe today, higher then Kareem [Kareem Abdul-Jabbar] and everybody. I don't know, something about Cleveland that I would have these outstanding games, and they were a couple when we needed a big win in our playoff push and I had one of my best games maybe like--I don't know, maybe fourteen out of seventeen shots, and Red [Red Holzman] was just calling plays for me and the teammates trying to get you the ball. That's the most fun time you can have when at a timeout they're asking you, "Where you want the ball? What do you want?" So, that was a play there. There was another big game in Atlanta [Georgia] where it was the last game of the season. We needed this win to make the playoffs and we were playing the Bucks [Milwaukee Bucks] and I came off the bench. Ted Turner was the, always on courtside and had twenty-five off the bench that game, and again they were just running plays for me and the ball was just going in and Ted was just jumping up like a cheerleader, but it was the most important game of the season 'cause we needed that win to make the playoffs, and we won the game and I was able to come up with the twenty-five points that really propelled us into the playoffs which was very significant for the whole organization, so there were some games like that that really, really stand out in my mind, very memorable. Story_ID: 369871 Speaker 1: What was it like being an NBA [National Basketball Association] player? Like here, you're a guy that you don't drink. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know, but, I mean, the NBA players they--I mean, they are--the ballplayers in the gyms where I shoot and stuff, they talk about how the women follow the NBA players around and wait for 'em? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: They stalk 'em, they--you know, I mean it's--I mean, yeah. Not just women, but gamblers all kind of people. I mean-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: What's the social life like in the NBA, and how did you deal with that because that can be a heady experience for a young man? Speaker 2: It could, and it's kind of what you make it, you know. You--the cards are in your hand. You can call the shots. You can determine if you want to live a certain kind environment and style and you can have friends. I mean, it's completely up to you. Like for instance when I was with the Knicks [New York Knicks], my two seats were the first seats on courtside. If you wanted to impress anybody, you give 'em a couple of seats and bring 'em all the way down to the first row in Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], they are impressed. So, but--so you could date women from a variety of places, it didn't have to be just the party scene or the club scene which it wasn't for me, you know, if you wanted to, you could meet CEOs, you could meet anybody that you wanted to meet, and if you could have an intellectual discussion, you could share times and you can have friends like that and you can kind of determine your surroundings. I've never really understood why so many players felt that they had to always be caught up with all the crowd because it's so much chaos out there. It's people that don't like you that are jealous of you, maybe their lady's looking at you or you're looking at theirs or whatever, but you can--you don't have to even participate in that until and unless and to the extent that you want to because the cards are in your hand. You can see people come to go to dinner with them. They can come over your place. You can go over their place. So, I was always kind of low key. Now there was a time in New York [New York] when you went out and partied, went to Studio 54 and, you know, Earl [Earl Monroe] could get you in (laughter), so you have fun, man! You're a young guy, you're single, you--you're gonna have some fun. You should, you're blessed, you need to have some fun. So, obviously I did some of those things as well, but at a time, you know, you kind of tone it down some and do it on your terms and your condition and in the environment that you want it in, so to me that was more appealing. Particularly after the first four or five years in the NBA, you know. Conserve your energy, conserve your legs and, you know, take a lot of the stress out of your evening. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you're married now. Were, were you married then? Did you get married--? Speaker 2: No. I waited until after I had finished all my NBA career which I think was a wise thing. You get a chance to enjoy your NBA career and you not have that--those extra responsibilities and you get the freedom of just kind of going as you please, so. The ultimate NBA hero is Wilt Chamberlain who (laughter), who was able to just live life on his terms all the way throughout his life. I mean, you may want to have a family and all as a part of your life which is a wonderful thing too, but Wilt, Wilt certainly did it his way for all of his life and he's kind of the model for the guy who does it his way on and off the court. And Wilt certainly did that. Story_ID: 369872 Speaker 1: But you know, one of the other big joys, joys in my life was the establishment of my camp [Mike Glenn's All-Star Basketball Camp for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing] while a member of the New York Knicks, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. So, all right. Tell us about that. How did that happen? Speaker 1: Okay. I had had this dream since high school [Coosa High School, Rome, Georgia] because as I said, my best friends were deaf and I would always talk to them in the fall and ask them did they go to a summer basketball camp. And they never did. They said, "You know, we're deaf. We can't go to a camp. We can't communicate," and for me that was sad that here my best friends were and I had such a wonderful time at camp and they could never go. So, I carried this dream around with me that one day I would start a basketball camp just for deaf kids and even when I was in college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], I would go to places where deaf kids were and I would spend time with them, and as a member of the Knicks, Mill Neck School for the Deaf [Mill Neck Manor School for the Deaf, Mill Neck, New York] which is on Long Island, New York, wanted one of the Knicks to come out to their tournament. They had the tournaments just like my dad [Charles Glenn, Sr.] used to have where the schools in that area would all get together. It would be New Jersey, New York, Connecticut--those schools in that area would get together and they wanted one of the Knicks to come. So, I went to that camp. I went to that game, that tournament, came out on the court, and I started signing for myself, and a hush went over the crowd. How does he know sign language? Is he deaf? Someone in his family deaf? Are one of the Knicks deaf? So, you know, I just explained to them about my dad and my background and they just adopted me. Here was a Knick that could sign and communicate to them, and I told the athletic director and the coach that at one day I wanted to even start a camp for deaf kids and they said, "Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn], why don't you start your camp right here? We got a nice facility." So I said, "Let's do it," and so I started the nation's first recognized basketball camp--summer basketball camp for deaf kids in 1980 in Mill Neck, New York, and pretty ordinary camp that first year. We had thirty-five kids--all deaf kids, all deaf boys except I brought my friends in. I brought Marvin Webster in and I brought Toby Knight in and all of a sudden, these deaf kids who had only seen these Knicks on TV and had never met a professional athlete were getting pictures and autographs, and they were allowed to feel special, and they took the pictures to the community and showed 'em the picture and told 'em about this deaf camp and the--and the talking kids wanted to go and they told them, "No, no, no. This is only for deaf kids," so they got a chance to be special, and I continued that camp. Now, I've run that camp for twenty-seven years now, this free non-profit camp that has been just a joy of my life to include deaf kids, have reunions of past players and it's just been a wonderful thing. Speaker 2: That's great. Now, yes. It's been twenty-seven years now? Speaker 1: Twenty-seven years. I started in New York and when I came with the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] for a few years, I was doing the camp in New York and one in Atlanta [Georgia], and I remember when going back to my dad's school [Georgia School for the Deaf, Cave Spring, Georgia] and after the first two or three years, it was only boys, and the girls kept asking me, "Mike Glenn, why can't girls come to the camp?" And I kept saying, "Well, I don't how to control young girls." And they'd said, "That's no excuse! You can get someone to help you. You could do that." So, (laughter) they were so persistent and actually I said, "Okay. I'm gonna accept girls in the camp this summer," and I started it, and it has just been a wonderful experience. I mean, the girls have been wonderful. They, the girls practice with girls, boys with boys, but we do field trips together, eat lunch together, and in the evenings we're together, and it's just--its added so much more joy to the whole experience. I think of my camp--one of our themes is Diversity Through Basketball. I also now let kids that can hear and talk into my camp. About 15 to 20 percent of 'em, but they may have deaf coaches, deaf teammates. They have sign language. You got to guess, learn what they're saying and then they know how a deaf person feels, so a lot of them go on to learn sign language. I've had 'em to go on to become interpreters from that experience, so my camp has been a bridge between the two worlds, and I enjoy that, you know, so this diversity, man, bring 'em in, bring 'em in. Let's get 'em in, let 'em share experiences, learn each other, play together, learn to respect each other's culture, and I think my camp has in many ways been a model for the community and for society how people from diverse backgrounds can get along with this common love--this common passion and it can benefit everybody. Story_ID: 369873 Speaker 1: You were with the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks] for three years you said? Speaker 2: Four years (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Four years. Okay. Speaker 2: I played four years with the Hawks. Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did you all make the playoffs during that four years or anything or did you--? Speaker 2: One year we didn't. I think the other three I believe we made it, the other three. Speaker 1: I think Atlanta was throwing some pretty good teams from what I remember. Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh yeah, we were good teams then. Speaker 1: Was, was Lenny Wilkens coaching then? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, he wasn't there. I didn't think so. Speaker 2: No. Kevin Loughery coached me my first two years and my second two years, Mike Fratello was the head coach. Speaker 1: That's right. Okay. So where did you go after the Hawks? Speaker 2: After the Hawks, I had the pleasure of signing as a free agent with the Milwaukee Bucks and that was a wonderful experience. Each experience was very unique, but the most intellectual experience on the court was with the Bucks. They were a very cerebral team. We had guys like Sidney Moncrief, who was our leader. Sidney analyzed everything on the court. Sidney was ultimately prepared for every play, every player. I have never played with a player as prepared as Sidney Moncrief, and it was a great experience. I learned so much from Sid. Sid was younger than I was, but his approach to the game was new to me even at that late stage of my career. Paul Pressey, an outstanding defensive player, good communication skills. Here was a player was asking me, "Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn], where do you want the ball when you come off of that screen? Do you like a bounce pass or a chest pass?" It was that kind of discussion and communication, and Don Nelson, a coach that would come and say, "Mike, now tell Terry Cummings how you want him to set that screen. Go and position him. Just show him how you want him to turn." I mean we had that level of communication and understanding of who's hot. Who to- gets the ball here or where we got to run this guy. Discussions on, how you think we got to play Jordan [Michael Jordan]? What do you think about that? Terry, would you play him that way? I mean it was these kinds of discussions going on and I felt that so inspired. Red Holzman had been that kind of coach. Red wanted us to be students of the game, but I think the best coaches and the ones that I enjoy most are the coaches that allow the players to grow, participate. These players are geniuses. These, none--I've never played with a dumb player. There's no dumb player in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. You do not get to that level being dumb. You have to be intelligent to know how to play, how to get yourself off, how to have success. You can't just out jump everybody (laughter) and have that level of success. So I really enjoyed Don Nelson who was very creative, got input, he gave you a lot of freedom. He would even say things like, "Mike, if you want that play--now maybe I'm calling this play for Sid, but you feeling hot! You wave him off." "Sid, get out of here! I got this one--I got this one," you know, and that was okay with Nellie, so (laughter), so it was--it was just great, man it was creative, it was fun, it was communicated, we were winning like crazy, and I enjoyed playing for the Milwaukee Bucks probably on the court more than any team I ever played with. Speaker 1: That's an interesting squad. I mean, Pressey and Moncrief were two of the greatest defensive players in the NBA. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then you got--they had a full game. Then you got like some of the greatest shooters. You've played with Craig Hodges. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Ricky Pierce. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: And with yourself--I mean, you almost shoot the lights out. Speaker 2: Oh, man! We were, we had tremendous horse games, and all of those guys were very motivated. On off days, Ricky Pierce is going to be in the gym. Ricky Pierce was a really hard worker, and Craig and I would be working out. I mean, we had guys that were very dedicated, very focused, knew our roles, knew how to be effective and we all just brought it together on that court under, under Nellie's leadership. It was tremendous. You're right, good shooters, good defenders. I mean watching Paul Pressey and Sidney Moncrief play defense was even a joy. I mean, in practice you didn't want him to guard you. I mean, Pressey seemed like his arms were so long, you know, (laughter) his arms seemed like they stretched all the way across the court like, "Pressey, go guard Pierce will you!" (Laughter) But it was fun and they were great guys and we would go out to eat together, and it was very mature, it wasn't so much of the party hangout. Very little if any of that and we all--but so it was a different kind of enjoyment, but we certainly enjoyed each other and enjoyed playing in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Now who was the big man on that team? Speaker 2: We had kind of a three-headed center. We had Paul Mokeski. We had Randy Breuer. Later, that next year we brought in Jack Sikma who was a big part of things too, but that year that we won, we finally--the Bucks finally beat the 76ers [Philadelphia 76ers] and we got to the Eastern Conference Finals. That was the '85-'86 [1985-1986] year and we played the Celtics [Boston Celtics]. We ran against a buzz saw. Red Auerbach later said, "It might've been the greatest Celtic team ever." Can you imagine a statement like that? But he had--that was when Bird [Larry Bird], Parish [Robert Parish], and McHale [Kevin McHale], Ainge [Danny Ainge] and D.J. [Dennis Johnson] were all in their prime. I mean they were playing at the top of their games at that point. They were like a well-oiled machine. So, but we got to the Eastern Finals, which is the equivalent to the Final Four, which was as far as the Bucks had gone [sic.] and I think it's still as far as they have gone. So, it was a great year and, and we celebrated the success that we had and I think Nellie and everybody knew that we went as far as we should have gone and maybe a little further by eliminating Dr. J [Julius Erving] and Moses Malone's Sixers [Philadelphia 76ers], so, we had a very great year then. Milwaukee won fifty-seven games. It was the best team also that I ever played on. Story_ID: 369874 Speaker 1: We were talking off camera about Craig Hodges and his--he was a very community-minded person. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: He's--I think it's the only story I know of an NBA [National Basketball Association] player that, that--I think he's actually said that he was blackballed by the NBA. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you any, any sense of his political ideology or I think being-- Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: You know, I guess, blackballing him in the NBA? Speaker 2: Well, he, Craig Hodges was--he came from a great family. His dad [Saul Beck] was like mayor of East Chicago [East Chicago Heights, Illinois; Ford Heights, Illinois]. Craig Hodges was an independent free thinker. He read a variety of things. All of us were thinkers though. All of us were thinkers and discussers, and Craig wasn't for accepting any kind of subordination or anything like that, and he would often times speak his mind and he looked out for the community. That possibly came from his dad, so he felt a responsibility to uplift the community and he would speak to even the superstars. I know I loved playing with Craig. Craig was a great, great guy, great mind, great thinker, great shooter, and I know even when he went with the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] and even after I was out of the game and doing broadcasting, I would talk to him and he would say he was talking to Jordan [Michael Jordan] about certain things. He wanted Michael to have a certain consciousness, connection, responsibly to the community because that's what Craig was about, and it was primarily the black community that had been this history of subjugation, this legacy of slavery discrimination, Jim Crow racism. So, he wanted to uplift this community, and you have to salute Craig for having the courage for that to be his goal and to let that be his goal and not be a shame to say, I want to uplift this community as it's gone through this. But there are people and powers that--that's not their focus or they want--they don't want that to be spoken, to be verbalized and so Craig would, and Craig was a tremendous shooter. I had never to that point seen a player that could shoot a three-point shot so easy and so quickly and so accurately. We would draw plays--Nellie [Don Nelson] would draw plays up where, "Craig, you're running around here. Craig, shoot a three-pointer, we can win the game." I mean, it was just that kind of play and Craig would do it. (Laughter) Nellie was expecting it and Craig would do so, it was fantastic. I still have the utmost respect for Craig Hodges and sometimes that road that you travel is a kind of a lonely road, a road less traveled, then it can be a lot more bumps in it and I think Craig has unfortunately had a lot of those bumps. But he's tough, he's resilient, he's smart, he's intelligent. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the discussion came--I mean, the way people started thinking about this is because he would--he had just won the NBA three-point championship [Three-Point Contest] one year (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: And the next year nobody would bring him on to a team. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: I mean, it didn't--it would seem like it would be different if he had a bad year or something and then-- Speaker 2: Right. Yes. Speaker 1: But all of a sudden he's--he can't be hired by any NBA team for some reason. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Nobody would pick him up. Speaker 2: I think it's very unfortunate, and I think also it's unfortunate for Craig and it's unfortunate that guys aren't free to make their impacts. Particularly if it's a positive impact, you know, and it was nothing that Craig has ever been doing that was negative. It may have been--maybe one politic didn't like the other politic and they wanted to be neutral or some, where as they could appeal to everyone maybe. But his life, his culture, his society--I mean, some of the great athletes in our history have taken very strong positions and ultimately society has applauded those champions whether it was Jackie Robinsons or Muhammad Alis or even guys like Lou Gehrig who, who stood up for things. I think that's an admirable quality. I think we need that in athletes. I think athletes need to be leaders again. That probably led some of the Civil Rights Movement in the form of Jackie Robinson's maybe signing with the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers] may have been the start of the Civil Rights Movement. I think of Paul Robeson standing up. I think all these athletic-led movements are good. I think Jack Johnson's impact as an athlete--we can't speak on it enough. I think it just changed the whole consciousness of America if not the world. So, athletes have a very special opportunity, and the way I see it, responsibility. I think Craig saw that and I think the road has been tough for him, but I would like to see him prevail very successfully. Story_ID: 369875 Speaker 1: --And this is the second part of the interview we started yesterday. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, can you please-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Today's date is October 10th. Speaker 1: Oh, can you say it louder so we can hear you (laughter). Now today's date is October the 10th, right? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: All right. 2006? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: We're still at 476 Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia], right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, correct. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 369876 Speaker 1: You were at the Bucks [Milwaukee Bucks] at this point I think, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Yes, that's--uh-huh. Speaker 1: Was that the last team? Speaker 2: Yes, the last team, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. So what happened with the Bucks? Now you--we were talking about some of the personalities on the team. The intellectual aptitude of many-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. You know it's very interesting though. As good as our Milwaukee Bucks team was, we were still not near the highest paid team. It's a small market and Nelson [Don Nelson] and the management did a good job on their end of keeping salaries down, so-- Speaker 1: So Don Nelson? Speaker 2: Don Nelson, yeah. Nellie being Don Nelson who was the head coach and he was not the GM [general manager], but you know, they all kind of worked together. So I came there--first I came on a ten-day contract, and Nellie was so impressed that he wanted to not sign me to another ten-day, but sign me to a two-year contract. So, it was at right near the minimum salary and I'd already played eight years in the NBA [National Basketball Association]. So, I completed the first year and had a very good year and enjoyed the guys, fit in well, and I attempted to renegotiate to come back and get a salary that was just much more on the level of someone with my experience and ability to contribute, and I think in some ways that was taken as an offensive move that maybe you should have gratitude that you had this opportunity to play. We kind of rescued your contract and gave you abilities to play in the NBA, and I think that was viewed as a negative thing, but I came on to camp and I was playing well and they made a decision that maybe I should be released. So I was released. They still had to pay me that salary for the rest of that year, but rather than renegotiate, I think it kind of rubbed their feathers the wrong way. So, we left on those terms. I was not mad. I was still getting paid a decent salary and it allowed me to start a new career. I played--it was my tenth year in the NBA and guards usually don't play much longer than ten years even today, and certainly not at that time. Speaker 1: This is 1987 right? Speaker 2: This is the 1986-1987 season, and I was healthy. I had my health. I had no injuries. I may could have hung on a year or two, but the attitude becomes that hey, here's a guard that's played ten years, maybe we better get someone else. Maybe we should not play him as much. Don't run plays for him, kind of phase him out. Maybe you can hang on here or there and get traded and bounced around and then start a new career, or start a new career with money coming in. So I just decided rather than continue to try to beg for an opportunity or go down to a lesser level and play in the CBA [Continental Basketball Association]. At that time only big guys were going overseas to play. I just decided look, I've got to start a new career anyway though. So I'm not going to try to hang on. I'm healthy, I'm going to just leave with this dignity with some money coming in and start a new career. That's why I've studied. That's why I have these degrees and I have other opportunities and I'm going to pursue 'em. Speaker 1: Now that's rare isn't it, in the NBA? From what we see and read in the papers and see on television. Hardly ever is someone--that someone decides well, I got my health and I'm just going to, I have other options. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It's usually, "I hurt my knee," or "I'm too--." "I can't catch the ball anymore." Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Or something like, you know--it's something really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is rare. Speaker 1: --dramatic that happens usually or they just kind of-, you--people wish they would quit watching the game and that sort of thing but-- Speaker 2: Yes, but I left. You're right, that is kind of rare. Most guys either want some more money or either they were hurt or something happened, and I was just at a point where I was ready for some new challenges and I--and it's kind of sad sometimes when you see athletes that play at a certain level and toward the end of their career they are treated so differently, and I'd seen that happen on teams even in the NBA because the attitude that the coach and organization has for you ultimately will determine your success. It's not always about how hard you play or how good you are. They can put you in situations, put you in a game with a minute left. Put you in situations, don't run any plays for you. You play six, five minutes you don't get a shot. They take you out of the game, and people see the box scores and says, "Well, this guy's lost it now. He didn't score, he can't play anymore," but you change that scenario--run plays for him, give him the ball, give him shots. He makes shots, and it looks entirely different. So, sometimes expectations play a major role in your success and when those cards are stacked against you, it's an uphill battle or a time to do something else-- Story_ID: 369877 Speaker 1: Well, a couple of points that you made in this discussion here that sometimes--well, teams--all the players in the NBA [National Basketball Association] are top-notch players. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: We know this. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: You know, in different stages of physical health. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And there're different personalities. But most of them have a nucleus that could probably win a lot more if they had the right guidance. Is there-, how much difference does coaching make or if--why would a coach decide not to play somebody who can actually produce? That's always bothered me, you know. Speaker 2: Well, it's a few reasons that might happen. One could be the contractual situation. Maybe they have money already allocated to another person. They drafted a person really high. The community, the organization expects that person to do well. Maybe they're selling tickets on that person or maybe it will make the organization look bad if that person does not do well. You drafted this guy first round. The owner or GM [general manager] is saying, "Okay you drafted him, you play him. We need to see this guy play. We need him to produce. It's good for our organization." Maybe some--maybe it's a personality conflict with the coach. Oftentimes you have players that have personality conflict or they do things their own way, and even though they're productive, the coach is not comfortable with him. A lot times coaches want to see their plays executed and run and they want to be treated with a certain amount of, you know, dignity and respect and in a certain way. Speaker 1: Deference. Speaker 2: Yes, and sometimes they don't--it doesn't work out that way and guys don't get an opportunity to play. I mean, there are even some situations that go much beyond that (laughter). You hear old stories about maybe a guy they liked the same lady off the court or they had something, you know. You hear all these kind of stories. I think that happens rarely. I think it certainly has happened a few times in the NBA (laughter). Times I wouldn't mention, but mainly their issues were contract or issues with style of play, with relationship with the coach, with expectations of the organization usually based on draft picks and money that they've already put on a guy and they want to see that guy do well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there's obviously racism questions, too. I mean, we could--I think we do a disservice when we don't acknowledge that racism existed and still does exist. So, I think we have to be aware of that in order to improve on it, and not just pretend that it's not there because there are clearly sometimes when GMs or coaches want a particular white guy played because they think that's good for the paying public--true or not--and rather than go against the grain, and fight the racism and just go with the best team, there are some organizations, coaches, GMs that will go on and say, "Well, let's do this. Let's give this guy some extra time here because this is good for our fan base," and also guys that may take political positions that maybe the team is not so comfortable with. Maybe they're very strong in their beliefs in a certain area. Maybe in black liberation or to uplift the black community there may be and there are some coaches, teams, GMs that are not so comfortable with that being a part of your label, a part of what you're known as, they would surely prefer you to be apolitical, and when I came in to the NBA, there were some agents and some older players that said, "Don't sound so intelligent." This was now--this was in 1977-78. It sounds like something that you think Frederick Douglass went through when he was giving his speeches and they'd say, "Give us some plantation talk." (Laughter) But there was still that mentality at that time. I don't think that's so prevalent at this day and age. Maybe a little legacy of that, but there were actually agents and players that would tell you, "Don't give so many interviews. Don't sound so intelligent and articulate." Just be a player that I just want to help the team win and I'm going to do whatever I can and let that kind of be your handle of who you are and you'll be accepted more and you will not be a challenge to the intellectual minds that are there for the coaches and GMs (laughter). Speaker 1: That are supposed to be the leaders of the teams. Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 369878 Speaker 1: The name of your shot. We didn't talk about that last time, but you actually named your shot. Speaker 2: I did, and you know, I'm a student of black history and culture and I knew that I had spent so many countless hours with my jump shot. I'd even had articles where I was interviewed and I had said, "My lady was my jump shot," because the Friday nights, the Saturday nights, the Sundays oftentimes when guys were out dating and hanging out, I was in the gym shooting, so I would just say, "My jump shot is my lady," because I spent so much time with it and I would even talk to it like a lady, "Come on, lady, in." So, you know, I had a relationship with it and I decided that if [HistoryMaker] B.B. King could name his guitar Lucille because of the relationship that had with his guitar, I should have a name with my jump shot. I had that much time, that much confidence in it. So as a member of the New York Knicks, we actually had people to write in with ideas and names and I got mail from all over the city. People with an idea of a name, and the name actually came from my sister, Teresa [Teresa Glenn], who is a historian. Teresa is one of the most knowledgeable people of history that I know that I've ever met and she had an idea and I actually went with her idea which was to name my jump shot Candace, C-A-N-D-A-C-E, and I actually educated the New York [New York] public on Candace, by, why Candace, so in the interviews I explained that in the times of Alexander the Great, the African queens, particularly around Ethiopia, were called Candace, and they had great societies where males and females were both respected and these Candaces had these great armies of elephants and Alexander the Great saw this great army in Ethiopia led by Candace and decided to go the other way and not attack Ethiopia and Sudan and around in that area at that time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There's a famous story about Alexander the Great for those who in ancient--you could read it in ancient texts, you know. Speaker 2: No, absolutely. Absolutely, so my jump shot was named Candace and occasionally even in these days I'll run across a fan who will say, "Hey Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn]! How's Candace?" And I've always just so--it's quite an honor for someone to first remember that that happened back in 1980 or '81 [1981] and to still remember that in 2005 or '06 [2006] is a real compliment. Speaker 1: That's interesting because you know one of the top basketball prospects to go into the WNBA [Women's National Basketball Association] this year was Candace Parker, who played at Tennessee [University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee] I think, who is from the Chicago [Illinois] area. Speaker 2: Wow! Speaker 1: I just wondered if she (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I need to get in contact with her. That would be a nice little story--one Candace to another (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, right. What's your sister's last name? I don't know if she has a married name. Is it-- Speaker 2: No, she's single. Teresa Glenn, and Teresa has taught at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], Paine [Paine College, Augusta, Georgia], Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. Most of the historically black colleges [HBCUs] around the Southeast, and African American history, African history, world history, and she can just teach it without a textbook, so she was really always into history where I was always into math. But we've kind of shared and helped each other kind of along our intellectual pursuits. Story_ID: 369879 Speaker 1: Had you planned to go into broadcasting afterwards? I mean, how did your interest develop around broadcasting (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have never--I had never planned to go into broadcasting. I'd never--I've taken one class at Southern Illinois [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], on interpersonal communication, but that is all the communication. I had no plan on going into it. I love mathematics. I thought about going into something relating to math. I'd even worked for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] one summer kind of as an internship while I was still in school, so the plan was to do something that was math related, and actually after I got out--well actually, let me go back to when I was playing with the Knicks [New York Knicks]. I had gone to grad school a couple of summers working on my M.B.A. doing quite well. Making even better grades in grad school than I was making in undergrad, which was mostly A's, and I was--talked to some on Wall Street that persuaded me that it may be in my best interest to become a stockbroker, to develop the relationships with all the players and my name and reputation, and I thought about being an investment banker maybe, but they thought that that was too much paper work, that I'd be better suited to use my personality and contacts. So, I became a stockbroker in New York in 1981, and then I let my license expire when I came to Atlanta [Georgia]. I kind of lost the spirit of it. When you're leaving Wall Street, it's such a step down to go anywhere else, and I was working right on Broad Street right off Wall Street in Manhattan [New York]. I mean, I was right there at the heart of the financial capital of the world and I knew a lot of people that worked on the floor. It was a very inspiring kind of work. I was reading all the books. Carl Icahn was taking over companies at that time. I mean it was just an exciting time to be working at Wall Street. Then when I came to the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks], Atlanta, I saw it as a secondary market. I didn't see the passion, the energy of Wall Street. Then I let my license--stockbroker's license expire. So after I left basketball, I decided to go back and become a broker again. So I started with Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.] this time and had to do the training all over, take the test all over and made some of the highest scores that had, they'd ever had in that office. They were just amazed that here was an athlete that was making these unbelievable scores to qualify to be a stockbroker. So, we studied at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] for a month and trained and it was very good training, so I'm really glad that I trained all over again to become a stockbroker. So, I worked for several years at Merrill Lynch as a broker, and also worked on the pre-pension plan for the NBA [National Basketball Association] players, so it was--it was very good, I enjoyed it very much for those years. Story_ID: 369880 Speaker 1: Then an opportunity to become a broadcaster came up. I was writing a few articles for the Atlanta Journal [Atlanta Journal-Constitution]. I was writing about a playoff series between the Milwaukee Bucks and the Atlanta Hawks. Those were the last two teams that I played for. I knew both coaches, Don Nelson, I knew Mike Fratello. I knew their strategies, their styles, so. After each game, I would write an article for the Atlanta Journal and my article was so--articles were so well received that the Turner Broadcasting [Turner Broadcasting System, Atlanta, Georgia] people asked me to be a guest at halftime of the final game just to give my analysis because I had given even historical perspectives to what was going on in that playoff series. Speaker 2: Now what year is this? This is-- Speaker 1: This should have been the--was it '87 [1987] or '88 [1988] playoff series. I think it was '88 [1988]. Speaker 2: Was that Orlando [Orlando Magic] and Houston [Houston Rockets]? Speaker 1: This was Atlanta was playing Milwaukee. Atlanta Hawks--my two former teams, Atlanta Hawks and Milwaukee Bucks were playing in a playoff series, and so I wrote nice articles and I did a halftime interview just giving an analysis, and I just told them what I saw. What was happening on the floor, and even people that knew me thought that, "Boy, I could tell you guys rehearsed that because that sounded real." I said, "No, we didn't rehearse, the guys just asked me questions and I answered them." You know, I was always able to analyze and explain being a mathematician. You better know how to analyze. (Laughter) So I just did my thing on the air and they offered for me to come back and see if I wanted be an announcer next year. So, I'd never really thought about it. I said, "Okay. I'll come back." So I interviewed, and that first year I subbed in. I was just a substitute analyst, and I did a few halftime shows. Then I did a few ESPN games. I was doing some collegiate games and I began to really like broadcasting and to pursue it. Pursue other opportunities. Pursue opportunities on CNN. So before I know it, I was doing shows. I had shows on CNN, 'College Basketball Preview.' I had a show, 'This Week in the NBA.' I was covering NBA All-Star games. I was covering Final Fours. I was covering the championship series. I became really a journalist who was giving analysis on the air, and I really liked it, and the show was going all overseas. One time Martin Luther King III, who is a friend of mine, was in South Africa. He said he woke up and looked at TV and there I was on the TV (laughter) doing my thing, so people all over the world would see me at these All-Star games and go "[HistoryMaker] Mike Glenn, I see you in Israel." I mean it was just a phenomenal thing. It was like a rebirth of me in a whole new, new area, and I liked it and I enjoyed it and I continued to do that for a little over fifteen years. Speaker 2: Okay. Fifteen years. So what happened at the end of fifteen years? Speaker 1: At the end of fifteen years, the Atlanta Hawks--I was the Atlanta Hawks' broadcaster. I had grown up as the number one player in the State of Georgia. I'd played four years for the Atlanta Hawks. I'd broadcast for fifteen years. So, I really thought that I was just a part of the family and very stable, and I didn't really look for other opportunities. I didn't pursue opportunities to continue working with ESPN. We were doing about seventy-five games a year. It was a full plate, a full agenda. I was still running my camp [Mike Glenn's All-Star Basketball Camp for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing] for the hearing impaired. I had a full life. Speaker 2: Okay. So you were full time with the Atlanta Hawks as a broadcaster? Speaker 1: Full time. Absolutely. Speaker 2: From what year to what year? Speaker 1: Well, it grew. I started in 1989 doing substituting work and then it grew until for the last fourteen years there until 2003, I was doing from sixty to seventy-five games per year, and that was a full plate for me. I wasn't trying to go cross country one night and be at the Hawks the next night, and do a collegiate game, so that just wasn't what I was doing. But as a result when new ownership came in for the Hawks, they decided to go in a new direction. Now keep in mind I had introduced some new things to the Hawks and to the broadcast. I was doing a halftime special during Black History Month. I would do a two-minute vignette on some person or some event that happened that was, you know, featuring African Americans and it really grew. I got good support for it. It was fantastic. People would come up to me and say, "Oh man, I saw that that was great even in the offseason. That what you did on the Black History Month, that was really good. You should be on public television or something." So, I used my collecting. I used my knowledge and level of history. I got support from the Turner and the Fox people to help dig up video to support it, and it just became a part of what I did, too, and it was a very strong part. I mean, we had very strong black history halftimes, and it's very hard for anybody to match that level of collecting that I had 'cause I was collecting books, newspapers, magazines, artifacts. I was presenting them in a very scholarly way, so--but the new ownership for, I'm not even sure what all reasons, but they decided to go in a new direction and it kind of caught me off guard. Speaker 2: They do this on a regular basis when, you know--I know, it has happened in Chicago [Chicago Bulls] a couple times where a new owner comes along and just replaces the announcers for some reason. Speaker 1: Exactly, and I thought I was part of the family though. I thought whatever changes would happen--I grew up in Georgia, and I was planning to stay. I got all kinds of awards and I'm a part of the family, but not necessarily so. So, and as you mentioned it happens into a lot of people and a lot of times. So [HistoryMaker] Les Brown, one of the guys that I liked a lot, a motivational speaker said, "The universe is giving you an opportunity to grow in a new direction." So, we have to accept that challenge and go in new and different directions. Story_ID: 369881 Speaker 1: So what did you do next? Speaker 2: So next I was the commissioner for the World Basketball Association. Speaker 1: Now how did that come about now? Speaker 2: The owner--I knew a friend of mine, Leroy McMath, who founded the World Basketball Association, minor league basketball across the Southeast. It was going into a second year, and he knew of me as a basketball junkie. Loves the game, and was interested in possibly having me come on as commissioner. So I met with him a few times and I decided, "Okay, that would be a new challenge, new opportunity to stay in the game, meet new people and use all my skills in a new way." So, I accepted the challenge and I've been for a couple years now the commissioner of the World Basketball Association. We have twelve teams primarily across the Southeast. We try to give young men an opportunity to continue their careers and pursue their dreams. Sometimes it's a just a step. Just play in our league and we'll try to refer you to the developmental league, to Europe, to the CBA [Continental Basketball Association], to the NBA [National Basketball Association], wherever your talent will take you. Give you some exposure and some development and some connection to the community. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I remember a few years ago Isiah Thomas was involved with a league and I mean there were some--'cause it used to be just the CBA was the minor league. Speaker 2: Right. That's right. Speaker 1: And then Isiah--did Isiah Thomas take over the seat? How did that happen? What happened? Speaker 2: He did. Isiah took over ownership of the CBA and I met with Isiah about it and was looking for opportunities to help him, help him get TV, help him even sell the team to some of the musical moguls here in Atlanta [Georgia], so I met with Isiah a few times before he was back coaching with the Indiana Pacers and the CBA, I don't know if the NBA thought that might be competition. It was a distinctly different league, and as it turned out then Isiah wound up letting that dream to the side, going on to become coach of the Indiana Pacers, and to continue on his career in a different path. But that was a very separate league, a distinct league that's been in existence for well over fifty years. It's a pretty stable league even though they've had their bankruptcy and re-emergence and that kind of thing. Speaker 1: So the CBA actually was separate from the NBA? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But used as kind of an unofficial developmental league for NBA? Speaker 2: That's right. Exactly right. Speaker 1: And now what about the World Basketball Association? Now did that actually start in 2003 or-- Speaker 2: Yes, and it's unofficially--it's not even as connected as a CBA because we send players everywhere. We don't have any support from the NBA whatsoever, but we like to develop relationships with them. We want them to see our players, scout our players and obviously sign our players and our coaches. So it's a developmental league, it stands on its own, but developing relationships and networks everywhere. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is--let me ask you a question. It's just an opinion question. In your opinion, what makes the difference in say a guy who is a player in the World Basketball Association rather than the NBA? I mean, what--because there are a lot of great--as we say a lot of great players and don't--that never make NBA for one reason or another. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And I was reading the--one of your books, the one that's about basketball and leadership and success. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And there are quite a few comments in there by successful players, but there are also comments and quotes by players who were successful at one point but then fell off the, you know, whatever it was, and became very unsuccessful. Speaker 2: Sure. True (simultaneous). Story_ID: 369882 Speaker 1: --So, go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay. I think one of the most underrated factors in the success of a professional basketball player or maybe even anyone is the infrastructure underneath. The stability, and when you have leagues and teams and families that can support you and give you an offense, a stable home or somebody that's working with you, you emerge a much better player, and oftentimes we've seen players that are even established players. They get into a new situation where even maybe their teammates are competing with them, they don't get along, they don't run plays for them, they don't give them the ball, they don't get the ball in their favorite spots. All these things are big factors, and guys that are known stars get in another situation and you think, "Boy, he's lost it. He's no good anymore." No, he's still good, but it's just the relationships and the infrastructure are much different. I think that's why even when you see kids play in elementary school, you don't see the talent emerge often times from kids who are in very unstable home environments. I mean, they're not getting the right nutrition, the right sleep, the right nurturing, the right teaching, and kids that have everything in place emerge early as better players, and you'll see that maybe all the way through high school and sometime in college, but by the time they get to be adults they may have overcome many of those obstacles and that talent will rise and you'll see the cream of the crop in the NBA [National Basketball Association] that have. But often times that infrastructure is a tremendous thing, and bringing that to mind, I also have worked for the last nine years with a nutrition company--a mineral nutrition company. It's called Youngevity, and one of the top mineral nutrition experts in the world named Dr. Joel Wallach, who distributed a tape called 'Dead Doctors Don't Lie,' which is the most distributed health tape in the history of the this country. But what Dr. Wallach's premise is, is that the mineral nutrition that is no longer available in most foods is necessary for our longevity, our health, for our reaching our maximum potential. So I've been also taking this message--we use it in our WBA [World Basketball Association] league. We use it as lectures. I've lectured around the country at colleges to professional teams about the importance of nutrition, and that's another thing that is misunderstood and not given enough credibility on all levels of play. The nutrition that you have before you go out there on that court as a factor of how you develop and how you play. Story_ID: 369883 Speaker 1: You're currently the commissioner of the World Basketball Association? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: And you're also a writer--you know, a book collector, and we were discussing your friendship with [HistoryMaker] Charles Blockson and your sister [Teresa Glenn] being a historian. How did you get involved in history on the level that you're involved? Speaker 2: It's amazing, and on my first book that I wrote called 'Lessons in Success from the NBA's Top Players' [Michael T. Glenn], I went to all the top players on every NBA [National Basketball Association] team and I asked them two questions. I asked them questions that my mom [Annye Wilkes Glenn] had always asked me. I asked them, "What lesson did you learn from your basketball? What lesson--what did you learn that's the most important lesson to help you be successful in basketball?" And I also asked them, "What's the most important lesson they learned to be successful in life?" Then I surrounded their thoughts with thoughts of other outstanding men and women throughout history because you know, I'd always known quotations. I recited them, they were on my walls, and so I picked some good quotations of famous people throughout history that kind of correlated with those people and their situations, but then I wanted the book where these quotations came from, so I began to get research. I said, "Well, where did this quote come from? Where's it written?" And my favorite writer of all time is a lady named Zora Neale Hurston, and I used a few of her quotes in there, and I wanted her books. I'd never had any of Zora Neale Hurston's books. I love her autobiography, 'Dust Tracks on a Road' [Zora Neale Hurston] the most. I mostly read nonfiction books and her--I guess her biggest success is 'Their Eyes Were Watching God' [Zora Neale Hurston], which was made into a movie. But I started collecting these books where--these quotes that contained the quotes, and I started collecting books, and that's when I first found out about first edition books. I never knew there was such a thing as a first edition book that was collectible. So, I was like a kid in the candy store. I learned a whole new area that you could collect and have, and I started with the Harlem Renaissance writers. The fascination with Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston and Countee Cullen and later on even James Baldwin, excellent writers that wrote so magnificently, and I wanted to collect their works, and I wanted the first edition copies of it. And from there I went to the slave narratives. I always loved Frederick Douglass and everything that he had written, and how in my opinion he is the greatest American that ever lived, and I found that I could get a first edition copy of his book? And you should have seen me when I got my first copy. I have more than one now. My first copy of 'Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass' [Frederick Douglass]. This book was written in 1845 and it was published in the Anti-Slavery Office of Boston [Boston, Massachusetts]. So, I saw the significance of this book. I saw that books have a spirit, and that it's a historical artifact as well. The fact that it was published in the Anti-Slavery Office in Boston makes it a historical artifact as well as a great book that impacted America and the world as did Frederick Douglass. So the power of books--the spirit of books led me to continue to collect and it went from Harlem Renaissance to slave narratives to music, to sports, to so many things that deal with the African American life in this country and abroad. Story_ID: 369884 Speaker 1: That was the first book, and it's interestingly laid out. Now, I've seen books about the NBA [National Basketball Association] before where they analyze the players and they say this guy can, is a good spot-up shooter or this guy would go to the hole. Another guy was just good for clogging up a lane (laughter). Speaker 2: Right. That's right. Speaker 1: You know, that kind of thing. But you had--you analyzed people on each team-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --based on who is the caregiver on the team? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And who's the dominant personality? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: So, tell us a little about that because that is a unique way to look at it. Speaker 2: Okay. Thanks. Yes. In my first book, 'Lessons in Success from the NBA's Top Players' [Michael T. Glenn], I identified on each team a dominant personality and a caregiver, and each team has its dominant personality that really determines the personality of the team. Even more so then the coach because there's this player that everybody follows and his leadership and his attitude and his persona is personified on that team. The easiest, most obvious example from my era were the great teams of Michael Jordan. Michael Jordan had a very strong demanding personality. He demanded that the Bulls [Chicago Bulls] practiced and played at a level that above--was above what most people thought they could perform, but because of his dominant personality, they played to that level and won championships. Now use the caregiver also to understand a person that everybody can relate to very easily, very friendly. Jordan was sometimes intimidating but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. He actually punched a couple of the players in the face and-- Speaker 2: Wow! Speaker 1: Steve Kerr has a famous story of him punching Steve Kerr in practice because he was guarding too close. Speaker 2: Whoa. Yeah, Jordan was a lion (laughter). Jordan was a lion, but then there are caregivers on the teams, too, as there are in all our organizations and our societies. There are caregivers that you relate to, can give you nourishing, can give you support, can give you a certain amount of comfort and they're very important, too, and on that particular team, Scottie Pippen played that role. I mean, you even saw when Michael was very sick during the playoffs against the Jazz [Utah Jazz] and could hardly stand up. It was Scottie that was helping him, escorting him off the floor. So, Scottie obviously grew up in that kind of environment where he was a caregiver, and those caregivers are important, too, in our societies and on our teams. So, I identify those on each team, and we have them in our societies as well, and in my opinion is we either should be a caregiver or dominant player or either supporting those people that are, and great teams know that. They know who those personalities are. They relate to 'em in that perspective, and they support 'em and follow their leadership. Speaker 1: Yes. Scottie Pippen had an interesting--a great player, but he passed first usually before he even shot the ball unless he had a wide open, you know. Speaker 2: He did, and it's amazing when I interviewed those players how their mentality is personified by the way they play. For instance, I asked Scottie what's the lesson he learned, and he said, "I learned that you develop your game as a whole for the team--for the team to win and individual things will come later," and you see that in his game. You see him defending, passing, helping out. Steve Kerr once said that he would even ask you if you wanted a shot and he would try to get a shot for you. So see, that's a caregiver that's looking out for you. I mentioned Paul Pressey that would ask me, "How do you like that pass? You like a bounce pass or you want a direct straight chest pass?" And those are just questions that a caregiver will ask. Sure they're professionals and sure that's their job, but everybody is not asking that question. Some guys are gonna ask, "Why didn't you catch the pass?" (Laughter). Speaker 1: Or why don't you pass it to me? Speaker 2: That's right. That's another thing. Why didn't you pass it to me? I was open (laughter). Speaker 1: And there's an old basketball saying in every gym in the country. You know, when certain guys are on the floor, they say there's not enough basketball for 'em 'cause everybody is trying to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Everybody's trying to shoot man, and glory is in scoring the ball! (Laughter) That's correct. Story_ID: 369885 Speaker 1: There are two others and they're 'From My Library' ['Lessons From My Library'] is-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the title and it's 'Volume I' ['Lessons From My Library: Volume I,' Michael T. Glenn] and 'Volume II' ['Lessons From My Library, Volume II: The Integration of Sports History,' Michael T. Glenn]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: 'Volume I' includes African American history characters that some of us are familiar with like Frederick Douglass, but also includes people like Mary Ann Shadd Cary-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that probably many people haven't heard of. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Why did you put that book together? Speaker 2: Well, I wanted people to know some of these great African American people. I wanted them to know their legacy and their contribution. I wanted all races to know about them. I certainly wanted black people to know of their history and their heritage and their legacy and their responsibilities because when they see themselves in a certain light in the past, it impacts how they see themselves today and the vision they have for themselves tomorrow. Often time, I believe our success is a measure of the expectations we have for our future, and if we think that we're supposed to be successful, that we're supposed to be a leader and we're supposed to help our communities, I think we will go down those paths. But when our mind has been subordinated to think that we can't, we aren't, we weren't, we don't deserve, we're less, we're minority, we aren't major, we're minor, then we behave that way. So, I wanted us to know who we are, who we were, and who we can be. So, I introduced a person like Blind Tom [Blind Tom Wiggins] and every time I've gone to schools or anywhere and I told people about Blind Tom, they can't believe. First of all, they didn't know about him and how magnificent he was. Blind Tom was a musician that was born in Columbus, Georgia who may be the greatest musician in this country's history. Who could play seven thousand songs out of memory. Who could hear a song one time and play it perfectly without a flaw. Even complex compositions he could hear it one time and reproduce it as well as create his own tunes. Who traveled around America, and even in the world was, a fantastic genius and these kids are like, "Why don't we know about him?" So, we have the responsibility to educate ourselves. I think our educational system should do a much better job of including these stories, but in the meantime and in addition to that, we have to reach out and learn and I wanted them to see that they could research and learn things that they did not know to be inspired by it. To be a friend of these people. To see these people as real people in their lives because that's what reading does for you. So, I think it adds to our literacy. It adds to our wanting to read and learning to read better. Speaker 1: I just thought of another point here. We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Samuel Floyd at the Center for Black Music Research in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: He spent a lot of time discussing Blind Tom. Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: And he discussed the tragedy of Blind Tom's life, which is, black entertainers and black athletes are often exploited and especially when I think with Blind Tom's master-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that raised him from--he discovered this ability in Blind Tom when he was about three? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and ended up basically managing his, if you want to call it that--all around the world. Speaker 2: Yes. Right. Speaker 1: He kept him basically in slavery. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All of his life. Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: Even after slavery was over. Speaker 2: And made hundreds of thousands. I mean, Blind Tom was earning about a hundred thousand dollars a year back in the 1870s. Speaker 1: And the master was spending it. Speaker 2: Was spending it and collecting money, and his legacy has benefited from that. You know, his children's children have owned property, have had land, have gotten loans, and have gotten businesses. So the legacy of that has been very positive for the people that owned him and after the Civil War managed him, as opposed to the relatives of Blind Tom who only have that history to hold on to, and I think that's why history is so important. I think it's more important for African Americans also. Schomburg [Arturo Alfonso Schomburg] said that also, who is like a mentor for [HistoryMaker] Charles Blockson, the greatest collector of African American history in our country and my mentor, but Schomburg, who was like a mentor for all collectors of African American history, said that our history had to be more important to us. We should also have an antiquarian emphasis because we need to collect to validate to be inspired to know who we are more so than anybody else, when you're subjugated and subordinated because that was the only thing our ancestors could leave. They couldn't leave property. They couldn't even leave a last name. Oftentimes they could just leave a song or a prayer. So, I think we have to grab that and hold on to that and nurture that and realize that this is our heritage. This is what's left for us and we have to take that and build on it. So, I think our history is more important to African Americans than it is to other people. Story_ID: 369886 Speaker 1: Just briefly tell us, as you said Blockson's [HistoryMaker Charles Blockson] the--Charles Blockson is the inheritor of the position that Arthur Schomburg [Arturo Alfonso Schomburg] once held (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --as a collector of-- Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: --black materials? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How did you meet Charles Blockson? Speaker 2: Okay. I was in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--traveling to Philly as a broadcaster. We were--76ers [Philadelphia 76ers] were playing the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks]. Yeah, you're there a day early. You had time to kill, and so I had heard of Blockson. I'd heard of his collection at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I said, "I'm going to go to Temple University today and I'm just going to see if I can see some of this collection." So I went to Temple. Found out where the collection was. Was looking through it, and I asked the lady who was the secretary a question. I said, "Boy, is this Mr. Blockson's collection?" "Yeah, this is Mr. Blockson's collection. He's here, would you like to see him?" I mean, I was--I was like, "Would I like to see him?" I had read so much about him. I was like, "Yes! Would he see me?" I mean, I was really amazed that he was that accessible. She said, "Sure, he's here," and she told who I was and Mr. Blockson was so gracious. He said, "Come right in, young man. How you doing?" So we talked. He shared some of his books, signed them and gave me first edition copies of some of his books, and he inspired me. He said, "Keep collecting. What you're doing is very valuable," and he pointed me to some books that I may want to get and to start my collection, and I often-, I still--I would talk to him about once a month. I would see him every time I go to Philly. I'd make sure and go by and see Dr. Blockson and spend some time with Mr. Charles Blockson and he al- talked to him on the phone, and he always says at the end of our conversation, "Mike [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn], keep collecting," and he acknowledged me in his book. He wrote a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful, wonderful book called-, and he says, excuse the term, but it's a book collecting term, and you're familiar with it. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: It says, damn rare, and damn rare is a term not just that it's a curse word, but that it means something that is so rare that you'll maybe see it once in a lifetime. So we're always in pursuit of that thing, and he mentioned it to me in his book. It's a wonderful book. I got about five or six copies of it, but it's a wonderful book. It's a great inspiration book for anybody interested in history and collecting, then it's a must. Story_ID: 369887 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your last book. The last one that I saw, from my library, 'Volume II' ['Lessons From My Library, Volume II: The Integration of Sports History,' Michael T. Glenn], is the history of black athletes. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you started off with a history of black boxers. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: People--what's his name? Richmond. What's his first name (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bill Richmond. Speaker 1: Bill Richmond. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tom Molineaux. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: Yeah. Tell us a little bit about that 'cause I think I haven't seen-- Speaker 2: Isn't it amazing? Speaker 1: --a collection that--I mean, a book that really illuminates the black boxing era especially the way you did or black baseball either, too. Speaker 2: Absolutely. It's amazing that we have such a long history that has kind of never been told adequately, and the first great athletes in American history. First there were jockeys that were mostly all black. There were great jockeys in the 1600s, but the first athlete to compete for a world title was a black man named Tom Molineaux, and how I found out about Tom Molineaux--when I was doing my halftime vignettes for the Hawks [Atlanta Hawks], I found out about--I was doing a story on Jack Johnson, and in researching on Jack Johnson, I found that a hundred years before Jack Johnson there had been a great boxer named Tom Molineaux, and I like everybody that I shared it with said, "What, there was a guy a hundred years before Johnson," and Tom Molineaux actually was enslaved in Virginia. Fought his way out of slavery. Went to New York [New York] when he won his freedom and it's believed that his owner--his enslaver would bet money that nobody could beat Tom Molineaux and on one final fight that he may have even bet the entire plantation and told Molineaux if he'd win, he'd give him his freedom. Molineaux won the fight, won his freedom, went to New York. In New York he defeated all worthy challengers and became the conquering champion of America, and he heard about a championship in England because the heavyweight champions in the world were in England at that time. It was the pugilistic, which means boxing, capital of the world, and in the fashion of Ali [Muhammad Ali] or any of the great champions, he said, "I want to go fight the best and I'm going to beat the best." So he had the kind of courage and audacity and the vision and the expectation that he could beat anybody. Molineaux found his way to England in 1809 and was trained by another black man, Bill Richmond, who had left during the Revolutionary War who was also in England. Bill Richmond was his trainer. Bill Richmond innovated the science of boxing in England. It was a--it was a kind of knockdown, drag out and Richmond kind of used left and quickness and dodging and a lot of things that he had a great impact on the history of boxing, and he taught this science of boxing to Tom Molineaux. Molineaux went all the way up the ladder within two fights. When he first got there they said, "This novice--this loudmouth novice couldn't be a challenge for our trained pugilist." Within two fights they said, "The only guy that can compete with Tom Molineaux is the heavyweight champion of the world." So, he went from within two fights, a loudmouth novice unknown, to fight for a heavyweight championship of the world, December 18, 1810. Thus, the first great American athlete took the stage representing America against the British Empire. This was the father of athletics in America in that it was the first great athletes. So, I don't care if you're a boxer, a baseball player, a race car driver, a jockey, you should pay homage to Tom Molineaux, who is the father of boxing, of athletics in America. Speaker 1: Yeah. Okay, and yes, some of the stories--I mean, the story of him fighting for the championship, and the crowd of course was an all-English crowd. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: He knocked the champion down three or four times. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: There was always some reason why they kept the fight going (laughter). Speaker 2: It was--it was (laughter) and even English writers agree he should've been declared the winner. Speaker 1: I think he won about four times, but they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --they revived the champion-- Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: --and then called him out on a foul or something. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Why--how did that happen? Speaker 2: It was a few instances. I guess the biggest one was Tom Molineaux had knocked the heavyweight champion, Tom Cribb, out, and according to London [England] prize ring rules, you have thirty seconds to come to scratch. Scratch means in the area in the center of the court where you draw the line and you come out and shake hands. You come to scratch within thirty seconds of being knocked down or out. Tom Cribb could not come to scratch, so his corner men--his second started yelling, "Foul, foul! Molineaux has something in his hands." This is bare knuckle fighting now. "He has something in his hands. A bullet or rock or something." So they investigated and they look and find nothing. In the meantime, Tom Cribb is reviving and he has not come to scratch. So different historians said it took a different amount of time. I've heard four minutes. I've heard two minutes. I've heard twenty minutes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think Molineaux tripped and then hit his head a ring post or something and that was so-- Speaker 2: --and that was a later incident-- Speaker 1: And then he couldn't, you know-- Speaker 2: Exactly, and so they revived Cribb and the fight continued and Molineaux should have been declared the winner right then. One other instance you mentioned toward the end how he really lost the fight is he knocked Cribb down and tripped over him and hit his head on the ring post and got a concussion and may have fractured his skull, and he could not go on, but a couple of rounds after that is how Molineaux finally lost the fight. Story_ID: 369888 Speaker 1: We always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: One hope is that the athletes will be reconnected to the community. That the community will recognize athletes, retired and current athletes. That they can be a leader in the community again. I think we have lost the leadership of African American athletes in our community. We've become disconnected and our communities are in a crisis. We need that leadership back. We need that courage. We need the impact to go forward in a positive way and there you can make an argument that the athlete has been replaced by the rap singers or the entertainers to a certain extent, but the leadership in the past came from your Paul Robesons. Paul Robeson who was probably the greatest football player in the country was a great leader of not only African American people, but labor and for equality of all citizens. He was a citizen of the world, but he--he's always connected to his black community that, that created him. Jackie Robinson was the same way. Jackie Robinson broke down so many barriers, but all the way until his death, he was working with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] working to get blacks jobs in managing and coaching in baseball. Jackie Robinson continued to fight for and to lead his community. Muhammad Ali, even when he was Cassius Clay. Jim Brown, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. But now you have this disconnect. Speaker 1: There seems to be a tug-of-war in some ways. I know when I, well in Chicago [Illinois] for instance, there was a time that [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks lived in the black community. He lived on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. Now most of the black Cubs [Chicago Cubs] players or White Sox [Chicago White Sox] players or Bears [Chicago Bears] players or Bulls [Chicago Bulls] players live as far away from the black community as possible. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: Michael Jordan lives in Highland Park [Illinois]. I mean, and it seems as though it's--that we suspect that the management wants to cloister these players, to keep them away from the black community, perhaps to keep them away from distraction on some level, but maybe to--I mean, I don't know. I mean, what--do you have a take on that? Speaker 2: I do. I think you make a very interesting point that you're right that many of the guys have moved out and they've been guided out. Sometimes teams will have real estate people say, "They'll help you find a home," and they take you right to these areas away from your people, your connection and your heritage, and the question always remains in our minds, is this a conscious thing to separate us, or is it just the guy's wife is in real estate and she knows this area. But regardless, conscious or unconscious, the effect is the same. But I think the athletes have the abilities to live in a certain area, but still be connected to the community with the spirit, the ideology or your methods, and your emphasis. So, I think there's that same emphasis even if they're giving to a charity. They don't give to a charity that tries to adjust the inequality. The heritage, the legacy of racism, discrimination. They don't give to anything that's trying to adjust to that. You'll see a few people that will occasionally, but for the most part, they're encouraged and led to these situations that don't deal directly where the most help is needed. Where you have the most unemployment. Where you have the most kids going to jail. Where you have the kids facing the greatest barriers to equality. You don't find athletes dealing with that and identifying with that very often. There are few, and I found, too, that you don't find school systems ready to bring these athletes in, even retired athletes. They're out there. They're willing, they're ready to come and talk at your schools. They can even wear their old professional uniforms or tops, and the kids would listen to them. But I think the black community has become disconnected and has lost a very valuable resource in the retired players, and I think there needs to be a reconnect with the present athletes and the retired athletes to provide a positive leadership. Story_ID: 369889 Speaker 1: Tell me, when you look back on everything you've done to this point and you're still young--you know, by most standards. Speaker 2: Appreciate it (laughter). Speaker 1: Of the people we interview (laughter), it's true, but you know what, is there any major thing that you would do differently now that you look back? Speaker 2: Wow. That's a very good question. I think I've learned so much through the journey. You know, they asked me, 'Lessons in Success' ['Lessons in Success from the NBA's Top Players,' Michael T. Glenn], what's the most important lesson you learned? And for me it was to learn from and enjoy the journey because you're learning, you're growing, you're making connections, improvising as you go along. So the journey is more important in my mind than a particular outcome because as you go you learn, you impact, you adjust, and so I have certainly enjoyed my journey. There are some little individual things that I might have done a little better. I may have gotten a little bit more connected. I may have put a little bit more emphasis at a certain time. For instance, as a financial consultant, so much of the emphasis that we have is directing people to invest in stocks and bonds of major corporations. Now the question is, are these corporations responsible to the community? Are they helping the community as they should? And if not, should we be directing toward that, or should there be companies that are socially responsible? Or should we even be directing people to invest directly in their communities through businesses, through opening up stores, through real estate? Maybe that's a better route than just buy into the Fortune 500 companies. I think I would rethink that a little bit more carefully as I was making recommendations because I don't think it's just about the individual making money and getting a return. It's well, now what has your money done? What have you done with yourself and your monies to impact other people? Particularly the people that got you to where you are. Story_ID: 369890 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family. We haven't talked about your family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think you dropped your son off at school before you--you dropped him off before you came here today, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. My son is thirteen, and I spend a lot of time with my son ever since he was born, you know. With my wife [Rhonda Anderson Glenn] and I, it's three of us and my son is now thirteen. My wife is a flight attendant with Delta Air Lines [Delta Air Lines, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia], so we travel a lot. We've been blessed in so many ways and they help me with my exhibits, you know. As I mentioned, I collect rare books, newspapers, artifacts and I do exhibits that show and expose these, so they help me with it. My son has his collection that he's had. He's developing the passion for book collecting, but I told him if he doesn't, I'm not going to leave my books to him, and if I do leave it, I want them to stay in the family for twelve generations. I kid him all the time and say, "I want somebody--the twelfth generation to say, 'My great, great, great, great, great, great, great, great grandpa Stinger [HistoryMaker Mike Glenn] (laughter) and his son, Michael Justin [Michael J. Glenn], left these for us and we built upon it to grow into some unbelievable thing,'" but he has an understanding and a love. He has his own copy of 'Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass' [Frederick Douglass] that was published in 1845, along with Harriet Tubman. He has a book from her from the 1800s, so he has a good collection. He's a wonderful kid and I enjoy spending time with him. My wife helps me. She helps coordinate a lot of the different exhibits, and so my sister [Teresa Glenn] and brother [Charles Glenn, Jr.] are both living in the Decatur [Georgia] area, too. I live outside of Decatur now. For fifteen years I was in Decatur, but right in the Atlanta, Georgia area. So, this is home and I got a supportive family and extended family. Story_ID: 369891 Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I've failed to ask you that should be raised that--you know, this interview would be incomplete without? Speaker 2: Okay. Let's see. We talked about nutrition. We talked about speaking. We talked about the camp [Mike Glenn's All-Star Basketball Camp for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing]. We talked about my parents [Annye Wilkes Glenn and Charles Glenn, Sr.]. We talked about the ball. Man, I think we have just about covered it all very well. I can't think of anything else that's-- Speaker 1: I've got one last question. Speaker 2: Sure. Absolutely. Speaker 1: It's similar to legacy, but a little different. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You probably haven't thought about this, or maybe you have since you're a historian. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Um-hm. And you know, it's--we hope to be a complex person so there's no simple answer to how we want to be remembered. But we certainly want people to recognize that we've tried to make a difference. That we have recognized a need, and who we are, and our responsibilities to who we are and where we came from, and we've tried to do the best to make the most of that. To bring attention, to bring strength, to bring honor to that and to influence the community around us in a positive way. So, whether that was through basketball, through analysis, through playing, through book collecting, through teaching, through the deaf camp, it all should really reinforce who you are, and who you are is that person that cares about people, that tries to make life better for people, and that tries to provide a positive example that you're committed to that and that you've lived your life that way, and I think there's not much better you can say about a person. Story_ID: 369892 Speaker 1: This is the Randolph County Training School [Roanoke, Alabama] high school basketball team from 1938-1939. My dad, Charles William Glenn [Charles Glenn, Sr.], is number nine. He's second from the, from my left, number nine, and dad's older brother, Pasteur Glenn, is standing beside him on the end. Uncle Pat is on the end, my dad, number nine, Charles Glenn, is next to him, 1938-1939, Randolph County Training School. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Very good, next. Speaker 1: Alabama, at Randolph County, Alabama. Yeah, 'cause I sometime forget to say Alabama. And that is me, [HistoryMaker] Mike Glenn, I'm coaching my basketball camp for the deaf kids. These are some of the deaf kids that are playing in an all-star game for me. The year--that's in the '70s [1970s]. No, no, not '70s [1970s], I'm sorry. That's in the 1980s, probably about 1986, I think it is. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great. Next. Speaker 1: This is my dad. This is the year 2000. Dad was in a wheelchair, Charles W. Glenn, Jr. [sic.]. All of those players around him are players that played for my dad and this is when he was attending the Mike Glenn Basketball Camp for the Hearing Impaired [Mike Glenn's All-Star Basketball Camp for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing], and he's being thanked by four guys that played for him, four hearing-impaired gentlemen that played for him on his basketball team. Speaker 2: Um-hm. My dad is on my left on the end, Charles William Glenn, that he's coaching the girls and the boys team at Georgia School for the Deaf [Cave Spring, Georgia]. Dad had one team in about '65 [1965] that had a record of thirty-one and one. They lost in the state championship game and my dad is on the end. I guess I'll just go and point him out. That's my dad there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Perfect. Next. Speaker 2: Okay. The Atlanta Hawks had a special day in 1981. They went to my mom's school, Coosa High School [Rome, Georgia]. My mom, Annye, A-N-N-Y-E, Annye Ruth Wilkes Glenn [Annye Wilkes Glenn] is holding up my jersey. They're having Mike Glenn Day with the Atlanta Hawks, and my mom in the center of the picture holding up my jersey, Atlanta Hawks number thirty-four. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. In high school that's me in the center looking at some of the trophies that I had. This was in 1973. This was May of 1973 in my home. My mom, Annye Wilkes Glenn, is to my left. My dad, Charles William Glenn, is standing on the other end and we're looking over a few of the trophies that I have. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: I am number ten on the bottom of the-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Okay. I'm on the bottom. I'm the player on the bottom left, number ten, with the autograph covering it up. That's the Milwaukee Bucks--'85 [1985], '86 [1986] team, division winning. Went to the Eastern Finals [Eastern Conference Finals] against the Boston Celtics that year. I'm number ten standing by, and Don Nelson is on the end there. Great team. Sidney Moncrief--I'm standing right next to number four, Sidney Moncrief, who was the captain of the team. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Right. Next. Speaker 2: New York Knickerbockers [New York Knicks] 1979 and '80 [1980] season. This is the last year of Earl "The Pearl" Monroe, number fifteen, and I'm sitting right beside Earl "The Pearl." My number is thirty-four, Mike Glenn, Earl "The Pearl" Monroe is number fifteen and legendary coach Red Holzman sitting right next to Earl Monroe in that picture. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next. Speaker 2: Shot of me playing with the Milwaukee Bucks. This was from the '85 [1985], '86 [1986] season, being guarded by John Stockton of the Utah Jazz. Mike Glenn, shooting guard, sometimes point guard with the Milwaukee Bucks. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Nice. Speaker 2: On the cover, Mike Glenn, the Stinger. Got the nickname the Stinger while a member of the New York Knicks. There I am on the cover of that magazine. That should have been about the '80 [1980], '81 [1981] season. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 2: Those others are showing. It doesn't matter? Speaker 1: No. He's got that one. Speaker 2: Okay. Mike Glenn, a guard for the Atlanta Hawks, wearing number thirty-four playing against Vinnie Johnson and the Detroit Pistons with the Atlanta Hawks. I played with the Hawks from 1981 to 1985. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Got that. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: It's me, Mike Glenn, as a sophomore in high school, at Coosa High School, C-O-O-S-A, Coosa High School, Mike Glenn. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next. Speaker 1: That's a young Mike Glenn again, the 1980, '81 [1981] season with the New York Knicks. Mike "The Stinger" Glenn, New York Knicks. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, we got it. Next. Speaker 1: Okay. This is one of your shots. Speaker 2: A jump shooter, one article in St. Louis [Missouri] called it the perfect jump shot. That's Mike Glenn at Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], number thirty-five, road uniform shooting a jump shot. That probably was about 1976. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Next. Speaker 2: Let's do the cover. Speaker 1: From the year 2004 celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Mike Glenn Camp for the Hearing Impaired. Some of the camp originators and supporters that have been with me more than twenty years are surrounding the center picture of me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Next. Speaker 1: We're going to have to change it around because we want to get her picture. Speaker 2: Okay. Yes. Yes. Mike Glenn, age twelve, with my first trophy wearing number twenty-four in 1968 and underneath me is my first hero, Mildred Nelson, in the center of that picture. Mildred was the greatest female basketball player--maybe the greatest player ever--in the history of Georgia School for the Deaf. My first hero, Mildred Nelson, in the middle. Speaker 1: Should we flip this one like this? Is that okay? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Stand by for a minute. Speaker 1: She's in the middle. Those were the days of the knee pads. Everybody wore knee pads. Speaker 2: Yes, they sure did. Speaker 1: And then they stopped wearing them. Speaker 2: They sure did. I don't know, man. I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Oh, okay. That's just a head shot of me. That's Mike Glenn, head shot. That was part of my twenty-fifth anniversary collectible program and that's the founder and originator of the Mike Glenn Camp for the Hearing Impaired, Mike Glenn. Story_ID: 369893 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell us about this, this small photo (unclear). Speaker 2: Okay. Young [HistoryMaker] Mike Glenn, eleven years old. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Perfect. That's enough. Okay. Next (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There you are in the pinstripes. Speaker 2: Okay. Coosa High School [Rome, Georgia] captains Mike Glenn, Jim Brannon [sic.]. In the middle is my coach, Bob Brannon, B-R-A-N-N-O-N. Bob Brannon named his son--his one and only son, Michael Jim Brannon after Michael Glenn, G-L-E-N-N, and after Jim Bragg, J-I-M, B-R-A-G-G, who was number thirty-five, captains of the basketball team. My senior year in high school, 1973, Coosa, C-O-O-S-A, High School, Rome, Georgia. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Outstanding. Next. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. Mike Glenn, a senior at Coosa High School, the number one basketball player in the State of Georgia posing with a patented jump shot. Speaker 2: With Candace. Speaker 1: The Candace, thank you. That's right, with Candace (laughter). Speaker 2: Lucille or Candace? Speaker 1: There you go. That's a good one. That's a good one. (Laughter) That thing's kind of heavy there. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold it right there. Go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. My wife, Rhonda, on the bottom left. R-H-O-N-D-A, Rhonda Glenn [Rhonda Anderson Glenn], flight attendant with Delta Air Lines [Delta Air Lines, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. You see a picture of me in an article, 'You Are What You Read,' highlighting Mike Glenn the commentator and book collector. Higher up and a picture of me also on the bottom playing against the Detroit Pistons against Vinnie Johnson. All of that's the bottom portion of that framed picture. Going, Hawk Talk magazine, official team magazine from March 2000 was telling that story. Up--going up a little bit, in the upper right-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. See, a little baseball--basketball card of me, Mike Glenn. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Go ahead, Mike. Speaker 1: Okay. See a little basketball card in the center of me. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry. Keep going. Speaker 1: And Hawk Talk, official magazine, March 2000. Nice article, 'You Are What You Read,' stressing literacy. Okay, going up on the right-hand corner is a picture of my son, who has his own collection. Michael Justin Glenn, J-U-S-T-I-N, Michael Justin Glenn, and this was highlighted in Black Issues [Black Issues Book Review Magazine], a book review magazine from December 2001. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Okay. The picture of Michael Justin Glenn, this is my son, Michael Justin Glenn. This year was 2001, so let's see. Michael was born in 1993, so (laughter) he was about what--'93 [1993] from 2001. What, what's that? Ninety-three [1993] to 2000 is six years, right? No, six from ten. My math is failing me all of a sudden. And he has his own collection. He has a lot of children's books as well adult books now. Now Michael Justin, J-U-S-T-I-N G-L-E-N-N, my son, this was--these pictures of Michael Justin and myself with collecting tips were taken from Black Issues book review. Patti LaBelle was on the cover of that magazine, December 2001. It also highlighted some of my books on this cover page. It has a little image of Phillis Wheatley's book done in 1773. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: You are on it, man. That's Phillis Wheatley's book. That is probably the most valuable book in my collection, from 1773, 'Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral' by Phillis Wheatley. Speaker 2: Yeah, I got it. Well, I got a copy of Ignatius-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Watch your hand, please, shadow. Speaker 2: That's the one I have at home, but I can't really--there's no cover for it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I've got the insides. Speaker 1: Oh, really. Speaker 2: There's no cover that says it's the original edition, but I think it is. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: 'The Life of Ignatius Sancho,' [sic. 'Letters of the Late Ignatius Sancho, An African,' Ignatius Sancho] from 1782. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. I've got that book--..