 Story_ID: 482906 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. And we have Jason-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Williams [Jason Williams (ph.)]. Speaker 1: --Williams and-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Addis Huyler. Speaker 1: --Addis Huyler as observers. Would you please state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Nathaniel R. Goldston, III, N-A-T-H-A-N-I-E-L, middle initial R, Goldston, G-O-L-D-S-T-O-N, III. Speaker 1: What does the R stand for? Speaker 2: Russell. Speaker 1: Okay, and your date of birth? Speaker 2: Ten, twenty, thirty-eight [October 20, 1938]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Omaha, Nebraska. Speaker 1: Your occupation? Speaker 2: I am the chairman of the board of Gourmet Services [Gourmet Services, Inc.], a food service management company. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: The 27th (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) March 26th. Speaker 2: --oh, 26th, (laughter), March 26, 2007. Speaker 1: Thank you. Story_ID: 482907 Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you what I call five People magazine-ish type questions, okay? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Yes, red. Speaker 1: Okay. And what do you like to eat? What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: (Pause) Gumbo. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: When you go on vacation, what is your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: South Africa, Cape Town. Speaker 1: Now let me ask you, do you have a favorite phrase, saying, or bible verse? Speaker 2: Favorite th-- Speaker 1: Phrase. Speaker 2: --phrase. Speaker 1: Or something that you say all the time. Speaker 2: I probably do (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, if it comes to you later, you can tell me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I will. Speaker 1: --what it is, okay? Speaker 2: I will. Story_ID: 482908 Speaker 1: Now let's talk about your family. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me your mother's name. Speaker 2: My mother's name is Mary Elizabeth Goldston [Mary Burton Goldston]. Speaker 1: And where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: Do you know what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventeen [1917]. This is her ninetieth year on this earth. Speaker 1: That's th- that's wonderful. Speaker 2: It is, trust me. Speaker 1: (Laughter) It really is. Now, tell me about her parents. Speaker 2: Her parents were Leon Burton [ph.] and Virginia Thomas [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And where did they live? Speaker 2: They lived in I think it's a place called Maysville in, in Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your mother share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: Not really, other than the fact that she basically left Alabama at a very early age, and they, they came to Omaha, Nebraska. My grandfather was, was working for a lady who is, owned apartment buildings, and he was like the handyman. They lived in those apartments when they first came from, from Alabama. And he was on call all the time. My grandfather was on call all the time to go fix the apartments, or to change the plumbing, or to wash the windows, or whatever needed to be done around that, all that the, the properties there. The name of the properties were the Unitha Apartments [ph.], U-N-I-T-H-A. What it stands for, I really don't know. But during the, her early ages, she went to school. I think it was Jackson Grade School [Jackson Elementary School, Omaha, Nebraska], and then she went to the same high school I went to, Omaha Central High School [Omaha, Nebraska]. My father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.] went to Omaha Tech High School [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska]. He was, he was a track star, had this, he had the 100-yard dash record all the way until the early--to the late '40s [1940s], about 1949 to 1950, when somebody finally broke the record. He was in school back in the, in the '30s [1930s], so it lasted for a long time. Speaker 1: How much education did your mother have? Speaker 2: My mother went to--she was--high school was her, the same with my father. Both of them-- Speaker 1: Do you know about your grandparents' education (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) high school graduates. My grandparents' education, my, my grandfather had a fourth grade education. My grandmother, I'm not certain about, but I don't think that she went much further than, than grammar school. Speaker 1: Were there any stories told about any of your family being in slavery? Speaker 2: Not necessarily in slavery, but they, they talked about some of the people that worked in the fields to make a living. They got paid but not much. Some of them lived on the land, and they farmed land for people down in, in Alabama. Others picked cotton, but never got all the way back to the slavery portion. Story_ID: 482909 Speaker 1: On my father's side now-- Speaker 2: Well, tell me your father's name. Speaker 1: His name was Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And when was he born? Speaker 1: He was born in Omaha, Nebraska. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And his parents or his lineage was basically traced back to the Omaha Indian [Native American] tribe. I do remember a great-grandmother that smoked cigars and pipes. Speaker 2: Do you remember her name? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But my grandmother's name was Lizzie, Elizabeth [Elizabeth Hicks], which very interesting, my mother's [Mary Burton Goldston] middle name is, is Elizabeth. But my grandmother was a different kind of person. She, she, she imbibed a little bit into alcohol and got in a lot of fights on the weekends (laughter). We used to have to go and kind of get her to take her home. And I mean she's, she, she was a true kind of the Indian blood. She couldn't absorb a lot of alcohol. And once she did, she, you know, she was rather short-tempered and had a few fights, broke a few beer bottles, and (laughter) hit people in the head, all kinds of things. But she was a great, great person. She had, you know, I had five, five uncles and aunts. And basically, we, we kind of spent a lot of time getting her out of trouble, but beautiful lady, hair all the way back down to the bottom of her backside almost. And, but she was, she was a good Catholic, went to church every Sunday. Can't explain it, I think she needed to go after what she did on Saturday (laughter). Speaker 2: And tell me your grandfather's name. Speaker 1: My grandfather's name on-- Speaker 2: Your father's side. Speaker 1: --on my father's side was, he was actually the stepfather, Herthwood Hicks. My other grandfather's name was Nathaniel R. Goldston, Sr. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was a minister. Speaker 2: Do you know much about him? Speaker 1: Know a lot about him. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: He was a minister in the C.M.E. [Colored Methodist Episcopal; Christian Methodist Episcopal] church in Chicago [Illinois]. He lived at 5857 Prairie Street [sic. Prairie Avenue]. I'll never forget that because I used to go visit him every, every summer, right around the corner from Washington Park in Chicago. And I used to go and do the row boat, the, the canoes and stuff up and down the, the lake there in, in Chicago. He was a very profound speaker. He was a minister for over twenty, twenty-five years before, before he died. How he got in the ministry, I don't know. But he was one of these people that, who was con- he was consistently practicing his trade, because I remember he would preach to me every, every day. Anytime that I would do something, he--I got a little sermon, so. Other than that, I can remember that on, on the Sundays he would go and visit folks and, and eat at their house and come home and, and go to sleep in the chair (laughter). That's my biggest memory of, of him. He was a, he was basically a, a very I think studious kind of person. He, he, he read a lot and studied a lot. Speaker 2: Where did his lineage lead to? Speaker 1: You know, that's a good question 'cause I really don't know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --other than the fact that I think he had some brothers that were in the Chicago area. One of the peculiar things about my family on that side is that they spelled their names several different ways. Goldston, G-O-L-D-S-T-O-N is the way we spelled it. They spelled it G-O-L-S-O-N. And then some of the people spelled it G-H-O-L-S-T-O-N. So I have never had a chance to trace the, the roots back to that to actually find out where all those people are. But I hear the name all the time, especially mentioned in West Virginia and Alabama. So I would imagine some of them either migrated from, from, from those areas and back into the Midwest, into Chicago and, and Omaha. Story_ID: 482910 Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Mary Burton Goldston] and father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.] met? Speaker 2: Basically, I think that they met during when they were in high school. My mother was at Omaha Central [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska], and my father was at Omaha Tech [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska]. And he used to meet her at the corner. The two schools were on different sides. One, one was a little bit on the west side, and the other was a little on the south side. And there was an intersection which led back into the, into the area where, where they both lived, and they would meet at that intersection, and he would carry her books back during those days when he was not running track. And basically, he, I think he, he, according to my [maternal] grandfather [Leon Burton (ph.)], he came courting quite often. And finally he convinced my mother that after she graduated from, from high school that they, that the two of them ought to hook up, get together. Story_ID: 482911 Speaker 1: Tell me what your earliest childhood memory is. Speaker 2: Basically in, in back in the projects in Omaha, Nebraska. We lived in an apartment at 2218 Charles Street. And I can recall the, a lot of snow. It snowed bigger, you know, up over your head. And I loved to go out and play in the snow. I'd, I'd get--I think the, the biggest thing that engrained in me, in order for, for you to go out, basically you had to clean up. You had to, you had to--I remember washing the--cleaning the bathroom, and washing dishes, and mopping the floor before you could go anywhere, oh, and vacuuming, vacuuming the floor before you, before you could go anywhere-else. I got up early in the morning. I cleaned up before people got--before they went to the bathroom. I was gone by the time everybody woke up (laughter). But I had to do those things, and I--those, those little chores that--and then I had a paper route. I started to sell Omaha Star paper. And I remember the, the bate- the greatest accomplishment I had, and I knew at that point that I, I had--I could, could sell things, is that--they used to have these paper-selling contests. A paper sold for a nickel. And I would, I started out selling twenty-five papers door-to-door. Then I went to fifty papers, and then I went to a hundred. And then I got to the point I could sell two hundred and fifty, (background noise) and then I got to five hundred. And they had these contests, and you win a bicycle. I won three bicycles. In three years I won, won three bicycles (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bicycles. Speaker 2: --for selling the most papers. Story_ID: 482912 Speaker 1: Tell me about your personal relationship with your mother [Mary Burton Goldston]. What were some of the things that even might stay with you today that you learned from your mother? Speaker 2: Well, basically, my mother was one of these people who, who was a strict taskmaster. And she basically made certain that you did everything that you were supposed to do. And the toughest thing was to try to lie to her. 'Cause I don't care what you said, or how you said it, or how you put it, she could figure out whether you were telling her the truth or whether you weren't telling her--and I had no idea what tell-tale signs I had. And she would punish you. She believed in you telling the truth. I don't care-what--but the problem was that you got a spanking whether you told the truth or whether you lied; either one, you got beat the both, both ways, so. And she believed in spanking you. But other than that, I mean she, she, she insisted that you, you do what you were supposed to do, be where you were supposed to be, and if you didn't, you paid. Speaker 1: So was that one of the traits you picked up? Demanding the truth from people around you? Speaker 2: I ended up being a little more lenient than my mother, especially with my children. I, I--my one child that works here in the company with me, Kim [Kimberly Goldston Martin], Kim has had one spanking. I spanked her one time. And from that point on, it was just I could look at her. Now my sons [Nathaniel R. Goldston IV and Steven Goldston], a little bit different. But really after age seven or eight, they didn't require anything more than a look either. But now in the beginning they would--I had one that went to the emergency room the first five years of his life. He was always tearing up something or falling somewhere, stuck his hand in a dog's mouth, fell and hit his head on the chair, took some--I forgot what kind of pills it was. He took a bunch of pills and had to take and go get his stomach pumped out. I mean he was consistently doing stuff that he wasn't supposed to do. But I was, I was a little more lenient on them than my, than my mother was (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mother was, okay. Speaker 2: I, I tried to be understanding. I didn't want them to (laughter) get all the corporal punishment. Speaker 1: So your mother was the disciplinarian in the household. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 482913 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your relationship with your father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Oh, it was, the relationship with the father was a very unique relationship. He was, he was a father for maybe the first nine or ten years of my life. And he was a, like a buddy from that point on. He, he went into his coaching mode. And we traveled together. We played golf around the country together. Whenever he went on a trip I went with him, whether it was on a train, or whether it was in a car, whether it was with people, or whether it was just alone. We did--he was the one that kind of took me under his wing and kind of showed me a lot of things about, about life. He was rather, he was different than my mother [Mary Burton Goldston]. He was rather trusting. He would let you kind of go out and do things on your own when you were traveling. That's why I liked to travel with him. He'd kind of let you kind of go out. If I met some people and we went to the movies together and we hung out together, he, he allowed that, that to happen. He didn't mind if I ate. My mother had this thing about if you're gonna go to somebody's house, you cannot eat. You'd better not eat. You know, you eat at home, that kind of thing. And he was kind of lenient and said yeah, if they, you know, if you want to, if you want to do that, go ahead, you know. He was also a taskmaster when it came to, to me and working for him. I ended up working for my dad for the better part of, from, from nine to about sixteen years old-- Story_ID: 482914 Speaker 1: What did your father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.] do for a living (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was in, he was in food service. He was a, he was a, a banquet manager and a head waiter. And basically what we did was to serve a lot of parties all the time. I got all the things that nobody else would do. In other words, if there was a breakfast at five o'clock in the morning that needed to be set up, I got the, I go that assignment, you know. If it had to be cl- if we had to wait and close up late at night, I got that assignment. Everybody else got to go home. So I got all the worst ends of a job, and consequently, I got, I think I got fired two or three times. And my mother [Mary Burton Goldston] would always talk him into taking me back. And I was, you know, every time I'd get fired, I'm saying I got, I got it made now. I don't have to go back there again. We worked at the Blackstone Hotel [Blackstone Center] in Omaha, Nebraska, was a, was a, a big part of, of how I learned about the food service business. And by doing all these tasks, and I didn't know it, you know, but the lesson in that, he told me, he said, "The one thing about it," he says, "you know how to wait tables, and you know the food service business." He said, "You will never, ever have to worry about making a living, being able to earn a dime. And when you work in the food business you never have to worry about eating. There's always a way that you, you'll be able to get a meal." But I remembered that, and, and it carried me all the way through college [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. I mean I, I, I--whenever I needed some money I'd go down to the local hotel, work, make twenty-five, thirty dollars or so, and that would keep me going. And plus, you know, along with the twenty-five or thirty dollars you got the three square meals or two square meals or whenever you worked on, on the shift. And it, it, it taught me a lesson. I never walked around--one thing he said, "Never walk around with no money in your pocket." Always keep something in your pocket. And, and if you get, you know, if you get to the point where you're running low, at least you can go somewhere and you can wash some tish- dishes or wait on some tables and, and earn yourself a buck [dollar] or two. Story_ID: 482915 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Mary Burton Goldston] work outside the home? Speaker 2: My mother never worked until I was about thirteen years old and my uncle started a, a nightclub and a restaurant. And she would work, she worked with him. Basically, she worked free, other than the tips that she made, because that was her brother. She was there to try to help him out in his business. Then, after that, we moved. We finally moved out of the projects, and we moved into a house. And she worked in the public school system in the cafeteria, 'cause food just ran all through our family. My uncle was a chef, and my dad [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.] was a, was a head waiter, and a maitre d', and a catering manager, and my mother was a line server and stuff in the cafeteria. So food just ran all through our whole systems. And then we had a catering service that we operated out of our basement. And everybody had to work in the catering service except my little sister. Somehow she always got to be--she had an excuse to be at--she had to be somewhere else other than, than working a party or, or putting the food on the truck and taking it to somebody's house. But she, she had some exposure but very little. But she was kind of special. They kind of let her get by. But me, I had to do it all. I had to, I had to hit the grind. Speaker 1: How many sib- siblings, brothers and sisters (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just, just the two-- Speaker 1: Just the one sister? Speaker 2: --of us, just the two of us. Speaker 1: And what was her name? Speaker 2: Judy. Speaker 1: Judy, okay. Speaker 2: Judith, Judith Inez Goldston [Judith Goldston Cook]. Story_ID: 482916 Speaker 1: Let's go back to the projects-- Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and tell me about the neighborhood and the people who lived in the neighborhood when you lived there [Omaha, Nebraska]? Speaker 2: It's very interesting that you would ask that (laughter). Next door to me on the left-hand side was a young lady who now owns Radio One [Lanham, Maryland], Cathy, Cathy, Cathy Woods was her name then. It's, it's [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hughes. Speaker 2: Her father [William A. Woods] was a CPA [certified public accountant]. But back in those days, CPA didn't have a whole lot of work to do, so he kind of worked part time for my father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.]. He, he did, he worked parties for my father. Then two doors down, at 2214 Charles Street, was a guy that ended up going into the Hall of Fame [National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Cooperstown, New York]. Bob Gibson was a Hall of Fame pitcher, pitcher for the St. Louis Cardinals. Then up the street, about right across the alley I guess you would call it, right across the alley was apartment that was upstairs. There was a guy by the name of Richard Addison [ph.]. We used to call him Buddy Addison, who ended up being the high sheriff in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. There were a lot of really--Bob Boozer--there are a lot of, there were a lot of, of great athletes that came out of, out of that neighborhood. We played sports and went to the, what we called, the local recreation center all the time. That's where you spent your spare time. One of the things that, that I think that, that we lack now in, in, in our, the raising of our kids is the occu- occupying their time. We had baseball leagues; we had football leagues; we had sewing classes. I learned how to make cookies in the, in that recreation center. We'd go down there every Saturday, and the boys would have to do the cooking. They would do the boys' cooking class, taught you how to cook. There was boxing there. We had a lot of guys who went on to be Golden Glove champions that came out of that same, that same little project area, went all the way to the National Golden Gloves. We had about five or six National Golden Glove champions. Leonard Hudgins was one of them. There as a guy by the name of Grimes [ph.] who was another one. We had a young lady, Maggie King [Margaret E. King], who went to the Olympics [sic.] in 1958 and 19--no, 1960, 1960 or 1964. She ran and high jumped in the, in the Olympics. We had a lot of very, very good athletes, and we had some people that went, went on to, to do some good. Then we had some people that didn't do so good. We, we had our share of those that went into the penitentiary and got, got in--did their little time in, in the, in the local jails. And a lot of them have really come out and turned their lives around. But basically, it was a potpourri of young kids. It was a segregated project. We had, black people lived on one side of this big playground, and then the white people lived on the other side of the playground. And consequently, there was a lot of little things that, little friction things that went on there between the, the two races. And, and, but basically, the, when the two met on the playgrounds, we began to, to integrate. And it was the recreation centers 'cause there was a white recreation center, and there was a black recreation center, and they decided that they were gonna blend the teams together. And it was very interesting that we, we had teams that were made up of both races, and, and very successful teams, and, and had a lot of fun, and got, that learned to get along. We didn't have as many fights later on in life as we had in the beginning. Story_ID: 482917 Speaker 1: Were the schools that you attended also segregated? Speaker 2: Yes--no, no, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Not the schools (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were integrated; never went to--unfortunately, I've gone through, all the way through college [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado], and I've never had a, a black professor, not until after (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Interesting. Speaker 2: --I went through, I went through--I did some graduate courses; then I had--at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], and I was--I had black professors, but I never had a black teacher or black principal the whole time growing up. Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school. What was the name of the elementary school that you went to? Speaker 2: Kellom-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --K-E-L-L-O-M, Kellom Grade School [Kellom Elementary School, Omaha, Nebraska]. Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of elementary school, maybe at (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was a captain, I was a captain of the safety patrol. That was, that was like being the president of the student government association, you know. And we had--I had some, some pretty tough teachers. Speaker 1: Do you remember any of their names? Speaker 2: Oh, there's one lady I'll never forget, and her name is Esther Wick [ph.] (laughter). And Ms. Wick was one of those kind of people that did not allow you to do anything. I saw her hit a, hit, hit a young man in the side of his face, and her handprint was still there when she--and you had these seats that were bolted down to the floor. She hit him so hard the seats came up from the floor (laughter), which sent a sign to everybody in that room, don't mess with Ms. Wick. Then there was another teacher there that was very interesting in my junior high. Her name was Ms. Hockabout. And the interesting story about that is that, when I went to high school [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska], I ended up and I, I met--I used to give Ms. Hockabout a pretty bad time, I and everybody else. It was like if you remember the, if you ever seen this, the, the movie 'Blackboard Jungle' that's the way it was in that junior high school. You had guys running all over the place and (unclear) and it was hard, you know, for them control, except when you went to Esther Wick's class. The rest of those teachers, they would just give them a bad time. And when I went to high school, I ended up and I met this young lady whose name was Helen Hockabout [Helen Hockabout Kelley]. And unbelievable, she and I became friends, along with another one of my best friends. We're still friends to this day. I just had a call from her yesterday from Arizona. Her husband is my stockbroker. But she was the--and I gotta get this straight. I think she was the president of the senior class, and he was the vice president of the senior class. I was the treasure of the senior class. And we have gone through marriages together. We've gone through births of children together. We've gone through children's weddings together, the birth of grandchildren together, and we still meet every year, two or three times a year, once or twice in Arizona, once in, in, in Atlanta [Georgia], once or twice in Omaha, Nebraska. We consistently stay in touch. Dick [Richard Kelley] manages all my money. He's managed my money ever since I've had the first dime. Story_ID: 482918 Speaker 1: Going back to your elementary days, you know, in that age of elementary school [Kellom Grade School; Kellom Elementary School, Omaha, Nebraska], I want you to think about sounds, sights, and smells that take you back to that time in your life. Speaker 2: I think the sounds were always the, the sounds that, that, that you hear when it's time to go to recess, you know, when you get out, and you can play soccer and whatever, basketball, or dodge ball, or what it is. When that bell rang, and you could go out, you know, and play, that was a, that was the music to my ears. The smell is really easy. In Omaha, Nebraska, at four o'clock in the afternoon they closed the packinghouse down. And it is probably a worst smell that you could ever imagine, came all the way from South Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] over to where we lived. And you could tell when the packing plant closed down because it just stunk up the whole city. And the sound and what? Speaker 1: Sights. Speaker 2: The sights. I think the sights were, were basically the, the, the river--the Carter Lake area. The sights that we loved to go to, we used to--there's a big lake there called Carter Lake. And every Sunday you go to Carter Lake and people would have picnics and, and have a lot of fun there. That was probably the, the thing that engrained, stayed engrained in me the, the most, was looking forward to that Sunday you'd go to church, and then everybody goes out to the lake. And some of them fish; some of them swam; some of them--and you'd have, you know cookouts and stuff like that. Story_ID: 482919 Speaker 1: Now, you talked about how much it snows [in Omaha, Nebraska]. How did you entertain yourself at home, you and your sister [Judith Goldston Cook], when it snowed and you could not get out? Speaker 2: Oh, we got out. Speaker 1: Oh, you always got out (laughter) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We always got out and threw snowballs, built snowmen. We had sleds, ice skates. I mean there's all kinds of activities you can--we used to take old tires and slide them, and get inside of them and slide down the hill on those tires. I mean there's all kinds of--and, and some of the other thing that we did, I mean, used, used to have what we called tire races, you know, where you just take the tire and just run it through the snow, trying to paddle it through the snow to see who could get to a certain place the fastest or have a relay. And somebody else would pick up the tire and go, and the next guy pick up the tire and go, and you go all the way around the block. The first one around the block wins, you know. Then you had--we actually built--there was enough snow that you could actually build little igloos, little houses out of the snow and get in them. And we did that. We'd have a little snow house and, and until it melted, you know. But-- Speaker 1: How cold did it get there? Speaker 2: Very (laughter). It, it seemed to me like the snow would come in late October or early in November, and you would never see the ground until May or June. The snow would stay there that long. And the weather was always around zero, or ten degrees, or five degrees, or below zero, fifteen below zero. That's when it's a little bit dangerous then, when it gets way below zero. But-- Speaker 1: So how did you get to school? Speaker 2: Walk. You got there and put your, you put your snowshoes on. And then your mother would wrap you up real tight and put all this stuff around you, and you walked to school. Those are the times they had neighborhood schools though, so we didn't have to walk across town. You just walked probably, I think we walked maybe four blocks or five blocks to school, so. Story_ID: 482920 Speaker 1: How old were you when you moved from the projects into your house [in Omaha, Nebraska]? Speaker 2: I was twelve years old. Speaker 1: And did your father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.] purchase the home? Speaker 2: My, my grandfather [Leon Burton (ph.)] on my mother's side, the one with the fourth grade education, owned a lot of real estate. The house that we moved into was the original house that he bought, that my mother [Mary Burton Goldston] grew up in. And my uncle lived in the house before we did. And he, when he decided that--oh, he, he bought another house. And after he bought another house, he moved out of there, and my grandfather let us move into that house. Speaker 1: So tell me how the neighborhood changed. Speaker 2: Well, the difference in living in the projects and living in, in, in the residential area was totally different. There were fewer people to play with. Obviously, the population was a little more spread out. You had to go places to find folks to--you had to go to other people's houses in order to have the recreation. You didn't have the recreation facilities right there in the neighborhood. You basically were isolated in, from running with four or five kids; you end of running with two or three, you know. And you had to find them in the neighborhood where you are. There was a lot of, lot of more territorialism in those neighborhoods. In other words, you'd go to a certain neighborhood, you might not be safe. You go and visit some girl over there you know, you'd, you'd better watch your back getting back 'cause you may, you know, have to run all the way home, you know, so. It was, it was different from, from that standpoint of view. It was a long way from, from school. And sometimes you'd walk to school, but a lot of times you'd have to catch the bus to go to school. Speaker 1: Was it a school bus or a public-- Speaker 2: No, it was a regular-- Speaker 1: Regular-- Speaker 2: --transit bus. Speaker 1: --trans- okay. And what was the makeup of that community? Speaker 2: Basically, it was a middle-class community I guess you would call it. A lot of the people in that neighborhood all had--they worked at the post office was a--which was a big thing there. They had some people that worked at the packing plant, which was a big generator there. You had more that worked from the, for the railroads, from Union Pacific Railroad. You had a couple of musicians that lived there, a couple of relatively famous musicians that went to play with Count Basie and some of those big bands. And they would travel in and out of the neighborhood there. But basically, it was a little--I guess the, the, the jobs were a little better paying than, than a lot of people that we lived with in the, in the, down in the projects. Story_ID: 482921 Speaker 1: So about this time, your family started their catering business. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.] would, while he was working during the week, sometimes people want parties catered at their homes. And they would ask him to do it, and he basically would, would basically come back and employ my mother [Mary Burton Goldston] to go back and cook all this food and put it together. And then we'd, we'd stack it up, put it on. We'd go rent plates, and tables, and chairs, and tablecloths, put them on the, put them in the different station--we had station wagons at that time, not a big pickup truck. But we'd load that station jac- station wagon three or four times to get out to the people's house and set the parties up and then serve them and then tear it back down and take it back. Speaker 1: Who were some of the clients? Speaker 2: The clients were a lot of the people that were patrons of the hotel [Blackstone Hotel; Blackstone Center, Omaha, Nebraska] and of the country club [Happy Hollow Club, Omaha, Nebraska] that wanted to have things done at their homes there. One of, one of our biggest clients during that time was, was Clarke Swanson, who's the founder [sic.] of Swanson foods (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Foods. Speaker 2: Yeah, L.J. Marcotte, the guy who was the founder of Mutual of Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska]. We did--my dad did some work for Warren Buffett back in those days. I caddied for Warren Buffett at the country club there--a lot of--the Dillons, who owned a lot of hotels and owned the resort in, in, over in Iowa. So it would be a lot of the, the, the higher class people in the city that basically wanted to do entertainment at home. But we would, we would cook their food for them, and, and bring it them, and, and serve it. And of course, my father insisted that you had these uniforms, so we'd have to have these black tuxedos, and white dinner jackets, and all this different stuff that you gotta donned in order to wait for the, wait on these people. I found some of it to be a little bit--I didn't like some of it because of the fact I would go out there, and some of the people that I was playing football with in high school, I'd be waiting on them, you know, and "Nate [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III], bring me this, bring me that," you know. And I said at that particular time, you know, there's gonna be a day (laughter) that I'm gonna get mine. Story_ID: 482922 Speaker 1: One of the most rewarding things that ever happened to me was to be able to go to the country club and Dick Kelley [Richard Kelley], my friend, was a member of that country club, the Happy Hollow country club [Happy Hollow Club, Omaha, Nebraska]. I, I was home; I'd come home for, to visit my mother [Mary Burton Goldston]. And he called me up and said, "Nate [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III], you want to go play golf at Happy Hollow?" I said, "I'd love to." And I went out there, and I shot one of the best games and played one of the best games I ever played in my life. And a lot of the people that I used to work with were still there. And I made certain I stopped by and visited all of them and, and made sure they knew that I, I wasn't, didn't think I was too good to, to be at the club. But that was probably one of the most thrilling moments of my life, to be able to play golf at that country club, yeah. Speaker 2: Tell me how you learned to play golf. You said-- Speaker 1: My dad [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.]. Speaker 2: --your father. Speaker 1: My dad started me at age nine. He cut off some golf clubs, and then he would let--he would play, he would go play nine holes, and he always let me play the ninth hole. Or if we played eighteen holes, he'd let me play the, the last hole with him on the, on the golf course. And then I'd just, you know, got to the playground with my golf clubs and just hit the ball in between goal posts, you know, not on, not necessarily on, on grass, either it was on dirt, so. I learned how to play golf the hard way (laughter). Speaker 2: What golf cau- course, courses were available for blacks to play on then? Speaker 1: Just the public golf courses. The one thing about Nebraska is there was no segregation, so you got to play the golf courses, the same golf courses, the public golf courses that everybody--private golf courses, it was a different case. Story_ID: 482923 Speaker 1: Now, tell me what type of student were you. Speaker 2: Not very good. I always seemed to be distracted. I had other things, other than--on my mind, other than, than grades. I was a C student. I'm not ashamed to say that now, except my grandchildren might see this thing. But my, my kids have all--I've gotten them all past that. But they never knew I was a C student. As far as they was concerned, I was probably closer to an A and a B student 'cause that's the way I presented myself to them. It wasn't 'til a little bit later that they found out that some of the things that I did during the times that I was growing up was very interesting and very parallel to some of the things that they did. Speaker 1: Such as? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'd have a tendency not to come home sometimes until way after curfew and try to sneak through the window. And then I'd leave a, a extra key under the mat to try to unlock the door real quietly, and sneak in the house, and lay on the couch, and act like I'd been there the whole time. A couple of times I got locked out of the house as a teenager. My little, my little toiletries and my stuff was out with a note that said you know, you need to sleep in the streets since that's where you seem to live, all kinds of little innuendos like that (laughter). Story_ID: 482924 Speaker 1: Let me see, you're in high school now. So tell me the name of your high school once again. Speaker 2: Omaha Central High School [Omaha, Nebraska]. Speaker 1: And what year did you go to that school? Do you remember? Speaker 2: I graduated-- Speaker 1: You graduated-- Speaker 2: --in 1956. I started in 1952. Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me about your high school years. You said you played on the football-- Speaker 2: I played football. Speaker 1: --team. Speaker 2: I played on the golf team. We won the city championship in golf for four years in a row. I made honorable mention all-city and all-state in, in football. I was in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. I became a major, was, which was my highest ranking in ROTC; a lot of student activities. I was, was on the student government association, student council they called it there. I was a class officer for, for my junior and my senior year. I was in the senior play in theatrics. I got ribbed by my football teammates when I came on the stage. I think it was 'Our Town,' [Thornton Wilder] and I was in--I forgot what my character was. As soon as I came on the stage, they all, they tore the place up. I mean it just got real loud. Didn't do a whole lot of singing or music kinds of things in, in, in high school but foreign language classes and foreign language clubs and stuff like that; had a lot of, lot of extracurricular activities when I was in high school. Speaker 1: Was there a teacher that you remember that might have encouraged you towards college? Speaker 2: He was my English teacher and my football coaches, name was Jim Karabatsos. And Jim always used to tell me, you know, you're so dumb that Shirley--you think Shirley Temple's a church. Now that was a (laughter), that was a (unclear). And he used to, he'd say, he said, "I can't believe it. You're so dumb you think Shirley Temple's a church." And you know, he, he would--but he was, he was, he was kind of ribbing you but at the same time pushing you to kind of be, you know, do excellent, 'cause I didn't--in English class, I mean he, he, he was saying, "How could you write something like this, you know, how could you--I can't believe this, you know, what are you thinking about when you do stuff like this?" So then he'd make you sit there and try to get it all right, you know, and that kind of thing and encourage you. And he was basically one of the biggest influences in my going to, to college. Story_ID: 482925 Speaker 1: Did you have any idea of what you wanted to do in life? Speaker 2: You know, the minute, the minute I went to college I knew exactly what I wanted to do. I wanted to be in the food service business, mainly because I'd spent half of my life learning, and I knew that, more about that than I knew anything else. I knew how to set tables; I knew how to, you know, the, the proper way to serve people; I knew the, the proper etiquette as far as setting up the glasses, the wine glasses and the aperitifs and all of that. So I knew, knew the--and I, and I was exposed to, to cooking and, and, and basically some of the preparations and some of the finer parts, some of the finer foods that, that people like. So, and I knew how to do parties. I knew how to set up and all--so I'm--the food service business attracted me right away. And I wanted to try to go--I found out that they had a major at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] called hotel and restaurant management. And I decided that's what I wanted to do, and that's where I wanted to go, except they had a different idea about grades than I did. So when my--when they looked at my grades they said oh, we don't think so. So I had a football scholarship, and I went to, to Doane College [Doane University, Crete, Nebraska]. And I found out-- Speaker 1: Doane? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Doane, D-O-A-N-E, Doane College. And I found out while I was going to Doane that they had a hotel and restaurant management program at the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado]. So at the end of my freshman year, I decided I was gonna go and apply to the University of Denver. And I had some good grades then when--'cause I played football at Doane, and I had some good grades then. They insisted on you having good grades. And so I was able to get into the University of Denver on probation. And the rest is history. I stayed there, had a great time. I stayed there quite a while (laughter). Story_ID: 482926 Speaker 1: You told me that in all the grades through high school [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska] that you never had an African American teacher. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And in college is when you had you had your first professor that was black? Speaker 2: It was in college--after, after I graduated from college. Speaker 1: Oh, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I took some graduate course at Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] and had my first African American teachers. Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me, what's your experience? Doane College [Doane University, Crete, Nebraska] is, is where? Speaker 2: Crete, Nebraska, which is right outside of Lincoln, Nebraska, right by where the University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] is, about thirty miles from where the University of Bran- Nebraska's campus. It was a small church college. In fact, we played football in the Central Church College Conference, the CCCC (laughter). And we were, we were quite successful, had a great time at Doane. There were, there were about three or four African Americans on the campus at that time, but it was a small school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Had one fellow from Nigeria and two guys that came to--came with me from my high school--different high school. And we all played football there. One of--well, I'm sorry--two of us played football. The other one was a high jumper. He was the state champion high jumper. He came there and ran track and did high jump. Story_ID: 482927 Speaker 1: Okay and then, on to the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado]. Now, well, let me ask you, when you went to Doane [Doane College; Doane University, Crete, Nebraska], was this the first time you were away from home? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Although, I had to stop and think about it. But, but, because I, but I did work for the railroad, which (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did you work for the railroad? Speaker 2: When, when I was in high school [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in my, in my, from my sophomore year, right after I turned sixteen. That's when I had my freedom from my father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.]. I was able to get another job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I started working for the Union Pacific Railroad as a chair car porter. And, and we went to Denver [Colorado], and Chicago [Illinois], and Salt Lake City [Utah], and Ogden, Utah, and Cheyenne, Wyoming. We went--I traveled the We- the Midwest and the West on the, on the train. Those were my first experiences really away, way away from home on my own. In other words, you're gone for a couple, three days before you get back. So, you know, you, you-- Speaker 1: Was this basically during the summer-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --until--okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what those, those were tourist trains when they-- Speaker 1: So did you do that every summer until graduated? Speaker 2: Every summer 'til I graduated, even, even the summer after I graduated. And my father called me up and said, "Look, you know, you've got--you have paid all this money to get this education and this degree, and you're still riding that train. You've got to get off the train," so. But the money was to the point I was making more money than a lot of people with college degrees. There was a time on that railroad you could make, if you double back, I was making somewhere around twelve to fourteen dollars an hour, unheard of in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s]. You know, I'd come--I'd make sometimes three, four hundred dollars a trip. I was able to pick up a paycheck a couple of times for eight hundred dollars for two weeks' work. But I, I stayed--I spent my whole time--I'd get off one train and jump on the other. And when you're young you can do that, you know. You get on, get your work done, and then sneak over in the corner and take a nap (laughter). Speaker 1: And so, what exactly did you do on those trips? Speaker 2: I was a chair car porter, a-- Speaker 1: Okay, tell me what that is. Speaker 2: --chair car attendant. We basically made certain that the, that the passengers got on and off the train, assisted them with their luggage. You made certain that your cars--you were assigned certain cars. You made certain that your cars were, were cleaned, the bath--that means the bathrooms had to be cleaned. The tai- toilet paper and the paper towels had to be stocked. You would sell pillowcases to the people when they got on the plane [sic. train] if you're in, in the night. You sell pillows to them and pillowcases and, and made certain you put them to bed at night. And then you made certain that they got off the train at the right stop. You'd go and wake them up and get them, get all their luggage and put it out in the vestibule and make certain they got off the train at, at the proper stop. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it basically a, it was a very good job, you know, not a lot of hard work, but the pay was absolutely fantastic. And I was a member of the union, you know, you had to join the union when you, when you--'cause it was the, I think it's called the, the Pullman Porters and Chair Car Porters Union [sic. Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters] or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, and so you were allowed to--well, you had to join the union. Even though you were sixteen, you were allowed to join the union (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: If you're gonna work on that train, you'd better. Story_ID: 482928 Speaker 1: Well, we know that you, you received a football scholarship to go to Doane [Doane College; Doane University, Crete, Nebraska]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: How did you pay for school at Denver [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]? Speaker 2: I worked my way through college all the way up until about the, the junior year. In my junior year I went to register and found out that somebody else had, some anonymous donor had paid my tuition. To this day, we really don't know who it is. But my junior year and my senior year were, were kind of picked up by somebody that we never knew. I--my father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.] didn't. We had an idea who it was, but we never--nobody ever stepped forward and said that I did this. But, but basically, I worked in, in hotels and country clubs and places like that, in the food service business. I even was a, I was a cook at a restaurant one time, a grill cook, cooking hamburgers, and hot dogs, and French fries and all that stuff. Speaker 1: And so-- Speaker 2: And then I worked in the summer during the railroad times, and I made enough money during the railroad--on the railroad [Union Pacific Railroad] to, to last for a long time. It would take a--that would pay all my tuition and still have a lot of spending money left. So I was, I was doing all right. I lived in apartments, nice apartments. I didn't, I wasn't hurting. Story_ID: 482929 Speaker 1: Now tell me the difference from the climate at Doane [Doane College; Doane University, Crete, Nebraska] to when you got to Denver [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. Speaker 2: Completely different. Speaker 1: Tell me about that experience (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Doane was a little small Christian school. And you had to go to chapel every Tuesday and Thursday. And you had to dress if you--it was family-style meals, and you had to dress up. You know, you had to wear a tie and a coat one day a week, you know. It was, it was a complete--University of Denver, everybody was running around in ski clothes and the shorts and going out and drinking beer every night, big time party school. Hugh Hefner came to, to choose our homecoming queen from, from Playboy magazine. We had [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis for homecoming. The University of Denver at--and this is, is amazing. Back in, in those '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]--I graduated in 1962--we had the, the president of the board of governors for the, for the students was an African American. Miss University of Denver was an African American. We served, we served in the student government association. We basically got to--I (cough) I was on the, the homecoming committee that, that selected and brought Ramsey Lewis out there for our homecoming entertainment and stuff like that. It was a, it, it was a very liberal campus, fantastic school. I still am a trustee at the university now. I've been a trustee for twenty-one years at that university. The experience was so great that I really, really enjoyed and still love the university, to the point of we're still trying to raise money for them and still trying to make it the best university around. Story_ID: 482930 Speaker 1: During this time, the Civil Rights Movement is gearing up in the late '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Nods head). Speaker 1: Were you involved in any way on, on campus, student government, or any of the-- Speaker 2: I was involved-- Speaker 1: --organizations [at the University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --in the student government, but you know, we really weren't involved in what is considered the movement, like the, they had the movement here. The best we were doing at that particular time is, is reading about it. There were some students on the campus, African American students that had come from, from basically some, some of the segregated environments. But as far as being active in the movement there, we, we were not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was so isolated. I mean you're out in Colorado in the middle of nowhere. And you know, the best you can do is look and see what you see on the news. We did know who Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was. We followed the news, and we talked about it in, in our fraternity groups and the groups where we were. But even all the fraternities were integrated out there during that time. So we lived in a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were they? Speaker 2: Yeah, we lived in a fraternity house, and we had, you know, four or five African Americans and about six or seven, you know, folks--we--in fact, in, the one we lived in was basically, it's almost like an international house, 'cause we had guys, we had Indians in there; we had Asians in there; we had black people in there; we had Jews in there; we had Catholics. We had everybody in that same fraternity house, and we all got along. One (laughter), one of the funniest things though was one of the guys one night--it was a black guy and a white guy got in an argument. Story_ID: 482931 Speaker 1: You were telling me about the fraternities. Did you pledge a fraternity? Speaker 2: Yes, I was in Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], but we also--I also belong to a local fraternity, which was called Pi Lambda Phi [Pi Lambda Phi Fraternity]. That was the one that, where we lived in the fraternity house [at the University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was very interesting. I think I said it was the United Nations [UN] there. We had all, all races, all colors, and, and all religions in that, in that house. And, and one night we had this nice little lady, Mrs. Stenith [ph.], who was the house mother. And one of the guys got in an argument--two of the guys got in an argument, one black guy and one white guy. And she got scared to death, and she ran out of the house and called security and told them there was gonna be a race riot (laughter). And by the time the security got there, of course, they'd, they'd solve their differences, you know, and gone on about their business. And they came back, and they said well, you know, we, we didn't seem to have a problem, but she was scared to death. We had to go and tell her 'cause she didn't understand. She was probably about seventy, seventy-five years old, so she didn't understand that these guys do this all the time. They do all this wolfing all the time. But it was an interesting experience. But we all got along great, and we're all still good friends around the country right now. Story_ID: 482932 Speaker 1: Now I know that you did a lot of work with your father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.] and in the food service industry. How different was it to actually study food service in college [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]? Speaker 2: Basically, a lot of (cough)--the, the best part of that education came through the, the business department, the business side of the business. It's one thing to be in the practical side, but the business, it was where you got the most education, how you control and do food curse- course--food costs, and, and purchasing, and how you control your costs, and the, the training programs that you've got to instill, and the accounting, how you account for, for everything so that--I think the technical parts of the business. See, the degree is actually in business administration. So you have a, I have a B.S., a, a business--Bachelor of Science in business administration. So the business side is where I learned--the rest of it was pretty much stuff that I already knew, except that I learned how to do a lot of cooking, French cooking and Italian cooking and things like that, that basically in your basic preparation and everything. So you learned everything from the ground up. You knew to--you know how to serve the food; you know how to cook the food; you know how to protect the food as far as the sanitation and things like that. So that was a, a big, a good, good exposure from that standpoint of view. But the biggest one, the biggest challenge was, was doing finance and business and, and those things that are required in the business curriculum. Story_ID: 482933 Speaker 1: All right, so you graduated in 1962. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: Oh, I went back (cough). Well, I started immediately after graduation [from the University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. I went back to Union Pacific [Union Pacific Railroad] and worked (clears throat), worked that summer for the railroad (cough). And then after that I took a job as a banquet manager for Dillon Hotels [Dillon Hotel Company] in, in Omaha, Nebraska. I worked for them for probably about nine months. And I really wasn't happy with, with the way I was using my education. And basically, it brought some people in, and immediately they, they were, became my bosses. And I didn't particularly like that situation, so I left. Thinking that I was gonna leave the hospitality industry period, I went to work for a company called Allied Chemical Corporation [Honeywell International Inc.], and I worked in the accounting department. I was the--I started as an accounts payable clerk. And then I ended up running the accounts payable division, when one of my classmates called me one day and, and said you know, we've got a, we've got an account that we're pursuing. We just got a contract to run the food service for Lincoln University in Missouri [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri] and wanted to know if I would be interested in coming and managing that, that facility. And I went, and they made me an offer I couldn't refuse. They offered to pay me--I was, think I was making five hundred dollars a month. And they offered me eighty-four hundred dollars a year, and I thought that was a big deal and jumped on it. Then plus I got a, a thousand-dollar bonus at the end of that year for, for running the account successfully. Speaker 1: So this is around 1963 or '4 [1964]? Speaker 2: This is 1964. Speaker 1: Four [1964], okay. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And that basically launched my career in the food service. I only had two jobs. I stayed with that company for ten years, and I started my own company. I've been in business for thirty-two years-- Speaker 1: See--I'm sorry. You stayed with Lincoln (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous)in the same business. Speaker 1: You stayed at Lincoln for how long? Speaker 2: I stayed employed by that company for ten years. I, I moved all the way up to senior vice president at that company. Speaker 1: And what was the name of the company? Speaker 2: Catering Management, Incorporated, CMI. After ten years, they, these guys had made so much money they, they sold out to another company. Speaker 1: Okay, and they basically took care of the food service just for that one university? Speaker 2: No, they, they grew the company. They had--we had several universities. And matter of fact, when, when I was senior vice president, we were doing--we had somewhere around forty colleges, of which I had sold twenty of them for the company. Speaker 1: Okay. And you began your business what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-five [1975]. Speaker 1: Okay. So how did you come up with the concept for your, your business? What was, what was gonna (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Basically it was the same business that I was working with them. I'd learned the business. What made me go into business was the fact that they, when they sold the company, they wanted me to become--they had advised the, the new buyers that I should be president of the company. And they weren't ready for an African American to run, run a company that size. The buyers was from New York and basically didn't have that kind of confidence in me that, that the, the former owners did. So I, I remained as executive vice president under that group. And I worked for them while they would send--they sent three candidates in there, each one of which never worked out, and I ended up running the company in between. And so finally it just dawned on me, you know, if I can run the company for them, why am I doing this, you know? And one of my former bosses called and said, "Nate [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III], you know, you need to think about going into business for yourself." And a couple of the other guys with the company had started their own little company. I said well, no reason. I'll, I'll just do that. And in 1975, I, I started Gourmet Services [Gourmet Services, Inc.], January 4, 1975 (unclear). We served our first meal at Johnson C. Smith University [Charlotte, North Carolina]-- Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) as Gourmet Services. Story_ID: 482934 Speaker 1: I wanna step back just a little bit and tell me about the draft. How did you not go to Vietnam? Speaker 2: That was very interesting. There was a lady who lived down the street from my mom [Mary Burton Goldston] who was, who worked in the Selective Services [Selective Service System] office. And I actually got a draft notice, and I decided I was gonna join the [U.S.] Navy and the Judge Advocate General's Corps, and I applied, especially with my ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] background. I, I did not go to advanced ROTC because University of Denver [Denver, Colorado] cut it out before I got to the advance corps. And I flunked the physical. I was, I was overweight. And basically, the guy told me that, you know, I couldn't--they, they turned me down and told me to come back in another month, go and try to lose some weight and then come back, and I could try to get back in. Well, needless to say, somewhere the draft notice got lost, and they never called me back. And I was advised to just wait 'til they call you. When they call you, then you show up. Well, they never showed up. I had at that time applied for law school [University of Denver College of Law; University of Denver Sturm College of Law, Denver, Colorado] and went to night law school for, for, for one quarter I think it was. And they--nothing ever happened. Story_ID: 482935 Speaker 1: So this was in--right after--in '62 [1962] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right in '62 [1962]. That was still in-- Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962]. Speaker 2: --sixty-two [1962], right. Speaker 1: That's when you applied for law school? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: What s- I'm sorry--what school did you apply to? Speaker 2: University of Denver [University of Denver College of Law; University of Denver Sturm College of Law, Denver Colorado], the night school. Speaker 1: Okay, you went to the night school. Speaker 2: I did, I did night courses, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Never got a law degree. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, because you actually go on to work for-- Speaker 2: Yep, went back and worked for, for-- Speaker 1: Allied [Allied Chemical Corporation]. Speaker 2: --the hotels, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 482936 Speaker 1: You told me that you actually serviced Smith as your first (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] was one of our first clients [of Gourmet Services, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me after that-- Speaker 2: We had actually six. We had, we had Johnson C. Smith, and then we had Voorhees College [Denmark, South Carolina] in South Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had Mary Holmes Junior College [Mary Holmes College, Jackson, Mississippi] in Mississippi. We had Wiley College [Marshall, Texas] in Texas, and we had Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], were our first clients that we started off with. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me exactly what it is that you do for the colleges as far as food service. Tell me how the-- Speaker 2: We were a contract (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) operation works. Speaker 2: --we, we they contract with us to feed their students, to run their cafeterias, and their snack bars, and their, whatever their infirmary feedings for their healthy--health in the--and we run concessions for the, for the football games and basketball games. Anything that's involved in, in actual food service on the campus is what we contract to do. Speaker 1: Do you have to have a dietician on your staff or-- Speaker 2: We do have a dietician-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --on our staff, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And that's--how do they come up with the meal plans? Speaker 2: We, what, what we basically do is that we, we had, we, we plan the menus depending on where we are in the country, what is, what, what foods are germane to that, that particular area of the country. And then we, we try to meet the nutritional needs through, through the offerings that we do. And, and then you've gotta plan and, and sure the colors go together and the, and all the, all of the different elements of making food appetizing and, and desirable-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and nutritious. Story_ID: 482937 Speaker 1: Now your whole family works for the business [Gourmet Services, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Who started out-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with you? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Tell me who started out with you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You're talking about my family now? Speaker 1: No, when you first started, who started out with you? Speaker 2: Oh, basically it was just-- Speaker 1: Who were your employees? Speaker 2: --just myself. My kids were, were well too, they were all too young during that-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --time. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: But as they've grown up, they worked in the business. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then now we have my wife in the business. We have some nephews, and nieces, and sons, and daughters, not all of them: got one in medical school, and then one is in the music business. The rest is--and I have two in the business, two-- Speaker 1: Okay, well-- Speaker 2: --two-- Speaker 1: --let's talk about your-- Speaker 2: --in the business. Speaker 1: --family. When did you and your wife--well, how did you meet? Speaker 2: We met when I was working at Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] as the food service director, and she was a student there. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her name? Speaker 2: Her name, her name is Darlene [Darlene Goldston]. That was my first wife. And we were married for thirty years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then in 1999 I got married to the current wife. Speaker 1: And her name? Speaker 2: Valerie [Valerie Hampton Montague Goldston]. Speaker 1: Okay. And tell me about your children. Tell me their names. Speaker 2: We have Russell, who's the oldest; he's Nathaniel Goldston VI [Nathaniel R. Goldston IV]. He is the vice president for, for business development with, with our company. We have Kimberly [Kimberly Goldston Martin], who is the middle one. Kimberly is, graduated from Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana]. Russ graduated from Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. Kim went, she got an M.B.A. from Purdue, went to Hampton University. Kim is executive vice president of, of the company. Then we have Steven [Steven Goldston], who is working in, in the hip hop music industry. He is a person who develops beats. He's a sound engineer. And we have Rachel [Rachel Montague], who is my stepdaughter, who is at Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] as a freshman-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --studying to be a reconstructive surgeon. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I have ten grandchildren. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know all of their names (laughter)? Speaker 2: Russ--don't even try. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Some I can't pronounce. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: But I have-- Speaker 1: Ten. Speaker 2: Russ has six children; Kim has two; and Steve has two. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And Rachel is busy in medical school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Medical school, okay. Story_ID: 482938 Speaker 1: How many employees does your corporation [Gourmet Services, Inc.]-- Speaker 2: Full and part time, we have over two thousand employees around the country. Speaker 1: Okay. And the college campuses that you have now, how many are there that you service? Speaker 2: We have eight college campuses. Speaker 1: Are college campuses the only place that your food service is available? Speaker 2: We run food services for, for large corporations. We do employee feeding for large corporations. We do employee feeding for hospitals and we do, we do some work for a lot of catered events, the private catering that we do work for. Then we do inmate feeding. We do jails and prisons and things like--so we, we-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --we basically do a potpourri of things, as well as public school systems, school districts and things like that. Speaker 1: In, in the Atlanta [Georgia] area or other-- Speaker 2: We ran the-- Speaker 1: --other states? Speaker 2: --food service for Atlanta Public Schools for five years. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: And do, do you utilize other minority businesses, you know, to help you-- Speaker 2: Most definitely. Speaker 1: --to--and tell me about that. Speaker 2: Most definitely. We have--we use--we have a produce supplier. We have a paper and small goods supplier. We have--we utilize a lot of the African American car dealers to provide our fleet. We have a public relations firm. We have basically a lot of the--all of our attorneys and all of our accounting firms are African American. Story_ID: 482939 Speaker 1: You have a joint venture with Aramark [Aramark Corporation]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, we do, we do probably about a $100 million in joint venture work with, with the Aramark Corporation. Speaker 1: Tell me who-- Speaker 2: Some of those (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Aramark is, so just-- Speaker 2: Aramark is-- Speaker 1: --just to get-- Speaker 2: --the largest-- Speaker 1: --it on the record. Speaker 2: --is the largest American-owned food service management company in the country. And we have aligned ourselves with them since 1996 at the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia] and have been doing work with them for over ten years now. And we operate some, some jails together. We operate several corporate accounts together. We operated the Atlanta Public Schools together. Some of the corporate accounts we are the lead provider. For instance, at UPS [United Parcel Service] and at CNN and at New York Life [New York Life Insurance Company] we are the majority contractor, and they're the minority partner, and that works very well. It depends on the situation and the relationship as to who takes the lead in the contracts. And then we, we do basically 65/35, 70/30 [percent], depending on, on the size of the account and, and the, the amount of capital that it takes to run the business. We, we, we bite off as big a chunk as we can, as our capital will afford us to, to be able to do. But we still maintain 100 percent ownership as a minority company [Gourmet Services, Inc.]. Story_ID: 482940 Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interview with The HistoryMakers. Matthew Hickey is the videographer. Would you state your name and spell it for me please? Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Nathaniel R. Goldston, III, N-A-T-H-A-N-I-E-L, R for Russell, G-O-L-D-S-T-O-N, III. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: October the 20, 1938. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: Omaha, Nebraska. Speaker 1: Okay, and the location of this interview? Speaker 2: It's in Atlanta, Georgia, at my headquarters' office of Gourmet Services [Gourmet Services, Inc.]. Speaker 1: And your occupation? Speaker 2: And I'm the chairman of the board and founder of Gourmet Services. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a completion interview started in 2007. Story_ID: 482941 Speaker 1: I'd like to go back a little bit and talk about your, your training and your college days. So, talk to me about the school that you attended, and what you see today, and what's being offered in the universities today. Speaker 2: Basically, I went to--I'm, I'm from Omaha, Nebraska. I wanted to go to, to school at, at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York], but I did a lot of non-concentrational type activities when I was in high school [Omaha Central High School, Omaha, Nebraska], so my grades weren't the greatest. But I got into the hospitality, interested in hospitality 'cause that's all of my--I know. I started working with my father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.] when I was nine years old and kind of grew up in the business and kind of got an interest in it. And I wanted to go to school in hotel and restaurant management. And I ended up going to the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado]. I, I first went to Doane College [Doane University] in Crete, Nebraska, basically to get my grades up, to be very honest with you. But I was playing football. It was a free, it was a free scholarship for me. So I stayed there for one year, and then I was able to, to get the kind of grades that I needed to get into the University of Denver. And I went to (cough), I went to University of Denver for--I spent a nice time--I was having a good time when I was in college, so I spent six years. I was on the six-year plan (laughter). I got there in 1957--1956, and I left in 1962 with my undergraduate degree. So I, I lived, I lived a little bit when I was in, in Colorado but never regretted it though. But I did get the call from my father in, in the January of 1962 and said this is it. You got to get out (laughter), or you're on your own, so. And I was kind of on my own most of the time, but I did, I did get the message and, and left the University of Denver. Story_ID: 482942 Speaker 1: University of Denver [Denver, Colorado] was one of three schools at that time that really offered hospitality management or institutional management as a, as a degree. The other two were Michigan State University [Michigan State University of Agriculture and Applied Science; Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] and obviously Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York], the, the Cornell school, where my son [Nathaniel R. Goldston IV] ended up going to school. So he, he, he, he went to the Cornell that I didn't get to go to. But throughout the country, now that, that major has really spread and basically because there's a lot of industry. You know, if you look at the, at the restaurant industry, the food and beverage industry, the amount of people that it covers throughout the United States is just absolutely incredible. It's one of the largest industries that we have, so you've got schools like the University of Nevada [University of Nevada, Las Vegas] in Las Vegas [Nevada] that offers, Florida International University [Miami, Florida], Florida State University [Tallahassee, Florida], and Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and then you've got school at Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and then you've got schools that at Bethune-Cookman College [Bethune-Cookman University] in, in Daytona Beach [Florida]. So it's spread throughout the universe, this hospitality management. Here at Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] we have a, a major in hospitality management. And there's a lot of people in that industry, and there's a lot of different areas that affect that. You know, you think of it as just as running a restaurant or running a hotel, but then you've gotta think about the suppliers, and you gotta think about the regulatory people that, the USDA [U.S. Department of Agriculture] and the people like that, that, that regulate the food that you serve. Then you're talking about the sanitarians and the health departments that regulate the facilities and, and your ability to be able to serve your, your customers. And then the food distribution business is absolutely tremendous. They've--it's, it's, it's a huge operation now. And you go into--we, we, we operate food service for, for prisons, for jails, for hospitals, for airports, for business and industry and feeding of the employees, for our school districts, for our colleges and universities; and it just goes on and on, the amount of people that you touch, the airlines. So you take that, coupled with the fact of housing people and traveling public nowadays, and, and the vacationing public and all that, all that encompasses our industry, whether it's a ski lodge, or whether it's a golf resort, or whether it's a college or university, or whether it's just plain old going to the hospital for an operation. So you've got food service encompasses a, a huge amount of people in the country. Story_ID: 482943 Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about how and what decision you had to make to, to decide where to start in your business. When you first came to Atlanta [Georgia], what was your thought? Speaker 2: Well, prior to that I worked for a company, Catering Management, Incorporated--excuse me (cough). Catering Management was a food service management company. I got involved with them by one of my classmates at the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado], worked for a big company at that time called the, the Slater Company. Later on it became the ARA Services, and then later on that became Aramark Services [sic. Aramark Corporation] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Aramark. Speaker 2: And one of my classmates was working in a college in, in Columbia, Missouri. And when I got out of school I went to work for the Diplomat Hotel chain there in Omaha [Nebraska], as well as I stayed, I kept my job, my college job, working for the Union Pacific Railroad, mainly because I made a lot of money on the railroad. For a, for a little young guy I was making seven and eight dollars an hour back in the, in the '50s [1950s]. That was a lot of money (laughter) in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s]. And I only had to work a couple of days a week, and it was really kind of addictive, to be honest with you. But there, again, came a command from my, from my father [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.] for--he said, "You know, you paid all this money to go to college. You spent all this money to learn the food service business, and you on the railroad cleaning toilets." He said, "I know the money is good, but you gotta utilize your education." So I then went to work at the Diplomat Hotel, Diplomat Hotel chain there in Atlanta, George- I mean in Omaha, Nebraska. I worked there for two years, and I got a call from one of my classmates, Ernie Goldsmith, who is now deceased. But Ernie says, "You know, Nate [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III], I got a--I'm, I'm in a business that you, you might, just might be interested in." I said, "Okay." So he says, "Why don't you get on the train--," I, I wasn't flying back in those days, so I got on the train, and I went to, to Columbia, Missouri. And he met me at the train station, and we drove over to Jefferson City, Missouri, to Lincoln University. And he told me, he says, "Look," he said, "We run--we--I have a, a contract to run the food service here, to feed the students here at, at Lincoln University." And he says, "And I think that you really might enjoy this." And I said, "Okay, tell me why." He said, "Well, in the first place," he said, "in this business you only work nine months out of the year." He said, "But you get paid twelve months out of the year." He said, "You like to play golf in the summertime. They have summer school, and you, you don't have to work as much during the summertime. You got a lot of free time." He said, "You're in the hotel business now." He said, "Hotel business everybody's traveling in the summertime. You're busiest with weddings and, and all kinds of vacations, people on vacations and tourist going through town." He said, "Your Christmastime, you're off. In hotel business, busiest time of the year is the Christmas and New Year's. And you're working, you know, fifteen, sixteen, and seventeen hours a day." I said, "You're getting my attention (laughter)." "And then, you know, Eastertime, you get to take a little, few ten days." And I said, "I'm convinced. How much does it pay?" So when we--my first job, he--I was, I was offered $8,400 a year, plus a bonus, a 10 percent bonus if I met my budget or exceeded my budget. And of course I did that very easily. And I, I started in the, into that business, and, and I'll tell you, it's probably the most enjoyable portion of my life from that point on (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well what year is this? Speaker 2: That's 1964. Story_ID: 482944 Speaker 1: And tell me exactly what your job was-- Speaker 2: I was in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at, at the-- Speaker 2: --I was a food service director for-- Speaker 1: Director, okay. Speaker 2: --for Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri]. I ran all of the food service, all the student food services on the campus at Lincoln University in Missouri. Speaker 1: So tell me a little bit more about what that entailed. Speaker 2: Basically, it, the planning, and the purchasing, and the, the staffing of the cafeteria, using your imagination to keep the kids interested in coming back and forth to the different meals, and then maintaining your, a budget. You had X amount of dollars, which was absolutely ridiculous at that time. I was feeding the students for six dollars and thirty-six cents a week, three meals a day, twenty-one meals a week for six dollars and thirty-six cents (laughter). And I found that very intriguing, 'cause at first it scared me to death. There's no way in the world that you can get, you know, three meals a day for, for, for that kind of money. For a dollar and something a day, you can't do it. But what happens is, is that students don't eat all the meals, so they all don't show up every day. If they ever did, it would drive you completely out of business. The second thing is, especially on the weekends, they leave. They go to St. Louis [Missouri]; they go to stay in Kansas City [Missouri]. The third thing is they don't like to get up for breakfast in the morning, so that's a very sparse meal, so, but you get paid for those different meals during that time. So I learned the, the management. It was probably the best initiation or the learning of how to run a real business, because y- you were there by yourself. I mean they, they gave you all the help; they gave you the purchasing power; they gave you the credit to operate on, but basically you had to run that business yourself. And day to day you had to meet that--figure out a way to meet that payroll, and to meet that food cost, and to make certain the meals were on time, and make students--make certain the students were happy. And it's a very difficult job. And if you, you ever get in that part of the food service business, you, you, you can operate anything. So it was a great challenge for me and probably just a, a gift that I happened to be in the right place at the right time to be able to do that. Speaker 1: So that's where you initially got your management skills-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to be able to go, go forward (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: So how long did you stay at Lincoln University? Speaker 2: I stayed at Lincoln University for six years before I was promoted. I was promoted to a regional vice presidency with that same company [Catering Management, Incorporated]. And I grew the company in, in the South. I moved to Charlotte, North Carolina, and I grew the company from zero to, we were doing somewhere around $12 million in the South in my region. And it was very easy because my, my talents--I took my talents to the, to the African American colleges [HBCUs]. And those were the colleges that I was familiar with, but they were also part of the underserved part of that industry, which nobody ever thought about. I mean they were right at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill [Chapel Hill, North Carolina] and Duke University [Durham, North Carolina], and University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama]. But who is at Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] and Barber-Scotia [Barber-Scotia College, Concord, North Carolina], and Livingstone [Livingstone College, Salisbury, North Carolina]? And why don't they deserve the same quality of food service as some of these other companies are getting? And it was a very easy sell for me to go in. Once I sat down and explained our programs and was able to show the savings to the university of what they could do under a contract, it became very easy, real easy for me. Story_ID: 482945 Speaker 1: Before you went in to show them what you could do, who, who was, who were the ser- who was the service that was providing them with-- Speaker 2: Most of our schools were providing--host-operated. They, they had the person from the home economics department who was, who basically was a dietician who would, who would run the food service. And, and not that they weren't, you, you know, receiving the nutritious meals and the great meals, but, but basically, there was no variety. You know, it was either you eat that or you don't eat at all. And they had it controlled to the point that the student had no freedom of, of what he would like to eat or he or she would like to eat when they went through the line. There was no variety as far as picnics and special events and things like that that would drive the participation of the students in the campus and really make the cafeteria the place that it needed to be. Students spend more time in the cafeteria than they do in any one place on the university campus, if you think about it. They're there three times a day; they're there three--there are twenty-one meals a week. They're there for at least an hour and ehalf on each visit or so. And consequently, they spend more time in the cafeteria than they spend in the classroom or any one classroom on the campus. So it had to be a kind of program that kept the, the students interested, kept them feeling like somebody cared about them, and kept them, you know, nutritiously fed and, and, and fueled for the-- Speaker 1: So you offered-- Speaker 2: --for their activities. Speaker 1: You offered variety with the nutritional-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --factor. Speaker 2: There's two things that I offered: number one, the, the, the nutrition came in, but then the, the ability to provide variety came through the ability of doing mass purchasing. I could get food a lot cheaper than this college itself could get food. So consequently, having that access and then with a lot of meal planning and a lot of imagination, you still meet the dietary, but you make it kind of an experience, a dining experience as opposed to let's go to the caf [cafeteria] and get something to eat and eat, and then go. And then next thing you know, you're, you're down the street at, at, at the hamburger joint, you know, or somewhere off campus where you shouldn't be, you know. And it kind of added a lot of attraction, especially to college administrators back during those days. Contract food service was almost unheard of back in those days. Story_ID: 482946 Speaker 1: So you build this business up for six years, until about 1970. Is that right? Speaker 2: Nineteen--nine- I, I built the Catering Management [Catering Management, Incorporated] business. I, I, I stuck with it 'til 1974, right. Speaker 1: So tell me, what happens in 1974 that makes you decide that it's time to go (laughter)? Speaker 2: (Laughter) It was very interesting. I was, I was still with Catering Management, but Catering Management had been sold, and it'd been sold to a major conglomerate company in, in New York. And if you remember the, the early '60s [1960s] and, and the early '70s [1970s], they didn't have a lot of faith in the fact that, that an African American can, could run that, that business. So when Catering Management sold, I was brought into Columbia, Missouri, as the senior vice president and chief operating officer. But it was always understood that I would never be the president of the company because they were in a search mode for, for president of the company. I ran the company for almost, I guess it was two years, from 1972 to 1974, with interim managers coming in--come--presidents coming. They'd come in, and they, they couldn't figure it out, and they couldn't do the business. And yet and still, I'd turn--once I turn the reins over to the them, I'd have to go back and start all over again, to the point that it became rather frustrating. And, and my wife [Darlene Goldston] said to me, "You know, you run these people's--this biz- business for these people. You don't need these people for you, for, to run the business. You can see that you run the business. You know how to run--you ought to run your own business." I said, "You're probably right." So they had one more sale, when they sold--the company that, that, that bought my company sold to Aramark [Aramark Corporation]. Then it was ARA Services. And I knew I didn't want to get into that big company and getting into all of that. It just wasn't my style. I wasn't gonna move to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and I wasn't gonna--and you know, what was my job gonna be? And I basically just decided I'll just start on my--I mean I just woke up one morning and flew to Atlanta [Georgia], and had a, a meeting with an attorney in Atlanta, and told him I wanted to--what, what, what is my, my legal obligations to this company, and how can I start my own business? That lawyer was Prentiss Yancey [Prentiss Q. Yancey, Jr.], who had graduated from Villanova [Villanova University, Villanova, Pennsylvania] and graduated from Emory law school [Emory University School of Law, Atlanta, Georgia]. And, and he was responsible ultimately for, for the merger between the American Basketball Association and the National Basketball Association. And Prentiss is, was a very bright guy. He knew how to bring things together. And he told me, he said, he said, "Well, let me look at your contract." And I looked at the contract. "You have a contract with, with food service management. You don't have a contract with ARA. So, if you were still an employee of, of, of the other company, you would have an obligation. But since you quit, you have no obligations to anybody." He said, "Now you gotta figure out how to go get your business." And it's a, a very interesting story in itself. Story_ID: 482947 Speaker 1: I started going back to clients that I had gotten for, for, for the other company [Catering Management, Incorporated]. And I talked to the president of Johnson C. Smith University [Charlotte, North Carolina], Dr. Lionel H. Newsom. And I told him that I was, I was thinking about starting my own business, and, and what do you think? He says, "Well, Nate [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III]," he says, "I'll tell you what." He says, "We don't know anybody but you; so consequently, I don't know that we'd know the difference. And then at that time, he left and went to Central State [Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. And Dr. Greenfield, Wil- Wilbert Greenfield came to, to, to Charlotte [North Carolina], and I told him about my conversation with, with Dr. Newsom. He said, "Well, I, I wouldn't have a problem. I wouldn't know the difference." So I went back, and I, and I organized and I came back in January of that year. Well, now it's time to ask for, for the name on the, on the contract. And Dr. Greenfield had what was known as the (unclear), the Hong Kong flu back in those days. And he tells the story that he, he was on his sickbed, and I came to his house, and I wouldn't leave unless he signed (laughter) that contract, which is true. I was, I was, I was determined to get his name on that contract. He said, "He got me off my deathbed and forced me to sign the contract." He says, "But it's probably one of the best things we ever did." At Barber-Scotia College [Concord, North Carolina] there was a Mable McLean [Mable Parker McLean] who was the president then, and she signed the contract with me. Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], Dr. Stone [Jesse N. Stone, Jr.], president at--he signed the contract with me at Southern University. And at Wiley College [Marshall, Texas] I got the contract there. And then at Voorhees College [Denmark, South Carolina] I got the contract there. And from that point on I opened up a business, on January the 4, 1975, that was worth about $3 million in sales, which was a lot of money during those days. Speaker 2: How long did it take you to acquire all of these contracts? Speaker 1: A week and a half. Speaker 2: So you flew, flew from--well you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I just-- Speaker 2: --no, you--well, you-- Speaker 1: I-- Speaker 2: --just came from Charlotte to Atlanta [Georgia] and then to the different colleges? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Right, yeah, I flew around on my American Express, had no idea how I was gonna pay the bill, but I was flying (laughter) (cough). And with those six colleges we launched the beginning of Gourmet Services [Gourmet Services, Inc.]. Story_ID: 482948 Speaker 1: What made you decide to come to Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Atlanta, I was living in Columbia, Missouri. By the time you drive from Columbia, Missouri to St. Louis [Missouri] or Kansas City [Missouri] and catch the plane, then get to Atlanta, you lose a day's worth of travel time. And I happened to, to come to Atlanta from out of St. Louis one, one afternoon. And I was actually headed to, to, to Charlotte [North Carolina], but I had--you had, during those days, you had to catch Eastern Air Lines in St. Louis, and then you would go to Atlanta, and then you'd transfer to a plane to go to, go to Charlotte. So that's how long it took me to get--and I was traveling with, then, I think he--yes, he had just become mayor of the City of Atlanta. I was traveling with Maynard Jackson. And he said you know, "Why are you living out here? You need to be living in Atlanta." He said, "You know, you, you got all those schools down there, and you got the close proximity" and this, that, and the other thing. "And, and Atlanta is the kind of city that you need to be in because people--we in charge; we running Atlanta." So I said, "That, that might be a consideration," 'cause I was thinking about moving back to Charlotte 'cause I'd lived there before. And I came down to Atlanta. And what was more interesting is that during my tenure on the, on the Union Pacific Railroad when I was in college [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado], I met a guy whose name was Marvin Arrington [HistoryMaker Marvin S. Arrington, Sr.]. And Marvin Arrington at that time had just become the, the youngest--I forgot what they called him before. It was city council. It was before the city--alder- alder-- Speaker 1: Alderman. Speaker 2: Alderman--youngest alderman on the city, in, in the, in the city of Atlanta (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was twenty-seven years old. Speaker 2: That's right. And I was walking down the street, and I heard somebody scream my name out loud, real strong. And I'm saying, Lord, who in the world is that? Lo and behold, it was, it's Marvin Arrington. So between Marvin and, and Maynard, I was convinced that I should, I should move, move our office to, to Atlanta. And the rest is history. Story_ID: 482949 Speaker 1: So when you got to Atlanta [Georgia], tell me about the competition and, and how you were able to--I, I mean with Maynard [Maynard Jackson] and, and, and Marvin Arrington [HistoryMaker Marvin S. Arrington, Sr.] on your side, it opened some doors I'm sure. Speaker 2: A lot of doors. Speaker 1: A lot of doors. Speaker 2: Immediately. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we, we immediately were introduced to all of the right people in the city, to the bank, the Citizens Trust Bank [Atlanta, Georgia], and the, and the whole nine yards, all of the people here. Speaker 1: Who was the president of Citizens Trust Bank at that time? Speaker 2: Mr. Funderburg, Owen Funderburg [I. Owen Funderburg] was the--he had just moved from, from St. Louis [Missouri] to, to Atlanta, so he hadn't been here that long either. But Owen was my, my first banker and the first man ever loaned me a hundred thousand dollars (laughter). Speaker 1: And what about the competition here, or was there any competition (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was no competition. Nobody, nobody was really interested in, in the, in the predominantly HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] at that time. I mean they, they were just, it was like fertile ground. It was like, you know, the California Gold worth- Rush. You go in and one president would talk to the next president. It was just like, you know. And we grew our company [Gourmet Services, Inc.] tremendously fast, in fact, too fast during those days, because while we picked up a lot of accounts, some of the accounts couldn't pay on time. And you know, we run into cash flow problems and things like that. In fact, one of the schools was actually, Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] was closed during that time. Then there was another little school down in South Carolina that kind of went under at that time. And then we had a little school, a little prep school over in, in south Georgia here, middle Georgia here that, that went under at that time. So, we got, we got, we had a mixed bag. But we then learned after a while that we need to be a little more careful about our growth and slow it down a little bit, and, and we did. And, and we began to diversify a little bit. Speaker 1: Who were your key players in helping you to establish your business here? Speaker 2: Other than Maynard, Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and-- Speaker 1: No, I mean in the company itself. Speaker 2: Oh, in, in the, oh, in the company itself. Back during those days, it was a gentleman by the name of Floyd Young, who was my, my first partner. Operates his own company now, FDY [FDY, Inc.], and they're located in Charlotte, North Carolina. Floyd's wife [Norma Young] didn't like him traveling, and so at that time he wanted to buy, buy the North Carolina business from the company. And we were able to, to work--William Dickerson, who is the key guy that ran Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for me, he started his own company. He has a, he has a, a company that basically operates nursing homes and elder care out in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Story_ID: 482950 Speaker 1: We were talking about the people who helped start your business [Gourmet Services, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Yes, at Barber-Scotia College [Concord, North Carolina] I had a young man by the name of Hubert Brice who, who is now deceased, but he was one of my carryovers. Hubert was the, the food service director at Barber-Scotia. And had a guy by the name of Gus Evans [ph.] who was out in Marshall, Texas. He ran Wiley College [Marshall, Texas]. I had all these really, really strong management people who had followed me, basically people that I'd brought to the company. And they said you know, I'll tell you what: if you're leaving, we're leaving. And along with that I had a great, great, great, great management team, none of which are with me at, at this particular moment, other than Brenda Branch, who was the (unclear)--who went on and became president of my company. She now works for, for another company [Jackmont Hospitality, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. But Brenda Branch, her husband is still with me. He's been with me for a hundred years. And, but he's--she's gone on to run a, run a retail restaurant company that operates TGI Fridays. So, but everybody's still in pros- close proximity. We still have a, an alumni association that gets together every now and then around restaurant shows or different visits to Atlanta [Georgia]. And we still, we're still together. It's still kind of a, a family thing, even though we're friendly competitors, some of us. And of course, obviously, I don't, I don't--I try not to compete with, with the, with the folks that, that we all used to work with. It's kind of an unwritten law, so. But we all do, we all work together whenever possible. Story_ID: 482951 Speaker 1: Was there any drawback by not having any competition? Speaker 2: Yes, because you cot- got a little bit reckless in some of your, some of the management of, of some of the things that you do. And I say that, you know, we, we got overly generous sometimes. And, and to our detriment we were, we were so anxious to, to really please our customers and things like. So we probably, we probably were kind of lax in some of the things that, that we allowed. It wasn't until probably I guess the early part of the '80s [1980s] when we really tightened up and started really managing our business. That's when we, we disguised--had to decide whether we're gonna be a business for everybody or a business for those that can pay. And we decide (laughter). So went--we dropped our sales from about $20 million down to eight real quick. And that's when I realized that, you know, you gotta, you gotta run this business like a business. You can't, can't be a welfare agency, so. We were nice to everybody. We lost a few dollars that way. And my accounting people came in and said we got to bite the bullet. So we trimmed the tree, and we, we started all over again. And as a result of that, we've been a very healthy, slow-growing company. Speaker 1: So after you trimmed the tree, as you said, were these still only universities, colleges that you were dealing with at the time? Speaker 2: Yes, we did have the New Orleans airport [New Orleans International Airport; Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport, New Orleans, Louisiana], and we had the Atlanta airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] in the early '80s [1980s] there. We had the College of the Virgin Islands [University of the Virgin Islands, Charlotte Amalie, U.S. Virgin Islands] at that time, which was, which was a, it was a cost-plus contract, so it, it didn't hurt us. But basically, the majority of our company was right core, right in the Southeast here. Speaker 1: What did you do to begin to build the business again? Who else did you begin to service? Speaker 2: Well, we began a, we began a, a catering division, and we started doing some city contracts. We did some contracts with the, for the youth sports programs and the summer playground programs. We did a lot of elderly feeding for the government back in those days, at the Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] days when the Title VII and XI and all those things came in, and they started these elderly programs. So we did a lot of that, government feeding. But we continued on our, our base, with the colleges and universities and built them slowly. But by that time the competition, the field was full of competition 'cause everybody watched what Gourmet [Gourmet Services, Inc.] had done. Now all of a sudden, ev- all the major companies are knocking on your doors, you know. And it was just absolutely a flood coming to the--they read our--how we went up the ranks in Black Enterprise magazine and said wait a minute. We know them. You know, they do the same thing we do. And so they invaded the market back in the, in the mid-'80s [1980s], and, and it's been a dogfight ever since (laughter). Story_ID: 482952 Speaker 1: What did you do to combat what was happening? Speaker 2: Well, what we did was we, we, we put together some new programs that, that, that became attractive and more competitive, knowing that these big companies couldn't meet some of the programs that we put together. So you had to figure it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like, like what? Speaker 2: Well, we, we began what we called unlimited feeding. We started, we started when, when, you know, that basically says you can come back through the line as many times as you want to; eat 'til you get full. And you can have seconds on everything except the premium om- premium entree. And the way you do that is like, fried chicken or chicken might be your premium entree. But if you've got spaghetti and macaroni and cheese and some of these other filling things, and you put some meat along with that, and, and it fills you up relatively quick, but it also doesn't cost half the, the, as much. And because of the, the absenteeism coming back and forth, you didn't have to charge that much more for it. And so they said oh, we can have unlimited feeding? So then what the other part of it we did was we took the industry itself and said people don't come to, to breakfast on Sunday morning. Kids don't get out of breakfast--out of bed on Saturday mornings. So we cut the number of meals from, from twenty-one down to nineteen, and we served brunch on the Saturdays and brunch on Sundays. And we're able to, to meet the marketplace and still charge like we had twenty-one meals but only served nineteen. So there was a lot of efficiencies that we brought, and then people began to copy that (laughter). But there, there was a, there was time when we--that, that was our marketing edge when we went in there, and the students just loved it. I mean the students would call the, the other colleges, say, you all can go back as many times as you want? Yes, you can eat. That was when overeating was fashionable. We're now at the other end of the spectrum, obviously, but--and we're having to do, I gotta do a presentation for Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] very shortly, the end of this week. So now I, I gotta show them how to eat healthy, you know, and not eat so much, and eat the right things at the right times and things like that. So you've gotta change, you know, gears with the, with the times, and we've been able to do that very quickly because we're such a small company [Gourmet Services, Inc.]. We don't--I mean--you don't--we only have to sit in this room, just us, and we make up our mind. Like this afternoon, we'll make up our mind how we will present to Fisk, and it'll be done. And, and these other companies, you gotta go through twenty vice presidents and regional vice presidents. By the time they, time they react, we've already run off with the market. Story_ID: 482953 Speaker 1: And tell me who's on your board. Who now works here [Gourmet Services, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Oh, we've got, we've got a great board. We've got a guy by the name of Barry Rand [A. Barry Rand], who used to be the president and CEO of Xerox [Xerox Corporation]--COO of Xerox, ran Avis Rent A Car [Avis Rent A Car System]. He's the chairman of the board of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. We've got Veronica Biggins [HistoryMaker J. Veronica Biggins], who came out of Mr. Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] little administration there. But Veronica grew through the ranks in banking at Bank of America. And, and we've got, we've got Alden McDonald [HistoryMaker Alden J. McDonald, Jr.], who is the president of Liberty Bank [Liberty Bank and Trust Company], and he's in, in New Orleans, Louisiana. Charles Teamer [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.], who was formerly the vice president of Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana], and he's the president of Dryades Bank [Dryades Savings Bank], also in New Orleans. And then we've got [HistoryMaker] Juanita Baranco, who's, she comes out of the auto industry. And, and, and we've got Lindsey Garrett [ph.], who was one of the founding, founding, founding fathers of Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group] down in Houston, Texas, who was a member of our board. We have the--retired from our board on leave of absence was Shirley Franklin, who was the, who is now the mayor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Mayor. Speaker 2: --of the City of Atlanta [Georgia]. And let's, let's see, we've go, we've got some more. But we've got a, we've got a world-class board, and they all work extremely hard. Dr. Joseph Johnson [HistoryMaker Joseph Johnson], formerly president of Grambling University [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and Talladega University [sic. Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], he's on our board. But we have a, we have a who's who of people, and we really, really--in fact, we're getting ready to plan a board retreat now, as we begin to move into some new phases of our business that we, we're gonna operate on--under. Story_ID: 482954 Speaker 1: But you added, going back, you added the catering part of the business [Gourmet Services, Inc.]. So tell me how it, how that's different from-- Speaker 2: The social catering is-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --is basically caters to the, to the public as opposed to a captive audience. And because of the fact that we've got so many accounts in the area, you know, we're able to do some, some catering, some outside events for people. We just recently did a, an event in, in--well, down in Selma, Alabama. We're getting ready for the voting rights issues, the voting rights celebration down there, doing a lot of events with that. We did the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia]. We did a lot of catering for the Olympics, as well as ran four venues for the Olympics. When the Super Bowl came to town, we did the owners' party at, at the museum out here in Decatur [Georgia]. I can't think of the name of the museum, but--Fernbank. At Fernbank Museum [Fernbank Museum of Natural History, Atlanta, Georgia] we did the, we did the party for the owners. We do lots of parties for, for the mayors and the city officials around town, do lots of weddings. And, and basically, it, it, it's a natural for us 'cause that's, that keeps our, our culinary juices flowing, gives our imagination a, a few challenges and opportunities. Story_ID: 482955 Speaker 1: Well, I noticed too that a lot of the hotels now are contracting out their services. Is that something that you will be doing or are doing (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we have a hotel. We operate, we, we, we, we've operated, we're operating the, the historic St. James Hotel at the foot of the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama, a 170 year-old property that has for the first time--Selma, eight years--seven--in 2000 elected a black mayor [James Perkins] in all of those years. And the black mayor selected Gourmet Services [Gourmet Services, Inc.] to run the hotel for, for the City of Selma. And it was a great honor, and a great pleasure, and it--we see history in the making every day. We will, on March the 8, be hosting both of the Democratic presidential candidates at the foot of the Edmund Pettus Bridge as they come there to celebrate the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965]. We just had the recent death of James Orange, who, who was very instrumental in making certain that we played a, a big part in, in that celebration there. So we're getting a little chance, our chance to participate in history as well. Speaker 1: So are there are any plans to further the hotel end of it (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we do plan to do it, but we don't want, we don't want to do it in big cities and big hotels. We like small cities and small properties, boutique-type hotels. Our hotel in Selma has forty-two rooms, and I like that. Speaker 1: So will you look for more historical places as well? Speaker 2: Well, we'll look for more smaller, smaller, more intimate kinds of operations. That's what we feel we can give you personal service and that kind--I'm not interested in operating a Days Inn or, or a Holiday Inn or anything like that. I like to have something that's unique and that's rare. And I think that would be our niche. Story_ID: 482956 Speaker 1: Throughout the years, have you seen a change in, or are there any challenges now that you didn't have before as far as permits and, and different things that come along with running the business [Gourmet Services, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Well, the biggest that, that we had (cough), we, we faced once we began to get big was the credit crunch, the ability to be able to, to compete, even though we bought a lot, being able to have that on credit in order to carry our accounts during the payment cycle. But that too is beginning to subside. The vendors now see the value in our business. They've learned that we pay just like everybody else. They've also felt a level of comfort with, with extending us the, the kind of credit that we need and the kind--and, and giving us the kind of prices that we need. Bank credit, still a little bit tough, but it's tough for everybody. And that's, a lot of that has to do with the economy; just doesn't have to do with us. But working capital was a challenge for a while, but it's beginning to work itself out, so. There has been some changes, the evolving of some of our African American banks and, and the growth there and their being able to finance it. We try to, try to keep the money in the community if we can where we go. While we may have to transfer money from, from the big banks, we try to, to patronize the local banks and especially the banks in our community. Story_ID: 482957 Speaker 1: In comparison, where, where do you see yourself in comparison to some of the other major players in the food industry? Speaker 2: I think we're ranked number fifteen in the, in the country, in the universe's contract feeders. Speaker 1: Who's number one? Speaker 2: Aramark [Aramark Corporation]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: They do, they do (laughter), they do about $12 billion in business. Speaker 1: Okay, and there's another company, Sodexo? Speaker 2: Sodexo, Sodexo is a French company. Aramark is the only American-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --based company. You've, you've got Compass [Compass Group]. Sodexo is about number three I think. Compass is number two. Compass has--comes from the UK [United Kingdom], but they've built their business by acquisitions of American-based companies. And they keep those names of those American-based companies so they won't be treated like foreigners. So, they even have an African American company in their portfolio that they own 49 percent of. They don't, they don't take the controlling interest. They, they take the second interest in order to try to maintain the, the U.S. presence. Sodexo, on the other hand, is a French company that acquired Marriott [Marriott International, Inc.], all the contract feeding services from Marriott. And they call themselves Sodexho Marriott [Sodexho Marriott Services, Inc.] in order to try to maintain their, their U.S. base. But now they, Marriott's took their name back after a period of two years, so they're out there on their own now. So they're a French-based company that operates in the United States of America. Story_ID: 482958 Speaker 1: So what's on the horizon for your company [Gourmet Services, Inc.]? Speaker 2: We've got a very exciting future. One of the things that we're trying to, trying to penetrate now is to, to bring our program into the public school systems. I don't want to be in Atlanta Public Schools, and I don't want to be in--I want to be in South Carolina, down in Orangeburg, South Carolina, and Denmark, South Carolina, the smaller markets. And I want--I don't want to bring it as taking over their food service but basically from a consulting standpoint of view, allowing them to use our purchasing power, and use our ability to purchase, as well as giving them access to computerize systems that they wouldn't normally be able to afford in some of these smaller districts, and bringing that service to them at a very reasonable price. We think there's an opportunity. There's an opportunity for growth there. The second thing we want to do is that we're beginning to build a retail brand. We have a relationship with, with focus brands. And we're gonna be developing--we've got our own unique way there. Schlotzsky's Deli is an opportunity. We want to basically begin to open up new territories back in Nebraska, in South Carolina and some of the other small areas. We want to do it with an owner-operator kind of a facility. I want to get young people that have graduated with a business degree and spent some time and want to run their own business and partner with them, allow them the ability to, to develop businesses, biz- and business opportunities on their own. We want to do the, the--and I talked about the hotel. We want, we'd like to look in, from the hotel business and some--we're beginning to get into a lot of the inmate feeding, yeah. We are currently looking at the possibility of doing a contract with the Georgia Department of Corrections, the sixty-one thousand people there. And part of our little niche there is to basically bring some of those inmates into the food service industry, give them the training, give the ability to, that if they ever do get out, and let's pray that they do get out, that they'll have, they'll have a way of make- making a--having gainful employment when they get out. So we got a little social responsibility and a little business. But you can do those things, you know, after you've got a core business that, like we have, that really supports us and allows us an opportunity to help other people. Story_ID: 482959 Speaker 1: So you said the Georgia Department [Georgia Department of Corrections]. What about federal pir- prisons? Speaker 2: Well, federal prisons would be-- Speaker 1: As well? Speaker 2: Yeah, a federal and county, local, county, municipal, any time that any of those in- incarcerations points. And we're doing that along with, with the Aramark Corporation. I have a great partnership with, with some of the guys at Aramark, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Really? Tell me about that relationship. Speaker 2: Aramark and Gourmet [Gourmet Foods, Inc.] kind of got together in 1996. When the Olympics [1996 Summer Olympics] came to Atlanta [Georgia], Aramark was the master contractors. And Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and Shirley Franklin basically told the Aramark people we're really pleased to have you all come to Atlanta. They said but you know, we need to, we need to have some joint venture participation in this Olympic Games. And it just so happened that I went to school with one of the then-presidents of Aramark. And John Farquharson called me up, and he said, "Nate [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III]," he said, "we've been fighting for all these years. It's time we need to do something together." And that marriage began, and we've been operating joint contracts with them all over the country through all lines of business for, for the last I guess eleven, twelve, almost, this would be the twelfth year, yeah, since, since 1996. Really, 1995 is when we got together. And it's been a, an interesting process, working with the big company. We, we've almost maintained our, our independence and our ability to, to participate in contracts based on our ability to contribute capital or whatever it is on an equal basis. We're not looking for any free rides. We want a seat at the table. We're, we're too vocal to be--to sit by the side and just kind of collect money. So that's worked very well, worked very well. Speaker 1: And you said that they wanted Aramark to have a joint venture. But were they actually looking for a minority vendor? Speaker 2: Yes. Oh, they demanded that basically on, on the fact that you're come into the City of Atlanta. We, we have Maynard Jackson to thank for that. Story_ID: 482960 Speaker 1: You talked a little bit about the airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia], in that you were out at the airport (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --for a period of time. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And tell me about, about the airport venture. Speaker 2: The airport was a great experience until we had that, that strike. If you remember, they closed the air controllers down, and they had the air controllers strike. And I, my business was on the Eastern Air Lines concourse. And needless to say, Eastern Air Lines ended up going out of business, and, and we opted out of the airport business, although we're, we're, we're on the way back in. At least we're bidding on some airport contracts again now. But it got to be rather unhealthy during those times. It was--we lost three or four hundred thousand dollars out there. Story_ID: 482961 Speaker 1: Is there anything else that we can look forward to from, from your company? Speaker 2: Basically, I think that there are some other things that we may be doing but nothing that's on the developmental stage that we can talk about at this point. But we've been able to put together a great management team and, and a great group of young people beginning to join us now. We're, we're planning the next generation of Gourmet Services [Gourmet Services, Inc.] at this point. Speaker 1: Well, well, tell me about that. Who's on the management team now? Speaker 2: Well, I've got Russ Goldston [Nathaniel R. Goldston IV], who's my son, on, the one that went to Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York]. He is the prodigal son who has decided to return home and work in the business. We've got Kimberly, Kimberly Goldston [Kimberly Goldston Martin], who's our senior vice president of marketing, runs the marketing division. We've got Ray McClendon [Raymond McClendon], who is, comes out of the investment banking industry, graduate of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and, and London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England], and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and all that stuff. He's got all the great credentials as our chief operating officer. He stands in the, in, in the stead and allows us to--he's developing my children to, to take over the business. It's better to have somebody from the outside developing them than, than, than the parents themselves. We've got Kristen Hoffman, who's just joined us in the sales department. She's running all of our sales and marketing. She's, she's a young lady that my daughter used to babysit for her. Her father was the second president of 100 Black Men of Atlanta [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.]. And so we've got a family relationship and a family tie there that--and her degree is in marketing and, and sales, and it, and it's a perfect fit. Then we've got some young people that we're bringing into the accounting department, Chandler Scott [ph.]. And he's--we're developing him into, into be our CFO. So, it's a lot of, lot of good things going on. Speaker 1: So you, you feel it's very important to pass on the baton? Speaker 2: There's no question about it, no question about it. You know, and, and it's amazing what you can learn from the younger people. You see, they, they, they come from a different background. They aren't scared of anything. And consequently, a lot of very good entrepreneurial ideas come from those, from those young people. I just give them the space to work, give the idee- you get--let them take the idea and develop it, and the company is, is the beneficiary of that, so. Speaker 1: And also, they bring technology as that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No question about that (laughter). Speaker 1: So they have helped to-- Speaker 2: I'm barely off the email, so you know, you're absolutely correct in that. They've got new ways and new ways to, different ways of doing things now. Speaker 1: Yeah. Is there anything that we-- Speaker 2: I don't think so. Speaker 1: --missed about the business, because I, I want to move on to talking about your involvement with the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 482962 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your involvement with the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.]. So let's start from the beginning. Speaker 2: Well, it was a (laughter), it's a very interesting story. Back in the, in the mid-'80s [1980s], we operated a food service for the Harlem State Office Building [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. State Office Building] in, in New York [New York]. And one of my, one of the people that, or one of the, the organizations that we regularly served on a monthly basis was the 100 Black Men of New York [100 Black Men, Inc. of New York]. And they met in our building, and we would, and we would serve them dinner in the evenings. And I just happened to be around and asked the president, who was Roscoe, Dr. Roscoe Brown [HistoryMaker Roscoe C. Brown], if I could just kind of listen into the meeting. "Y'all, this is a secret meeting or something?" "No, no, no, no, sit down." And they were--I listen to them. They were planning their annual fundraiser for scholarships that they gave to, to kids in Harlem [New York, New York], basically, going to any college that they wanted to. And, and it was a nice, it was great, great kind of a program. And on my way back to Atlanta [Georgia], I thought about it. I said you know, there's no organization like that in Atlanta that basically, you know. And it was during the time, in those '80s [1980s], black males had a, they had a, a horrible rap. I mean it was, I mean we were known as people that, that ran off and left our families and people that went to the grocery store and never came back for twenty years and all that kind of stuff. And we didn't have the greatest reputation. And I thought about it, and I said you know, there ought to be, we ought to be able to put one of those groups together in the City of Atlanta. And I came back to my secretary, who was Monica Douglas at that time, and I told her. She said, "Yeah, maybe, I don't know." She said, "I, I don't know." She said, "But you're right: there is nothing, you know, there is nothing here in Atlanta that even comes close to that." We didn't have a black chamber. We didn't have a--we had the Black United Front [National Black United Front], which came close to doing something like that. So at any rate, I decided I would, I would call a few guys and invite them to dinner at the Mansion Restaurant [Atlanta, Georgia]. It ended up there was twenty-five or thirty of us showed up. And I talked to them about, you know, the group in, that I'd encountered in New York. And they were actually founded to combat police brutality in Harlem back in the, in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s]. That's how they got their group together. You know, they called it 100 Black Men [100 Black Men, Inc.; 100 Black Men of America, Inc.], and they worked with the police department and the mayor to stop some of the police brutality that was going on. And, and I said we need that kind of a community organization here, and the guys agreed with it. So we sat down and as a result of that, we decided we had to try to figure out what we were going to do. What can we do to impact the, the community in the City of Atlanta? And of course, one of those guys was in the superintendent of schools. He said, "I'll tell you what you can do. You can help some, keep some of these young people in school." He said, "You can help us, you know, basically give them some kind of a hope, some mind of a reason for staying in school and going on with life instead of dropping out. Our dropout rate is somewhere around 45 percent, 50 percent." And we said well, that makes sense. So what, what, what could we do? He said, "Well, I'll tell you what: he says I got a school. The worst school I got is Archer High School [S.H. Archer High School, Atlanta, Georgia] up at Perry Homes [Atlanta, Georgia] in the projects up there. And if we can figure out a way to help those kids through school and make certain that they went on to college and had a college education," he said, "We could do it like that guy did up in New York, that Eugene Lang." He said, "We challenge them. If they come through our program, and they do everything we say, that at the end of there, when you graduate, we'll make certain that your college tuition is paid for." Everybody, the room went silent. And then of course the, the accountants came up there. "How much would that cost?" "We don't know how much it would cost." "Well, don't you think we need to find out first?" So we went back. And the next meeting they came back, and when the accountants came up and gave their report, said, "You would have to raise anywhere between three hundred and fifty and a half million dollars every year." You've got to be kidding me. That's what it's gonna cost. Now if you get out there and make that promise, you better be able to deliver. And so we thought long and hard about it. And I was kind of the leader of the group, since I was the convener. Story_ID: 482963 Speaker 1: Tell me (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So-- Speaker 1: --who were the, the players? Who were the twenty-five or thirty folks-- Speaker 2: Oh, there's-- Speaker 1: --or some of them? I know you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --probably don't remember all of them. Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time, it was Alonzo Crim [Alonzo A. Crim], who was the, then-superintendent of schools. You had several doctors, Dr. Dennis Turner, a local dentist. You had Matt Wilburn [ph.], who was an entrepreneur, business entrepreneur. You had Terry Reynolds, who was a dentist. You had Charles Meredith, who was the chancellor of the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] during that time. You had Joseph Hoffman [Joseph I. Hoffman, Jr.], who was the, the, he's an orthopedic surgeon. You had John Matthews [ph.], who was a CPS--CPA [certified public accountant], ex-IRS [International Revenue Service] agent. You had, let me see--I got a picture of them back there on the wall. I'll be glad to kind of share that picture with you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But-- Speaker 1: So you were as the leader (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Charles, Charles Williams, Chuck Williams who was a, he was a county commissioner during that time. He was the Fulton County [Georgia] commissioner during that time and a doctor Willie Clemons, who worked at the Atlanta Metropolitan College [Atlanta Metropolitan State College, Atlanta, Georgia]. But at any rate, it ended up being twenty-two guys from all walks of the community. Speaker 1: And so now you're the leader. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm basically the convener, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 482964 Speaker 1: I'm still paying for all the meetings too, by the way. I'm paying--every time they--that we had dinner, we either catered or we would pay for it. And so, as a group, you know, we, we sat, we sat up there and we talked and we kept saying--and, and I came and that's when I, I, I coined the phrase: you know what, guys? When you do the right things for the right reasons, God will find a way. And they said, "Nate [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III], that's--we've got to have a--everybody here ain't in touch with God like you are" (laughter). I said, "Well, we need to give, give it a shot." So we thought about it for a week and came back, and we said all right, why not? We said man, we gotta start raising some money right away, and we gotta put our own money in here, by the way. So immediately we started off with everybody saying that we will be responsible for a thousand dollars, a personal contribution every year. So that was like twenty-two thousand dollars. So that, that gave us a little bit of hope. That gave us a, a, a, a, at least a, a bank account to begin to operate on. And then from that point on, man, we gotta really work, you know, to make certain that we, we get this thing done. So then the lawyers came in, and they, they're saying all right, guys, there's a certain amount of responsibility. If you start interacting with these kids, there's spurt- certain amount of legal responsibilities that you're gonna have to live up to. There's a certain amount of, you know, rules that you're gonna have to follow and making certain that, you know, you don't violate any, any personal rights or family rights and things like that. And so he came up with what we called the covenant. And the covenant basically was between 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.], Archer High School [S.H. Archer High School, Atlanta, Georgia] eighth grade class, which we just pulled out of a hat and just took them as they were. It was, they were, they were, I think it was thirty-two kids in that class. Then we had to get their parents involved, brought their parents and met with their parents. And the parents got all excited and--, "I want my son to have the right--you, are you telling me he can go to college?" And of course, you know, we became the instant heroes of Perry Homes [Atlanta, Georgia]. We ain't done nothing yet. We ain't busted the first grape yet, you know. But we, you know, we felt, you could feel inside of you basically the feeling of these people and the relief of these people. And all of a sudden, you, you're their new best friend. And they all signed the covenant. And we began to work with, with that first class. Speaker 2: Now the covenant was basically telling the parents what their responsibility would be? Speaker 1: That's exactly right: your responsibility's to make certain that if, if there is a function or a meeting or whatever it is, that your child gets there; number two, that you know, if there is homework assignments or whatever it is, you know, and they need help, you, you pick up the phone and you call if you can't, if you need help, the minute you need help, or the minute you have a problem, you call us. We're your new, you know, partners in this deal. Then we had the principal of the school, who was partnered in the deal. And then we, we, we got-- Speaker 2: Who (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) back and everybody-- Speaker 2: Excuse me. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Who, who was the principal of Archer High at that time? Speaker 1: Bob [Robert Dixon]--what was Bob's name? I, my-- Speaker 2: You can't remember? Speaker 1: You know, when you get old-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I, I-- Speaker 2: I-- Speaker 1: --I have a book I'll give you that's in the, it's in the book. But Bob, Bob, and he became a member of the 100 Black Men. He became a member 'cause he had to be in all of our meetings to know what was going on so that he could stay abreast of what was happening. And all of a sudden, you know, we, we went back, and we started: you know, that's a whole lot of work; we gotta figure out a way to get this done. So they--lo and behold, they took my secretary, who had a background in education, and they, they said well, Monica [Monica Douglas], you can be--what we need for you to do is to, to be our link between the kids and the, and the organization. So they took her out of my office and put her in an office at Archer High School, to be there for the kids every single day, to make certain that they didn't have any problems, that they stayed out of trouble, that they did--were, were going to class, they were doing all the things they needed to do in order to be successful. Story_ID: 482965 Speaker 1: Right after that somebody wrote a story in the newspaper about the 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.] and their challenge to Archer High School [S.H. Archer High School, Atlanta, Georgia]. And one of the, one of the gentlemen in the community called and wanted to know, he said, "I want to know who these 100 Black Men are. What, what, what did they do? I mean what--," he says, "I ain't never heard folks in the black community helping one another." He came from--he was the founder of Majik Market. And he was known in the community not to be such a good friend of the African American community. He was, but he wasn't, you know. He would help Hosea [Hosea Williams], but he ain't necessarily, he didn't, he, he never, never trusted Hosea. Yeah, I'll help you, you know, and help you with your dinners and stuff like that. His name was Dillard Munford. And Mr. Munford called and requested a meeting, 'cause he just wanted to find out--, "I want to find out more about this organization." So I called Joe Hoffman [Joseph I. Hoffman, Jr.], who was the vice president at that particular moment. And I said, "Joe, you think we need to meet with this man?" He said, "Yeah, I guess it won't hurt," you know, so we went out there. And of course, when we walked in his office, Mr. Munford, just started hugging both of us. He says, "I, I just wanna look at, at, at black men who're gonna help people in their community." He said, "They always want me to help them." He says, "But I ain't never heard of them helping themselves," you know. And I looked at Joe, and he looked at me, and I said well, well, well. So anyway, long story short, we told him what our plan was. He said, "That's a great plan." He said, "I- y'all don't want no money from white people." We said, "Not necessarily." He said, "I know you don't want it, and I don't wanna, I don't wanna, I don't wanna disrupt the process." He said, "But I know of a foundation that would probably be very interested in what y'all are doing. And I happened to be the vice chairman of that board. And if y'all don't mind, I want to try, just try to see if I can get some money from them for y'all. Y'all need an office. You need to have some staff. You need to be able to do this; need to have some working capital." And he says, "I don't want, I don't, I don't, I don't want to interfere in your business." He said, "I just want to help you out." And he went back to the (background noise) Gannett Foundation. Speaker 2: The Gannett? Speaker 1: Gannett Foundation, which owns Channel 11 [WXIA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia], and 11alive. And he told that story to that foundation. And he called us about three weeks later. He said, "Y'all don't know Cheryl Whipper [ph.]?" And we said yes, we knew, we know Cheryl--, "And Channel 11?" Said, "Y'all need to talk to her. Cheryl, Cheryl needs to talk to y'all. She's on the foundation board with me." So we, we called Cheryl and invited her to lunch. We went to lunch, and she presented us with a check for sixty thousand dollars. She said, "I don't know what y'all did to Mr. Munford (laughter). But he just raised all kinds of sand in the, in the meeting, said we just got to do this. We can't, we can't do this." And consequently, from that point on--of course we thanked him--but I would go to lunch with him probably every other month over at the Capital City Club [Atlanta, Georgia], let him know what was going on, the progress, and, and thanking him. And he said, "All I want to do is just keep up with what's going on. I, I can't be no member, but I just want to know what's going on." Speaker 2: I find that very interesting because Majik Markets were known for, you know, being in the community and having very high prices, I would say (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, right, gouge the, gou- gouge the people in the community. Story_ID: 482966 Speaker 1: Well, I have two questions. As you were talking I thought of--you talked about how the parents were very elated about the plan, but what about the reaction of the kids that were going to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the kids were just, I mean they were-- Speaker 1: What were their-- Speaker 2: --they were just so happy-- Speaker 1: --I mean were they-- Speaker 2: --that they, they were just so happy to know that they, they had an opportunity to go to college, it was just absolutely incredible. The name of that program was Project Success. And Project Success, we knew we had to be successful going in there, and we knew we had to do something other than just have that dues base. And so we, we--that, Project Success led to what we call Le Cabaret, Le Cabaret, Le Cabaret, which was our first fundraiser [for 100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.], that we held at the re--the Hyatt Regency [Hyatt Regency Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia]. And we, we--it was a, it was a dinner party that basically we invited the community. And we had Phyllis Hyman came in to perform. She was our first performer for Le Cabaret. And we actually sold the, the Hyatt Regency out completely. We had over a thousand people there. We ended up netting a hundred thousand dollars off of that, which gave us hope, 'cause now he had about a hundred and twenty-five grand [$125,000], and we had our expenses paid, and we had three more years to go, so we--well, two, two more years to. So we figured there was, there was a possibility that we might be able to get there. And of course, the next Le Cabaret we had two hundred thousand dollars. And in the third year, we decided that we'd take on a new challenge and do a football game, a football classic. And when you do the right thing for the right reasons, you're always successful. That football game was on a Saturday afternoon at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] stadium. And on Friday, we had one of the worst rainstorms you ever want to see in your life. And we're sitting up there saying Lord, have mercy. We got all these tickets, and where are the--how are we gonna get these people to the game? That Saturday morning the sun came out. The shine had lit up the whole city. We had all these people in town. We had people scalping tickets outside, selling tickets for our little game. Our little game costs like forty dollars, thirty-five or forty dollars. They were selling tickets for seventy-five dollars outside the, outside of Georgia Tech stadium, and it was a huge success. We sold the stadium out, thirty-five thousand people, unbelievable, and we made two hundred and something thousand dollars. We had our money for the kids then. So we, we got to be, we, we be, we became believers. And those two, those two functions are two of the major functions (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Functions, and they-- Speaker 2: --that support-- Speaker 1: --they still-- Speaker 2: --one--and they still go on. Speaker 1: --you still have them every year? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Story_ID: 482967 Speaker 1: How has Project Success evolved? Is it the same type of program going on now? Speaker 2: Little bit different, little bit different. We don't choose the kids randomly. We kind of, we kind of screen the kids. We take the kids, and they apply for Project Success now. But Project Success was only the eighth grade class at that time. Project Success starts at age--at, at grade four and goes all the way through grade twelve. Speaker 1: What are the criteria (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you've got, you've got students in the fourth grade, fifth grade, sixth grade, seventh grade, eighth grade, ninth grade, tenth, and the eleventh that have evolved through the program now. Speaker 1: So where is the program held? It's not held at any one school any longer. Speaker 2: No. We have several schools, about five different participating schools. And it, it's a, it's a citywide kind of a project. And basically, the students apply, and we, we kind of make certain that they're in the right income bracket. They, they, they would, they would never be able to make it to school if it's not for Project Success, number one; number two, their parents need to be willing to participate in the project. Speaker 1: Is it only in the Atlanta [Georgia], in Atlanta proper? Speaker 2: Yes. It's in, it's 100 Black Men of Atlanta [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.]. But now, 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.] now has six chapters in Georgia. We have a hundred and five chapters around the country now, but--and they have different kinds of educational programs. Some of them are called the Young Scholars; some of--but everybody has the same mission: education, empowerment, and community--and community service, community development. Story_ID: 482968 Speaker 1: Well, l- let me back up a little bit. You're at the meeting for 100 Black Men in New York [100 Black Men, Inc. of New York], and you brought the, the concept back to Atlanta [Georgia]. Once here in Georgia, did other counties or cities come and see how you, how you started it here in Atlanta to-- Speaker 2: Well, in, in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) have a prototype? Speaker 2: --in nineteen- in 1986, once they heard about our project in Atlanta, there was already a little splinter group in New Jersey who kind of left the New York chapter and started their own little--then there was another little group in Indianapolis, Indiana; then there was a small group in St. Louis [Missouri]; and there was a big group out in Los Angeles [California]. And Joe Hoffman [Joseph I. Hoffman, Jr.], who was my vice president, his, his father [Joseph I. Hoffman, Sr.] had started the New Jersey chapter [100 Black Men of New Jersey, Inc.], and he'd also started the Los Angeles chapter [100 Black Men of Los Angeles, Inc.]. So he asked, he said you know, he said we ought to make this thing a national thing. And so we thought about it, so then, then we went to Las Vegas [Nevada], and we had a meeting there. And they decided that we should do this; we should go ahead and, and capitalize on this federation of clubs and put it together. And they decided in 1986 to have the first meeting in the City of Atlanta. And so I was the host of the, of the first meeting, and it was very successful. And they saw us do Le Cabaret, and they saw the things that we were doing, and they saw the Project Success. They all liked that. They thought--they felt real good. And of course, by that time, we had Maynard [Maynard Jackson], and Andy [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], and Marvin [HistoryMaker Marvin S. Arrington, Sr.], and all of the city leaders, you know, all involved. And they were, they were support- I mean very supportive. I mean the mayor said, "Anything that y'all want, you can get from me." He said don't worry about it, you know. And it was that kind of groundswell of support that gave all of us a reason for being in the City of Atlanta. And it kind of, that chemistry picked up throughout the other chapters, and it began to energize the movement in DeKalb County [Georgia], in South--in, in Clayton [Clayton County, Georgia], and south Fulton, north Fulton, DeKalb County. Then it went on down to Newnan [Georgia], and now it's, you know, down in Albany [Georgia] and in--there's, I think there's nine or ten, maybe even twelve chapters throughout, throughout the State of Georgia. But it, it, it was a movement very similar to the movement that we're, we're looking at now. And we labeled that. I er- when I became president, I, I labeled it a movement, because we grew from six chapters when I, when I became president. When I left the presidency we had forty-seven chapters around the country. And I said this is a movement that everybody needs to be involved in. And now it's grown to a hundred and five countries--I mean a hundred and five. And then we're in, we're in Africa; we're in, we're in the Bahamas; we're in the Caribbean, the St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]; we're in Turks and Caicos and all different kinds of chapters around, around the country and now around the world. So we now took that little, little group that was affecting some thirty-two kids, we now have a hundred and five chapters, and we have over fi- I, I would say seventy-five, eighty thousand people in the program at one time. Speaker 1: How did, how did New York feel about the fact that they-- Speaker 2: New York never would come in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They, New York decided to join the movement after the train had left the station, grew all around the country. And back in the early '90s [1990s]--no, late '90s [1990s] they finally decided to, to get on the train. And now, now this next year we're having our national meeting in, in New York [New York]. Story_ID: 482969 Speaker 1: We were talking about New York [New York] as the city that started this-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --all, but yet they didn't join-- Speaker 2: New York [100 Black Men, Inc. of New York], New York resisted based on the, the foundation that they didn't want to get--they thought that a national organization would cause a whole lot of politics and, and people would get hung up on, on having to follow different national rules and things like that. They would only join if it was a federation of clubs. Well, that's what we did. We put together a federation [100 Black Men of America, Inc.]. Everybody has different principles upon which they operate on. We just try to maintain the same goals. And everybody's management style or everybody's style of doing that is, is different in every city. But that still, that still wouldn't convince Roscoe [HistoryMaker Roscoe C. Brown]. I said, "Roscoe, everybody operates independent." Yeah, yeah, but (unclear). So, we, we went ahead and we organized in, in, in Atlanta [Georgia]. And the first chairman of the board or the first vice president was William Hayling, Dr. William Hayling from Los Angeles, California. He happened to be Joe Hoffman's [Joseph I. Hoffman, Jr.] father-in-law. And, and he was the convener of the meeting in, in Las Vegas [Nevada]. And then there was a gentleman by the name of Oliver--oh, God--who's an attorney, who was the vice president. And the treasurer was a gentleman by the name, Jesse Swanigan [Jesse C. Swanigan] in St. Louis [Missouri]. And the secretary was Moses Gray, who was the president of the chapter in, in Indianapolis [Indiana]. And they served a period of two years, two years. And at the, at the end of that two years, they, they--another election was held. That meeting was held in, in New Jersey, in Newark, New Jersey. I did not go to that meeting. I was obligated to go to a family reunion out in Missouri at the same time, so I had to meet--I had to, to miss the meeting. And during the process of my family reunion, I got a telephone call about midnight the second day of the family reunion. And the telephone call was from Fred Calloway, a guy from California, from the Los Angeles chapter [100 Black Men of Los Angeles, Inc.]. And he said, "We just had an election of officers, and they, and they elected you president." I'm saying, "What are you talking about, Fred?" He said, "No, I'm serious." He said, "We had an election, and the group told me to call you and find out if you would accept, 'cause you've been elected." And I said (laughter), "Okay, I, I mean I, sure I will. I wouldn't have any problem in, in that." And it kind of baffled me because the next president should have been, I thought, should have been the vice president, Oliver Lofton is his name, Oliver Lofton. And Oliver is an attorney, and he was our general counsel, and he's from New Jersey, and he's in his own home state, which is why I thought they went to New Jersey in the first place. He said, "No, man, they elected you (laughter) president." So, I became the second national president, and-- Speaker 1: What year was this? Speaker 2: This was in 1988, '88 [1988] or '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: But you were still the president of the local chapter [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.] here in Atlanta? Speaker 2: I was, I was, I was doing my last, my last term, serving my last term. But I thought it was, it was a great honor, especially since I wasn't there. They told me it was a whole lot of politicking going on, but I don't know what, what, what it entailed. But long story short, that became our, our--and then, then in my cabinet I had T.B. Boyd [T.B. Boyd III], who was my VP. He was from, from Nashville, Tennessee. And then I had Moses Gray, who got reelected as the secretary, and, and Jesse Swanigan, who got reelected as the--so, the only change was myself and, and Dr. T.B. Boyd. And it was, it was an interesting, in, interesting tenure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you served for how long? Speaker 2: I served for four years, two two-year terms. And at that time we grew from, we grew all the way up 'til--when I left office we had forty-eight, forty-eight chapters. Story_ID: 482970 Speaker 1: What other changes happened under your administration? Speaker 2: Oh, basically, we--(laughter) oh, that was interesting. The first convention, my first convention, you know, we didn't have enough money to pay for the convention, so I had to, I had to pay for the convention out of Gourmet Services [Gourmet Services, Inc.] (laughter). We had, I ended up, we, we ended up (unclear) but it was San Francisco [California], and boy, it was expensive. I had to put a twenty-something thousand dollar deposit down in order for us to have the meeting, but we, we had the meeting. But, but what happened during our administration is that we, we decided, number one, I stressed the fact that we can't have conventions as usual. We have children that we serve as role models for. So anything that we do, our children need to be part of it. They need to be part of the--they need to watch the leadership and how it works. They need to be able to attend social functions. They need to meet people from around the country who are in the same programs, the same kinds of programs that were--so, the first thing that we demanded was that any chapter that comes, you gotta bring your students with you. You gotta bring a minimum amount of, of students with. I think it was fifteen or twenty, which means that they had to figure out, out a way to pay for them, and get them all dressed up, and get blazers and stuff for them and the whole nine yards. And that was the, that was the difference in having just a normal little convention where everybody goes and have a party and all that kind of stuff. It couldn't be about that. The second thing, it had to be about furthering the movement and basically organizing around the country to make certain that we, we had the right kind of perceptions and ethics in the communities that we served and all that. So we had folks come in and basically talked about how we can mentor, the proper way to mentor students. And then we had, you know, folks that would come in and basically talk about how you can do fundraisers. And then we had national sponsors to begin to, to join the organization [100 Black Men of America, Inc.]--join the, join the groups and come in and help us with our different programs in the different locales. So that was the beginning of, of the national, working as a national-- Story_ID: 482971 Speaker 1: Is there anything new on the drawing board for 100 Black Men of Atlanta [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.]? Speaker 2: No. They're moving into--I think what we're doing now is, is we're doing a lot of health and wellness things, citywide, not just for Project Success. We're doing citywide health fairs. And we're doing basically Saturday Academy, which his big, Saturday Academy, SAT, coaching. We're doing a lot of cultural events. They're going to, now they go to Wall Street and learn how Wall Street works through our group with Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management]. They're learning financial management. We now have a group of our parents that we, we take through a, a credit process and help them establish credit and buy homes. And we have a special mortgage program that they, they are able to participate once they get certified. They're, they're able to take them and put them into the, to a State Farm or one of these, some of the local mortgage companies. And they work together through, with Merrill Lynch to basically do financial planning and affordability of housing. We have a group that, that basically works with the, all of the, your young people on, on cultural events. We have, we have a group called the Collegiate 100 that comes out of the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], mainly because all of the--a lot of the 100 Black Men are my age. And for kids to try to relate to folks my age (unclear) it ain't primetime, but they relate to those college students. And those college students present the program, and they're, their mentors, and they're, they're their big brothers and big sisters throughout the, the program. So, that's a lot of--the delivery has, has changed a lot. We've, we've been able to, we just won a national award from Mutual of America [Mutual of America Life Insurance Company], who gave us twenty-five, I think it was a twenty-five thousand dollar cash award because of Project Success. We've been able to, to move through the program some four hundred and fifty, five hundred kids that have graduated from college. Some of their kids are coming back into the program now, which is unbelievable. My mentee is forty-two years old, and I'm--he's still my mentee. He's, he's working at UPS [United Parcel Service] now. We've got some kids that are vice president of banks here on a local basis. We've got some doctors, kids that went through engineering at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]. We've got, got a great, great group of kids that have come through the program there. And now you see the (cough), the benefit, the return on what we did. Speaker 1: Is it as many women or girls involved as, as-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --as young boys? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, there's (unclear) there's young, young boys and girls. We don't, we're not gender specific. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that really makes it where you've got to be real careful too and, and--but a young lady who is my master baker at Bethune-Cookman [Bethune-Cookman College; Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida] came through our program. She went on to culinary school down in Florida, and now she's my master baker at Bethune-Cookman College, so. Story_ID: 482972 Speaker 1: Mr. Goldston [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III], when you look back over your life, is there anything, if all, that you would change? Speaker 2: Probably not, probably not. I've been, I've been very fortunate, and I've been blessed. I have been able to raise a good family, good kids, and no trouble. Grandkids have been--I've got ten grandkids that are blossoming out, in they're, they're following. No, there's nothing I would change. There have been some tough times, but you learn from the tough times. So those are necessary in order to, to be successful in other parts of your life, so. Story_ID: 482973 Speaker 1: Well, tell me, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think as just a person that cared about other people, a person that people could go to and always get help or, or some kind of a relief, a person who had done God's work. Speaker 1: Okay. And what about your legacy (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The name Nathaniel means a gift from God. Speaker 1: And what about your legacy? What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Oh, I have--my legacy would be the success of Gourmet Services [Gourmet Services, Inc.] and the success of, of 100 Black Men [100 Black Men of America, Inc.]. Story_ID: 482974 Speaker 1: Because this information, your tape and your story, is gonna be made available for future generations, what would you say to someone who might want to enter into the business that you're in, in food service, or to somebody in general fifty years from now, what message would you want to send to them? Speaker 2: I think that if you, if, if, if you've got a dream, if you've got a vision or something that you want to do--business is a little bit different than it was when, when I started--I probably would recommend that a person get into the business, study it, know everything about it, if possible. And if you decide you want to really get into it, I'd probably look around and get me a good investment banker and go buy a business that already exists. There's no sense in going through all the heartache that I went through and all the mistakes and all that stuff. Let somebody buy a business that's successful and grow that business or take that business where, where you want to go. That's a different kind of entry to business that kids have the opportunity to do now that I didn't have the opportunity to do then. The second thing is always stay true to your message. If you are who you are, just stay that way. Don't try to be somebody that you aren't. And dedicate and commit yourself to making certain that you are the best that you want to be. Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you'd like to share with us? Speaker 2: No, I think that's pretty much it. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you so much for taking the time to share your story. It, it's gonna be a great, or it, it's already a great inspiration. But I'm sure it will be a greater inspiration for the future generations. Thank you so much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 482975 Speaker 1: On the bottom left is Bob Williams [Robert Williams], and then we have Howard Spiller, and Ernie Oden [ph.], and J.C. [ph.], Joseph Hoffman [Joseph I. Hoffman, Jr.], Dr. Joseph Hoffman. That second row there: Terrell Slayton [Terrell L. Slayton, Jr.], and myself, and Leon Odom, Frank Williams [ph.], and Dennis Turner [Dennis Turner, Jr.], Leon Odom, Frank Matthews--I mean John Matthews [ph.], and George Goodwin [ph.]. Couple of them I couldn't remember. This is a picture of the, the first ad that was sponsored by Coors Brewing Company, talking about the Gourmet Services [Gourmet Services, Inc.] and Project Success. Speaker 2: And with the 100 Black Men. Speaker 1: 100 Black Men of, of Atlanta [100 Black Men of Atlanta, Inc.], right. Family portrait from, from, for Black Enterprise. Speaker 2: What year was this? Speaker 1: And I'll start on the, start on the left. This is June, 2003. On the left you have Latisha Spruel [ph.], who is my niece; next to her is Valerie Goldston [Valerie Hampton Montague Goldston], who is my wife; next to her, next to her is myself, Nate Goldston [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III]; and then on my right would be Kimberly Goldston [Kimberly Goldston Martin], who's our senior vice president; Steven Goldston in the back with the pink hat on, and that's my youngest son; and then Charles Martin, who is my son-in-law. He's a--it was the financial officer for the company. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, he's on the back left? Speaker 1: Yes, back left. This was an article that was featured in Georgia mag--Georgia People [sic.] magazine that talked about 100 and me being their number one salesman in the City of Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: What year was that? Have any idea? Speaker 1: No. It's probably on there. Speaker 2: What decade, '70s [1970s] or '80s [1980s]? Speaker 1: It was in the, that was in the '80s [1980s], about in the, the early '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: This was a story that was done on Gourmet Services on the beginning of, on the beginning and the tracing the history of Gourmet Services, featured in Georgia Trend magazine. What year was that, nineteen- that's got a year on it. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): November 1988. Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-eight [1988], yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Left is a, is a black and white picture of me in my first Easter out- one of my first Easter outfits. And I was probably at five at that time. Speaker 1: That's my baby picture in the middle. I guess I was about six months old. I must have been happy to be here with that big smile on my face. Speaker 2: And then the color picture of the same Easter outfit that I wore that sun--that, that year. That was, had to be about 1943. Speaker 1: This is the end of the Tour Championship [PGA Tour Championship] in 2007. And I was, happened to be lucky enough for being a member of the, of the winning team, Napoleon Home- Hornbuckle [Napoleon Hornbuckle] in the, in the middle of there and two of my fellow members from the Golf Club of Georgia [Alpharetta, Georgia] that joined us on that team. Speaker 2: This is the celebration of our twenty-fifth anniversary for Gourmet Services, taken seven years ago. And that's in, on the stairs of city hall, where we still operate the food service there, and all of our, all, all of my wait staff that worked the, the, the, the party that night. Speaker 1: This is me as I'm hoisting a gift from--that was given to us in honor of being the company of the year from Black Enterprise magazine in our twenty-fifth year, still at the twenty-fifth celebration. Speaker 2: Do you know what year that might have been? Speaker 1: This is, this is a picture in the early '50s [1950s] of Nathaniel R. Goldston [Nathaniel R. Goldston, Jr.], who is my father, the founder of the Nate Goldston Catering Service [ph.] and the man who taught me everything I knew about the food service industry...