 Story_ID: 634200 Speaker 1: I have to start out by asking your name, and we, we have to slate the interview and ask some (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --People mana- magazine-ish questions. But I want to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, and giving us your date and place of birth. Speaker 2: Okay. My name is [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover: D-A-N-N-Y, last name G-L-O-V-E-R, Danny Glover. Speaker 1: And your date of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is July 22, 1946. Speaker 1: Okay. And your place of birs- birth? Speaker 2: San Francisco, California, at the old Stanford Hospital in San Francisco, California. Speaker 1: And we're at the, we're taping today--today's date is-- Speaker 2: (Cough) I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Today's date is December-- Speaker 2: December 20th. Speaker 1: --twentieth. Speaker 2: Today is December 20th-- Speaker 1: Two thou- Speaker 2: --two thousand fifteen [2015]. Speaker 1: And our location is San Francisco in the Hilton. And your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an actor. First of all, that's my occupation. My work other than that is as a citizen. Speaker 1: Activist/citizen. Speaker 2: Or citizen (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Citizen, okay. Citizen, that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think all citizens should be activists-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --whether they're film--in movies or whether they're just ordinary people. My mother [Carrie Hunley Glover] and father [James Glover] were activists-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --but they weren't actors. Story_ID: 634201 Speaker 1: And five People magazine-ish questions. Your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite what? Speaker 1: Food? Speaker 2: My mother's cooking, which would include more than five things. And everything that she put her foot in (laughter), figuratively. You know, whether it's her turkey and dressing, it's her dressing, oyster dressing; or whether her biscuits, her, her pound cakes and layered cakes, her sweet potato pies. I can go on and on. Her fried chicken, her collard greens--she almost invented the word collard green (laughter) with the way she cooked them. Yeah, so my favorite food comes down to that. The other foods that I've had a chance to eat, and I appreciate a lot, I love Indian food. I love Senegalese food, also Ethiopian food. But those, those are acquired tastes. The first one was the taste provided by my dear mother [Carrie Hunley Glover]. Speaker 1: And a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite what? Speaker 1: Color? Speaker 2: Favorite color would be earth tones; browns, beige, would be my favorite color. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Kind of? Speaker 1: Time of year? Season, favorite season? Speaker 2: Since I'm in a city, city that doesn't have quite a number of seasons, (unclear) Indian summer, around November, around September or October. Here [San Francisco, California], Nov- some parts of November as well. Speaker 1: And a favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: I don't know, since I don't have enough time vacationing, in my life. So, I don't know what would be my favorite place. You know, at home (laughter) would be ideal, if I stayed home. Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's fair enough. That's fair enough. We have that answer (unclear). And then your favorite phrase or saying? Do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not really. You know, I can't remember any one specifically. I can take one from a movie that I did ['Lethal Weapon'] that seems to be--continues to gather steam: "I'm getting too old for this--" blank, blank, blank (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Story_ID: 634202 Speaker 1: Okay, so let- we were talking about your mother. So, you, can you give her name and what you know about her, her background and growing up? Because you know pretty far back, right? Speaker 2: Well, my mother-- Speaker 1: Her name was Carrie? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Carrie, C-A-R-R-I-E, Mae, M-A-E, Hunley was her maiden name, H-U-N-L-E-Y, Hunley [Carrie Hunley Glover]. My mother was born in Louisville, Georgia, and she attended primary school there, high school. And then she went to Paine College in Augusta, Georgia, where she graduated in 1942. She taught a year in high school, and then she migrated to New York [New York] where she met my father sometime in late 1943, early 1944. They courted and were married on New Year's Eve 1944. And my father was from Kansas City, Missouri. Speaker 1: Your father's name? Speaker 2: My father's name is James Henry Glover [James Glover], he was from Kansas City, Missouri. He had grown up in places like Chicago [Illinois], Cleveland [Ohio], St. Louis [Missouri]. His mother died during the great flu epidemic in 1920. And so, part of his time was, he spent being raised by his father. And then someone, a close family member, her name was Dewey, D-E-W-E-Y, took him and raised him. She was a housekeeper, and so he traveled from different places and lived. He, my dad, even though his father wasn't prepared to raise a child--he had my father when he was past forty, and--or close to forty, (cough) and, but he, my dad always said he loved his father. And I think the foundation for who I am comes from the bare basics of those relationships of caring, love. Part of my moral, my moral, how would you say, imperative, or moral underbearing as a child. As my mother said, I will be eternally grateful for my mother and father because I didn't pick cotton in September; I went to school in September. So, that's a huge paradigm shift, a huge, huge shift that certainly--it certainly gives some sort of indication how much my mother respected, loved her parents for the sacrifices they made to make sure that her brother, her sister, and herself went on to school. They all went to college. So, in that sense, I'm a byproduct of that. My [maternal] great-grandmother, Mary Brown, lived on the farm with my--on the farm. I met her from the time that I spent on the farm from the time I was six months old to three years old. And she was a healer. I have vague memories of her. She was born in 1853. She was freed by the Emancipation Proclamation. So, that's the kind of--that's, that's the total of my, you know, historic memory. And certainly my parents, after marriage, my dad, my father, was transferred to Los Angeles [California], he was then transferred to Oakland [California]. And he was discharged from the [U.S.] Army after the war [World War II, WWII] in 1945--April, 1945. And, and he wanted to go back to Detroit [Michigan] because he's a Midwest guy. And he had a job, he told my mother to wait for him in Detroit. And my mother said, "You better find a job here. We ain't going nowhere. This is God's country." And so, you have both parts. You have an idea how decisions were made in my family. I come from a very strong and certainly quite extraordinary matriarchal line. My grandmother, my mother's mother, was a midwife. It's rumored that she delivered half the county. But she was a prominent midwife, and a keen observer, a keen--she was the matriarch of that community in Louisville, Georgia. And so, a great deal of what I inherited, in terms of leadership, come from my--come before my mother and come with my grandparents, with my mother, as I watched a young couple grow and mature in the midst of a movement that was happening in 19--in the Civil Rights Movement. Story_ID: 634203 Speaker 1: Who were you most like? Or what do you have of each of your parents? Speaker 2: I'm, I think, I'd like to think that I have my father's [James Glover] patience and my mother's [Carrie Hunley Glover], to use a word, abruptness (laughter). There's some of that. I want to think that I have my father's gentleness. My father was a very gentle man, very--he didn't have a lot to say. My mother, on the one hand, was, you know, she walked in the room, and the room lit up, you know. She was that, she was a dynamic woman. She was the regional president of the National Council of Negro Women, and she was someone who realized, I would imagine, the opportunity that she had to not only raise a family and, and you know, acquire all the things that she wanted to in life, but also be of service as well. And, and so, and the point and time of service, even though she was, you know, in her thirties at the time of Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], or the time of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, she embraced it, as both of my parents embraced it. And so as a child, because I was the oldest, I was very--able to vicariously, you know, see or, or listen to their interpretations of what was happening in the world, happening in this country. And, and I suppose I assumed most of that sense from my parents first, and they made it feel as if was important and necessary to support what was happening. And that was evident from watching television together at night during the Montgomery Bus Boycott when I was like nine--eight, nine years old. From them talking about it, and me being vicariously connected to what they were talking about, listening to them. And so, there were all those things that were supportive in my own growth, you know, parents who were engaged. And they were engaged primarily through their union, the postal alliance, the national postal alliance [National Alliance of Postal and Federal Employees]. And so, they were engaged there. It was, so, I grew up around union politics and the importance of unions. My dad remained close to his union even after he retired in, after working thirty-three years. That would be 1981. Even after he retired, he was very close to his union. And I say I saw the Civil Rights Movement as the groundwork for their own growth and their own development. And their own, own ways of taking responsibility as a citizen, I was very indirectly, I would say moved by it, and it certainly it had a major impact on my own, own sense of what was important. And, and I have to thank my parents for that. Story_ID: 634204 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think I had read that you, you called your mother [Carrie Hunley Glover] self righteous, and you self righteous. That-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in some respects, that the two of you may have--? Speaker 2: Well, my mother was opinionated. She was self righteous, and she thought she knew everything (laughter). And she knew most things, and so I take on a lot of that, of my mother's character that way, you know what I'm saying? And she was very articulate, and I feel, she was just--I think about her often. I think about my parents often, you know, whenever I'm in some sort of situation, almost anything. They come up to my--they come into my framework of thought. You know, I mean I live in the city I was born in. So, there may be a moment where I pass through something, pass by a moment, in a moment, and relish the things that they were able to bring to my life. So, you know, I--my dad [James Glover] was my best friend. I was mentioning to someone, I fell in love with my dad probably when I was five, four, or something like that. And I just thought he was, he was a genuine cat, you know what I'm saying? You know, he was, he was, he was small in stature, but just a sweet, sweet man, kind man, a generous man. And, and I think a great deal of that part of me comes from him. Part of it comes from my mother. My mother had a heart of gold, you know. And so it was to be around there--and I think the responsibility since there were no extended family in San Francisco [California], there was just the five children and the two parents. And I think the responsibility--they were self aware in the sense of self containment that had--even though my brothers, you know, we all got in trouble with the law in some sort of way, you know what I'm saying. We thought--and it's all basically because we thought we could get away with something (laughter). You know, my point, usually, when I couldn't get away with it, I said I didn't like going getting arrested, so (laughter). So as a kid, we all do that. I think one of them got stopped in a grocery store or a variety store stealing some toy soldiers or something. Said, okay, that's enough for me. Story_ID: 634205 Speaker 1: And so, pretty much, I mean one thing I understood, and really felt about my mother [Carrie Hunley Glover], was my mother loved self sufficiency. I got my first paper route when I was eleven years old, and I had paper routes on and on. I think I had a paper route from the time I was--yeah, I did, I think, San Francisco Chronicle, from the time I was thirteen to eighteen. And before that, I had the San Francisco Examiner, was (unclear). So, I would get up, do, do my paper route at 4:30 in the morning. And it was, the thing about it was, was that there was a direct line between my being self sufficient and also taking, being responsible, you know. So, and that's not necessarily you have to do something, but to be responsible and to carry it through. And even though I was not--I was a poor student academically, except in math. That was the one thing that I did with precision, exactness was deliver my paper route. And then there's something else about that, when you're alone at 4:30 in the morning. So, you meet through the paper people like--articles, people like, I remember the first time I met, you know, Cassius Clay [Muhammad Ali]. And I remember that, reading about him, not paying too much to the gold medal that he won in the Olympics [1960 Summer Olympics, Rome, Italy], but also--but pay, but just looking at his brashness and his bravado and everything else. And, you know, just before his fight with Archie Moore in San Francisco [California], and I remember discovering him, you know, or discovering you know, my hero at the moment, as a child, were the men--young men and women who were closer to my age. You know, people like, you know, Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses], Diane Nash, or Fannie Lou Hamer. I met, I met them, you know, I met them first of all--and then there other names, H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin]. I met them first of all through my paper route and my (unclear), through--we're sitting there before I start my route, reading through and looking for articles. Speaker 2: When you were in high school? Speaker 1: When I was in high school [George Washington High School, San Francisco, California]. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Can you-- Speaker 1: I went through there, I looked through there. Would see the Freedom Rides, would kind of visualize myself, you know, on the Freedom Rides or whatever. And since I made repeated trips to the South, I tried to carry out some of that, in my naivete, on my own (laughter), you know, walking in a trucking stop where, you know, it said, you know, coloreds in the back, you know. You know, it's a kind of idealism and the kind of imp- the sense of impression that I always felt, because I wanted to be like those people. I think as a child, in some sense--I mean I wasn't an athlete, so I couldn't say I wanted to be like Willie Mays or [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron, or whoever the prominent athlete of the time was. I just wanted to be like those people who were doing all those great things in the South. So, then I carried it--I didn't set out and make a pronouncement at my high school, everything else, about wanting to do that, but in my, in, in my sense of myself, or my imagination with myself, those were people I wanted to be like. Story_ID: 634206 Speaker 1: So Danny [HistoryMaker Danny Glover], what was your earliest memory though of growing up? 'Cause you, you live very close now to where you were raised? Or are you now? I've heard you say that. Speaker 2: My earliest memory, my earliest memory growing up--and I, and there are probably others that are going to precede this--was when I was five years old, 1951, I got hit by a car. And I remember that and all the stuff that happens when you're hit by a car. When I was five years old in 1951, my dad was thirty-two. He was born in 1919, he was thirty-two years old. And I remember, I remember, I remember the accident itself. (Cough) I broke my right femur. And I remember moments, glimpse of moments in the hospital getting my leg--. And I remember my father taking me, sitting me on his neck, with one leg in a cast--sitting me on my, his neck, and going from where we lived in the southeast part of San Francisco [California] to about 3rd [Street] and 22nd [Street], catching a bus all the way to the other side of San Francisco where went, where we had our healthcare, medical care, Stanford Hospital to have my doctor visit. And I used to love it, because my dad would often, often--after we finished he was right down from the Fillmore [Fillmore District, San Francisco, California], the traditional black community. So, he would walk in there, and he had a friend named Stoney [ph.]. So, this is around when I was six or seven years old. I always wanted my dad to take me to see the doctor, because he would stop by Stoney, give him a little shout and everything else. It was during the day. And Stoney would have these little hot dogs spinning around on the what you call it. I'd just go in and sit in the chair right in front of the hot dogs and stare at them like that. And I'd just stare, I didn't say nothing else. So Stoney would say, "Jimmy [James Glover], why don't you get that boy a hot dog?" "Oh, man, he knew you was going to say that. That's why he went up there and was staring at them." (Laughter) So, my dad would go, he'd go and buy the hot dog. Yeah, man, that's how he was, man (unclear). So, that's--my earliest memories were that. I don't remember too much before then that I remember. I remember when I got hit by the car. And somewhere in my, my memory channel where you deal with pain, or put pain, I remember that. And I remember my dad being very sad that he wasn't there 'cause he had gone to, I think Kansas City [Missouri] to bury his father. He had gone to bury his father. Speaker 1: Oh. Speaker 2: So, I think those are kind of my earliest kind of like memories-- Story_ID: 634207 Speaker 1: So you're the oldest. Are there all boys? Speaker 2: No, one girl. Speaker 1: One girl? Speaker 2: Three--four boys. Speaker 1: So the, the names and birth order? Speaker 2: My sister Connie [Connie Glover Grier], who's deceased, was right behind me. Her birthday was August, August 18--I mean, excuse me, November 18. My brother Reginald [Reginald Glover], who's next, who i- who was like thirty-five months younger than me. So, there're three kids born in thirty-five months. His birthday was June 27, 1949. And then my brother Rodney, who was 1953, Rodney Glover [Rodney Glover, Sr.]. And then the last one is my brother Martin [Martin Glover], who is 1958. Yeah, so my mother [Carrie Hunley Glover] kept trying for another girl (laughter). And after Martin, she gave up, said that's enough (laughter). Okay. Speaker 1: She had one, and that was it. Speaker 2: They got one. Speaker 1: And now you're--she's--so it's all boys left? Speaker 2: Yeah, my sister passed. There's only three of us left. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My brother Reg- Reginald passed. So, there are two who are closest in age to me, and closest to me. Speaker 1: Oh, the two youngest ones? Speaker 2: No, the two oldest ones. Speaker 1: The two old- okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just have the two youngest ones now. Speaker 1: Okay. That's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 634208 Speaker 1: Can you describe what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up here in San Francisco [California]? Speaker 2: It's interesting enough, the sounds that first come to mind with me were--and I wasn't able to connect them then--but how I would approach my entrance into my [maternal] grandparents' farm [in Louisville, Georgia]. Because I spent so much time, my early sensorial mechanism was, was really, you know, was really formed and shaped through those images, you know, the smell, smell of breakfast, the smell of sausage cooking. We would smell that. The smell of--the feel- feeling of the hot air, the heaviness to the air. The, the sounds of, that you hear in the morning and night in the country that you don't hear in the city; those are the first sounds that I remember. So they were, they were, they really shaped my identity, and certainly my relationship with my grandparents and that rural setting that I spent so much time in, and continue to. I mean, I mean I have a great deal of mobility. None of my brothers [Reginald Glover, Rodney Glover, Sr. and Martin Glover] or sisters--sister [Carrie Glover Grier] had the mobility that I have, so I can go down there and hang with Fannie [ph.], or go down there (unclear). But there's something else that calls me to hang with them and be down there with them. Story_ID: 634209 Speaker 1: So what was the young [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover like though as a boy? I mean what were you like? Speaker 2: Well, I mean-- Speaker 1: You s- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) it's hard to say what you were like, because somebody's always imposing their own thinking, or their own idea of what you are like. But I remember someone who was extremely shy. You know, someone who was, at an early age, was desperate for a girlfriend, or somebody to like me. I remember my mother [Carrie Hunley Glover]--making my mother proud, because she's my first love. You know, and she was my den mother when I was about, went to Cub Scouts when I was about six, seven years old. (Cough) And for all of us that are living in the projects on our street, she was den mother for a group of us. So, I remember that. I wasn't very good--I wasn't--I couldn't, I couldn't, how you say, make a name for myself or be expressive through athletics because I wasn't that good in athletics. And neither was I that good academically (laughter), except for math. I had this eighth grade teacher, Ms. Lumber, L-U-M-B-E-R. She was from Beaumont, Texas. And she, she, she realized that I had some challenge with reading, but she pushed it forward for me to do something, you know, with sports. And I--Ms. Lumber, I accredit that to her, gave me a kind of sense of myself differently, you know, I didn't feel awkward. And it wasn't sports. She gave me the sense of myself that I could do something, that there was something with math, and she celebrated that. And I think great teachers do that. They celebrate what you do well, and they try to, attempt to massage that to a point where you begin to say, "Well, if I can do that, I can do this, or I can do that, I could do that." And Ms. Lumber was that for me, Lumber, L-U-M-B-E-R. So, the kind of things that, that I remember at the earliest point between, between you know, the point in time in, in 19- 19- 19- in the 1950s, the kind of things I remember were the kind of struggles that I had. I remember--it was right, the school is not too far from here. My elementary school is still open--it's not, it doesn't serve as an elementary school anymore, but--Irving M. Scott [Irving M. Scott School, San Francisco, California]. Like she would let you pass out the graham crackers if you (unclear), or she would allow you to do various tasks, which was an affirmation that you had done something well, you know. And I remember her for that. Now, it didn't solve my situation of struggling in school. Speaker 1: So, you were dyslexic, though? Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a slight dyslexia. Speaker 1: Just slight? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had trouble with that. And I think it was exacerbated by the fact that I probably got nervous, and, and certainly was not comfortable with myself and all of that, you know. Yeah, so I think it got, it got some sort of attention, more attention. Speaker 1: Also, the epilepsy. That happened around--? Speaker 2: Well, the epilepsy didn't happen until I was fifteen years old. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was a brief moment in my life. Now, I don't know, nobody knows what that has to do with. I remember my mom had concoctions of grape, Welch's grape juice, fruit, grape juice which was going to help me, and stuff like that. But I mean the epilepsy was, was a problem that I had, but it never had any impact on me. Story_ID: 634210 Speaker 1: Your elem- name of your elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to Irving M. Scott [Irving M. Scott School, San Francisco, California] and P.S. 1 [ph.]--Irving M. Scott and Daniel Webster [Daniel Webster Elementary School, San Francisco, California]. Speaker 1: Daniel Webster? Speaker 2: Daniel Webster. Speaker 1: Elementary? Speaker 2: All the way through-- Speaker 1: Or junior high? Speaker 2: --because we moved to the hous- we lived in the housing projects (cough)-- Speaker 1: When you first got here? Speaker 2: --when--'til I was eleven years old. And so, each time we moved I had another school I went to. I remember P.S. 1, kindergarten, first grade. Then second grade, third grade at--(cough) third grade and fourth grade in Irving M. Scott; and fifth and sixth grade in Daniel Webster. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then about what junior high? Speaker 2: Roosevelt Junior High School, middle school they call it now [Roosevelt Middle School, San Francisco, California]; and George Washington High School [San Francisco, California]. Speaker 1: All right. Now-- Speaker 2: And those, those happened--we moved since I just (unclear)--so we moved just before Thanksgiving to our new home which my parents [Carrie Hunley Glover and James Glover] had saved up to buy in the Western Addition [San Francisco, California], well, just, just around Haight-Ashbury [San Francisco, California]. And we moved to that house in November 1957 just, just before Thanksgiving. So we had Thanksgiving, and I, and then the--I went, continued--my father--my parents continued with me going through the Christmas break and everything else at Daniel Webster. Then I graduated from Daniel Webster and, and then went to Roosevelt Junior High School. Which was kind of hard for me, because I think students matriculate and they form their own groups in neighborhoods, and they all know each other when they go to, make the next step to junior high school. And I didn't know anybody in the junior high school. I was the only--I was--in my homeroom, even though there were black students in the class, excuse me, black students in the school, the--and Asian students in the school that I went to, Hispanic students also, students, Italian students, and I remember them all, all. But when I went to the junior high school, these kids didn't come from the project primarily, you know. Speaker 1: They did not? Speaker 2: They came from basically homes and families. And there were black students whose families had bought in the same area that my parents bought, who now were--and they had bought perhaps before my parents bought. So, they had friends who they matriculated from elementary school to junior high school with. And I remember going (laughter), I remember going to that cla- to that school first, and I didn't know anybody. Story_ID: 634211 Speaker 1: And for some reason, I can't remember why I came there, not so much late for the first semester, but I was late for the electives, like if you want to take music and stuff like that. And I remember going in the music class, and the, the teacher asked me what, what instrument I wanted to play, and I said the trumpet. And he said something, and I can't--I don't remember quite, quite how it came up, but he said something like, "You can't play the trumpet. Your lips are too big." And I was almost, I was in shock that he said that. He could have said, "We don't have any other instruments," which--what the situation was, "You can play another instrument," you know. So, I was shocked that he said that, and, and that the class just erupted in laughter, the class, yeah. And there were guys in the classroom who obviously had bigger lips than mine, but the way which that came out,, (cough) and that marked my existence in junior high [Roosevelt Junior High School; Roosevelt Middle School, San Francisco, California] and high school [George Washington High School, San Francisco, California] from that moment on. Speaker 2: That statement marked your existence in both junior high and high school? Speaker 1: High--it's almost like, it's almost like the kids in my neighborhood [Western Addition, San Francisco, California] picked it up. And as they matriculated to, to the various other neighborhoods (unclear), my lips became the subject. And even guys who had bigger lips than me would always call me Big Lips, you know. I remember Paul Jones [ph.] would call me Lips and he had big lips that seemed like they were all over his face. Or Richard Anderson [ph.], you know, and but nobody would mess with Richard; didn't dare call him Big Lips, because Richard was, Richard was a wonderful, good basketball player first of all. Secondly, he'd fight, you know (laughter). And, but it followed me. From--seems like for some reason it's almost like--it's kind of like morphed in terms of that. And everyone had it. If somebody would call me Lips or--there was a ba- there was football player named Big Daddy Lipscomb [Gene Lipscomb], Big Daddy Lipscomb, played for the Chargers [sic.], I remember. And they used to call me Big Danny Lips (laughter). And all the kind of stuff that really--already with a child who as himself is kind of quiet, somewhat inward, shy and everything else, it was like devastating, you know. Of course, it would have an impact on, on the fact that you, you liked girls, and you don't know if somebody's going to come up and call you Lips, or whatever, or whatever. And it did happen; stuff like that happened. Story_ID: 634212 Speaker 1: So, it, it, it certainly, it certainly--I had some friends. I remember my first friend was--that I used to walk home with, big heavyset guy who seemed to be of Middle Eastern origin--not Middle Eastern, but Eastern European origin. Because his, whenever we went to his mother's house, she spoke very little English whenever I walked him home. I remember exactly where he lived there, and we used to walk home together because he lived on the way, on the way on my way home. Instead of walking home myself, so he didn't live that far from me, maybe about seven or eight blocks from me. But, and I think that's part of the other reason why, you know, a child needs some sort of val- validation. If I had some validation as an athlete, then maybe it would have kind of softened the blow, or some other kind of validation as someone who would fight, you know. But those are kind of things that I wasn't, I wasn't, you know--to fight like that. You know those things weren't happening. So, I think you take on, I think you take on various other kinds of ways in which you feel, you feel value, you know, within yourself. And aside--and shaped from--and my parents always worked hard, and I knew that. There was a structure in my household where we all participated. We had chores to do every Saturday. By the time we got to (unclear) I had to wash the kitchen floor and bathroom floor. And my sister had to--we each had have a week, between Reggie [Reginald Glover], myself and Connie [Connie Glover Grier], we each had a week of washing dishes. And if you wanted someone else to take your week, you had to pay them to take your week, to change your week, you know. So, there was a kind of structure there. And it was, it was a structure that was centered around--there was no gender responsibility, you know; I washed dishes, I cooked, and I had to prepare lunch and everything else. So none of that was determined. My girls do this or that. And certainly because of the relationship my mother [Carrie Hunley Glover] and father [James Glover] had, my father cooked. And my mother would always remind him that she taught him how to cook. And, and so, there was always that kind of, there was a kind of space, you know. I knew where my father was going to be. I knew that if he said you're supposed to be home by six [o'clock], you know, he wasn't going to jump on you if you came in at five after six, but he took note of it, you know what I'm saying. And there was a way in which, in that family, you felt, you felt the sense of, another sense or value that we were all constructing our lives around trying to keep the family going. My parents--always not enough money with five mouths to feed. Four, with my brothers born before 1958; Marty [Martin Glover] was born in 1958. Not enough mouths to feed and everything else. So, so, but there was, there were moments when we moved over there, at eleven years old. So, the three boys slept in one room, the three oldest, that's my, my--boys, myself, Reginald, and Rodney [Rodney Glover, Sr.], we slept in the same room, and we had bunk beds that you'd pull one bed out, and it was like really, it was really the sun porch in the room--in the house that they bought. Then there was a room (clears throat) a room for my mother and father. And then there was a room for Connie, my sister. And when Rod- when Mar- when Martin was born in 1958, subsequently he slept with her, you know. When he became old enough, he slept with her. So, there was always that--we went on--we didn't go--a vacation for us was to travel down south. I don't think I went any other place outside of Disneyland [Anaheim, California] and Yosemite [Yosemite National Park, California]. And I went to Yosemite, I was like fourteen years old. And outside of that, we went, our journeys to the South. I remember 1954, because he hit a horse in the Rocky Mountains. It was late coming back, and I remember that. I remember, and we went into a tailspin and came within a matter of feet from going off a cliff, with all f- six of us at the time. Nineteen fifty-four [1954] means that my youngest brother at the time was one, I was eight. Connie was six, or seven just about; almost seven. And then Reggie was five, you know. So, I remember all of that. I remember those thing. Story_ID: 634213 Speaker 1: But we always took a trip, and it was always--I think I would be the one who would most be excited about getting down to the farm [in Louisville, Georgia], because it was a world that I kind of knew intuitively from my child- there, my time there as a child. Speaker 2: Because you lived there from-- Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: You lived there when you were young, 'til three years old, right? Speaker 1: I lived almost, I lived almost two years with my [maternal] grandparents. I lived about over a year with my grandparents on two occasions: from the time I was six months old, and the time that I was two, you know. And I lived with my grandparents, yeah, on the farm. My mother [Carrie Hunley Glover] left us down there, which is traditionally what we do. Left me down there when I was six months old. She was expecting Connie [Connie Glover Grier] at the time, my sister. She went back then, she left me and Connie down there when she was expecting the third child, Martin--I mean Rod- Reginald, Reginald [Reginald Glover], the third child. So, in that time, we spent time with that. But my dad [James Glover] said, my dad said something to me later on in life. He said, he said one of the saddest moments that he had was not having his children around. And that said everything about him that you knew intuitively. But this is later on, when, when I was in my forties, fifties, forties or something. He said that was the saddest thing. And so what he said only solidified, or only validated what I felt--that he really, genuinely enjoyed being a father in that sense. And really in a sense that whatever he did, how he worked, he always thought about his relationship to the work he needed to do to provide for the family. And I realized that, because you had these feelings about someone--well, you just genuinely like someone. And I extend it to really loving him and really appreciating him when I realized what he was to me, and really loved him. You know, but you realize something about who he was, you know. And my mom was a very strong willed woman who came from a strong willed mother. And it seems as if a lot of the character- a lot of the characteristics of my father were similar to his father, you know. And both of them were gentle men. Mack Hunley, my [maternal] grandfather, was a gentle man, gentle man, and worked, worked very quiet, you know. And my, and my grandmother--while my mother would, did not generate any--my grandmother was like, for me, bigger than life. You know, she was just kind of really proud. She had all this, she had the combination of Choctaw in her and everything. And she was, she was, she was really quite--and my mother--and you learn something. The other thing is you learn as a child is that you learn what it is to be a child within the framework of family, by watching a relationship between your mother--and your parents and their parents. And I can say that I never met anyone who adored their mother and father (laughter) like my mother adored my, her mother and father. She genuinely adored them. And she would always take another step. I mean besides feeding--having to feed children, you know, five mouths and everything else, and--along the way, as it grew to five--she also, she also was always willing to send her mother a few dollars. And then if she needed a few dollars, her mother would send her a dollar. You know, so it was a kind of one, a sharing of something that I just found just phenomenal, it was beautiful. Story_ID: 634214 Speaker 1: And I thought about it, because I was always kind of (unclear) kind of nosy, privy to what my parents were talking about, you know. I remember when I, when I took typing class in the seventh grade [at Roosevelt Junior High School; Roosevelt Middle School, San Francisco, California], I got a chance to--now type--you know, back in the day, back then, you know you typed--you had a little, you know, a little manual typewriter. You typed the address, the names, and the address, the names, you send out the union newsletter. And so I would be, I would do that for them when I took it in seventh grade. And it gave me an idea. It gave me a chance to kind of listen to what people talked about and who was there, whether it was gossip or whether it was stuff that was, for me, about what was happening in the movement. Or-- Speaker 2: (Cough) So, they were very involved in the union then? Speaker 1: They were, they were very involved in their labor union [National Alliance of Postal and Federal Employees]. My mother [Carrie Hunley Glover] was secretary of the local, and my father [James Glover] was the treasurer. They were very much involved in it. They were very strong. So, the kind of ideo- ideology of the labor movement was a part--was a staple in my household. It was-- Speaker 2: So, it's almost, it's in your DNA, really. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: It's in your DNA. Speaker 1: Well, it's that, it's what I heard people talking about and what I--what they referenced, how they referenced, you know. When I mean, I remember them celebrating the Cuban Revolution in 1959. I was almost, I was twelve years old going on thirteen. And I was wondering what they were celebrating. They were celebrating the victory of Cuban Revolution, that union. And you come in San Francisco [California], and it's a very, very--I was thinking about this story about people like Harry Bridges, you had the strong, strong--or the boycott of Auto Row when I was a kid and everything else, and how people were drawn into it, and given that San Francisco is in a sense a major city, but a small city, relatively speaking; seven hundred thousand people. So, you see how people in a sense construct their lives in such a way, and construct movements around here. And you know, even though I didn't know all that then, as I remember, as I later on researched it, I was able to place my parents, and listen to--from the stories that I remember, to the mo- great moments in political action, you know, and citizen action in, in my, in San Francisco. Story_ID: 634215 Speaker 1: How interracial are the dealings--I mean, multiracial (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How, how--? Speaker 1: I mean, you're living in mixed communities. How black, or how, how much contact are you and your parents having with the other races? Speaker 2: Well, primarily at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] where my parents [Carrie Hunley Glover and James Glover] worked, you know, the demographics of the United Parcel Service [sic.] began to change with the influx of African Americans starting about 1948, when my grand- my parents came to the post office. So, their actions and their relationships were a mixture of several things. They came into contact with white workers, of course. They also--and they probably came into contact with white workers as well at the end of the war [World War II, WWII] when my mother, (cough) my mother took a job, had a job at the [U.S.] Army commissary, or something like that. She had some kind of job like that. But primarily the, as the demographics changed--and a lot of the diversity within the pers- the post office was pretty strong, you know. When I say diversity, I mean of men and women who were either using the post- the post office as a jumping off point, or the leverage to do something else in life--go to school, law school or whatever. I remember Curtis Green worked with my parents at the post office. He later became the head of the Municipal Railway here [San Francisco Municipal Railway], the bus line, you know. Or, Yvonne, Yvonne Golden [Yvonne Scarlett Golden] was a good friend of my mother's. I remember they lived in Berkeley [California], and I always remember because we used to go over there on the Sunday afternoon. Antoine [ph.], her son, who is close to my age, but a little bit younger, his daughter and everything else. And Yvonne Golden was the first woman that was hired as a supervisor in the post office. And she went, had to go to court to have that done, you know. And she was a black, happened to be a black woman. She was the first woman hired as a supervisor. So, all those things I became privy to at a very early age, and the conversations that went around there, you know, and the support that she received from fellow postal employees, you know, at the union [National Alliance of Postal and Federal Employees]. So, there was a sense--even though the movement, the movement that we associate with the Civil Rights Movement was in the South, it was certainly reflective of the struggle against du jure segregation, and into that, the way in which people saw themselves in relationships in their own context--political and social context, historic context in San Francisco [California], kind of like merged in a way, you know. And so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--go ahead. Speaker 2: --so those are some of the things that I remember as a child-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --you know. Story_ID: 634216 Speaker 1: So, is education--what about religion in the hou- ? Are your parents religious or not? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother [Carrie Hunley Glover] came out of, she, my grandparents--my f- my grandfather [Mack Hunley], Baptist. My grandmother, A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]. Pine Hill [Pine Hill Baptist Church] was my grandfather's church in Louisville, Georgia. Lofton [Lofton A.M.E. Church] in Wrens, Georgia was my grandmother's church. And my mother converted, from my understanding, and it's to C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] because she went to a C.M.E. college [Paine College, Augusta, Georgia]. And so, we went to C.M.E. church from my earliest memories, and still I'm a member of Missionary Temple [Missionary Temple C.M.E. Church], right on, right here in the city, in the heart of the black community in the Fillmore [Fillmore District, San Francisco, California]. And I remember going there from the child- from childhood, you know. Before we moved from the projects to buying a home, it was just--once we bought our home in the Western Addition, in Haight-Ashbury [San Francisco, California], it was closer; the church was closer. I didn't have to, we didn't have to come all the way across the other side of town to go to church. But yeah, my mother was very much involved in the church. She, her involve- the level of involvement--our level of involvement did not match my mother's level of involvement (laughter), or her desire. Because in the church, the church performed certain other things just besides spiritual uplifting. It gives you status, permanent status. And, and my mother would always try to put me and my sister and my brother in these pl- (laughter) in the Easter play or the Christmas play. And we'd be up there in the back holding a palm or something (laughter) in the corner or something like that. Mama would say, "How come I come to these and you have--you never have nothing to say? None of y'all never have nothing to say." We said, "Shoot, Ma, we don't even want to, we don't want to be here," (laughter). And then--because you, you know, you're anointed through your children. They'd say, "Oh, Ms. Riley [ph.]." (Cough) Or, "Oh, Ms. Hanberry [ph.], oh, Ms. Hanberry, your--," I don't think Ms. Hanberry had children, or whoever this member was, "your child was so wonderful." She never, my mother never got that from nobody (laughter) because I had--like, neither one of us never had, we never had a lead in a play. We never had the lead in a hymn. We were always in the background, and all that stuff like that. We were--it was me, Connie [Connie Glover Grier], and Reggie [Reginald Glover], you know. In fact it's funny, because for a long time--so this is 1958, '59 [1959] when 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] came out. And I was like--there was a woman named Lorraine Hansberry, and I was just enamored with her. I just watched it, and nobody ever come up to her. I said how come people don't come up to her and tell her how great her play is, you know (laughter)? I had heard about the play, I had read about the play and everything else. Speaker 1: You read about the play and heard about the play? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You heard about the play? Speaker 2: Oh, I heard about the play. This is Lorraine Hanber- I thought--I didn't get the last--it's (pronunciation) Hansberry (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Hansberry. Speaker 2: Hansberry. And I said, nobody ever--and I'm sitting up in the church, and I watch her. Moment I read it, I said--and I connected the name, because she was prominent in the church. But nobody ever said nothing. Nobody ever would ever come to her and say, and I thought--it was, it was funny. I thought that she, that she was the woman who wrote the play-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Right. Speaker 2: --'Raisin in the Sun'--as a kid you know (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And (unclear) this is my secret, you know, as a twelve year old kid; you know, twelve year old kid, or eleven year old kid whenever this comes out I said, man, she goes to our church! (Laughter) You know, it's the thing--you know then somebody--I'm glad I found out. I forgot how I found out that it wasn't the same woman. But I'm glad I didn't kind of like announce it or (unclear) (laughter). But I wasn't that kind of person. I wasn't going to go out and say, "You know who goes to my church? Lorraine Hansberry," you know and everything. And I wasn't that kind of person, you know, and everything else. I just waited and I found out, boy, that's not her, you know. Story_ID: 634217 Speaker 1: But it's that kind of--you hear--I remember listening to Taresa Hall Pittman [sic. Tarea Hall Pittman] every Sunday. We'd have jazz on in my house during the week, because my dad [James Glover] was a jazz man; he loved, that was his music. And we have Sunday, important, Maria, Maria--Tarea Hall Pittman had a show on called 'Negroes in the News,' and I listened to that every--this is about the only thing I listened to on Sunday. I didn't listen to a lot of gospel music, everything else. And she would have, she'd have a news report of what black people were doing. 'Negroes in the News,' I remember that one (laughter) she called--I talk to people, I ran into people who--I said, "Do you remember 'Negro in the News'--'Negroes--'?" I think it was, wasn't a national program, it was, I think it was syndicated regionally and everything else. But those are the kind of things that flavored your life in a sense. So you'd hear something--and then my paper route, you know, my paper route, you know, looking through there, scouring through there. You're alone at 4:30 in the morning, thirteen years old. You're alone and everything at fourteen years old, and you, first, the first thing you're going to do since sports, baseball, had been introduced to me, I'd look at the box scores. Then I would look at the box scores, then I would go over to the front page. And if there was anything about young stu- students in the South, I'd take it in, you know. So I heard about, I read about people like Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] and all those people when I was a teenager (laughter) when I was a young kid, you know. And it was, it was really interesting, in that sense, how you--and then when there'd be the conversation at the high school [George Washington High School, San Francisco, California]. Margie Wade, I remember Margie Wade. She was in high school, she was like a year behind me. And she would always talk about going, when she graduates from high school--I didn't know where I was going to go when I graduated from high school. But she said, "I'm going to Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana], to Alabama, where all the stuff is happening and everything." And so, there's these little kind of clubs and groups that, that--yeah, of course, you have different cohort- groups. People who are the hippest people on campus, they hang around their group. People who are not so hip, they hang around in their group. People who are the pretty people on campus, they hang around in their group, and everything else. I remember Margie Wade, and Margie Wade used to like to talk about what's happening in the Civil Rights Movement. So she was, she was my ear in a lot of instance- in a sense, in some ways, as someone who was able to talk about, or wanted to talk about it. And she was going to Grambling, which she actually went to Grambling. She went to Grambling, and she was going to Grambling and everything else. So, it's the kind of things that I remember, you know, behind--. You know, I didn't--I'd go to parties. And I just had my fiftieth high school reunion last year. And I couldn't make it, because I was making a movie in Mexico, I wrote them a letter (laughter) t- talking about at the basement parties, about trying--hoping that I'd get a dance (laughter) which I never got, and walking home by myself in the fog and stuff like that. And listening to Johnny Mathis, because Johnny Mathis is an alumni of our school. Johnny Mathis' 'The Twelfth of Never,' which means that's when the dance is over, the school dance is over. If you ain't got a dance then, you (unclear) (laughter), and I never got a dance on 'The Twelfth of Never.' Because nobody--I never--I was either too intimidated to ask someone to slow dance with me, you know, all those kind of things that you go through as a guy who's--a young guy who's, who has, you know, his own sense--his own self esteem images, or stuff like that. And that one moment in the seventh grade [at Roosevelt Junior High School; Roosevelt Middle School, San Francisco, California], seventh grade when the teacher said what he said about my lips, man, that had kind of like, it went wildfire, viral, around every (unclear) (laughter). So you go to what you call it, and then--but this is, if I got in the party. And so, you know, it was a whole lot of parties. You'd go in with a group. And as soon as you get to the door, they'd say, "It's packed. Were you invited?" "No." "Okay, adios," (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) We're going to turn--okay. Speaker 1: I mean, you know, I mean you had to have, you had to have, you had to have--and I know it sounds kind of desperate. But there were other things, you know. Even though I wasn't a student, great student at all, you know, I did good at math; I was really good at math, I focused on math 'cause that was (unclear). I struggled with reading. Speaker 2: But, but math is, math-- Speaker 1: Huh (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not everyone's good at math. Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Not everyone is good at math. Speaker 1: Yeah, I had this facility for numbers. Speaker 2: And you have a facility--you have a great memory, too. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So-- Speaker 2: Did someone ever tell you that (simultaneous)? Story_ID: 634218 Speaker 1: --Great memory. And you'll see people throughout their life. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You may run into somebody, and everything else. I was at a party last night that I had to go to, I went to. And Jackie [ph.], who I, I remember he had, his sister in law who's, was my first wife's [Asake Bomani] best friend, Shirley [ph.]. Shirley and I, and Tom [ph.], her cousin, we've known each other from the post office picnic. Because-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --their--Tom's mother worked with my parents [Carrie Hunley Glover and James Glover] at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. So, we all went on picnics together. Shirley's mother is Tom's mother's sister. So, there was all these kind of connections that you have. So, I saw Tom last night. We've known each other, and it had been--we've tou- at each point in time in our life, we touch each other, when we were students, you know, or, you know, Shirley was a student and she was on strike in 1968. And I knew Shirley when we were at City College [City College of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] before then--all these kinds of things. They don't--you don't--the thing is that you remember it, and you remember people, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, but not everyone--no, not everyone has that facility-- Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: --Mr. Glover [HistoryMaker Danny Glover]. Not everyone. Speaker 1: Or there are moments that--because each spot, and you can reach back in your life and remember, you know, men and women, you know, at various points, whether it's high school. You know, I remember O.J. Simpson when he was running for Galileo [Galileo High School; Galileo Academy of Science and Technology, San Francisco, California] and took last place. I was there when he took the last place in the 100 yard dash. You know, all of a sudden he gets faster, he plays football, and then the rest is history, you know. But I remember O.J. Simpson back then. I remember him when we used to go to Booker T. Washington Center [Booker T. Washington Community Service Center, San Francisco, California], Booker T. Washington Center, and we were thirteen, fourteen years old, you know, when various groups--it was the center for various black kids primarily around the c- around the city from various neighborhoods who would come over there and play basketball, social activity, stuff like that. So, those are the kinds of things you remember, (cough) because they're part, they're part of your process, the process of growing up, and part of your maturation, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera and so on. Speaker 2: So, what--how do you decide to go to San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: How did you decide to go to San Francisco State? Speaker 1: There were, there were a lot of things that were happening. I remember the summer of sixty- '66 [1966], and I had basically, I had no--I mean, I always can find a job washing dishes, you know. I mean I worked--I'm at nineteen years old in '65 [1965], and I worked beside my father who had a part-time job. 'Cause he always had a full-time job, part-time job to make a little bit of money at Lone Mountain College [San Francisco, California]. It was a great moment for me because that was another kind of, kind of union with my father. And I-- Speaker 2: So you graduated [from George Washington High School, San Francisco, California] in '64 [1964]? Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964]. Speaker 2: And so then you were just working? Speaker 1: No, no, I went to City College. Speaker 2: You went to Ci- okay. Speaker 1: And basically I didn't do anything at City College basically that year. And then I went to, to--I started the second year, and then I kind of just fell by the wayside. Then I went to, to San Francisco State extension, and that's where I met a great friend of mine still, Clarence "Buzz" Thomas. Who was--we came to San Francisco State together. His, his, his nephew [Ryan Coogler] directed the latest Rocky film ['Creed']. Yeah, Clarence Thomas. Clarence and I are still friends. Clarence's people came out of the ILWU [International Longshore and Warehouse Union], longshoremen workers, and stuff like that. And so, it's a whole kind of--he come, we both come out of these kind of labor, you know, unions and stuff like that, union also. So, I remember Clarence very well, because we're still friends. So, you connect that, you connect with these people who're still friends. (Unclear) there's a couple of brothers, they're twins, they're twins, you know, who I know. We've known each other since we're like fourteen, fifteen years old. And they'll call me up, "What you doing, man? What's going on and everything?" Alvin [ph.] and Alvin [ph.]--and Alvin. I just found out recently they were actually from New Orleans [Louisiana], because we had--they were talking about--they invited me over for some gumbo. And he made some gumbo, and I said, "Hey, this is good gumbo. But I'm the gumbo king around here," (laughter). So, so, I mean, you find these relationships, they're still, you know, and it's wonderful to have. I could see someone and know their--and remember a moment in our, you know, where we cross each other's path. You know, or somebody passed away, or somebody's sick, or whatever, you know. And that's, you know, and that's one of the things you find now, that a lot of cats you grew up with who did make it through, who did find their way through, be it past jail or crack cocaine, or whatever the stuff that they had to deal with and everything else--they still, you see them, you know, at a funeral. So, you know, David Black [ph.], (laughter) who lives in (unclear) I remember these people. You know, Big Harry [ph.]. Harry will get in a fight for you. And Harry's so strong, he likes to pick people up and throw them on the top, throw 'em on top of the car (laughter). He'd charge you and put you up there. Big Harry, man, he's sick now. You know, so those are the kind of things that you remember. So, the names and associations go with that. Story_ID: 634219 Speaker 1: I remember in 1966, which is part of the reason got me in- when I heard [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez read poetry in 1966. Speaker 2: So, 'cause she talked about coming out here at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, she was out, she was out. Speaker 2: 'Cause Amir- Baraka [Amiri Baraka], Baraka was out here (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, she was out here. Speaker 2: And she-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And well, she was writing poetry, and I remember at a little place at San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]. And I ended up going out there the summer of '66 [1966]. (Cough) Because Margie [Margie Wade] said, "You know, Danny [HistoryMaker Danny Glover], you always talking about you want to work with kids." And a friend of hers who's in the same class said that, she said, "Why don't you go out there and volunteer with the program out there?" They have a summer program out there. I went out there, and I just started wandering around the cam- the campus. And, you know, there are things you end up doing. You know, Malcolm [Malcolm X] ha- Malcolm definitely had a major effect on me, so I spent some time sitting in the mosque [Muhammad Mosque No. 26, San Francisco, California] and everything else. So, that's 1965, you know, nineteen years old. And there are other things that have--. But I think all the background allowed me, allowed all this to happen in 1966. I used to go to meetings at the Black Panther Party headquarters of America. It was a little storefront. It wasn't the Black Panther Party in Oakland [California], but it was another storefront. And I remember I used to go to their meetings and sit up there in 1966. And then (laughter) Betty Shabazz came, Malcolm's woman came to California. And then they went to pick her up at the airport, but they didn't have--they--with their guns and everything else. Because after, after the Black Panther Party in Oakland had their--came into Sacramento [California State Capitol, Sacramento, California] with their (unclear) guns, the whole (unclear), they--but the word got out that they didn't have any bullets in their guns, so they got outed (laughter). And they had formed out of Lowndes County--a brother who worked there, I can't remember his name now. But I didn't know him that well, but he worked in, he came out of Lowndes County, that's where the Black Panther Party comes out of, Lowndes County, Mississippi [sic. Lowndes County, Alabama], you know. And he comes out of that group, and he formed it out of that. And so, those are the things you remember, in the sense. So, when I, when I started hanging out more at San Francisco State, just being around, I had a little job which I g- washing dishes in the late spring at Mount Sinai Hospital [San Francisco, California]. I'm making two dollars and twenty-four cents an hour. And I started going up to San Francisco State, and I just participate, I was sending my--whether it was the tutorial program during the summer of 1966. Or after that, I would go out there and I would just be there and participate in events. And to honor that, honor that kind of ac- in the way, with the idea of going back to San Francisco State. Story_ID: 634220 Speaker 1: And so, what is the San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] that you find at that time when you come? You know, what, what's happening on the campus? Speaker 2: Well, what is happening, there was this real amazing--you find students who had come back, particularly Jimmy Garrett [James Garrett], who'd come back and worked in SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. Jimmy Garrett was part of Freedom Summer, and others. And then the people that he attracted out the state were people that you know: Ralph Featherstone, H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin]; they would come out, you know, because they're communicating with each other. Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], you know, Cleveland Sellers. You know, all those guys would come out. They would come out to San Francisco State, around there because so many things were happening out there, especially after the party [Black Panther Party] went to--in 1966 went to the capitol building [California State Capitol, Sacramento, California] and had their guns. So, if you say, there was an enormous amount of traction to San Francisco [California] and the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] with them. Of course, one of the things about San Francisco State was that the people who came out there were, in some sense, organizers. Jimmy Garrett was an organizer. You know, that's what he'd done for years with SNCC and everything else, in the South and everything else. So, they knew how to or- they knew how to organize. First of all, it was the Negro Student Union, so that changed to the Black Student Union. And I think that was one of the things we started doing, was we started turning over bid whist tables in the commons (laughter). Speaker 1: Have to have your bid whist, right? Bid whist. Speaker 2: They would go--(laughter) and then chastising, you know, the three piece suit wearing frat boys, you know, all this stuff like this. And, and then since they were organized, they knew exactly where--how--the money train. So, they gained control of the student, the student association and the budget. So, they decided they were going to invite Amiri Baraka out there, the spring of 1967. And it's about--and this is one thing about organizing. It's about how you get a headline too, you know what I'm saying? And it's one thing they've learned from their experience in the South all those years and everything: how you get a headline. And so they had--in that sense it was, everybody got attracted. Anybody who considered their--in terms of black art--since you have the most prominent person in terms of black art--black art in the spring of 1967 after, on your campus, you know, everybody was there: Roland Snellings [HistoryMaker Askia Toure'], who was a poet, kind of, and a favorite, Amiri Baraka was out there. And then you had [HistoryMaker] Sonia Sanchez. She had this kind of web, local, you know. So, it became the place. And I remember (laughter) I had never been on--like I said, I told you my story about church and everything. I remember when Amiri came into the BSU office one day and said, "I want some of you so called revolutionary brothers to come be in these plays." And h- Amiri had such a way with words, and some of them could be stinging and everything else (laughter); "You so called revolutionary brothers." (Laughter) I remember him coming in the office that day, you know. And so, that's when I got in my--I went to the place where nobody was auditioning. Because everybody wanted to audition for Amiri's play, 'Mad Heart,' or Ben Caldwell's [Benjamin Caldwell] play, 'The Job' and 'First Militant Preacher' [sic. 'Prayer Meeting; Or, The First Militant Minister'] (cough) or [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins' play, 'How Do You Do,' you know; or Jimmy Garrett's play, 'We Own the Night.' Speaker 1: But Ed Bullins was here too? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Ed Bullins was here? Speaker 2: Ed Bullins was here, too. Ed Bullins was living in the Black House [San Francisco, California] with Eldridge [Eldridge Cleaver], was living in the Black House. Ed Bullins and Marvin X had a play called 'Flowers for the Trashman.' They all lived in the Black House. And then there were activities going on in the Black House, on like Monday night. I mean, Huey P. Newton would come in and read poetry in the Black House, or other people would come in and read their stuff in the Black House. Story_ID: 634221 Speaker 1: So, there's just amazing--then, you, you'd hear, read everything. Like, like I remember--now that we've become good friends, Don L. Lee. Speaker 2: Oh, right. Speaker 1: Don, I remember him when he was Don L. Lee (laughter). Speaker 2: Now, he's Haki-- Speaker 1: Huh? [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Madhubuti. Right. Speaker 1: Remember, I remember when he was Don L. (unclear) Don L. (laughter). So, all this stuff--he had to calm us down, all your stuff, it's just, it's terrific. And you're just saying, now--you're saying, there's a cat--okay, what's, what do I read, you know? Sort of struggling, what do I read? What is the conversation? What is, what is the narrative that's going on here? You're trying to figure--you don't put it in that terms and everything else. So, you have your first major book that you struggle through, Franz Fanon, 'Wretched of the Earth' ['The Wretched of the Earth']. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-seven [1967]. Say, whoa. Then you try to read it over and over and over to get the concepts and chara- learn the concepts, what he's talking about. And, and, and, really, your relationship to the concept is visceral the first time. You just feel it, the way he talks about the colonizing, the colonizing, everything else, in some sense. So, you have to, you have to now put on a little hat, and see yourself as a coloni- colonizer as well. So, all these kinds of things are the kind of things that San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], in a sense, began to shape there. I remember reading Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] you know. I remember, I remember reading Julius Nyerere's African socialism. I wanted to major in economics, now. You know, I'd come out there with the idea I wanted to major in engineering because I was good at math. But it was economics now. So, all these kind of things. And, and it was always--I mean that three years, that three years through 1969, from the spring of--the summer of 1966 through the fall of 1969 and into 1970 were some of the most intense years of my life. Speaker 2: Right, because there's a lot of activity. Speaker 1: We brought [HistoryMaker] Nathan Hare out in 19- in the fall of 1967. Speaker 2: Well, talk about that. Because this, when I was reading about this, I was thinking this would make a really good movie. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: I was thinking it would make a really good movie. Because this--first of all, what you're talking about with Nathan Hare and the takeover-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --you know is really the start of black studies. And-- Speaker 1: Well, I think on the one hand, Nathan Hare was the primary voice. He was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. And like I said, we know, we controlled the budget, the student budget, let's bring Nathan Hare out there, sp- fall of 1967. And Nathan Hare--and the strike came out of--. And we had Summerskill [John Summerskill], who was the president, who seemed to be one of--kind of like Kennedy liberals and everything else, and everything. He'd lived in Africa, worked in Africa and everything, was (unclear). So, you know, we got a lot of leeway. We'd go in there, and we're young and obnoxious in some way. You know, we go in there, in a meeting with him. And somebody--I'm not going to name who--would take their, have their bullet bandolier on, and then throw it on the table before the meeting (laughter). We'd do stuff like that. We planned stuff like that. We'd go into the meeting and say (laughter)--we would come in, we'd be meeting and someone would take off their bandolier, you know, the bullet--then throw it on the table first and start--you know what I'm saying (laughter). Some (unclear) (laughter). I mean (unclear). And I remember that stuff. You know, I remember we did that stuff, you know. We set the tone of the meeting, right here: "Now we have to have--," this and all, you know. And he was our friend, and--as much as he wanted to be a friend within the narrative and context of the school itself. And then, but the other things that came out of there--since they were organizers back as far as 1966, they were involved in the Western Addition Community Organization, WACO, another organization that were mobilizing in the black community, in the Fillmore [Fillmore District, San Francisco, California]--the traditional black community, in the Fillmore, mobilizing for the fight against redevelopment. So, we would attend meetings and sit there in meetings and just simply be observers; as students, as gophers, or runners, or whatever (unclear), whatever, and facilitate the meeting. So, we were assigned as the BSU meeting--as the BSU, as a part of the Black Student Union, to go to certain meetings in the community and re- and report back. That's how, that's how we functioned. So, we weren't just simply thought of us as students; we had an off-campus office. We got redevelopment agency, who we're barking at to give us an off-campus office right on Ellis [Street] and--between Fillmore, between Fillmore [Street] and Steiner [Street]. We had an office there right around the corner from the really wonderful soul food place. And there were all these things that were there. I think, I think on the one hand, to be--if you look at it now, it's certainly driven by our orientation and commitment, but, and driven--for those who were young, we followed those who had been in the struggle and everything else. And, but, a lot of that was sponsored by our own kind of, like bravado and naivete of youth, you know, all of that stuff. Story_ID: 634222 Speaker 1: So, the Gator incident happens in s- in-- Speaker 2: Explain the Gator incident. Speaker 1: The Gator incident is when we went up to the Gator office. And the Gator [San Francisco State College Gator] had been release--kind of writing--the newspaper, they were writing these kind of derogatory articles about the Black Student Union [at San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]. So, we went up there to the office, and a fight ensued in the office. And a lot of, a lot of, a lot of national attention was on the fight. And we always appropriately knew how to use national atten- whatever attention we got. And a lot of us, and several of us, including Buzz [Clarence "Buzz" Thomas], Robert Prudhomme, several other people were--Landon Williams--we all were either suspended or expelled from school (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now you, were you suspended for six months? Speaker 1: Yeah, six months, I was suspended for six months. And so, we were expelled from school. Speaker 2: But Buzz was suspended too, right at some point? Speaker 1: Buzz was suspended. Landon was--Landon Williams--and I think Landon went and joined the party [Black Panther Party] after that or (unclear). Speaker 2: Now, why were you suspended? Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: Why were you suspended? Speaker 1: Because I was part of the fracas. There was a fight that broke out; I was part of the fracas. So, all of these kinds of, all of these kind of things were happening right then. Then it got so much attention and, you know, Byron S- Byron Smith [ph.], Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], a group of lawyers who came to our defense, came to our defense and everything else, and got everything--you know. So that was, that was then. And I think, and all of this, all of this--this is in 1967. So, Nathan was out there. Amiri [Amiri Baraka] had gone, he had (unclear) the spring, Nathan was gone. And we couldn't, we couldn't get the administration to move on [HistoryMaker] Nathan Hare, to hire him for another year. Because we were seriously working on ideas around a black studies program. We'd have meetings about that, the BSU [Black Student Union]. We were in a sense using our time to kind of frame the idea around a black studies program, what it would look like, you know. And so after that, we went into--he was there for 19- all of 1967, we went into the summer, no movement and everything else. Then we called a student strike in the fall of that year, black, black students. But we didn't know that, one, the teachers had some issues. Two, that the strike would facilitate the kind of emergence of issues around the Hispanic community and the Asian American community and all other communities. So, we formed the Third World strike coalition [Third World Liberation Front]. And, and we had people like Roger Alvarado who people used to--he used to wear a beret like Che [Che Guevara], and they used to call him Little Che, and you had people from the Asian community. And I mean, really it was pr- quite--we just shut the campus down. Story_ID: 634223 Speaker 1: You had SDS [Students for a Democratic Society], was SDS (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Huh? Speaker 1: Student Defense League. (Cough) Student Defense--SDS? Speaker 2: Oh, SDS, you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: SDS, Progressive Labor Party. John Levin, who's good, still a good friend and a writer, he worked on a script with me. John Levin was with SDS and everything else. So, it's a major strike. And, and because they brought the tact squad out there, something was always happening all the rest of that year until they broke the strike after five--. They really, one of the reasons they broke the strike--they (unclear) break the strike, they cut off the money for the student--association of students' budget. We were still--yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, I see (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a part of it. They figured out at some particular point that they had to cut off the money for the association of students' budget. And so, part of that was whatever--what- kind of what had kept us--. But we had gained (sneeze) a great deal of community support for the strike, you know. You know, you had Rick Wriddley [ph.], who was heavy in the community par- you know, all of the great--Cecil Williams. I got a picture of Cecil Williams with all of us in the leadership of the Black Student Union. Cecil Williams in 1968, [HistoryMaker] Reverend Cecil Williams, you know. Somebody sent me--as a matter of fact, Buzz sent me--Clarence [Clarence "Buzz" Thomas] sent me a copy of the picture. I got a picture of that on my computer somewhere, you know what I'm saying. So, I think all the, the San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] was that it--after the strike of '68 [1968]-- Speaker 1: And the strike lasted for months? Speaker 2: Five months, it shut down campus (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Five months, which is a-- Speaker 2: And then everybody was on trial most of 1969, or most of--well, you were on trial-- Speaker 1: For, for having? Speaker 2: --(unclear). For everything from conspiracy--. I mean most of that time after that, you know, starting in the spring of '69 [1969], they were having trials. I was on trial because of the mass, mass--one of the mass busts that they had, you know, arrests that they had. And they tried us as a group, so I was on strike for--I was on trial then for like the spring--I think about two months or something like that. Speaker 1: I see. So, that's, that's when you said Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] and group were? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was, that was for the Gator incident [San Francisco State College Gator]. Speaker 1: Oh. So, who-- Speaker 2: Well, there was a group of lawyers, some of them, one of them I keep in touch with now who lives in Berkeley [California], who would lead a team of lawyers, young lawyers there; young law students and everything else. We raised money to bail people out of jail. And at that time we informed the commune, we informed our commune. And our commune was right on, right at Fillmore--I mean, right at Page [Street] and Fillmore [Street]. Me, Terry Collins, Leroy Woods [ph.], George [ph.], Donald Smothers--and what's George's last name? George--god, I can't think of George's last name. He later became, you know, a judge and everything--George--. And we formed a commune, and the center, the center of everything was our commune. That's where the meetings were held, strategy meetings were held. That's where the, we had a few--that's where the big parties were held; and the big parties to raise money, and fundraiser. Story_ID: 634224 Speaker 1: I mean the, the, the, the main, the main--I remember that time that the--you know, you'd play, all you did was play Sly Stone's [Sly and the Family Stone] 'Sex Machine' all night, and play James Brown, you know (laughter). Speaker 2: 'I'm Black, I'm Proud'? Speaker 1: No, not 'I'm Black and I'm Proud' ['Say It Loud (I'm Black and I'm Proud)']. Speaker 2: No, at that point it would have been-- Speaker 1: It was, yeah, he had a long one. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Really 'Sex Machine,' something like that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But I knew Sly was--and Sly was, we all knew Sly. Because all of us--this is a community where The Pointer Sisters and everything--we saw, we saw them in the early '60s [1960s]. Sly--we'd go to Sly-Sly [Sly Stone] used to be a deejay at KSAN [KSAN Radio; KSOL Radio, San Francisco, California], and his brother, his brother Freddie [Freddie Stone] played in Leon's band [ph.]. This is all during high school-- Speaker 2: Wow. Speaker 1: --you know. So, you had all these kind of musical traditions meeting around. And the other thing about it, for me, and I tend to say--because after the beat generation, which is North Beach [San Francisco, California], most of these clubs and, and pla- coffee houses began to open up around hou- my neighborhood [Western Addition, San Francisco, California]. So, at sixteen or seventeen years old, I used to wander in there and sit there and listen to poetry. So, I'd listen to people like Bob Dylan, you know, or the Stones [Rolling Stones] or something (laughter), you know what I'm saying. So, it's really, on the one hand, I think part of that--you know, or Jimi Hendrix, you know. All of those kind of people were, became a part of my life in that period of time, you know. And in fact, I was telling somebody (cough) that I'd come up on Motown [Motown Records], basically. We'd come up on Motown through the late '50s [1950s]. You know, [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson, the (cough) Smokey Robinson and The Miracles, certainly the Four Tops, and everybody else--Mary Wells. (Yawn) I'm sorry, going through this much (unclear). But that, those were the kind of influences that had--. And then all of a sudden I'm watching my tastes around '63 [1963], '64 [1964], I'm listening to other stuff, you know, going, wandering around. Because I spent a lot of time by myself. When you have a paper route and you're collecting money, you go and collect the money, you go around and sit around. And you peep in another place, you sit there for a while, (unclear) open coffee house. The church right adjacent to Golden Gate Park [San Francisco, California], there's a church there [Mt. Zion Baptist Church], right on Baker [Street] and Oak [Street]. They had a coffee house. This church is still there. I remember the coffee house, and I used to-- Story_ID: 634225 Speaker 1: And then the other thing is that I moved out of the house when I was nineteen, just before my twentieth birthday in 1966. I was making enough money to move out of the house and got me a -- Speaker 2: So, what are your parents saying about the--I mean when you get in the strike [at San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], what are they saying? Speaker 1: Well, I think-- Speaker 2: Or even your activities and things? Speaker 1: Even my what? Speaker 2: Activities, what are your, what are your parents saying? Speaker 1: Well, my parents were concerned and worried, no doubt about that. They began, their concern with me began, you know, late 1964, nineteen sixty- or 1965, going to the mosque [Muhammad Mosque No. 26, San Francisco, California] 'cause my--going to, sitting in the mosque and everything else. And we had, we didn't have a disengagement, but we had, we had arguments about-- Speaker 2: A disagreement. Speaker 1: --passionate arguments about that; a discussion about that and everything else. Nowhere--my relationship with my parents is seamless in that there's no breakage in the relationship. There's never been any breakage with my mother [Carrie Hunley Glover] and father [James Glover]. There never was any--. But, certainly they, they in the other sense were, I think somewhat supportive of, of my growing radicalism. But at the same time, at the same time they were concerned about me as well. Story_ID: 634226 Speaker 1: Well, you know, there's a lot--I mean I, I was just thinking that because the Black Panthers are here, and attention went from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] to the--not went from SNCC, but a lot of focus was on the Black Panther Party. Speaker 2: The Black Panthers had a-- Speaker 1: A lot of focus. You know, because I mean Chicago [Illinois] is trying to be Black Panthers--you know, a lot of focus is on-- Speaker 2: You know, I worked in, when I lived in the commune in 1968 I worked with the breakfast for children [Free Breakfast for School Children Program], Black Panther Party. In fact, the church there [Sacred Heart Church, San Francisco, California], right on the corner of Fillmore [Street] between Oak [Street] and Fell [Street], I'd go there every morning. We'd go there, serve breakfast to kids and everything else, 1968, breakfast for children. So, we had--the BSU [Black Student Union at San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] prided itself--this (unclear) BSU--I think it's different from the other black student unions in the area. We prided ourselves with the relationship with the Black Panther Party. We'd get together in political education classes often. Read the Red Book, Mao's Red Book ['Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung,' Mao Zedong] together and stuff, study that. And things, and so there were, you know, study groups and everything else. And some of the, some of the cats who were members of the local Black Panther Party were people that I knew, either from San Francisco [California], you know. And my growing up--John Bowman, I remember. I remember John Bowman knew my brother, was in the tenth grade, and he ran track, you know what I'm saying, and I remember him at parties. So, there was this kind of way of people who filtered into--Sam [ph.], who became a Black Panther Party--I remember him because he's a basketball player and, you know, one of the cool guys on campus at City College [City College of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] when I was up there, back in '64 [1964], '65 [1965] and everything else. So, so the Black Panther Party, I mean was made up of different people. I can't think of a name right now. But she was, I remember her, she's one of the pianists. She was a member of the Black Panther Party, and singers, in the Third Baptist Church youth choir [at Third Baptist Church of San Francisco, San Francisco, California], you know what I'm saying. So, all those kind of--you see people who were part of the community, a part in some sense of an extended, an extend- you had an extended relation- extended relationship as a part of that. So I think those kind of relationships were, were I think were comforting relationships for us is all. And so, we had a nice relationship with the Black Panther Party. We had the Black Panther Party newspaper [The Black Panther Community News Service; The Black Panther Intercommunal News Service]. And so on and so forth, so, there was a kind of relationship that happened; a quasi- not so much a kind of relationship that was, that was founded on--founded certainly on solidarity, where we would work together on different other kinds of things. Not a structured relationship, but a relationship nonetheless with the Black Panther Party. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 634227 Speaker 1: Well there was a lot of organic going--I mean, you know, sort of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --formations and things-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --demonstrations, it's Vietnam [Vietnam War]. I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Vietnam. We were all participating in the Free Huey campaign [for Huey P. Newton], you know, all participated in that and everything else. And you know, and let me--under, in no uncertain terms, you know, in my relationship with the BSU--something that was a much more outward relationship, because I held the position as the minister of culture in the Black Student Union. But basically I wasn't a member, demonstrative member, in terms of ideas and certain areas within the framework of all those things that are happening in San Francisco [California] at the time. Speaker 1: So, you say you were not? Speaker 2: I was not. Speaker 1: You were not a demonstrative member? Speaker 2: Well, I mean I said--what I'm saying-- Speaker 1: This doesn't make sense to me. Speaker 2: I think-- Speaker 1: That doesn't make sense to me (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think on the one hand--certain hand, the former chairman of the Black Student Union, when I came back to the fortieth anniversary of the strike and everything else, and I gave my analysis of it. And the cat said, "Hey, man, how come you didn't talk that much back then?" (Laughter) And I said, "One, everybody else was talking." (Laughter) "And usually if you had the biggest natural, you got the most time talking." And I said to him--that's what I said to him. But I mean the thing is, though, my ideas of going continue in the place--in a space that has been involved in other radical movements, you know, and other progressive movements, you know. I mean I was involved in the anti-apartheid movement as far as back as 1974 and 1975, you know, with the African Liberation Support Committee, you know, everything else. We had--I mean I remember, I remember when we were fighting over--we almost had had some volatile fights over whether we were supporting UNITA [National Union for the Total Independence of Angola] or MPLA [People's Movement for the Liberation of Angola], you know, in Angola. I mean, really intense. And MPL- and UNITA was getting guns from South Africa. But MPLA was the Communist, you know. So we didn't--so there were arguments of principle around that. So, those are the kind of discussions that I was involved in post-San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], you know, discussions. And then when I--when--and so there's so many different things, of ways in which--. I didn't, you know, I was loyal, I was a participant, no doubt about that. I spoke, no doubt about that. But I was, I was in the next tier, you know, in terms of that, from my own vantage point, you know. Now, people tend to embellish a great deal, not too much, my actual participation and stuff, you know. In fact, I was (laughter) I was over there when I did 'Places in the Heart,' Ebert [Roger Ebert] and what you call it had me on. And they had got note that I, somebody said I was a member of the Black Panther Party. And I said, "With no disrespect to the Black Panther Party, because I knew a lot of guys who lost their lives around the Black Panther Party, but I think it would be a disservice for me to say that I was a member of the Black Panther Party. I supported--I worked in the breakfast for children [Free Breakfast for School Children Program]. I read that, I spent a lot of time with political education, but I wasn't really a member," mainly because of that; not because I was trying to take myself away from the Black Panther Party. Just understand my relationship. And I'm very clear about that. (Cough) Of course, with time comes wisdom, and thinking, you know. (Cough) Some of the people that I may have been involved with were still stuck in 1968, you know, and the rhetoric of 1968, and understanding the narrative, you know. And that, that is, that comes from reading everything, you know, from everything--to be--to watch movements from a different kind of standpoint. Once I (unclear), once I began doing the work of Athol Fugard, the great South African playwright (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's what--so can you tell me--so let's go back to LeRoi--I mean, Baraka [Amiri Baraka] saying, "Do--who here, which of you are revolutionaries?" Speaker 2: Yeah, "I want some of you so called"-- Speaker 1: "So called revolutionary." Speaker 2: --"revolutionaries to be in these plays." Speaker 1: So, who--what play were you in? Speaker 2: I was in a play called, called 'Papa's Daughter' [Dorothy Ahmad]. Story_ID: 634228 Speaker 1: --Interest in that period. And, you know, now things are coming out. Because I asked her if she liked the f- doc- you know, the one that was done on her, she didn't really like it. Speaker 2: The one about Sheila? She- Shola, Shola Lynch (unclear)--? Speaker 1: Yeah, she didn't like it. She said it was romanticized, some of it, so she didn't like that. And then there's, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: But I thought it-- Speaker 2: It'd be interesting--because we were, my company was Louverture Films when we first attached-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes, that's right-- Speaker 2: --attached to it initially. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They mention it. Thank you. Speaker 1: Yeah, they do mention it. Speaker 2: (Unclear) in there. But you know, you know I don't think Shola, for all intents and purposes, from--she wants to be a star. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: You know. Speaker 1: But, but, it wa- I mean-- Speaker 2: And we fell out, we fell away from the project, and then fell out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Fell away from the project. Speaker 1: Fell away from the project. Speaker 2: Because we couldn't raise the money. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: You know, and we, I think we had some real issues with the approach as well. Speaker 1: Oh, see, so you--okay, so, so did you see [HistoryMaker] Stanley Nelson's? Because you've d- you did the Black Panthers mix, remix-- Speaker 2: 'Black Power Mixtape' ['The Black Power Mixtape 1967-1975']. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Sorry. Speaker 2: And that was based upon--and I think people kind of see that in misinterpretation, as it is a, an analysis of the moment and everything else. It's an interpretation of how other people saw the moment. So the voices that you heard, with Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] interviewing his mother [Mabel R. Carmichael], you know, which is part of their-- Speaker 1: Which is-- Speaker 2: --their family. Which is beautiful. Speaker 1: It's beautiful. Speaker 2: You know what I'm saying? So on the one hand it wasn't an analysis of the Black Power movement as it was how it was embraced. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And what I mean, there's a steady drone of information about the Black Panther movement [Black Panther Party], all of it derogatory and everything else. And yet, you saw through this avenue by Swedish documentary filmmakers how they interpreted it, a sense of it as a reimagining of democracy. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: A process, another process of what was going--. Yeah, they were young. Yeah, they were bold and everything else, and all of that. And yet it was, it was, it was some other kind of other way of referencing it. And again, I hope people understand the intent of the movement, and how the movement was an outgrowth of the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: How it would now find itself as a manifestation of those voices as well. Speaker 1: That's right. Well that, and then you have Stanley Nelson. He just did his, you know. It's coming, oh, it's going to be on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] in-- Speaker 2: Okay, I haven't seen it. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, so that, that's interesting too. You know, I think more people will look--I thought his work was important too. But it was, I think it was more focused on the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] than it was--oh, no, that's not true. It included Fred Hampton and Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I think part, part of the--I mean, it comes through how you see yourself. We've always kind of like--these ideas find themselves and begin to emerge and grow in some sense. And then they take some sort of national posture, or national, have some sort of national presence. Then all of a sudden, the place where they grew from, they kind of like left out, left off the radar screen. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right the-- Speaker 2: You know, cool, we came out of here, you know. Speaker 1: It came out of here. Speaker 2: But you, you have to understand the diversity of radical thinking, you know. Speaker 1: That came out of--'cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It came out of San Francisco [California], yeah. Speaker 1: Well, see, that's what I was even wondering-- Story_ID: 634229 Speaker 1: Is there any--is it all just merged in like with Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]? All of that is just happening? San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], Berkeley, is that all--or is this (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Mario Savio had come out here and certainly had been a part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], Mario Savio. And we had the Free Speech Movement in Berkeley in '65 [1965], '66 [1966]; I can't remember. And, but, I think that there was--but Mario Savio was, let's say for all intents, European. And I don't know what nationality he is, but he is European. These are black students who--remember, see, this is the kind of credit you don't get. Is that the Mississippi Democratic Freedom Party [sic. Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party] in 1964, part of their platform in trying to unseat the Mississippi delegates (cough) at the national convention [1964 Democratic National Convention, Atlantic City, New Jersey], at the state convention, part of, on that platform was to end the Vietnam War, 1964, before there were any radical movements that involved primarily--anti-war movement was primarily white, talking about 1964. That's one of the elements in there. That's--it was those young people, black people, who were pushing it. And [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding so aptly says that 'cause and Vincent Harding was a primary writer of Beyond Vietnam [Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence]. Vince Harding said that. These other groups that were pushing King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--young people were pushing King around the Vietnam War in a sense. Young black people were pushing King around the Vietnam War. So, I mean all these--we often, often are left on the sidelines when the credit, when the movements emerge, and yet they don't have a European or white author, or someone else. It's the same thing here. I mean, San Francisco State is a working class college, bottom line. It's a teachers college. So, these students came in here who came back--SNCC students came back with students who were aware of the history of the school itself and everything else, and found a haven for this place. Not at UC Berkeley. They may not have been able to get into UC Berkeley. But not UC Berkeley. So, they began to kind of take whatever the process was and use it. Like this--there was a tutorial program at San Francisco State College, about, I think anywhere--for a moment changing numbers--but anywhere from ten to twelve centers. The Black Student Union took over the tutorial program (laughter). So now you had jobs, because they were work study j- projects and everything else. And now, you had another link into the community. That's how we were at first able to build our link into the Western Addition [San Francisco, California] in the issue around, around gentrification, what we call it now, but, redevelopment, as we called it then. So, you had, you were involved in the school. Obviously you came in contact with the parents through the tutorial project. Also, you came into the other issues around this black community and everything else. So, we were right there at the center at this particular moment. And for what people like Jimmy Garrett [James Garrett] and others envisioned is an urban movement. You know, the movement that they had, the skills that they had learned in Mississippi, everything was--now they were thinking about translating those skills into the urban movement around redevelopment, and take some thought around that, you know, and everything else. And so it was a natural, organic kind of transference that happened with that. The same thing with the Black Panther Party. The Black Panther Party came up with, hey, you know, community control the police? Or, you know, s- p- defense--the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense--defense or whatever. Those are the kind of things that they came up with. We're often not given credit to those kind of-- Speaker 1: That's right. Story_ID: 634230 Speaker 1: So, di- with, with the ethnic study- did you take over the BSU, though? Did you actually take over? Were you made head of the, the Black Student Union [at San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]? Speaker 2: I was head of Black Student Union, union in the fall of '69 [1969], '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is the vision for the-- Speaker 2: How do you have all this information (unclear)? Speaker 1: Because I did a lot of research. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was chairman of Black Student Union. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: But everybody had left. Speaker 1: Everybody had left? Speaker 2: Everybody--see, what happens with a profound action like a strike, is that, you know, you begin to apply, "Oh, I got in Stanford Law School [Stanford, California]. I got in Stanford (unclear)." (Laughter) "I got in graduate school here." "I got in Hastings [University of California, Hastings College of the Law, San Francisco, California]," and everything else. So, the core me- leadership was not still there. It was gone, the core leadership wasn't there. Speaker 1: So, you then--you-- Speaker 2: Then I just assumed that role (unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. So, what were you doing during the time you assumed the role, then? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Because is that when--is that when-- Speaker 2: Well, the ethnic studies program [College of Ethnic Studies] was already in process, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean it was, it wasn't like--now, now the ethnic studies--the idea of managing and putting together the ethnic studies program came--went to the hands of, you know, academics and everything else. So, ethnic studies was one of the key, key-- Speaker 1: So, then that's when Hare begins his fight? Speaker 2: I'm g- what? Speaker 1: Hare begins, [HistoryMaker] Nathan Hare begins his fight? With the-- Speaker 2: No, Nathan, Nathan, Nathan was gone by then. Speaker 1: He was gone? Speaker 2: What happened was Nathan was gone. They did not hire Nathan. Nathan stayed in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] then. They did not hire Nathan back. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: Yeah, they did not hire Nathan back, which is the reason for the strike. We had Nathan from the fall of 1967 through 1968. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: And they did not hire him back that year. Speaker 1: And then you had two other presidents, Hayakawa [S.I. Hayakawa]-- Speaker 2: Hayakawa-- Speaker 1: --kawa--right, right. Speaker 2: --yeah, Hayakawa became president. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But the idea of the ethnic studies program, which was facilitated also by all those groups, plus the teachers, teachers as well. The idea of that main- remained alive, and that's what, that's what we were celebrating when I was back in here. Speaker 1: Were the teachers? Speaker 2: In, in November of this year I was back here. I came here November 7th and 8th, and basically participated in a program with the alumni association and the ethnic studies program, celebrating forty-six years. Speaker 1: Yeah, but I mean what I'm saying is that that's one of the first, or the first, of those program--I think I read that it was the first ethnic studies-- Speaker 2: It was the first, and it's the only one. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Speaker 2: It's the only one. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so that--and the fact that you included not just black, but Hispanic and others in that. Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: Was it at the time? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. Here's, here's what's happening. And we have to understand this, so we don't become revisionists about history. Speaker 1: Right, that's--okay. That's-- Speaker 2: We were kind of forced to, you know. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: I mean on the one hand, what do you do? You either form an alliance, a strong alliance with progressive whites, Hispanic students, Asian students, Native American students, or, or, or you--and teachers. Or, you just sit out there by yourself. Speaker 1: Okay, I got you. Speaker 2: Or, you get lost in--and let me just tell the truth. You get lost in the transaction. Speaker 1: Well, you know, that's actually happening at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] right now. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: The money had to--you know, everybody's grabbing at the pot of money. You know, remember, they've had those the--I know you've been down in Atlanta [Georgia], but they had a protest on that campus, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't know, I didn't know. Well, it's different now, you know, how it plays out with the p- one of my, one of my conversations--in fact, I'll send you my comments. I'll get to you my comments about, about the, about what I, what my speech and conversation--my comments. I started out with--I was talking about fifteen minutes, twelve, fifteen minutes, about where we are now and everything else. Story_ID: 634231 Speaker 1: You see, I think part of, part of the issue is about two things that are happening on the campuses now. One is the de-emphasis of-- Speaker 2: Sit back. Speaker 1: --of--the de-emphasis of, of, of these programs, one. And the second thing is the de-radicalization of college campuses. We had a lot of radical thinkers-- Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: --in the faculty, radical students and everything else [at San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]. You brought this whole group of children who came out of the Civil Rights Movement. Either they were directly attached to it, involved in it, or they were in some way connected by--it's their generational mandate. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You have that--you don't have that anymore. Speaker 2: No, and I could tell you even worse because I was just--I--worse. Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The black studies departments are mainly white (laughter). Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: It is really--I mean it is-- Speaker 1: Well, well, see, there was always--there was always the issue with-- Speaker 2: It's worse. Speaker 1: --with--I think within, within the black studies program. And more so, I don't know how much in the Hispanic program, and particularly I say Hispanic, because Asian Americans seem to be more assimilative-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in some sense. But there's always the issue between, between black nationalists and also black radical political thought. That was always--wherever it is. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: And there's al- and that whole current runs through the part of the 20th century, the first part of the 20th century, from Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois]. If you look and read it--if you look (unclear), runs from Du Bois to other--Padmore [George Padmore], and all those other kind of radical thinkers who had to come up against the kind of nationalist thinkers or assimilators. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And that's always an issue with that. So you have, you have, one, the fight. You--and it happened--really I think the black community was most devastated by the Red Scare of the late '40s [1940s], and everything else. You--they were most devaca- by, decimated by it. You know what I'm saying? Because they had us--I mean you had people like C.L.R. James who was expelled from the country, you know. One of the great Marxist theorists and intellectuals of the 20th century was expelled from the country. All these people had to run and leave the country, and particularly black people in a sense, because they, they didn't have the foundation that perhaps radical whites, whites did in order to get jobs in other places. We had to find safe havens and everything else. So, I think, I think on the one hand, they were most devastated. And then you were attacked, as Mary McLeod Bethune says, "The tallest tree in our forest": Paul Robeson. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: They chopped him down basically, in a sense. You talk about what you call--who is a radical, who had talked about African liberation from the time in 1939 when he and Du Bois formed the Council on African Affairs in 1939. Who had been--so, you had these kind of thoughts that were running through that. And the one thing that you didn't, you didn't want if you were--let's use the term power as everything else, is to have those voices be the anointed voices. You have, in 1944 probably the most, most popular African American and artist in the world is who? Paul Robeson. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And when he sings that song, trib- what you call it, to America, sings 'The House I Live In,' (makes sounds) you have the most--at the height, the pinnacle of his place. You know, Ebony magazine does a major article on him and everything else, with the family and his ch- son [Paul Robeson, Jr.] and everything else. And boom, it's all out the windowpane. So, I think that's a part of, part of the discussion, and part of, part of what's been happening the whole process in this, you know. And quite clearly, clearly, you know, the Black Student Union were group of nationalists, primarily. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You know, black student unions happen to be groups of nationalists, really, you know. They were radicalized in some ways, or the potential of them being radicalized because of the Black Panther Party, and the mobil- and the moment of the Black Panther Party, the moment that the Black Panther Party had, you know. But that was going to be increasingly--[HistoryMaker] Nathan Hare, in all intents and purposes, is, is concerned about black studies as a nationalist. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: He's a nationalist. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And everything else. Story_ID: 634232 Speaker 1: And I think on the one hand, for myself in thinking, the idea of embracing, embracing a plethora or a group of others, of forming a coalition-- Speaker 2: So, is it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was a difficult thing for the Black Student Union [at San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]. They had no choice. Speaker 2: Okay. But where did you fit in that? Where were you? Speaker 1: Where did I fit? Speaker 2: Are you a national- were you--is it? Speaker 1: I'm more, I lean more to being a progressive radical. Speaker 2: Black--radical-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: And that's the way I've always been. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. To be-- Speaker 1: You know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I've been, I didn't change my name to any kind of nationalist name or anything else. Speaker 2: Right. That's right. That's right. Speaker 1: I always had that-- Speaker 2: That's right. Okay. Speaker 1: --as a center grounding, you know. And that came--I don't know if it came from the fact that, that I came from here in a place where it was serviced by coalition building and radical thought, this city right here [San Francisco, California]. I didn't know where that came, you know, came from, you know, but all that. So I think that's a major issue on campuses now, you know. Speaker 2: Oh, there-- Speaker 1: And I basically say that, say that basically in my comments when I was here April--on November 8th. Speaker 2: Yeah, there are a lot of issues on that. So, especially for a project like ours--that's a whole 'nother subject. So let me ask you for-- Speaker 1: Some, talking about the worst comment to use, if you want to go into Marxist terms, is bourgeois. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Is bourgeois-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, petit bourgeois. Speaker 2: Right, petit bourgeois, the proletariat. Speaker 1: But that's who the petit bourgeois is. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yes, yes. I'm not saying that nationalism is not important as a leverage. But you h- you need, you need to be, you need to be--you have to be analytical, (cough) however you want to call it. You call it whatever it is. A spade is a spade. If you want to call it socialism, or you want to call it something else, then it's something else. I'm not saying that I'm a radical socialist and everything else, but if anything, I like Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] said in 1952, and John Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] always reads his statement. He says in his statement, "I think, I believe I'm more--," in 1957 [sic. 1952], "I believe I'm more of a socialist than a capitalist." Speaker 2: Right, right, right. So-- Speaker 1: And that was, that was also the danger of Martin Luther King. Speaker 2: That's right. That he was making that change. Speaker 1: He was making that stand. Speaker 2: He was making-- Speaker 1: He was talking about war, racism, militarism. Speaker 2: No, he's making it, he's having a more global view. Speaker 1: He's having a much--global view, what they're saying, you know. Speaker 2: And a lot of the black nationalists--I mean really black people are trying to find themselves, their history, their find- you know-- Speaker 1: Well, well, I don't know if we find ourselves--you know-- Speaker 2: No, I think they were-- Speaker 1: I think, I think--I don't know what--I mean I've-- Speaker 2: It was the fascination with-- Speaker 1: There were certain places there and everything else. They have movements in the Communist Party in Alabama, you know. Robin Kelley [Robin D.G. Kelley]-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --wrote, it was a wonderful book on the Communist Party in Alabama ['Hammer and Hoe: Alabama Communists During the Great Depression'] in the 1930s and '40s [1940s], you know. Speaker 2: Well, that, you know, that is actually, that is Angela Davis' parents [Sallye Bell Davis and Frank Davis]. They were, they were a part of that-- Speaker 1: Well, see, that's what I'm saying about this what you call it-- Speaker 2: --that, that's what--that's her parents. Speaker 1: You get to interview--that Angela [HistoryMaker Angela Davis] I'm sure had, would've said, but she talks about that because she's a, she's a radical. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: She's a political radical. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You know, progressive radical. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying? And so you can't, you can't, you can't--you have to connect whatever your nationalism is, whatever your sense of nationalism is, have to connect it to what is happening with the debt situation and debt crisis in Africa. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Because there's the same--I showed this, I show our film, 'Bamako,' which is about the debt crisis in (unclear), in Africa, to the Venezuelan ambassador to the UN [United Nations]. He says, "That's our story." Speaker 2: I see. Speaker 1: (Laughter) You know what I'm saying? That's a viewpoint that we have to have, we have to have right now. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying? And so, so I don't know if the, if these programs, the black studies programs have lost their purpose with those two things. Speaker 2: Well, they--I have a whole--we're not going to get off on that, 'cause I'll get off. (Laughter) So, I'll just--because I don't know what they're--I have to find out what they're doing because I'm a little worried about it. But anyway, and now even lost focus, it's even what people are researching. And anyway-- Speaker 1: Anyway, this decade-- Speaker 2: They're very aca- very ethereal. Speaker 1: Well, they're very--become--aca- Speaker 2: It's very ethereal. Speaker 1: They're taking it out of practice, and whatever. Speaker 2: It's very ethereal. Speaker 1: When I--when I--my wife [Eliane Cavalleiro] is a professor of education. And I say, "The difference between you and most of the university professors that you see around here--," 'cause she--the dean at one of the schools, at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], wanted to see her work and everything. "The difference with you is that your work is dealt with practice. You are the direc- executive director of the Geledes institute of African descendant women [Geledes Black Women's Institute]. You were in the Ministry of Education when Lu- in Lula's [Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva] first term, and you were working in there with ideas that were not ideas for--just to be placed in some sort of academic journal, but ideas to put into practice." Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: "That's the difference between you, it was academic." Speaker 2: No, it's, it's--yeah, it's very ethereal. Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying? Speaker 2: It's very ethereal, and I think that some of that is a problem. Story_ID: 634233 Speaker 1: So, you start working for Model Cities. Speaker 2: I start working for Model Cities in, in September--(cough) I'd say July of 1971. And it was pretty, pretty for me, pretty amazing in some sort of ways, because I was able to trans- transfer the kind of community processes that I had developed over that period of time, from 1967 and everything else, into the work. So I was, I had run, I had been part of a tutorial program out in the Bayview-Hunters Point [San Francisco, California], you know, at one of the churches and everything else. So it was, it was kind of like when--then I--something else happened, and I--that I thought I saw happening. Potentially you had these really articulate, you know, organic intellectuals, primarily women: Eloise Westbrook, Espanola Jackson, and all these women who were part of it. Remember that, I remember them right here, who were now defining in their own way the things that they thought that their community needed. And so, working with that process was, for me, this, this emergence of this kind of democratic process, you know, the possibilities of the democratic process, where people identified, this is what we need to here: issues around housing; the issues around this; the issues around employment; the issues around business opportunities. All those things, they were identifying that. And they were coming from (yawn), they were coming from the or- the grassroots, the--from the bottom. And they were coming from the bottom. The programs I evaluated in Bayview-Hunters Point were young community developers. I also evaluated the Hunters Point housing project, being providing levering money, evaluating program specialists--leveraging money in the bank. They had, people who had places where they could have their houses rehabbed and everything else. In the Mission [Mission District, San Francisco, California] I was involved in was the Mission hiring (unclear). Whole set, a different set, defined by the community--whole different set of imperatives, alternatives, and everything else, and also the Mission Reading Clinic [San Francisco, California], which at that time was one of the twenty-five best reading programs in the country. Mission Reading Clinic. So, those are the kind of things that I did around there. Yet you had--I think working there six years, over six years, almost six and a half years--I think one of the things is that the process--while everything is new, works in a certain way. But I think I became somewhat disenchanted with the process itself, as it began, it began to-- Speaker 1: Well what--why is that? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Why was that? Why did you become disenchanted? Speaker 2: Well, I began to see where if--evaluation theory is a new concept in social programs. It had been an experiment through the healthcare system, hospitals and everything else, where you have, you have finite information, and that information is replaced. Now, we're playing with subjective and objective information--how you'll be able to look at information. How do you c- how do you clearly define the success of the program, you know? There're some programs that were easy, you know. You look at the objective. You're one of twenty- one of the twenty-five best reading programs in the country as a Mission Reading Clinic was, then you have data to support what you do. And you have the data, and see the data seen through the improvement of the kids' grades, et cetera, and language skills, and so and so and so. But it got so, in some sense, that after the money came, the money became also disruptive in terms of agendas. And it may have been that element, it may have been part, part of it anyway. You know, this is our time to get our piece of the pie, or whatever, you know. And so, I found very--these, these courageous women who were, who were at the head of this, you know. And a lot of what--a lot of who they were and what they represent, was the reason why, reason why the community, it didn't dissipate or didn't fall apart and everything else in the program. So, there were a lot of mixed feelings there. Story_ID: 634234 Speaker 1: I remember one time I was, I--was Christmas of 19--was it 1972? Christmas of 1972, the early part of '73 [1973], I started to get this real what you call it magic--I get a shot, a muscle relaxer for my back and my neck, because I was so tense. At the same time, a friend of mine, Keith Greer [ph.], said, "Hey, Dan [HistoryMaker Danny Glover], we're starting an improv [improvisation] group up. Do you want to be a part of the improv group?" And I said, "Yeah." And after I got my--the muscle released and my back released and everything, I said, "Yeah, I'll be part of the improv group." And that began a new phase in my life. Even though sometimes we'd play improv games and everything else, and part of this is that we've part of a group called BANTU [Black Actors Now Through Unity] with Mel Stewart. Mel Stewart later on went on to be 'All in the Family.' He was the first one 'All in the Family,' before the other gentleman [Sherman Hemsley] who got his own series ['The Jeffersons']. And had been a Broadway actor, an off-Broadway actor, and had done some film (unclear) Mel Stewart. And Mel Stewart had us taking--this is back in 1967, after the infamous statement of me doing a play, an infamous statement by Baraka [Amiri Baraka] about "Some of you so called revolutionaries," and everything else. I became the minister of culture for the--on the what you call it. On the-- Speaker 2: On campus? Speaker 1: --the Black Student Union central committee [at San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], which means I set up cultural events and everything else. And then I further explored acting and everything else. And Mel Stewart was trying to find--he had come there and made himself present there during the time Amiri was out there, Baraka was out there. Because there was so much commotion. Everybody was attracted around Amiri. And so, he started a group out at Bayview-Hunters Point opera house [Bayview Opera House], which was a facility that the group of black longshoremen controlled out in the Bayview-Hunters Point [San Francisco, California]. He started a group called BANTU in 1968. I'm involved in the group. Keith is involved in the group, and he's studying to be a director and everything else. So, fast forward, (cough) I just, I said man, I got to, I'm going to do something just to relax. So we went, we rehearsed up at Lone Mountain College [San Francisco, California], we got the space. And the basic things that you learn about improv, just using yourself and being available for the moment, everything else. So the next thing I did was, after doing that, and we'd go to a place called Minnie's Can-Do [Minnie's Can-Do Club, San Francisco, California], this woman [Minnie Baker Thomas] who, Aaron [Aaron Dunn], her son, I'd known since we were kids. She had a bar called Minnie's Can-Do. What was--the place, what made it famous was that it was the place where [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange developed 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf']. Now on her night, when she came in there was Tuesday night and everything, it was packed. On my night, I'm not getting but a couple of--(laughter) if you got ten people in the audience you were lucky. So, I started doing that, and then I just happened to be looking in a, an annex. You know, you have these annexes where you can take classes, everything else. And I saw where there was a worksh- a scene study class. And I didn't know what the word scene study was, really. There was a scene study class given at Westcoast Black Repertory Theater [San Francisco, California], which was in my neighborhood and everything else. Well, I went there to start taking--I remember play, one of the plays we were reading was an Alice Childress play. And the young woman, I see her face now, I remember her what you call it, her name in a minute. But she was a graduate student at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], and in 1975 she was going to become--in the fall of 1975, she was going to become head of the black actors workshop at the American Conservatory Theater [San Francisco, California]. What happened was a guy--what happened is that the American Conservatory Theater, ACT, has a program much like the El Nio [ph.]...