 Story_ID: 60594 Speaker 1: Good evening, my name is Samuel Adams with The HistoryMakers. Today, I'll be interviewing you. Behind me is Mr. Scott Stearns, he'll be videoing. Observing today, this evening, is Miss Cynthia Newell (ph.). Could I have your name? Speaker 2: My name is Evangeline Jennings Hall. Speaker 1: Could you spell that for me, please? Speaker 2: Capital E-V-A-N-G-E-L-I-N-E, capital J-E-N-N-I-N-G-S, capital H-A-L-L. Story_ID: 60595 Speaker 1: Could I have your date of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is September the 6th, 1915. Speaker 1: And can I have our city, state, and location and address of where we are today? Speaker 2: You are at 1025 Second Street West, Bradenton, Florida, 34205. Speaker 1: And could I have your occupation? Speaker 2: A retired life underwriter. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is April the 24th- Speaker 1: What year? Speaker 2: 19 -- Twenty-02 [2002]. Story_ID: 60596 Speaker 1: We begin each interview with five short-answer questions just to start an interview going. What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food? Crabs. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: I'm a little partial to red and green. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Spring. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation or destination spot? Speaker 2: I like to go 'round the District of Columbia [Washington D.C.] for vacations when I can afford it. Speaker 1: And what is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: What is your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: My favorite phrase or saying--one of my favorite sayings is, (PAUSE), "Service is the price that you pay for the space that you occupy while on this earth." Story_ID: 60597 Speaker 1: I'd like to begin our interview by talking about your parents and your siblings. Could you give the names of your parents and the names of your siblings, and the spellings of those names? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Minnie Brooks Jennings; my father's name was William Pink Jennings. My mother was a native of West Florida; my father was a South Carolinian. Speaker 1: Did you have any brothers or sisters? Speaker 2: Yes. I had five sisters and one brother. Speaker 1: Can I have the names? Speaker 2: Alberta Jennings, Dorthelia Campbell, Minnie Monroe, and of course my name Evangeline Hall, and the little boy was named William Pink, Jr. Oh, I forgot Ruth--my sister Ruth. Speaker 1: Now, do you know anything about your mother's parents and grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes. I knew--not a lot about 'em because my mother lived in DeLand, Florida, and they were natives of West Florida, and they would come down periodically to see us. I met my mother's father twice, but grandmother outlived him, and she would come about every other year and see us. Speaker 1: What kind of people were they? Speaker 2: They were Christian people, especially my grandmother; she was a devoted Christian, and my mother and dad were too, but granddaddy wasn't; he wasn't all that devoted. He, you know, he just went along with the flow. Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your father's parents? Speaker 2: No, because he was from South Carolina, and I didn't know much--I didn't know much--anything about his parents at all, or the South Carolinians. Speaker 1: Did you ever hear any stories about them? Speaker 2: No, I didn't. I know that he had a family before he married my mother, but I never knew them. Story_ID: 60598 Speaker 1: What type of man was your father? Speaker 2: Oh, he was--well, naturally you know I think he was an ideal dad because he took care of my mother and he took care of us, and I don't know--now that I'm a, you know, woman, and, and, and able to understand things, I don't know how he did it because--he had three jobs; he cleaned the Administration Building where the superintendent of the schools was, he had an attorneys' office-Scarlett, Jorden, Futch and Fielding, the four attorneys in that office, and they were in the courthouse. Then, when he finished there, he went out to Stetson University [DeLand, Florida] and worked, so he--those were the three jobs he had all of my lifetime knowing him, and his lifetime until the Lord called him. Speaker 1: (Unclear) people forget this camera's here. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Now, what type of woman was your mother? Speaker 2: Well, my mother taught school, but after she went to having children, naturally she had to stop. And she sang, she sang in the choir, and of course when she found out that I had music--she tried of us for music, but I'm the only one that just went to town on it; the others took it but they didn't do well, so--that's the way the cookie crumbles. Speaker 1: Now, I wanna know--do you know the story of how your parents met? Speaker 2: No, I do not; they never told us that. Speaker 1: Never shared that with you? Speaker 2: No, they didn't. Story_ID: 60599 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you said there were five kids in the house--and your parents (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It was, it was six girls. Speaker 1: Six girls. Speaker 2: Yeah. And the boy came on the end, but the Lord took him back. Speaker 1: Okay. So I wanna know--how did your household work? What were the responsibility and chores of who did what in the house? Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, honey. We got up in the morning at around five o'clock--start the, you know, the water--the wash tubs if it was the day to wash, get the boil pot ready and the tubs ready so that, you know, we could--my mother could get started and we could come and join in after school. We had chores to do; we had to leave our rooms spotless, hang up our night gowns, and see that the room was left in perfect order. I remember so vividly one day; my mother waited until I got up to the corner and the corner was about a block and a-half from our house, and she said, "Curly, curly"--that was my pet name, Curly, and the reason they named me that, they said when I was born I just had a mass of curls all over my head, and said my oldest sister said to my mother, "Oh, Bobbi, isn't she pretty? Name her Curly." And that's why Curly is the nick-name. So, to make a long story short, she waited 'til I got up to the corner and she says, "Go in your room; see what you need to do." I had left my gown lying on the bed so I had to go in and hang my gown up. And I come out and run so I wouldn't be late to school. Those are the kind of parents--but you don't see those kind of parents now. The children rule the parents; they tell them what they ain't gon' do and what they gonna do. But if I'd done that, you wouldn't 'a been able to meet me today and interview me (laughter). Speaker 1: Who was the disciplinarian in the household? Speaker 2: Both of 'em. But my mother was the chief; she called them shots, but both of 'em didn't fail to discipline us, you know. And one thing I've never heard my mother and dad do--if we were getting punished for something, I never heard one of 'em interfere or something, you know. Like some parents will interfere--"Well, don't whip that child" or nothing'. They never said a word. Story_ID: 60600 Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory? I'm ashamed to tell it, but I'm gonna tell it because if my mother were living, she would tell it. We had had dinner that day, and I always was chubby, so you could tell that I liked to eat; I enjoyed eating. We had dinner, put the food away, and up in the safe was a little dish of sausage, so they just set it up in the safe. I'm gonna steal the sausage and eat it when they would have given me all the sausage I want. Turned the safe, sausage and all, over on me; I will never forget that day. I was afraid 'cause I knew they were gonna kill me, and they were afraid because they thought I was hurt, and all such lovin' and pettin' I got, and I was glad because I knew I was gonna get skinned, you know? That happened to me; it sounds stupid but it happened. I remember it as though it just happened yesterday (laughter)--a piece of sausage; now they woulda given me that sausage if I'd say, "I want that sausage to put in"--but I wanted to steal it--fixin'--turned that whole safe over on me, and not a scratch. But they were worried thinkin' it had hurt me, you know? And I was worried thinkin' they was gon' kill me (laughter). I will never forget it--I will never forget it as long as I live. Speaker 1: So did you get a whippin' for that? Speaker 2: No, I didn't--um-um; I guess they were so glad I didn't get killed; you know what I mean, or somethin'? Um-um, I didn't get any whippin'; I got a good scoldin' now--I got a good scoldin' but they didn't whip me. And since I've been grown, I know why they didn't whip me; they were glad that thing didn't hurt me, you understand what I mean? It went over me; it didn't cut me up. And all that glass and things that got broke--I never got a scratch on me. And they were glad, you know what I mean? They didn't scold me, just told me, "Don't do that anymore." They say, "Anything you want to eat, ask for it; if you don't have enough, let us know; you can get more." But I always was a greedy little chubby thing comin' up--um-hum. Story_ID: 60601 Speaker 1: What was your--what was the neighborhood you lived--the community you grew up in in DeLand? What was it like? Speaker 2: It was at 524 West Euclid Avenue [DeLand, Florida]. And just in recent years, I was back there to see the old home place, and it's still there. Speaker 1: Were there good neighbors and things in the community? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Like who were some of them? Speaker 2: Well, my mother--we didn't have an immediate neighbor because my mother had a whole block from like that [DEMONSTRATION] to up to where that--up there--you know how they're buyin' those small town--and on the end of that block, she sold to her brother who had no property, but she kept that big space in between his house and our house, but she sold the end up there at him, and he built his house on that end, and then there was this big field in between, and then her house sitting there. Speaker 1: So pretty much, the area was just you and your uncle. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How was that? How was- Speaker 2: Well, on the left side of us, there was a family--the Davises; they built later on, in later years--after we were there. Speaker 1: So what was the church community like when you attended? Speaker 2: Union Baptist and it's still there. It's on the corner of Euclid--at Euclid--what is that other street comes this way? I can't think of the other street but it's right on the corner there. It was Union Baptist and it's still Union Baptist. Speaker 1: What type of people went to the church? What type of, you know, how were they? Anybody who had influence upon you? Speaker 2: Well, I always wanted to be like my aunt. I had an aunt, look like if heaven would open up, it would just take her in. I just believed in her; in fact, I had two that I just believed in. One was my mother's aunt, which made her our great-aunt, and the other was my mother's sister. Speaker 1: What were their names? Speaker 2: One was name--we called her Aunt Stelle (ph.), but her name was Estelle Green. And [great] Aunt Mary's name was Mary Campbell. Speaker 1: What was there about them that made them so special to you? Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: What was there about them that made them so special to you? Speaker 2: They were highly Christian. Aunt Stelle never had any children and she had so much love for us; we were her sister's children. She just loved us and she wanted my mother to give some of us to her, but my mother wouldn't do it; she gave me to Aunt Stelle and took me back--let me stay about a month, and she took me back; she said she couldn't do it. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: She didn't say, but Aunt Stelle never had any children- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: She was like me; I've never had a child in my life, but I've reared five right here. So it's just the way the cookie crumbles, I guess. Story_ID: 60602 Speaker 1: What type of child were you? Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: What type of child were you? Speaker 2: Well, I would do my little slick things and hide my hand, and they thought I was a little angel. But I was--if I wanted to hit you (DEMONSTRATING HITTING)--be lookin' so sweet, nice--see where I'm goin'? (Laughter). They say, "Where Curly? What Curly say?" "She said so-and-so"--see, that was my nick-name, Curly. "Well, she's 'bout tellin' the truth." But they didn't know Curly was slick and sly. (DEMONSTRATION OF INNOCENCE--SMILES). Speaker 1: But were you like that in school? Speaker 2: No. We had to toe the line in school, honey; you bet-not go--and them teachers bet-not tell anything. Also, at [Oswald Perry] Bronson--at Bethune-Cookman [University, Florida] now, his father and mother--his father was the principal of my school when I graduated. I tell Oswald [Perry Bronson] about it now; he's the--he's the principal--the president of Bethune Cookman College, and he and his sister were little children--I often tease 'em about it. His mother's name was Miss Jenny (ph.), and she had to wear her dresses down there (DEMONSTRATION). Every time I tell--remind (unclear) of it when I see him. He's at Bethune-Cookman now; he's the president there. I get letters from him, little notes, quite often. And I told him, I said, "I knew you and your little sister when you were little thing; and Miss Jenny--and your daddy was my principal. He bring y'all to school here and that was it--he was little." Story_ID: 60603 Speaker 1: What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: What was the name of the school? Speaker 2: Euclid School. It first was named Bronson, B-R-O-N-S-O-N, because that's what he was--Professor Bronson; but in later years, they changed it to Euclid Avenue School [DeLand, Florida]. Bronson was the black principal. Speaker 1: So how were your teachers? How was Miss Jenny as a teacher? Speaker 2: Lovely; she was so highly Christian, and I told Oswald [Perry Bronson] about that too, and he just laughed. I said, "Miss Jenny she wore these dresses like this" (DEMONSTRATION)--"up there; you couldn't see nothin'; and down here" (DEMONSTRATION) "to the ankle, on the school ground." Do I need to say more? Speaker 1: What type of student were you? Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: (BRIEF OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: They all came right here, son (DEMONSTRATION); (unclear) know it 'cause I told him so much about it so many--we just laugh about it. (Simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--They were strict. Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: They were strict. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And you couldn't see up here either (DEMONSTRATION); she wore those high necks, you know? Now, women wear them down--oh, they leave nothing to the imagination and--but she wore those high-neck dresses and sweepin' the ground. And she was straight like this cane; she wasn't no big lady; she was a sweet Christian woman though, and he was highly Christian, too. They named the school for him [Professor Bronson] at first, and then later--in later years, they named it Euclid--Euclid Avenue School [DeLand, Florida]. But before then, it was Bronson. Speaker 1: Now, what type of student were you there--while you were there? Speaker 2: Well, I was no dummy, I was a good student. And this is what's going to surprise you. Each teacher--when the gong would ring, the teachers who played music had to go down and start playing a march on the piano, and we would have to march from our classrooms to the chapel. Do you know I had a week that I had to play music just like a teacher? And I was in school, and I was so mad when I graduated 'cause I always was a frisky type--always showin' (DEMONSTRATION OF FRISKINESS). I had to play. I was madder than a red hen on a red-top roof. I wanted to prissy, you know? You see where I'm comin' from? But they made me play (laughter)--them teachers--those teachers. I had a week to play, just like the teachers; and the gong would ring. Whatever teacher's time was to go play for us to march in that auditorium--Miss Sharp was one, Miss Wiggins was one, Miss Hill was one, and Evangeline Hall was a student--Evangeline Jennings I was--was a student; and that one, that one, that one. And time that bell ring, I'll go down there and play just like a teacher. Story_ID: 60604 Speaker 1: Now, you said there was a music teacher that had a profound effect on you; can you talk about her? Speaker 2: Miss Wilhelmina Johnson? Oh, my God; that lady had an impact on me that I will never forget because--I don't know--if you didn't wanna respect her, you would have to. She was--she was--she was positive, and yet she would give, but you didn't play with her with those lessons; she could tell when you hadn't practiced like you should, and she'd make you sit there and she'd reason with you, says, "Now, you're not gonna be usin' your momma's time squanderin' it up comin' over here; she's payin' for these lessons. I'm not gonna report you this time, but don't come here anymore with not knowing your lesson." And she's--if you remember how she was light and could make them frowns up in the forehead up there, and she'd make that frown and she wasn't satisfied. Lord, honey, she just didn't tell me that time; she wouldn't get chance to tell me no more; I'll have them lessons. And she would--I do it sometime now just for the heck of it because I never known anybody would use that language before. When my lessons were real good, "Oh, Miss Jennings, you played beaut-i-ful today. Not beautiful; did you get me? You were beaut-i-ful. Did you get me? You were beaut-i-ful." She was 'bout big and this cane. You knew her. I said, "Thank you, Miss Johnson." She was pleased then. Speaker 1: What instrument did you play? Speaker 2: Piano. And I wanted to play violin, but it was not my gift; I didn't do anything with it. I've always loved violin music but I didn't do anything with it. Speaker 1: So where did you take this music gift you had when you were a child? How did you use it besides just playing at school? Speaker 2: Oh, I played for churches ever since--piano and organ--ever since I've been out. Ever since I've been out--I've been down there forty-some years--'bout fifty now-Sarasota [Florida]. Story_ID: 60605 Speaker 1: So what were these teachers giving you that you were learning as you were growing up? What were you learning from them--these great people you were around? How was it affecting your character? Speaker 2: Fine because it, it, it affected me to this effect, that I wanted to be like some of them. Miss Sharp was another good music teacher but she--I don't know--my mother put me over to the Johnson School of Music and that's where I had to go, but Miss Sharp was another music teacher--Evelyn Wiggins Sharp. But actually, I was never her student, but she had to play a--a--a week or a month, whatever the principal put up on the board, to assign you to play. If you played for a week or two weeks, you played for 'em to march into the--that gong would sound and then the children start--you start the music and they march in the auditorium; that was when they'd have service in the auditorium with the groups. Speaker 1: So these people really had an influence upon you. Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, yes. Speaker 1: What do you see in yourself today that you learned from those people then? Speaker 2: Well, not that my parents did not have good moral standin' but they had them. And another thing that I liked about them, they were sincere; I mean they would not hide--if my lesson was poor, they wouldn't hide it from me; no matter, they didn't care what kinda punishment I got at home, they'd let my parents know. And I can appreciate it because it isn't fair to the parent, but people don't do that nowadays, you know? All they want--the pay and go on. But it was different then; you got your lessons or you were reported to your parents and that wasn't so good when you were reported to them, you know. Speaker 1: So while you're in high school--who were the teachers when you were in high school that really have an influence upon you then, at that point? Speaker 2: Professor--I'm tryin' to think of his name; he's from Eustis, Florida--Professor Maxie (ph.) Header (ph.)--an influence on me; he was 'bout big as this cane. His wife, Mrs. Maxie, taught me subjects, and Miss E.K. Wright was just as big in the big world as they were little people in their little--they were small in stature. Miss E.K. Wright was real fair, real big, never smilin'. She look at you and say, "Evangeline, you know you can do better than that; you don't do better, I think I'm gon' have to report you to your momma. Your momma is sendin' y'all out here to school to get these books; don't get 'em, I'm gonna report you. I can't play with you; like I tell mine, and they know to get their lessons too." Helen and--I can think of--Jim--she had two girls and a boy and she'd call 'em out--"they better get theirs, and I'm gonna report to your parents you don't get 'em, hee hee." And she was a big ole' bright lady, a big ole' thing. She meant it, too, but she didn't play with you, um-um. I--I can, I can truthfully say none of the teachers would hide anythings from you; they'd just tell on you, and you'd have to suffer the consequence. Speaker 1: What were the consequences? Speaker 2: Oh, you don't know? They'll tear your kingdom down (laughter); but thank God I kept mine straight. I was always afraid of a whippin'. I was just sitting down the other day and I told one of the kids that I rear and I say, "You know what? I don't remember anytime." I said, "My daddy never whipped me his whole life, and I think my mother whipped me about twice in my whole life." I say, "It may or might not have been because I didn't need it," I say, "but evidently they didn't see fit to do it." But the one next to me they lived on her; she would talk back at them--sass 'em. You're too young to relate to this, but they call you sassin' the old people when you talk back to 'em. "Don't you sassy them old people, you won't have good luck." Well, she would sassy; she'd talk back, you know? And she'd get them whippin's, but not me; I ate humble bread, I didn't get 'em. Speaker 1: Yep. When you're about to graduate high school, are you having any thoughts about where you're gonna go for college, or anything like that? Speaker 2: Yes, I wanted to go to Bethune-Cookman [University, Florida] 'cause my oldest sister had graduated from there. Speaker 1: And is that where your parents were encouraging you to go? Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: Is that where your parents were encouraging you to go? Speaker 2: Yeah, they wanted me to go wherever I could go 'cause they didn't have money to, you know, to sit me down, and I could work my way there, and in the summer I would go over there. In DeLand [Florida], different families would hire you to go and live in the beach home with them and carry their children down the beach, and that was--I'd do that in the summer and make a little money. I wouldn't trade anything the way I was reared; it's not--the children have much better opportunity now, but we had more morals and more standards to live up to, you follow where I'm going? So I wouldn't trade anything for it. Story_ID: 60606 Speaker 1: Now, what I do wanna ask you about growing up in Deland at that time, what were your experiences with white people? How did you learn--how did your parents teach you that this is how you're supposed to act and interact with white people? How did you learn that lesson? Speaker 2: She taught us not to talk back and be prejudiced; she never liked that--she didn't like that. And I think what helped a lot, too, every Sunday evening--and not one Sunday, but every Sunday--I told you that my daddy--one of the officers was the superintendent of schools? Every Sunday evening they would bring a basket, groceries and clothes in it, for us--for the children. And she never said "Minnie--Minnie, we brought som'n here for you an' Pink [Minnie and William Pink Jennings] for the children"--big ole' clothes basket with food and clothes; not one Sunday evening but every Sunday--not one. I remember it so vividly. Speaker 1: So at that age, you had good experiences with the white people in- Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, yes; every Sunday, Mr. and Mrs. (unclear) would come and bring that, and you'd see dad cleanin' up his office and clean up those lawyers' office. We didn't have any--many bad relations with 'em, I mean we didn't know any--they were nice to us and bring us things. Story_ID: 60607 Speaker 1: So you're at Bethune-Cookman [University, Florida]. What do you decide to major in? Speaker 2: Well, I thought I was gonna major in music and then I--I--I thought English would be it, but look like boyfriends was it (laughter). Speaker 1: Why do you say that? Speaker 2: Well, because I--that's what I chosen when I married; that's why I say it. Speaker 1: So how long were you there before you- Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: How long were you there before you married? Speaker 2: Just a couple a years. But see, I needed to stay there 'bout five so I could get--everything. I'm not ashamed; I'm ashamed but you understand, I must tell the truth. Speaker 1: So what happened--after you got married, where did you go? Speaker 2: Well, I went to Fort Myers [Florida]; it was a bad marriage. No I didn't, I went to Miami [Florida] first then we came to Fort Myers. And then here [Bradenton, Florida], and that's where we separated--right here. It didn't last. Speaker 1: And what year is that--that you arrived here? Speaker 2: I don't remember now because it was in the--it was so unpleasant I really don't even wanna remember it. It was--musta been in--musta been in the late '40's [1940s] or the early '50's [1950s]; the late '40's [1940s] or the early '50's [1950s]. Speaker 1: We're about to change the tape right now. Speaker 2: Pardon? Story_ID: 60608 Speaker 1: Now, you come to Bradenton, Florida, you say your marriage didn't work out- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --But you said it was not a happy experience when you first get here. Why is that? Speaker 2: Well, may I put it like I wanna put it? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: We weren't equally yoked. Have I said enough? Okay. I enjoyed my church work; he enjoyed gamblin', so we were unequally yoked; that's the whole thing in the nutshell. But I didn't let him stop me, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, I couldn't; God been too good to me. I just persevered and went right on with my church works like nothin' wasn't happening, until the final day come when I just had to do somethin' about it. When I had to do somethin' about it, his sister was living then, and she was the type that if you didn't get along with her brother, then she's through with you forever and hated you, so when that time came, I--I wanted to be the first one tell her, so I was to her house next morning, tol' her what had happened; I will not go into you with that because it's terrible. And I said, "I will never have anything else to do with him," and I said, "I wanted you to hear it from me first, and I wanna tell you what happened." I said, "Now, you ask him and let him tell you." I say, "If he tells you anything different from what I've told you, I want you to call me." She hasn't called me to this day, so I guess he tol' her the same thing. Story_ID: 60609 Speaker 1: Now, what was Bradenton like when you got here? Speaker 2: Darlin', this was the most prejudiced, and it was called the Friendly City when it shoulda been called City of Hate--prejudice--and you see, I wasn't used to that 'cause the superintendent of school [DeLand, Florida] always took care of my momma and daddy; I was just used to that kind treatment in DeLand, you know what I mean? But honey, it's different here. I said, "How on earth did they name this the Friendly City? They've got it wrong; no friendly city. This is the City of Hate. And Miss Rogers, Joe Bivins, the manager of JCPenney Store which was right--it was right down there in front of the Courthouse at that time--farther this way (DEMONSTRATION), and his assistant manager--and me. We formed a committee called the Bi-Racial Committee, and we formed that committee under Mayor Sterling Hall, the man you see presenting me the Key to the City? He was the mayor then. And we would go explain to these places that didn't want the kids in 'em and didn't want 'em to eat at the drugstores and the dime stores. And we say, "We'll bring them; they're not gonna tear up your store, all they wanna do is sit down and eat." McCrory (ph.) said, "No; no way, we don't care who bringin' 'em." But they had a black cook there and a black assistant cook. We weren't harsh; we didn't go in no nasty way; in other words, we didn't go in tellin' them what they had to do, we went in and asked them. Touchton Drugstore where I was havin' all my prescriptions filled, he said, "No, can't let them children tear up my store. Open load down here in East Bradenton. No, Lawd, 'fore I let 'em come in here, I'll close my dinin' room." That's what our [Bi-Racial] committee got--I tol' you we were on the committee; there were two whites and three blacks--the manager of JCPenney Store, his assistant manager, Mrs. Minnie Rogers, Joseph Bivins, and Evangeline Hall. And I, I, I, I, I don't make a lotta noise, but I watch things and follow them. So (unclear) said he'd close his before he let anybody come in--any blacks eat at his counter [Touchton Drugstore, Bradenton, Florida], so we went over to Palmetto [Florida], and of course you know that's lynch town too, and they said, "No." They say, "Well, we're gonna bring the children then." "No, they'll tear up our place," and Touchton [Drugstore] where I was havin' all my prescriptions filled. So I just moved my prescriptions and we did it--nice way; we didn't--we just--and kept the parents informed that had accounts there, and they closed 'em and Penotes (ph.), who is operating down there right now and said he'd rather close his he call hisself closin' his as if we were so dumb we wouldn't know any better, he put up a little wall there, and you come behind that wall and go right on in to the dinin' room there, but you could never tell it from out here, and somebody sneaked and told us--a white person--and we promised them that we wouldn't betray them. So we went down one day to investigate it, and that place was covered back in there with nothin' but white eating, but who's spending our money. So then we just made it known to the community what was happenin'. I haven't spent a nickel down there, and I had a friend that died; she didn't--she didn't stop spendin' hers down there but I didn't care about that; it didn't matter with me. We wanted the community to know what was happening, and we did the same thing with Touchton [Drugstore]. It was at--since the children were gon' tear up--I mean they're gonna tear and we're sittin' there watch them eatin' they gon' tear up somethin'? They weren't gonna tear up anything; they just don't want 'em. I don't understand 'til this day how they named it the Friendly City; they should have said, "A city of prejudice and hate." Speaker 1: Did you ever experience--did anyone ever do anything specifically to you? Did anyone treat you unjust, specifically to you? Speaker 2: Uh-uh 'cause I didn't give 'em a chance. I'd go to school with my children. I visited PTA's working the PTA; anywhere my children were, they'd see me visitin' there. Um-um, I didn't play that junk. I'd be there; I had to visit, you know what I mean? Story_ID: 60610 Speaker 1: Now, the interesting thing is you come to town and you begin working for an insurance company- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --which you end up working for them for forty-two years, moving up in management. Tell us how it (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Forty-Seven years stayed with that company (simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Forty-Seven years. Tell us how it was when you first get the job and begin working there. Speaker 2: Well, it was nice. The first thing happened shortly after I got the job. An applicant--I got an application from a man who was workin' at one of the banks downtown. But what he didn't know that I had found out--because I had gotten the okay from my company. They said, "Well, sure, Miss Hall, if a white man or white woman wants to work, let 'em work; that's what we're tryin' to do." But when I found out that he had stolen money from the bank and let them know that, they said, "Great God, no, you don't hire nobody like that." Say, "We meant if they had a good character you go ahead and hire 'em." So he kept comin' and I--I didn't ever let him know that I had found it out and had reported to the company and they told me, "No, don't hire him." I didn't ever--he doesn't know today, if he's livin'; I just told him whenever we got an openin'; we didn't have an openin', but--I had openin' but I couldn't use him, you know what I mean? 'Cause the bank had fired him for stealin' so I couldn't use him; but I didn't know that until I went--plowed into it, see? Then Touchton [Pharmacy], he moved on the corner there of Manatee Avenue, right across from the courthouse, and they closed him down; his business just went down, down, down. And McCory (ph.) finally decided to let the children eat--we'd go with 'em. But that Palmetto [Florida], that's another place. Story_ID: 60611 Speaker 1: Now, you called that lynch town earlier; why did you- Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: Explain why you called that lynch town. Speaker 2: Yeah, Palmetto [Florida]? It's pitiful there; they didn't even let you come in there and be with 'em and eat. Um-um, they say, "No, period--don't care who wit' 'em; don't care if Jesus wit' 'em" (laughter). "They'll tear up our place." Now how in the devil they gon' tear up the place they sittin' down there eatin'? That's the reason I call that town--the Friendly City? It shoulda been Bradenton, the City of Prejudice and Hate! Speaker 1: But you changed it. Speaker 2: Yes, we changed it, but we had to keep on and take a low profile. We told 'em, "We aren't tryin' to make you do anything; all we want you give 'em a chance; we gon' be here with 'em, they ain't gon' tear up yo' store; we aren't gon' let 'em; we all sittin' down here. We gon' be with 'em." And that's the reason I stand with Touchton, bless his heart; he was right there under the--and the man now is workin' out at Eckerd [Drugstore]; that's the only reason I still have my--have my account with Eckerd, followin' him. He say, "Miss Hall, I can't keep help." He had two women workin' for him and they had husbands and their husbands was sick. He says, "And I'm gonna have to close my drugstore." He say, "But Eckerd's has asked me to work for them." 'Cause see, he was a pharmacist; he owned his own drugstore. He said, "Would I be asking too much of you to ask you to bring your trade with me?" I said, "No, you sure won't; I'll be happy to do it." And I been--that's why I'm with Eckerd. Okay, so when Eckerd got ready to take it over, [JC]Penney's wrote me and asked me--tol' me they were buyin' Eckerd's--JCPenney--and if I would mind havin'--lettin' them have my account. I wrote them back--"You have my permission; I'll be glad to let you have 'em." And that's why I get a bill from JCPenney's once a month because I pay my, my, my bill at the drugstore monthly. But Eckerd's--they bought Eckerd's, you know? Speaker 1: So there were good white people in this town. Speaker 2: It's some--it's some good ones; it's some good ones, better believe me. And it's some (SHAKING HER HEAD)--they better pray; if they don't, then hell, they're gonna lift up they eyes, um-um, 'cause God has no respect a person; He loves us all. He made us all; He created us all. I don't have no hate in my heart for any of 'em. I love 'em; I just feel sorry for 'em, I really do. 'Cause the Lord died for all of us; he didn't have to do--he didn't have to die; you know that. He coulda spoken the word and just--took it. Didn't He take it? Um-hum. So, in turn, I feel that we, we owe the Lord, and we do. And the name of that thing that you owe is--and I know my agents used to get tired of hearin' me say it, but I'm a firmer believe of what I believe. "Service is the price that you pay for the space that you occupy while on this earth." Do you believe that? I know my agents say--they tease about it. After some of 'em retired, "Miss Hall, what you say about service?" "That's the price you gotta pay, sugar." You don't--you don't get anything for nothing. Nothing from nothing leaves nothing. Am I right? "Service is the price you pay." And the Bible comes along and backs it up and says, "He who is the greatest among you must be servant of all." Do you believe it? Do you believe it? I do. I'm glad I'm a servant; I wanna serve; I don't wanna be served, just let me serve. Just--just use me 'til you use me up; I enjoy it. 'Cause my Master speaks. Story_ID: 60612 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your work at the [Central Life] insurance company--how you moved up to (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--to management. They give you the promotions, you know, as you progress; they started me as an agent first. Before I knew it, they pulled me off and made me an assistant manager right here in Manatee County, all this happened. Then, in later years--and they--all the time they sent me to Virginia for--every summer--for these classes. Then, after a length of time, the manager that I was working in, they called us over there, the two of us, and I said, "Mr. Johnson, wonder what they wanna have a conference with us about." He say, "I don't know, Miss Hall." I say, "Well, I don't either; they didn't--Mr. Martin"--he was over the agents depart--he said, "No." Went over there with this meeting with them, and they were notifying him that they were giving him Orlando [Florida] district, and they were moving me from assistant manager to manager of this district; that's what they wanted with us. And I said, "Well, do you think I can handle it?" So he say, "Well, now you been handlin' it. And Mr. Johnson'll tell the truth. You been handlin' it down there." He say, "She sure has." Speaker 1: So were you the first African American woman to be- Speaker 2: For Central Life [Insurance]--black manager, and I enjoyed it, and I didn't abuse my privilege. I enjoyed it and I treated those people like I would like to be treated. Story_ID: 60613 Speaker 1: So you were a black woman in a leadership position in business at that era. Speaker 2: I know it. Speaker 1: How was it at that time in the business world? Speaker 2: All right, I'm gon' tell you the truth. We had one lady, that lady made money's--money's momma on that debit. She run around in the community and tol' everybody what my salary was, and she says, "I don't want it 'cause that little money she's working for I wouldn't have it; I make plenty money out here on this debit." She came to be one of my best friends. My manager who had turned it over to me and gone to Orlando [Florida], he said, "Knowin' you as I do, you gonna get along with her." He say, "Now just let her--don't, don't worry about what she--let her tell the people out there"--and I say, "But it's so unethical. She even tol' me what her salary was." She say, "I couldn't work for that little bit; see, I make big money on this debit." But she did have a big debit, and she wrote a lotta business, but it helped me, too 'cause my salary went up. See, she out there beatin' her gums tryin' to--and my salary went up. When she died, I was the best friend she had. She took sick, I used to go and take her out, take her riding, take her out to eat. She say, "Oh, Hall, you so good to me." I knew what it was, her conscious was beating her down. I say, "I'm supposed to be good to you, we both Christians; what you expect?" She says, "But you're so good to me." That's what she would say--tell me that all the time; but I knew I was. You got to be a servant if you wanna be great. What would I do blowin' up at her and goin' around sayin' no good things about her? Just let us talk--bless her heart. Just like they tol' me at the home office, "She's talkin' 'cause she couldn't"--say, "Miss Hall, now, she doesn't have any managerial material," say, "But she's a dern good debit person." Say, "And that's what she jealous of." Say, "Just keep your head up and go on and do your work." And I--it didn't worry me. Speaker 1: All the time while you're moving up within the company of the insurance company- Speaker 2: Uh-huh? Speaker 1: --you're still doing this service here. Speaker 2: You doggone right. Story_ID: 60614 Speaker 1: Now, tell me how the Bi-Racial Council [Committee] was founded and put together. Speaker 2: Bi-Racial Council? Speaker 1: (Inaudible response). Speaker 2: Sterling Hall--Mayor Sterling Hall--I was born and reared in DeLand [Florida] and he was born and reared in Sanford [Florida], and if you know the community you know how close they are. He told us, when he had us together and tryin' to get this Bi-Racial Committee formed, that in his boyhood days, he saw something happen that he said would never happen if he ever became a mayor. He say under his father's mayorship at Sanford [Florida] there was a lynching, and they were black people; and he said if he ever was a mayor, it would never happen under him, and it didn't. They accused a man--this church right down here (POINTING) at the end of this church--poor fellow, highly Christian man, they accused him, talkin' 'bout he had molested a white girl; that man hadn't bit more molested a white girl than a rabbit, and Mayor [Sterling] Hall got a group of people--you know where he hid him? Right over in Tampa [Florida]. He said he wasn't gon' let the [Ku Klux] Klans kill that man, an innocent man--it'll be on his hands. He tol' me where he was; he said, "I'm tellin' you Miss Hall 'cause I've explained to you 'bout my daddy's condition--what happened to him." He said, "and I'm not gon' let it happen." He said, "And I know you won't give 'em"--I had to beg him to tell me where they hid him. He didn't wanna do it but he did it reluctantly. Then he found out that I could keep secrets, and you see what he did? Gave me the Key to the City [Bradenton, Florida]. I didn't tell it, I wasn't gon' tell it. What would that profit me to go tell it? And he doin' somethin' to favor that man? He hid him right here in his own backyard, right there in Tampa [Florida]. They woulda carried him down that courthouse and lynched him for something he didn't do--an old, old Christian man. Speaker 1: Were the [Ku Klux] Klan active in Bradenton [Florida] at that time? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: Was the [Ku Klux] Klan active--The Ku Klux Klan, were they active in Bradenton [Florida]? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, Lord, yes, um-hum, um-hum; and they woulda, they woulda, they woulda thrown him 'cross that courthouse yard--lawn sho' as I'm sittin' here. He [Mayor Sterling Hall] said it wasn't--he said when he was a boy, he said if it ever--if he ever became a mayor, it would never happen under him, and it didn't either. He slipped that man outta here in the night and hid him right in his own backyard, right there to Tampa [Florida]. Um-hum, had that man (unclear); he died a natural death like anybody else when time; he didn't ever come back here, but he did that, that [Mayor] Sterling Hall up there--he did that. Story_ID: 60615 Speaker 1: So when the Civil Rights Movement starts picking up in the late '50's [1950s] and up to the mid-'60's [1960s] and Dr. [Martin Luther] King's going around the country and other people like this- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --What's the tone in Bradenton [Florida] about change coming? Is it accepted? Are they fighting against it? How were the whites and blacks attempting to bring about change? Of course, that Bi-Racial Committee, I'm sure, was working. Speaker 2: Well, with our Bi-Racial Committee working, it--we finally got some of 'em convinced, you know what I mean? But you still got some of 'em out there hangin' on, you know. There's something else I would like to say, but it isn't expedient; I won't--um-um, I won't--I will say this much, and that's all I'm gonna say about that. People who wanted to sell moonshine was sellin' moonshine and, you know, that low-life stuff? That's all I'm gonna say about that; I could say a lot more, but I don't want- Speaker 1: What was the black community like in Bradenton [Florida] at this time? Speaker 2: Hmm? Speaker 1: How were the black people--the black community--how were they? Was it a strong community? Were--how was it here? Speaker 2: Well, no. Nobody--didn't seem to have a special interest, you know what I mean? G.D. Rogers [Sr.], who was the president of my company [1933] did; he had an interest. Alan Jones--and both of them are gone to Glory. Those were old pioneers here, and they were--they were interest, but nobody didn't seem to, to care, you know? Speaker 1: Were they scared, do you think? Speaker 2: I don't--to tell you the truth, I don't know. I, I don't believe they were scared; I just believe they were nonchalant and just didn't have enough pride and get up and go, or something; no motivation or something. I don't, I don't think they were scared. Story_ID: 60616 Speaker 1: So where did you get that motivation to be the leader, and step out and say, "We have to do something different?" Speaker 2: Well, I just wanted to do it; I just did it, and we formed us a Bi-Racial Committee under Mayor Sterling Hall, and that's when things begin to kinda--that's when the black fountain where the black water was and the white water was, durin' his administration, when that disappeared from the courthouse. Oh, honey, you just don't know. There's some more I could say, but it isn't expedient, and I hope you understand what I mean. I will not say it but--they've come along way. Mr. [G.D.] Rogers built that project [Rogers Garden Park Apartments, Florida]; he was instrumental in getting it. There are--some person on this little wing of property right back of the youth center, and they gave the city that, so they're--they're not renamin' it Rogers Project anymore. But in Tampa, the golf course that was named behind him [Rogers Park], they were gonna destroy it but those people went to court and it's still Rogers [Park] Golf Course. But you see, you don't have enough people here to support you; you see where I'm goin'? Speaker 1: But you took a leadership role in so many youth centers being built- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --You did that, you were in city government- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --You made sure people were--things were being done fair and properly. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: You had no problem taking a leadership role. Did people start following you after this? Did they start saying, "Well, Miss Evangeline Hall is doing this." (Simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. (Simultaneous)- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--let's take--let's listen to what she's doing. Did they come along with you? Did the black community start- Speaker 2: They came along pretty good because I even open up--if you see my sign out there, I worked on the polls all my life, too--when they started allowin' us to work, and I was first assistant clerk, and then it was a mother and daughter thing, and then after they moved one of them, then they put me in the assistant place, and then in a couple a years, I been clerk precinct ever since; that was way back then, and I've been it ever since. Story_ID: 60617 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask you about--and I ask everybody about this question. April 4th, 1968- Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: April 4th, 1968 when Dr. King is killed- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: -What was it like around here when you heard about (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, so many people were so upset. I never will forget that day the longest day I live; I had gone somewhere and came into my office around 3:30 [three thirty] or 4:00 [four o'clock] and they were telling the news and I just, I just, I just went out; I couldn't take it. My secretary went out, my cashier went out; they--we, couldn't take, we couldn't take it. And I said, "Well, let's pray that he [Martin Luther King] lives. Let's pray, let's pray, let's pray. But it won--he was a Moses for us. And the one thing I love about him, the Lord showed him his death; he told us about it, didn't he? That's the reason I believe it, he told us. He say, "I've been up the mountain, the Lord showed it to me. I won't be here with you." He told us what was gonna happen, but we didn't believe it, I know I didn't. That's the reason I know he's resting with the Lord, and he fulfilled the purpose that the Lord put him here for. He didn't put him here to be destroyed, but he did what the Lord put him here to do--to help emancipate us. Speaker 1: Did you see things change after his death in the City of Bradenton [Florida]? Speaker 2: Um-hum--slowly. Speaker 1: How did things change after that? Speaker 2: Slowly but showly--slowly, slowly. A lotta the whites now weren't, weren't--they didn't like it; they, they were bitter against that, and I don't blame 'em. It's a lotta Christian white people; you may not believe it, but it is. And it's a lotta "hellions"--lotta non-Christians--Atheists, or whatever you wanna call 'em. But it's some good white people, and them good white people, some of them was cryin' too. But one thing, I'm so glad he saw it and tol' us about it before it happened; that's the reason I know he's [Martin Luther King] restin' with the Lord. He say, "I like to be with you like anybody else, but I been up there; the Lord done showed it to me." What more could the Lord do? Couldn't do any more than that, could he? He say, "I love to live like the rest of you. I know he woulda, wouldn't he? But I can't." Bless his heart. Story_ID: 60618 Speaker 1: Now, you've become--you take a turn and start becoming extremely politically active, and you become the first African-American woman--President of the Women's Democratic Party [1976] (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right. Speaker 1: Talk about how that comes about--how you get to that. Speaker 2: Well, there was a lady here--I don't think that lady know what prejudice was--Mary Mulvey (ph.)--and that's what hurts me to my bones today. She was the first woman that served on the school board, and until just in recent years, they've had women serving, but she was the first and served for years, and they haven't named a school in this county after her. Anyway, she recruited me; I would go and she would--"'Vangeline"--she say, "'Vangeline, please, why don't you take an office here?" I say, "I don't want one in this same area; I don't want it." I say, "You see how it is there." She said, "You bigger than that; look over that junk. Come on, 'Vangeline." And she kept on 'til I just gave in to her. I don't regret it; I'm glad I listened to her. She just insisted; she wouldn't take 'no' for an answer, so I joined the Democratic Women's Club. When I joined, then they elected me for what--treasurer; that was the first thing they elected me for--treasurer. I served that, then they elected me for vice president; I served that. Then they elected me for the president [1976]. The League of Women Voters did the same way; only thing, they had their little prejudices in another way, you know what I mean? But I served the League of Women Voters as their treasurer; I served as a member for years. I would get to these different stores where I was assigned and take [voter] registrations on Saturdays and--Fridays and Saturdays 'cause I closed my office reports on Thursdays, and that would leave me Friday free to work for them and I'd go out and sit in front of these stores, whatever store that they said I was assigned to, and register people to vote. I did that for years; I enjoyed it. I enjoyed it. Speaker 1: We're gonna change the tape right now. Story_ID: 60619 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna know about what specifically you did at the [Central Life] insurance company. Explain what you did and your experiences while at the insurance company--what you did (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--What is my job? Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: Well, when I was assistant manager, my job was to get out on the field and work with different agents at different times, anywhere over the district, and my district [Florida] comprised Sarasota, Wimauma, Immokalee, Labelle, Naples, Fort Myers, Palmetto--I said Wimauma, didn't I? Ellington--all those places was my district. So I would--after I became manager, I would--I had two assistant managers which mean that I didn't have to get on the field because that's the purpose; that's why they gave me two assistants, see. The district was growing and, and, and took all my time in the office, although I had a cashier clerk who took all the deposits, and I would just see to it that she--if I felt like it, I'd take her to the bank, let her make the deposits daily; if not, she drove her own car on her lunch hour or whenever, and take the money and deposit it. Speaker 1: They said you were an underwriter? Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: Your title was an underwriter, or--your title--was- Speaker 2: I was district manager at that time; when I started, I was just a builder--learning the business, then they promoted me there to an agent, then they promoted me there to a district manager meanin' that I was over all those places I named to you- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --Ellington, Labelle, Immokalee (ph.), Fort Myers, Sarasota, Punta Gorda, and this way (POINTING), what is that place goin' up there where it--Ruskin--all of that was my territory [Florida]; all of this was my territory. Speaker 1: Now, how were the (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Arcadia. Story_ID: 60620 Speaker 1: How did you assist the African American community with the insurance? Speaker 2: How did I do what? Speaker 1: Help them to understand what the value of the insurance business was, like when you dealt with them. Speaker 2: Oh, it was money to be made then. All you had to do was apply yourself and you made good money; that's how I made my money. And then if you invested in the right type of policies--'cause that's really the way I got my start. Speaker 1: What were the right type of policies? Speaker 2: Well, they cost money, and most people just want a straight-life, somethin' that doesn't cost--don't cost much money, see what I mean? And then when time to borrow on it, what can you borrow? The loan is so little, when you get ready to cash the policy and cash surrender value for the value, it's so little, so it taught me how to invest, and I would invest in those good policies. That's how I was able to buy the place next door; we built that next door and we had a place over here (POINTING) in East Bradenton [Florida] that we did, and did it off of insurance money, investing in the right kinda policies. One lady down the street she came up to me, since I retired, to get her policy cashed, and she raised holy tunket 'cause she didn't get a lotta money. You know what? She had a Thousand Dollar straight-life. I say, "What do you expect? Here's your calendar right here on the back," I say, "and I tol' you this when you brought it to me befo'; you're not gonna get anything much." I say, "If you had invest in the policies that we tried to sell you, honey you could get some money now, but you didn't do it; we had to do it your way." Speaker 1: Do you think blacks just didn't understand how to--the, the value of these policies--they didn't understand that, or- Speaker 2: I hate to say what I'm gonna say but I'm gonna say it. They always felt that the white man's water was cooler--his ice was colder and he didn't sell 'em nothin' but straight-life policies. He never offered them them educational policies and those endowments that--that made me get where I am with money, um-um--straight-life, see? Four or Five Thousand Dollars was a little dab of money--but, look at them--that table on there, you understand? After a certain length of years, you don't want no straight-life; that's somethin' you gotta pay all your life, you follow me? Speaker 1: Now, explain what a straight-life policy is. Speaker 2: A straight-life policy is just what it say; you pay it as long as you live, and the values on it are very low. The loan value is low, the cash surrender value is low; the only time you get the full benefit is when you die. But you get those other policies that I invested in that I try to sell them, they say, "Ooh, that's too high, I can't get it, I can't afford it." "Okay, pay what you can afford." But I had me some friends who did invest in 'em and they were glad. You just gotta sacrifice; you can get anything you want if you sacrifice. Speaker 1: So why do you think the blacks weren't buying into the other policies--just the straight-life policy? Speaker 2: Well, I hate to say it but they thought the white man's ice was colder than our ice. Speaker 1: So yours was a black insurance company? Speaker 2: Sure; I never worked for nothin' but a black insurance company--Central Life Insurance Company. Speaker 1: What was the name (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Mary McCleod Bethune, Garfield Devoe [G.D.] Rogers, Alan Jones, Edward Davis, Nick Martin--those was the founders of Central Life, and all those people were money people. Edward Davis was a principal of a school, Nick Martin was--had been in some insurance company; all them was money people--and Madam Mary McCleod Bethune; they are the ones who--who birthed Central Life [Insurance] and caused me to get where I am. Story_ID: 60621 Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the white insurance company in town? Speaker 2: Oh, Independent [Insurance] and Gulf Life [Insurance] and--what else? Independent, Gulf Life and--but that Independent and Gulf Life there's---these black people--they were run over by that. Speaker 1: A lot of black people had (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Independent and Gulf Life. And they folded under just like we did. We had a man from--where was that young black man and I was--me and two more person was the only people on the board that stood up against me and--against him, and some of the members got mad with me, say, "The reason you're not voting for, Miss Hall, because he's a young man; we want him because he's got young ideas." See, I was on the Board of Directors [Central Life Insurance]. "He's got young ideas; he can keep this company movin'." And he had lied to 'em, tol' him he owned two or three Kentucky French Fried--Kentucky places out this way (POINTING) where he was livin'. Come to find out he was a homosexual, got in there and winin' and dinin' those people there--those homosexuals at that college there in Tampa [Florida], and, and, and stole all our money. He did that for us; he did that for us. My picture and all the other managers' pictures that was on the walls in the home office, he took 'em down; put his up but took our pictures down when we're out here managin'. We didn't care--I didn't care. People out here respected me and they loved me, and that's why I love these people of Manatee County, and they get mad when I say it but I mean every word of it. They made me what I am; they get mad say, "No we didn't." I say, "Yes you did; you supported me with my company; you did it, you did make me; don't tell me you didn't." I meant every word of it. They don't like for me to say it, but the truth is the light, isn't it? I'm gonna tell the truth. These black people made me what I am. Did you hear me? Did you hear me? I appreciate 'em, too. They say, "Take some insurance from Miss Hall; take straight-life. Take anything you can afford, take somethin'." They get mad when I say it. I say, "But I mean every word. You made me. I was your servant but the Bible say, 'if you gon' be the servant, you're the greatest of all ain't you?" (Unclear), they don't like it but I tell 'em about it. They did, they made me. They loved me, they supported me, they believed everything I said. I didn't lie to them. Speaker 1: Did you have any white customers? Speaker 2: Miss Debois (ph.) had one or two white customers on her book. She's the only agent--in Arcadia, no--no, no way; and Punta Gorda, no; Fort Myers, no. But I had some good agents down there, and Fort Myers is a big place. Immokalee (ph.), Labelle, Naples, all down in there--and Naples is a rich place [Florida towns]. At first they didn't allow any insurance companies in there; they just had a little--couple of rows back in there where they let black people build, but we canvassed it; we went on in there. Story_ID: 60622 Speaker 1: Now, this whole time where you're building up your status within Central [Life] Insurance- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --You're still just so active in the community. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: This, that, the other, the building of things and initiator of things in the community. Are you seeing blacks--are there any other African Americans in the community doing it with you en masse--besides the few who were on the Bi-Racial Committee, are there any other African Americans coming and going? Speaker 2: Cynthia's been workin' diligently with it, but honey, I feel sorry for--she doesn't have anybody to help her. She's been workin' diligently with these black people. Speaker 1: Did you ever think you woke 'em up and got... Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know; I think some of 'em did 'cause some of 'em have thanked me; some of 'em have thanked me. Speaker 1: Now- Speaker 2: And another thing that I didn't like about our people that I liked about her mother--her mother and I we worked with PTAs and the school, and wherever our children were, we were there. These people just send their children to school and never see them. Her mother was so active in the PTA 'til I really--just made me more active, you know what I mean? I was already loaded down with Central Life [Insurance], but it made me more--it was a challenge to me. Story_ID: 60623 Speaker 1: Now, talk about the children that you took care of and raised. Speaker 2: The children I reared, I wouldn't trade anything for 'em. The oldest one has disappointed me; she had a good marriage, but she--she wasn't nice to her husband, and of course you will reap what you sow. I hope I've said enough. Okay--all right. The next one to her, the next oldest one that I reared, she lives in East Bradenton [Florida]; she's workin' for Sherriff Charlie Wells and has been there--it's--be soon time she can retire; she's just tryin' to hang in there two, three more years when she can retire with full benefits. But both of them, I sent them through college on a work study program. At that time, you could get the work study program but when I sent Nikki--Nicole, the granddaughter that I took and adopted, that was done away with; no more work study program. That's why I paid cash for her for two years because all the children that went away to college, they claim the reason they failed 'cause they didn't know how to study, so I told her, "I'm gonna give you the benefit of the doubt. You bet-not make no failin' marks in them two years," and she didn't either. I say, "'Cause I ain't gon' pay for you but two years." And every--they send me that bill I send their money up there. I say, "I don't want you usin' this for an excuse you don't know how to study and that's the reason you failin'; you ain't gonna have nothin' to do but study." So then I paid for her for two years; the other two years, I made her get a loan; she's 'bout paid it out. And the first thing she did when she got outta school, I went and bought her a brand new car, I say, "Now this is to get you back and forth to school." I say, "And I want you to get a General Motors car." I say, "You know we always bought the brand new Cadillac's but you can't afford that; get that outta ya mind." I say, "Get you a Pontiac or a Chevrolet." I say, "Both of those are General Motors cars." So she got the Pontiac and that's what she got. I say, "Just so you got a General Motors." I say, "Don't fool with them Ford's and that junk, get you a General Motor car and I'm happy." So that's what she did. I made the down payment--co-signed. And at that time, I didn't know that; that's when I found out that they wouldn't sell students, I don't care if they did have a job, somebody had to sign. So then I signed for her and bless her heart, she never missed a payment 'cause I always tol' her, "If you ever get so you can't pay your bill, don't dodge people; call them ahead and say, 'Mr. so-and-so, my bill is due Friday, the 15th, and I won't be in there until the 18th because I don't have the money.'" But thank God she never had to do it; she had that money there on time. I say, "You could make your credit go bad if you don't." 'Cause see, her mother that I reared before her she had made hers bad, not listening to the old--they say you're old and fogey; that's what they call you, you know--and get behind your back and laugh at you. But they better listen to these old fogeys, don't you think so? Hum? Be better off sometime, wouldn't it? Story_ID: 60624 Speaker 1: So what is there left, do you think, that the black community needs to do to improve themselves? Speaker 2: Well, I think they should get up and do without, and don't beg so much charity and this, that, and the other. Do on your own. Pull yourself up by your bootstrap; you got a bootstrap there, pull yourself on up. I didn't have anybody to prey on; I just paid my bills and established a good credit rating, you know what I mean? My mother taught me that. But far as tryin' to keep up with the Joneses? We didn't know what that was. See, if the Joneses--I couldn't keep up with the Joneses; I had to do what I could afford, see what I mean? But in my lifetime, I owned seven brand new Cadillac's, thanks to my husband. He--after the children all got grown and was gettin' grown and gettin' out, he say, "Darlin' you always said the Cadillac was yo'"--what car? Speaker 1: Your favorite? Speaker 2: Yeah; he say, "And you never buy--you always buy a Pontiac 'cause you--why don't you get yourself a Cadillac?--nobody better to ride it." And I owned seven brand new ones, right here in Manatee County. The one I gave away, I bought that after my husband died. I gave it to his--to my step--my favorite step-granddaughter. It's four of 'em down there in Wimauma [Florida],but she's my favorite; she just loved my husband and I like we were Jesus Christ, and she's always been so sweet. I gave her that, and the insurance paid with Triple A for the whole year. She say, "Mother Dear, I didn't know such service we was gettin' with this Triple A." She say, "Mother Dear." She just all up in Cloud Nine; she's had the car now for three years. And nobody made me stop--common sense made me stop drivin'. I stopped driving at night because I got lost a couple-a-times; I wouldn't tell any of my friends why I quit; they begged me to tell 'em but I wouldn't tell 'em, I had too much--I got--I got a lotta pride; you may not believe it but I got a lotta pride. They don't know today why I quit drivin'. "Well, why did you quit drivin'?" And I say, "'Cause I wanted to." But I've tol' several people since. I got lost at night, and wasn't too far from this house; and the second time I did it, I say, "Um-um, I won't get lost no mo'; I ain't drivin' at night no mo'." So then I notified all my friends. "Any meeting that's at night, somebody don't pick me up, I will not be there." "Why you ain't"--I say, "I can't drive anymo'." "The doctor stop you?" "No." So they didn't ask anymo' 'cause I wasn't gon' tell 'em anyway what happened 'cause I had too much pride. I wasn't gonna tell them, but I stopped myself. So for about seven, eight years, people picked me up at night. I go anywhere I wanna in the day, but at night, um-um-um--no, no, no. I got lost twice; I wasn't gon' get lost a third time. I meant that, baby; you don't blame me, do you? Three strikes, you're out (laughter). Story_ID: 60625 Speaker 1: Now, I wanna ask you--since you've been community leader in so many different areas, in the black community, with the mayor and government and city government, and in business, how have you seen Bradenton [Florida] change from when you came here in the '40's [1940s] to right now? What's the major differences that you can point out? Speaker 2: It has really changed because people weren't interested in voting; they didn't do much voting; it didn't--it didn't bother 'em. Voting didn't--that was the least of their worry; and a lot of 'em I found out didn't know how--they were ashamed and I would take 'em right here and teach them and show them, and never tell anybody, and a lot of 'em that--didn't know how to handle a ballot. I had to order absentees, but I've never touched their ballot any more than to open it, read what says and have them to read it. "Do you understand what that is?" Some of 'em say, "No," if they understood--if they didn't, I would explain to 'em what it meant, you know what I mean? And that's how I got a lotta people registered; then have 'em to sign it. I registered many a people right here at this house right on that table out there. I said, "Darlin', if you don't vote," I say, "That's all you got anybody wants to vote. If you don't vote, just hang it up, honey, 'cause everything, you know, is just out there." Story_ID: 60626 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community? Speaker 2: What are my concerns? That people are not more serious and interested in affairs and things, you know what I mean?--to support certain issues. If you don't understand the issue, do like me; if it's one I don't understand, I--a mule's hair is long and he doesn't know everything. Anything I don't know, I get me some information on that thing. Don't be ashamed, just--if you don't understand, just let somebody explain it to you, Uh-huh. I gotta go to class here April the--I done forgot the--May the 3rd I think it is; I got it on my calendar. Bob Sweat (ph.) havin' a class for us over there at the Civic Center; I don't miss 'em 'cause they have an election here May the 13th. I'm clerk of my precinct and been for years, so I gotta--have to keep abreast if you don't. Don't grumble if you don't vote; just shut ya mouth and go on. Am I right? Speaker 1: Yes, you are. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Story_ID: 60627 Speaker 1: League of Women Voters- Speaker 2: Democratic Women's Club. Speaker 1: Democratic Women's Club- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Bi-Racial Committee- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And at Central Life Insurance Company; don't leave them out (simultaneous)--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Central Life Insurance Company--opened a youth center for the kids. Speaker 2: Um-hum; I worked on that. Speaker 1: Which one--which one of anything you've done, the many services you've done, what are you proudest of? Speaker 2: I'm prouder, to tell you the truth, that I was able to influence more people to vote, I really am; I'm proud of that, and they listened to me. That's what I'm proud of, and that showed that they believed me--what I said. And I said, "If, if, if, if you don't know how, don't be ashamed." I said, "I can't vote your ticket, but I'll come to you." And I've gone to a many of their homes--read it for them, explain what it means, then ask them which one they wanted to vote for. I say, "Now, I can't mark your ballot; I can't do that now, it's against the law; you'll have to mark it now, whichever you want--blah, blah, blah, blah, or blah, blah, blah, blah. You wanna vote for Tom, Dick, or you wanna vote for Greg..." You know what I mean? "And there's his--read his name; you know where his name is--all right." I never touched their ballots 'cause that's against the law you know. I've taught a many of 'em. Some of 'em were--I, I found out later that the reason they hadn't been votin' they were just--didn't know, and they were too embarrassed to ask, but I told 'em, "That's, that's nothin' to be ashamed of; that's nothin' to be ashamed of." And I say, "Everybody has to learn; I had to learn; that's nothing to be ashamed of." I was sittin' right there on that porch and showed a many of 'em. I say, "Now, call me when your ballot come, and I'll come or you bring it there." Some of 'em brought it, some of 'em call me. But I--on everybody I read it to them--so and so and so and so--they, they didn't know how to read and comprehend what they were reading, you know what I mean? "Miss Hall, we don't know so-and-so. We could probably just vote a straight Democratic ticket?" I say, "No, baby; that isn't the way it reads. You are a Democrat but you vote for the person," I say, "that you know and what they can do for you, not the party." Did I tell them right? Well, that was my instruction and I'm gon' tell you and I meant that from my heart. I said, "Because you go down there talkin' 'bout a party, you--um-um, lost in the fogey." I say, "You vote for the person, sugar (laughter)." That's just the way--that's the way I talk to 'em. "Vote for the person, sugar." Some of 'em be men and wives, um-hum. Story_ID: 60628 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: Pardon? Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: To be? Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I really don't know. What do you mean--in what way? Speaker 1: What do you want to be most remembered for? Speaker 2: Oh, I know that part, but--I know what you meant by that, but I mean--well, really, to tell you the truth, now you gon' be mad at me, I don't feel that I've done anything. I feel that these people made me what I am. I don't feel that I've done anything; I really don't. And they get mad at me but I was tellin' the truth. I say, "You made me; you made me get up and be smart. You made me." "No we didn't." I say, "Yes you did; yes you did." And I enjoyed every minute of it. I've enjoyed every minute of it. I love these people, and they proved that they loved me. They believed in me. "I can't tell you who to vote for, honey, you read up on the person," I say, "and if you like what you read"--"Well, I'm a straight Democrat." I say, "Well, I don't care what you are, you read up on the individual." I say, "And whatever he can do, then that's what you vote on, not whether he a Democrat or"--you understand where I'm goin'. And I'll sell that idea because some of us sold that they just gotta--"I can't vote for nothin' but Democrat." You got some good people out there can help you, am I right? Don't you agree with me? I'm not gon' mess those people--contaminate their minds, talkin' 'bout "You got to vote a straight Republican ticket." I don't do that; the Lord wouldn't love me if I did that, would he? You vote for the person. You don't have to go 'round and blow no horn. "I ain't votin' for no Democrat; I ain't votin' for no"--you don't have to do that; it's yo' business--that poll, am I right? That's yo' private business unless you call for help, and I'll go over, call--get one of the girls with me I read it to 'em. "Well, which one you think is better, Miss Hall?" I say, "Now, I can't tell you but there's Jack Gordon, blam, blam, blom, and bloom, bloom, blam and bloom, bloom, blam. That's the way I do. So that's the way I leave them because you get in trouble doin' that. Don't vote for Jack Jones, vote for Jimmy Joe, you know. You don't do it that way. And people'll love you, too, better. They think, too; they have--they have--they can think, don't they? They're not dummies; they're not dumb. Speaker 1: Miss Evangeline Hall, thank you very much; it's been a pleasure speaking with you. Speaker 2: I hope I haven't talked you to death. Speaker 1: No, you have not (laughter). Speaker 2: I hope not. Speaker 1: Right now, we're gonna ask you to switch seats with me and we're gonna go over these pictures. Story_ID: 60629 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, is that you? Yes, and these (simultaneous)-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that's you in the '40's [1940s]. That's me. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How about this one here? Well, this was in later years, that one was; but that's me-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. --but I can't remember the year, but it's in later years--much later years than the other one. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photo please. Oh, yeah, that's my children; that's one of the girls I reared--one of my children--that's them. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Which one is that? This one right here, that's the oldest one. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And her name is-- Evangeline; she's named for me. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and who are the other people? I don't know them, but that looks like the Carnegie (ph.) boy there. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And when do you think this might have been taken? I'm just--I'm tryin' to think. I'm just tryin' to think, where were they? I really don't know. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photo. Oh, that was--that's me. This was taken at the Central Life home office; I was gettin' some awards for somethin'--I was getting an award. This was my agency director, that little man there, and that was one of my assistant managers there, that fat fellow, and this was my agency (unclear). We were at the Home Office; I was getting an award for something, I don't remember what it was. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, good. Let's (unclear--static worsens on tape). Oh, that's where I was a veteran poll worker showin' where I'd worked on the poll and all of that. Bein' a veteran poll worker, that's me, um-hum. Got me sittin' by the organ; this was taken in 1988, see that?--September. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photo, please. Oh, this is where I was gettin' the Key to the City from Mayor Hall--Mayor Sterling Hall; he was a fine mayor, a Christian mayor, bless his heart, yes; bless his heart. He was a Christian. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear--static) worked with you on helping set up the Bi-Racial Conference? Pardon? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Was he also the one that helped you in helping set up the Bi-Racial Conference? Yes, he was--yeah, he was mayor at that time, yeah. He was the mayor when that was set up. That's when he gave me the Key to the City. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next photo. Oh, I love this; this is the National Conference of Christians and Jews. There I am; we were having a meeting--probably a social gathering 'cause we, we brought the Christians and Jews together. You saw the picture over there, right? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Yeah. That's what that is, National Conference of Christians and Jews. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Do you know what year this might have been taken? Hum--I don't know; is it on the bottom of that--on that picture--the year that thing is, that Christian (simultaneous)-- (Simultaneous)--Which one? This (simultaneous)-- (Simultaneous)--No, no, that Christian--look--look at me; on the wall there where the (simultaneous)-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous)--for the camera? Nineteen Eighty-Three [1983]. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Who's that man on the right, in the red shirt? Do you know him? No, I don't; he was a member of the group. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, very good, thank you. We have to change tape...