 Story_ID: 571053 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Arthur Holmes, Jr., A-R-T-H-U-R, H-O-L-M-E-S, J-R. [HistoryMaker Major General Arthur Holmes, Jr.]. Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No middle name. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have any nicknames? Speaker 2: They call me Art-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but that's, that's, I won't tell you my middle--my name while I was in college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, maybe when we get to that part (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, we better--and I'll tell you, it was Pookie. Now that's--so now you know why I don't want to say it. Speaker 1: Right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Twelve, May, 1931, Decatur, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm working in county government, I'm the director of the Department of Transportation for Montgomery County, Maryland. Speaker 1: And you are a retired-- Speaker 2: I'm a retired major general. Speaker 1: Okay, in the United States Army, right? Speaker 2: United States Army. Speaker 1: Okay, now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is the 29th of July, 19--I mean, 2008. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're presently in my home in Olney, Maryland. Story_ID: 571054 Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask that only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Favorite food? I would say fried chicken. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I would say the springtime. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes, San Diego, California. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: You can do it. Story_ID: 571055 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Arthur Holmes, Sr.] side but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: It's Grace, G-R-A-C-E, Lou, L-O-U, maiden name, Bradley, Holmes [Grace Bradley Holmes]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is 13, I'm sorry, 14, January, 1913. She was born in Pulaski, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Oh, Pulaski, Tennessee, that's-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --the home of the Ku Klux Klan [KKK]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay and now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? Can you trace them back to the 19th century or beyond or-- Speaker 2: No, I can only trace them back to my grandmother. My grandfather had died before I can remember it. My grandmother and my mother and my grand- that's as far as I can go. Speaker 1: Okay, so there are no stories about slavery or Reconstruction or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I, I know that my grandmother's father was white. I don't know anything else. Speaker 1: Okay, now what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Lorene Holt. Speaker 1: Okay, Lorene, L-O-R-E-N-- Speaker 2: L-O-R-E-N-E. Speaker 1: Okay, H-O-L-T, okay. Now, well, what do you know what life was like for them? Did they, were they agricultural family or did they live in the city or-- Speaker 2: They were an agricultural family and she was a domestic, my grandmother was a domestic, and a very strong and, but a very jovial woman. I remember lots of times with her that she would, she really would make you laugh. Speaker 1: Okay, can you, you remember any particular stories or, or things that she said that were funny? Speaker 2: No, she--the things that she said really were things at the moment and that she would take them and, and make you laugh with them and she was a person who was strong in family. If, I can remember a time when she was kind of the breadwinner for the, for the family. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother talk about going to school and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: My mother, yes. My mother went to the eighth grade. My mother had a very high propensity for mathematics and later on in life she went to school and got her GED [General Educational Development] and she taught herself how to type and to take shorthand. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when she died, she had been the president of the Women's Home and Overseas Missionary Society for worldwide church, the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, the A.M.E. Zion church, okay. Now, so what did your mother do for a living? Was she, did she basically operate as a housewife when she was growing or was she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was a housewife, then she worked for the TVA [Tennessee Valley Authority] as a custodian and then she got into church work and she worked as the secretary of the church for fifty-three years, the church in Knoxville [Tennessee], and then she was the executive secretary for the Women's Home and Overseas Missionary Society for some ten years, then she became president for eight years. Story_ID: 571056 Speaker 1: Well let me go to your father's side. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, Arthur Holmes. Speaker 1: Okay, that makes sense, Arthur Holmes, Sr., and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: It is 26, January, 1907. Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your--oh, I'm sorry, where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in Huntsville, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, right, that's right. I know the name of a Rev. A.Z. Huggins, from Hunts- I don't know if you've ever heard of that name but he was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion minister in Huntsville. Speaker 2: No, I was, I was born there in Decatur [Alabama] but we left Decatur when I was in the, I believe about the third grade. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so your father was born in Huntsville. Now, are there any stories about, do they have any stories that go back to the 19th century or to the slavery or to-- Speaker 2: No, my, my dad, well they were agricultural folk. My grand- great-grandparents were half Indian [Native American]. Speaker 1: Do you know what Indian group they were from? Speaker 2: No I don't. They, the family origin is around the Montgomery, Alabama area and I'm not sure what Indian tribes were around at that particular time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have very little--my daughter said she was going to do some of the genealogy but she hasn't done any. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know your grandparents on your father's side? Speaker 2: I knew my grandparents on my father's side, Jordan [Jordan Holmes (ph.)] and Dolly [Dolly Holmes (ph.)], and I'm trying to think what was their, their last name, I can't think of it right now. Speaker 1: Are these your maternal grandparents or-- Speaker 2: Maternal, right, yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: On your father's side. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, are there any stories about those days that are passed down in the family? Did your family own land or did they-- Speaker 2: They, they owned land around the Huntsville area but that has been dissipated. I don't know that there's any land there now. Mom [Grace Bradley Holmes] and Dad moved up the Tennessee Valley with the TVA [Tennessee Valley Authority]. Dad worked for the TVA and we moved from Decatur, Alabama to Sheffield, Alabama as they, as they built dams in the area, we would move until we got to Knoxville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay, so he worked on those dams in the quad cities area, Alabama, Sheffield, Muscle Shoals [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Sheffield-- Speaker 1: What was that big dam there? Is that the Wheeler? Speaker 2: Joe Wheeler-- Speaker 1: Joe Wheeler Dam [Wheeler Dam, Alabama], right. Speaker 2: --is there and then he came up to a little town called Soddy, Tennessee [Soddy-Daisy, Tennessee] and I'm not sure what dam there is around Chattanooga [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay, they, they went from the quad cities to Chattanooga? Speaker 2: To Chattanooga and then from Chattanooga to a place called Harriman, Tennessee and there was Loudoun Dam [Fort Loudoun Dam, Tennessee] around there and then Knoxville and Mom saw the schools were good in Knoxville and said this is where we are going to, going to stop and that's what we did and both them, and that's where I grew up was in Knoxville. Story_ID: 571057 Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: Yes there is. Mom said she saw him at a, at a pool hall. He was standing outside and she was smitten by him. She was married at, at fourteen years old and Dad [Arthur Holmes, Sr.] was twenty-one at the time and they stayed married for sixty-three years. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now tell us something about your parents' personalities and when you think about their personalities and their talents and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I take a little bit after both but mostly after my mother. My mother was a person that was always trying to better herself and she was, I guess as a son, I would always say she was a smart lady and if she decided she wanted to do something, she would go ahead and do it and you can see from what I tell you about what she had done that she pulled herself up. Dad was a very strong man, very quiet man, a very family oriented man. The children, I have a sister [Betty Holmes Mason], the children came first and although we were not rich by any means, I never remember being hungry, I never remember not having the clothes that I needed to wear. He did those things for us and he loved Grace [Grace Bradley Holmes]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now-- Speaker 2: A very frugal man, put it that, put it that way too. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have some stories about his frugality (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, if you, if you ask Dad for, for a nickel, he could go in his pocket and give you a nickel. I remember going home after I had grown up when I had a, a Mercury Marquis, this is back in the, when Mercury Marquis were big and Dad said, you know, I, he called me Hoss, he said, "Hoss, I don't know why you need that big car. You don't need that big car." So he was a very frugal guy. Speaker 1: Okay, he thought it's too big? Speaker 2: Oh, he thought it was too big. I didn't knock it. All--he'd always talked about getting a little Ford but he never bought a Ford, bought a Ford after his first car. He bought Oldsmobiles after that but he was always talking about, "All I need is a little Ford," and that, that was kind of his benchmark. Story_ID: 571058 Speaker 1: Now do you have, have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I have one sister-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Betty [Betty Holmes Mason], and she's now in an assisted living home in Knoxville, Tennessee but we grew up together, both of us graduated from college. Speaker 1: Is she older than you? Speaker 2: No, she's younger than I am. She's two years younger than I. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So when you were growing up, it was just you and your mother [Grace Bradley Holmes] and father [Arthur Holmes, Sr.] and your sister? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Pretty much, okay. Speaker 2: That's right, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have an earliest memory of being at home? An earliest memory with your family? Speaker 2: Well I remember, I remember from the days in Alabama where, you know, in those days, families kind of lived together. We lived on one side of the street, across the street was my grandmother, across the alleyway in the back of us was my other grandmother and I remember when I first went to, went to school, I remember playing there in Decatur [Alabama]. There were four boys that were born in that neighborhood within the period of about five months, starting in, in April, May, I think the last one was born in September and all of us were, grew up together, we played together and we were very close friends. Story_ID: 571059 Speaker 1: How old were you when the family, you know, first made its first move? Speaker 2: When--the first move was made when I was six-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I know that because I started school a year early. I grew rather fast and in those days, you can get in school without showing a birth certificate so I was large and my mom [Grace Bradley Holmes] and dad [Arthur Holmes, Sr.] sent me to school at age five. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, at age five. And then that's when you all moved to the quad cities (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we moved, we moved the next year to Sheffield [Alabama]-- Speaker 1: Sheffield, okay. Speaker 2: --and then after that, we stayed there for approximately, or maybe ten months or so. We didn't stay there very long and then Dad and Mom moved up to the Chattanooga [Tennessee] area. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and how long did you all stay in Chattanooga? Speaker 2: We stayed there, I went to two grades there so about two years. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're about seven now, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm trying to think. I was in the third and fourth grade there so I was about, about eight years old. Speaker 1: About eight, okay and then when you were eight you moved to Knoxville [Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Moved to Harriman-- Speaker 1: Harriman, okay, that's right, Harriman, Tennessee (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Harriman, Tennessee and we stayed there about two years. Speaker 1: Okay, then to Knoxville. Speaker 2: Then to Knoxville. We moved to Knoxville a week after Pearl Harbor. Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay. Speaker 2: In 1941. Speaker 1: All right, so you'd been about, about eight, I guess, then right around-- Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-one [1941] I was ten. Speaker 1: Ten, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, you were born in '31 [1931]? Speaker 2: Thirty-one [1931]. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, that's right, okay. Story_ID: 571060 Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of the places you lived and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, in, in Decatur [Alabama], it was, it was right in the neighborhood and there wasn't much to do except, you know, you played marbles, you tried to play baseball in some of the yards. There wasn't a lot of recreation facilities for blacks in Decatur at that particular time. When we moved up in the Chattanooga [Tennessee] area, we were actually in a little town called Soddy, Tennessee [Soddy-Daisy, Tennessee] and there were twenty-one black families there and I can remember roaming the fields there and I remember we found some Indian cigars, so to speak, and we, you had to take those and, and (unclear) tobacco and you have to dry them out and I forgot to take them out of the oven (laughter) and my mom [Grace Bradley Holmes] found, found those things but I remember those, those were good days. We, we played cowboys and Indians [Native American] and that's when you had the guns with caps in 'em and it was a, I had a good childhood. I don't have bad memories of a childhood and I had a loving--a loving family. Speaker 1: Okay, now what about Knoxville [Tennessee]? Now-- Speaker 2: In, in Knoxville, I went to, to the grammar school there for the second semester and I met my best friend, an individual, Edward Hill, who I talk with right now, once or twice a week. We're like brothers. There's nothing that Ed wouldn't do for me, I wouldn't do for him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and they called us Mutt and Jeff. I don't know whether you remember the cartoon, Mutt and Jeff. Mutt, Mutt was a very tall guy and Jeff was a very short guy so if you go to Knoxville, Tennessee, if you see Ed Hill, they'll, they'll know Art Holmes [HistoryMaker Major General Arthur Holmes, Jr.], they'll ask you about him because we just, we were very, very close. Speaker 1: So was he very short? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was very short. He didn't grow until he went to college and he, I think he's about 5', 5'9" now. Speaker 1: Okay, and you're about 6'3" right? Speaker 2: I'm 6'3". Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, Mutt and Jeff, yeah-- Speaker 2: Mutt and Jeff (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it was a popular comic strip in all the papers in those days. Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 571061 Speaker 1: What was the name of your first grade school? Speaker 2: First grade school was in Decatur [Alabama] and I can't, I can't remember the name of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I remember, I can't remember a name of a school until we get to Harriman [Tennessee] and it was Jamieson junior high [Jamieson School]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and that's, it had the, it had really all grades from first grade through about the tenth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, so Jamieson junior high in Harriman? Speaker 2: In Harriman. Speaker 1: And then-- Speaker 2: And then in Knoxville [Tennessee], I went to Maynard grammar school [Maynard Elementary School] for a semester, then to Beardsley Junior High [Beardsley Junior High School, Knoxville, Tennessee] from the seventh through the tenth grade. Speaker 1: Beardsley? Speaker 2: Beardsley. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And then Austin High School [Knoxville, Tennessee] for the tenth and eleventh grade, graduating from Austin High School. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. You graduated, was 19-- Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-eight [1948]. Speaker 1: --forty--1948, okay, all right. Now did you like school? Speaker 2: Oh, loved it. I went to good schools, had good teachers. I was a member of the National Honor Society when I graduated from high school and I, my memories are, it's time to go back to school, let's go back and we would do that. I played basketball in high school and good memories. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did you have a favorite subject in grade school? Speaker 2: I liked math and, and I loved geography. I still, I have a thing for maps now. My wife [Wilma King Holmes] says that I have to have a map everywhere I go but I, I love to have maps and know where I am and see where I'm going but geography was a, was a favorite subject for me. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did you have a favorite grade school teacher or any of the, or-- Speaker 2: Yes I had a favorite teacher from, in junior high I should say, Mrs. Hyatt [ph.] and until she died, we were in touch. She was one of those people who, if you didn't do all that you could do, she would come to you and let you know that and, but she was a loving person and, and she would get on me and Ed Hill [Edward Hill] in a moment because we were rather mischievous and we were always doing something, nothing what I want to say, destructive but just the little things we would be doing and talking to each other. Story_ID: 571062 Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of, of religion and church? Speaker 2: Well, we were always in a church. My mother [Grace Bradley Holmes] somehow was a secretary of every church we were in and I remember going to a Methodist church in, in Decatur [Alabama] and Mom was the secretary of the church there and when we came to, out of Decatur into Sheffield [Alabama], we were in church. So I've been, always in my life, the church has been part of my life and the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church has been part of my life since 1941. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now did you, were you involved in church activities when you were growing up? Did you take (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, in the youth organizations, in the youth choir, where it was the buds of promise in, in the school, I mean in church, and I, we had to go to both services. In those days, you went to a morning service at eleven o'clock, then they had another service at six or seven o'clock and we were always there. Speaker 1: Okay, now would you say that you got your moral foundation from the church or from home or a combination? Speaker 2: It was a combination because, a couple of things I always tell folk. I never heard my dad [Arthur Holmes, Sr.] curse. He always worked hard. My mom was always the person there saying, "You can do this." I don't mean that she was pushing you but she was letting you know that you ought to do as good as you can do and you could do. And so, I have great respect and love for my mom and dad and they're the foundation of, of whatever I am right now. Story_ID: 571063 Speaker 1: Now was popular culture a big part of growing up? Did you, was the radio and music and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well we had radio and we had the records, the 78s [78 rpm record] and 45s [45 rpm record] and, yes, dancing and going to house parties. You know, there weren't a lot of places for blacks to go in Knoxville [Tennessee]. For young black folks, most of the time, we had parties at our homes and playing the records and dancing were things that we did. Speaker 1: Okay, now was, I know you grew up during the era when Joe Louis was boxing. Was that a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Joe Louis was one of my favorite people. I remember when Schmeling [Max Schmeling], I don't know whether you remember that name, when Schmeling beat him, there were, I was still in Alabama at that time and people were saying that Joe Louis, was in the hospital and that was one of the saddest days for me. I finally met Joe Louis in Norfolk, Virginia when Hampton Institute [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] played Central State [College of Education and Industrial Arts at Wilberforce; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] in football. Speaker 1: Yeah, Central State from Ohio, yeah, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so Joe Louis was at the game? Speaker 2: He was at the game. It was called the Fish Bowl at that particular time, I don't know what they call the game now but, well, Hampton got beat but we were over there as ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] students and we marched during that period. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did you have any other heroes growing up from popular culture? Speaker 2: Well you, yes, as I said, Joe Louis and you had Jackie Robinson later on but I was, I was kind of fixated on sports and sports heroes. Story_ID: 571064 Speaker 1: Were all your teachers black coming up? Speaker 2: All of my teachers were black until I got to college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, so these were all black schools in-- Speaker 2: These were all, these were segregated schools. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think I got a good education out of that, I've never (clears throat), excuse me, I've never thought that I was cheated. Now, I'll give you an example of that. When I was going to--in high school [Austin High School, Knoxville, Tennessee], we didn't have anyone in the school that, well, on the school program was not trigonometry, as an example, but there was a veteran there who said, "If you can find the time in your schedule and get enough people, I'll teach trigonometry," and we did. We took a library period and we took trigonometry. So we had a group of teachers that cared for us and made sure that we got the right thing. I had an English teacher who, I'll tell you, boy, you, you had to have the verbs right, you had to, and when you were writing, just for your test, she would grade your English on, on the various tests that you had. Story_ID: 571065 Speaker 1: I was just saying off camera that I, I, when I heard you mention the fact that you didn't have trigonometry in school, I wondered if the state, you know, deliberately did not, you know, mandate that in the colored schools and, and-- Speaker 2: To the best of my knowledge, it was not man- well, I know it was not mandated. Speaker 1: Yeah, so you had to pick up that kind of stuff on your own (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you, we did. We wanted it too and we knew about it. There were folk, our teachers would talk about it and tell us that you should have it and, and we did. Speaker 1: Yeah, for those of--who are watching this and don't know it, the states controlled the, the state supported colored schools in those, you know, those southern states, those segregated schools. Speaker 2: Yeah, they, I don't think they cared very much as to what you had. It was, it was up to the principal and the teachers and the, I guess the--what, what the teachers knew and that would, that would be it but we had very strong English and a very strong math folk in there who worked with us. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's important. A lot of, you know, English is really important. So, now were you, when you were in high school [Austin High School, Knoxville, Tennessee], were you involved in clubs, in various clubs in high school? Speaker 2: Yes, I was involved in, in clubs and I was a member of what they called the Hi-Y with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and I played basketball in, in high school and I made all-state in basketball. I-- Speaker 1: What position did you play? Speaker 2: I played center and, you know, in those days, at 6', 6'2", 6'3", you were a tall guy. I played center and I played some forward and we went to the semifinals in the state and that's the year that I made all-state. Speaker 1: Okay, can you remember the tallest person in--that you faced in the state basketball? Speaker 2: I would say, and I remember in, a fellow in Kingsport, Tennessee who I would say could have been 6'4" or 6'5" but that's it. Speaker 1: That's the tallest one? Speaker 2: That's the tallest, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, things really have changed haven't they? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. I played center some in, in college [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] at 6'3" and then we got a guy who was 6'8" and he still couldn't play so I still played center. Speaker 1: Yeah, just 'cause your tall doesn't mean you can play, right? Speaker 2: No, and he, he was not coordinated and had, really had no great desire to, to play and then we had a fellow from Washington [D.C.] that was 6'5" and he was our center for most of the time when I was in college and I played, played forward. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, now we live in a day and age when the pros consider a 6'3" guard a short guard. Speaker 2: That's right. I guess Magic Johnson changed that but when I went, when, as, as we were talking, when I was there at 6'3", you were a tall guy. Story_ID: 571066 Speaker 1: Now you said you moved to Knoxville [Tennessee] around a time of, the invasion of Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: How, and you were ten then. How did World War II [WWII] affect you? I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, World War II had very little effect on me in the sense that my mom [Grace Bradley Holmes] and dad [Arthur Holmes, Sr.] found ways to get things for us. I can remember getting secondhand shoes because, you know, shoes were, they were rationed at that particular time. I remember-- Speaker 1: Well, let's put this in persp- 'cause a lot of people don't know about this but there was a shortage of goods in the United States during the war and so-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. There was a shortage, for example, butter. You, you couldn't get butter, you got margarine and margarine in those days came in as a white substance and you had to then put yellow in it to make it look like butter. Meat was rationed. Sugar was rationed. Gas was rationed. So I remember those particular things because we would want to, visit our parents--grandparents, down in Alabama and Dad would have to save up gas so that he could have enough gas to drive to Alabama and drive back. The men would carpool to save gas because they only got a certain allotment of gas. You had A, B and C stickers for your car and that told, that told you how much gas you could get in any one month. Speaker 1: So if you, would you, would the stickers be, have something to do with your occupation or something or-- Speaker 2: It would, yeah, you would tell what you had to do, how far you had to go to work and how you use your car and that would then determine whether you got a A, B or C sticker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If I remember correctly, the C sticker was, was the highest that you, that you would get the most gas. I mean, I may have it turned around but there was a classification as to how much gas you got based on the sticker that you had and you had stamps for such things as sugar and, and meat, things of that nature. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So you didn't have a rough economic time, I mean-- Speaker 2: No, Dad was working. At that time, during the war, he left the TVA [Tennessee Valley Authority] and went to work at Oak Ridge [Tennessee]. If you know, Oak Ridge is where they made the atomic, the uranium for the atomic bomb and they had to build that place from scratch and Dad went out there and he was a carpenter out there and so I don't remember hardship during the war except that, you know, they would ration things and you looked at those and your mom certainly rationed them out to you also. Story_ID: 571067 Speaker 1: Did you keep up with the, did your family kind of keep up with the war [World War II, WWII] and how black people fared in the [U.S.] military during the-- Speaker 2: We didn't, I don't remember looking at how black people fared in the military. I do remember keeping up with the war. I do remember Dorie Miller [Doris Miller] and he was our hero. Dorie Miller, who was killed at Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii]. I do remember them talking about the-- Speaker 1: Now he was, he was killed later, I think, but he was a hero of Pearl Harbor. Speaker 2: He was a hero at Pearl Harbor but he was killed later, yes. Speaker 1: I think he came up out of the galley and shot down ships (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. He was in the [U.S.] Navy at that time. You could only be a, a cook or some kind of menial work and I, I do remember those kind of things. Our teachers would tell us about those particular things and I, I didn't have any, any family that I know of that went to the [U.S.] Army. Dad [Arthur Holmes, Sr.] was classified in 3-A, 3-C or something like that because he had a family and so he never went in the Army. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have any relatives that were ever in the Army or-- Speaker 2: I don't remember any relatives that were in the Army. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and during those, did you realize when you were, now you were ten when the, when, about the time that the U.S. entered the war? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Do you, did you realize when you were a kid that there, the Army was segregated? Speaker 2: Oh yes, I knew that there, that there was segregation. You know, coming up in a segregated society, it was kind of something that I knew was, I knew was going on, it wasn't something that I was, you know, particularly upset about it at that particular time because that was the way things were, were going. Speaker 1: Yeah, you would have been surprised if it wasn't, I guess (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 571068 Speaker 1: So, okay, so as, as you're reaching, did they have, now I know they probably didn't, but did they have a ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in high school [Austin High School, Knoxville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: No, no ROTC in high school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: In fact my, give you a story about the [U.S.] Army--ROTC and, my friend and I took the test for the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] and we never even, never heard back from them whether you failed or what and we heard nothing. Speaker 1: Now you were a National Honor Society, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the National Honor Society. Speaker 1: And you took the test for the Naval Academy, sent it in and never heard-- Speaker 2: Never heard a word about it. Speaker 1: Rejection or, nothing? Speaker 2: That's right, nothing. We don't know whether we did good or bad. Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, when you were a senior, now you must have been, all-state basketball player, National Honor Society, you must have been a pretty popular fellow? Speaker 2: Well, at the, at our graduation, I was given a medal as the most outstanding boy in the class and my high school days were good days. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you, now are you the first person in your family to go to college? Speaker 2: I was the first to go to college. I went to college and my sister [Betty Holmes Mason] went to college and there was never a day in my life that I didn't know that I was going to college, that was something that my mom [Grace Bradley Holmes] and dad [Arthur Holmes, Sr.] pointed to, and education was most important. You didn't bring bad grades home. You had to, they wanted to know, they wanted to see your report card. In those days, they could see your report card and if you had any bad grade on there, that was something that you were talked to about and you just didn't do that. Speaker 1: Okay, now you graduated in 1948, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 571069 Speaker 1: Now, were you aware then of the, and I know a lot of, you know, high school kids, probably were not but, I just wonder if you were aware of the struggles in the [U.S.] Army at that point and the armed services, the U.S. trying to, I think Truman [President Harry S. Truman] tried to, first made the moves to desegregate the Army in '48 [1948], '49 [1949]? Speaker 2: That's right and that was, you know, you knew of that but I was not fixated at that time on the [U.S.] military and so it was something that was happening, those were good instances and, you know, you were saying how good the president was to do that and you had soldiers who would come back and, and who were in the war [World War II, WWII] and they would tell you some, some of the stories so you knew that the segregated Army was not a good Army. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and well, can you remember like some of the stories that they would tell you? Speaker 2: Well, they would just, they couldn't go to the various clubs. They were, when they went to, they were stationed in certain cities, you know, you had to go to the black, black clubs. You couldn't go where the white fellows had gone. I don't remember any, you know, real bad stories except the segregated nature of the Army at that particular time and I didn't know any officers, I don't remember any officers that I knew coming up. I do know that a couple of my teachers were, were officers and, and they came back but they came back when I was a senior [at Austin High School, Knoxville, Tennessee]. So, during the war, I was not made aware or talked with any officers. Story_ID: 571070 Speaker 1: So, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school [Austin High School, Knoxville, Tennessee], what was your aspiration? What did you think you would be as a career (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanted to be an engineer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wanted to be an electrical engineer and that was what I started out to do, however, when I got to college, I decided I wanted to go to dental school and I majored in chemistry and minored in biology. Speaker 1: Now, now how did you choose Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]? Speaker 2: My mother [Grace Bradley Holmes] chose Hampton (laughter). Now, that's a story too. Edward Hill, the fellow I tell you is my real good friend, and I had reserved rooms at West Virginia State College [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], that's where we wanted to go, and his father became ill and he could not go to West Virginia because of financial reasons and he went to Knoxville College [Knoxville, Tennessee] and Hampton offered a scholarship to me and so my mom said, "I, you, I think you should go to Hampton, that would help the family financially," and I went to Hampton. Had never been to Hampton but I love it. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what was your first day at Hampton like? Speaker 2: Scary. At that particular time, there were a lot of veterans back at school and they were much older than we were and at that time, hazing a freshman was not unheard of and so it was kind of scary. You had to wear a green beanie if you were a freshman so you were identified and they would make you do a lot of things like stand on one foot and, and sing the alma mater or sing the National Anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] backwards, which you know you couldn't do but there was, there was harassment. They would come around at night and if you were, had something in your room you were eating, they might take it. It was a scary time but we had a good time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't want to be at Hampton the first semester, well, first part of the first semester, and then they had basketball tryouts because Hampton did not give athletic scholarships at that time and I went down with a group of about fifty or sixty guys and I made the basketball team and when I made the basketball team, I started to meet people and by Christmas you couldn't have, you couldn't drag me away from Hampton. So, and as I said, I loved the place. Story_ID: 571071 Speaker 1: Who were some of your favorite teachers at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Well my, there was a Mrs. Hall [Anita Hall] who was a biology teacher who, again, was one of those people who would say to you, you can do better than you're doing, and would let you know that. There was also a Jewish fellow there named Jake Bella [ph.]. Hampton-- Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: B-E-L-L-A. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Jake taught chemistry. He would teach physics and he was a person you could go and talk to and it, he was just a wonderful individual and we asked Jake why he taught at Hampton and, a little black school [HBCU] when he was as brilliant as he was. He said, "I enjoy the students here at Hampton, I enjoy what I do, I think I'm making a contribution," and I would say Jake Bella and Mrs. Hall were the, were my favorite teachers. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any classmates of yours that we would know now or, or that stand out even though we might not know 'em? Speaker 2: Well, my college roommate was the dean of, of the school of biology at North Carolina Central [North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina], Dr. Hugh Pattillo [Walter H. Pattillo, Jr.]. My other college roommate, Artie Williams who is retired and is at Hampton, was a coach at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and then he went into the high school ranks and, and was in guidance and coaching. I don't know of any, you know, people who have notoriety out of my, out of my class but those two guys, I think, have done very well. Speaker 1: Now who was the president of Hampton in those days? Speaker 2: A Alonzo Moron [Alonzo G. Moron] was the president. He was the first black president of, of Hampton. He was from the [U.S.] Virgin Islands and he was the president during the whole time that I was at Hampton. Speaker 1: How do you spell Moron? Speaker 2: M-O-R-O-N-E [sic.], I believe that's the way it's spelled. Speaker 1: Okay. Did people ever make jokes about the similarity of his last name, too? Speaker 2: Well, we did, yeah, you know, not, yes we did. Speaker 1: Our president is a Moron. Speaker 2: That's, that's right, yeah, and he was kind of an aloof person and, you know, so certainly we would try to make light of him. Story_ID: 571072 Speaker 1: Did you do as well at Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] as you did in high school [Austin High School, Knoxville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: No, I, I graduated from Hampton with a C plus average. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: I, I think it was just me and not getting down to studying. On the other hand, when I came into the [U.S.] military, I graduated number one in guided missile and nuclear weapon staff officer course. I graduated number 11 out of 110 in my advanced course. At the staff college [United States Naval War College, Newport, Rhode Island], I graduated, they had it in thirds, I graduated in the upper third and then I, I was selected out of the staff college to go to the [U.S.] Army's Civilian Education Program and got a master's degree in, in business administration. So it was me. Speaker 1: Was it too many distractions or-- Speaker 2: Too many distractions but I think I got a good education because I went to Fort Bliss [Texas] for the first Army course and I was working, or in classes with West Pointers and I did very well. I went back to Bliss and took an eleven month electronic course and I graduated number two out of the electronic course. So it was me. I taught, I taught for ten years in, in the Army, five, I'm sorry, I taught for five of my first ten years in the Army. I taught at the artillery school, I taught electronics. I taught at the Ordnance School [United States Army Ordnance School, Aberdeen, Maryland]. I taught guided missiles and nuclear weapons. So, I don't think I'm smart but I think I'm better than a C plus. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now you were in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] at Hampton? Speaker 2: I was in ROT- when I went to Hampton, Hampton was a land grant college, or is a land grant college, and you had to take ROTC the first two years and then the Korean War came along and if you were in ROTC, you got a deferment and I knew that if I was called into the Army, I figured I would never go to college, I'd never finish college. So I joined the ROTC which I had a very good, I was in very good academic standing there and they had asked me to join and I called from my home in Tennessee and said I wanted to join and it's one of the best moves I ever made. Speaker 1: Now is there a man named Brown [Walter Brown] who was in charge of the ROTC there? I read about a fellow name Brown who was, is that, who was in charge when you-- Speaker 2: There was a, there was a West Pointer, there was a white lieutenant colonel in charge of ROTC when I first went there, Greiner [ph.], a Lieutenant Colonel Greiner. Then a Lieutenant Colonel De Maurice Moses, a black lieutenant colonel came there who, shortly after he got there, made colonel and he was the PMS and T [Professor of Military Science and Tactics] during my stay at, at Hampton. Story_ID: 571073 Speaker 1: So you graduated from Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] in-- Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952]. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952] and then you went, you said you went right to Fort Bliss [Texas]? Was it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, went right to Fort Bliss to school. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And my first actual duty station was in, out on Long Island in New York. Speaker 1: Okay, what fort was that? Was that-- Speaker 2: Fort Totten [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Fort Totten, okay. Speaker 2: But I was stationed in, in the Flushing Meadows area [Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, New York]. We had a gun battery out there and that's where, but my headquarters was in the headquarters of a unit that I was in, was at Fort Totten, New York. Speaker 1: Okay, so what kind of unit were you in initially? Speaker 2: Anti-aircraft unit, a 90mm gun battery. Speaker 1: Okay, now do they still have those kind of batteries in the-- Speaker 2: No, they did, at one time they had missiles around the cities and the guns when I was there, then they moved to missiles and they don't have the air defense systems around now like they did at that time. Speaker 1: And that was the height of the Cold War? Speaker 2: That's the height of the Cold War, 1952. You know, we were still in the Korean War at that time. Speaker 1: And the, there was still some, some concern there might be an air invasion of the United States, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right. So you had anti-aircraft units around most of your major cities, Baltimore [Maryland], Washington [D.C.], Cleveland [Ohio], Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 1: San Francisco [California]. I know I've seen the batteries in San Francisco down on the, yeah. I've seen those. So, nowadays they would, I mean the [U.S.] Air Force and the [U.S.] Navy would take care of that, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Air Force, the Air Force has a, the air defense role and missile, ground missiles I don't think play any, any role in that at all. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now how long were you stationed in New York? Speaker 2: I was stationed in New York a year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I went to Fort Bliss to this one year school I was telling you about. Speaker 1: In electronics? Speaker 2: Electronic school and I stayed at Bliss for a total of, of three years. Speaker 1: Okay, so that takes us to 1957 or so? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-six [1956]. Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956], okay. Story_ID: 571074 Speaker 1: In 1956, I went to Germany and I served in an anti-aircraft unit in Germany. Speaker 2: Okay, now Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] was president of the United States then? Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 2: Okay, and U.S. still maintains a force in Germany today, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, um-hm. Now when I was there, it was a very large force. It was about three hundred thousand, that's very, very small now but I was in the, in an artillery unit in Kaiserslautern [Germany]. Speaker 2: Kaiserslautern, was K-A-I-- Speaker 1: I could not spell it for you (laughter). Kaiserslautern, L-A-U-T-E-N [sic.], is the last, Kaiserslautern would be the phonetic way. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, in, in Kaiserslautern you were-- Speaker 1: I was a staff officer in a anti-aircraft outfit. I was the electronics officers and communications officer. Speaker 2: So you at that point would have been a lieutenant still? Speaker 1: I was a lieutenant. I was a first, first lieutenant. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I taught at Bliss and made first lieutenant at Fort Bliss [Texas]. Speaker 2: Now, now what was the atmosphere like then for black soldiers or for black officers, specific in those days? Speaker 1: It was an integrated [U.S.] Army but you still had very little you could do off post because segregation, let's say in El Paso [Texas] was, was still the name of the game. So, during your time on the post, you were integrated but outside, it was still a segregated society. Speaker 2: Okay, so there's a certain duality there because the states where they still had it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: --rigid segregation-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --you, if you left the post, you were-- Speaker 1: You were in a segregated society. Speaker 2: --that was the post on-- Speaker 1: That's right, but on the post, you were integrated in your jobs and in the activities that you had. Speaker 2: Okay, now for civilian employees, I guess, from those southern states who worked on the base, was this kind of like an island where they could be kind of free to-- Speaker 1: Yeah, if you had the talent and on those bases you could, you can go, go places but as I said, you know, you had, as you say, a duality. The post was desegregated but the outside of the post was not. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. So, so, now where did you, how long were you in Kaiserslautern? Speaker 1: I was in Kaiserslautern for a little over a year, maybe fifteen months and then I changed to the Ordnance Corps [U.S. Army Ordnance Corps], became a regular Army officer in the Ordnance Corps. Speaker 2: Now what is the Ordnance Corps 'cause you spend most of your career, your career in the Ordnance Corps? Speaker 1: The Ordnance Corps is a, what they call a technical service and it has logistics in it, ammunition is a forte, maintenance is a forte, maintenance and supply, a procurement. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's a cert- it is a support service. Story_ID: 571075 Speaker 1: Okay 1957 and the Ordnance Corps [U.S. Army Ordnance Corps]. You're back in the United States, right? Speaker 2: No, I'm in Germany. Speaker 1: Oh, you're still in Germany, okay. Speaker 2: I stayed in Germany from '56 [1956] through '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. You just switched jobs, I guess? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, that's when I went to missile units. I went to a missile and, and nuclear weapons unit. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was the, what was your feeling in those days about the advent of a nuclear war? Did you really, being close to what was going on, did you really-- Speaker 2: Well, you certainly always feared that. I was in a unit that actually assembled nuclear weapons and I was there when Khrushchev [Nikita Khrushchev] said that he was going to preclude us from going to Berlin [Germany], I think, that was the Berlin crisis at that time. And so, a nuclear war was something that you, was on your mind at all times and you knew that that would be a devastating situation and I knew the capability of our nuclear forces and you would assume that the Soviets had an equal capability and in my mind I couldn't see how you, anybody could survive in a nuclear war. We had small nuclear weapons but small nuclear weapon to me is not a real term. Speaker 1: Yeah, when you think about what the devastation. Speaker 2: Yeah, the devastation you're going to get from a nuclear weapons and, you know, the, the fallout you get from it, things of that nature, make you say, how could you work in that environment after you had a nuclear exchange but we were prepared and we, it was always on your mind. Speaker 1: I remember two things, well, there's a famous newsreel of Khrushchev with the shoe in his hand beating on a-- Speaker 2: Beating on a UN [United Nations] table-- Speaker 1: --yeah, table and then they, they used to show that all the time and then they would, this phrase of his, "We will bury you." Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, and he made very serious threats at Berlin and we were not going to stand. We went to, went to, on full alert in some instances. Speaker 1: Okay, now also, the Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] administration, well a lot of things are going on in the United States when you were out of town. Did you keep up with kind of the news? Speaker 2: Not that much. You know, you, you had the, our primary newspaper was the Stars and Stripes and it was mostly about what was going on in Germany. You had some stateside news but you were not into, at least I wasn't into, a lot of things that were going on in the states. My family was there with me, my wife and my kids and, you know, you were looking at family things and doing family things and enjoying Germany as a place. Speaker 1: Now, now when did you get married? Speaker 2: I got married in 1952, after I came out of Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And from that marriage there were three children, two girls [Deborah Holmes Cook and Sharon Holmes Key] and a boy. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, let's see. So, you were there until 1959. Was there any, any good stories from that period of time that you can tell us? I mean, how did the black G.I.'s get along with the German population? Speaker 2: Oh, they got along fine but, again, as you go around post, you find that we kind of segregate ourselves and there were clubs that were primarily black. There were clubs that were primarily white. The music played was different, country and western as opposed to the blues and what have you but by and large, soldiers got along well outside of the camp and certainly inside of the kaserne, or the camp, there was no segregation. Story_ID: 571076 Speaker 1: So, well, when you came back in 1959, now what did you do? Speaker 2: Well I came back in 1959, I went to the ordnance advanced course and that was a six month course, a professional development course, and that's the course I told you I came out number 11 out of 110--tenfold and then after that they kept me there as an instructor and I was an instructor at the Ordnance School [United States Army Ordnance School] from 1960, from 1960 until 1963. Speaker 1: Now where was the Ordnance School at? Speaker 2: Aberdeen Proving Ground about, you know, about thirty miles, about sixty miles up the road. Speaker 1: Is Aberdeen, South Dakota or-- Speaker 2: No, Aberdeen, Maryland. Speaker 1: Aberdeen, Maryland, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: All right. I'm getting my Aberdeens mixed up. Okay, Aberdeen, Maryland, okay. So you were there until 1960-- Speaker 2: I was there until 1964. Speaker 1: 'Til '64 [1964], okay, all right. So you were there when the Cuban Missile Crisis was going on, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. In fact, when JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] decided on the, the, not barricade, blockade-- Speaker 1: Yeah, blockade. Speaker 2: --and they made the announcement, I was on my way to Quantico [Marine Corps Base Quantico, Quantico, Virginia] to teach a course in guided missile and nuclear weapon supply and I heard it on the radio as I was driving from Aberdeen down to Quantico [Virginia]. Story_ID: 571077 Speaker 1: Okay, now I don't know who, who all, watching this would be interested in this but I better ask, what are the nuances of supply, I guess? Speaker 2: Well, supply is, is across the board. You know, somebody has to get the ammunition on the repair parts, the actual end items to the soldier and so that's what you do in the supply business. You also have to maintain them. The soldier fighting doesn't have time to do a lot of maintenance so he sends that equipment back to, say, a maintenance unit and the ordnance [U.S. Army Ordnance Corps] had the maintenance units. In my career, I commanded maintenance and supply units throughout my career. Speaker 1: Okay, so this would include vehicles, weapons and-- Speaker 2: Vehicles, weapons, ammunition, all of those. Speaker 1: Okay, I know there's stories, a famous story about the Zulu War [Anglo-Zulu War]. They were, they were saying that the, whoever the quartermaster was, didn't give 'em the keys to the bullets or didn't give them enough bullets. Speaker 2: Ah, yeah. Speaker 1: That's how they lost but, you know, there's a, you know the story like about, in the Civil War where, you know, people run out of things or they have one thing and they don't have another. I think that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well you know that's, that's one of the things with supply, you know, a balance of supply. You need to get the new guns up or new trucks up. You also need to repair those that have been shot up or that are broken down in some way and so that's, that's your job to do that and I commanded a company, it was a supply company in Korea. I commanded a maintenance battalion at Fort Riley, Kansas and maneuvered in Germany with it. I commanded a support command at Fort Riley, Kansas which was the support for a division of fifteen thousand folk and, and we did the supply and maintenance for those, for those folk and then I was the assistant division commander for the 1st Division [1st Infantry Division]. I, and, and so my work has been with tanks and vehicles during the latter part of my career. Story_ID: 571078 Speaker 1: Now have you ever run across, on a level where you get the equipment? Have you ever run across some, a piece of equipment that just didn't work right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure. You have equipment that it doesn't live up to its intended capability. The [U.S.] Army had a vehicle, the Gama Goat, that was an articulated vehicle and it, it had a lot of maintenance problems so it didn't stay in the, in the inventory very long. So you did, you do have those kind of things come along but certainly when they get out to the field with a soldier and he starts to use it, if it's good, it's okay, if it's bad, you're going to know about it real soon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By and large, we had good equipment. Some of the trucks I had when I was in the support command were older than some of the soldiers but they were still running and running well. The Army has a very rigorous maintenance program and so with that, you keep equipment going for quite a while. Speaker 1: So what does it take for them to, you know, replace, say, a fleet of trucks if they're maintaining them well and they can still-- Speaker 2: Well, what you do is, certainly you try to improve your equipment. So you'll have a, let's say a M151, that's a jeep, and then you'll have an M151A1 that has some improvements on it and so you'll try to get those out to the troops. And then the jeep was replaced by the Humvee that you hear about in, in Iraq, that's an upgrade of the vehicle. So you, you do it in models. Tanks, we had the M60 [M60 Patton] tank that had a, a 90mm gun, 105 gun [105mm Gun T8], I'm sorry, and then you got the M1 [M1 Abrams] tank that had a 120mm gun and you replaced the M60 with the M1 so you replace by models. Speaker 1: Okay, now what happens to old equipment? Were you in charge of disposing of any of that? Speaker 2: Well you do have, no I was not in charge of disposing. There is a, there is a command that does disposal but in, in my time, if, and when the Army finished with a piece of equipment or a model of equipment, that model went to the reserves [U.S. Army Reserve] because the reserves at that time were not expected to be in combat as, as intensely as they are today. Today, the reserves keep the same equipment as the, as the regular army. Story_ID: 571079 Speaker 1: Okay, now I remember, now this may seem off the wall but there was a time when if you were reading a sports magazine or comic book, sometimes there were ads in the back for, that you can send away to get an anti-aircraft gun from a (laughter)--have you ever seen that kind of thing? It was, it's really (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: I've heard a couple of people that actually-- Speaker 2: You know, I don't know of that. I know organizations can get pieces of equipment. You might say a, Veterans of Foreign War [Veterans of Foreign Wars] installation, they might have a tank, an old tank or an old gun that's completely out of the system, that would happen but that's the only thing that I know of in that line. Speaker 1: Okay, so I do remember those ads and I just wonder, say, how in the world does this happen? Speaker 2: No, I don't, I think that that was getting your money that, I don't think that that would happen. Speaker 1: Okay, you don't think that ever was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that would never happen with a tank or with an anti-aircraft gun or, or a rifle. They're very, very tight controlled on weapons and you can destroy, if the weapon is going out and you have no use for it at all, that is in the reserves [U.S. Army Reserve] or in shooting clubs or what have you, then they're destroyed with very tight constraints. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I've heard of guys who claim they had the rifle they had in the [U.S.] Army, you know, at home. Speaker 2: Well, I, in the Army that I was in at that particular time, that was not the case. You made sure that there was accountability and security for weapons. I can remember an instance with me when I was a battalion commander. A young fellow was getting ready to go, getting ready to go out of the Army, to be discharged, and his weapon came up missing. Well he had sold his weapon downtown and I told him he was not going to go home, he was not going to be discharged until we found that weapon and we found that weapon. Speaker 1: Okay, so he actually sold his weapon to someone. Speaker 2: He actually sold his weapon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So during the Vietnam [Vietnam War] era. Story_ID: 571080 Speaker 1: Now, okay, so, now you served in Vietnam? Speaker 2: Yes, I served in Vietnam. Speaker 1: Okay, in the same capacity basically, as the Ordnance [U.S. Army Ordnance Corps]? Speaker 2: I was a battalion commander in Vietnam of a maintenance battalion but it was more than that, I had a supply battalion, I had a finance unit, I had a signal unit, I had a postal unit, I had a, a unit that handled the soldiers that had been killed. I'm trying to think of what they called it. I can't remember that now but it was a unit that had a number of disciplines in it and I commanded that outfit in Pleiku, Vietnam for six months. Speaker 1: Okay, what years were these? Speaker 2: This was in 1970 and '71 [1971]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now at that time you were-- Speaker 2: I was a lieutenant colonel. Speaker 1: Lieutenant colonel, okay, and well, throughout the [U.S.] Army to that point, did you, was your, your elevation in rank smooth? I mean, was it smooth (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I made, I made promotions on time. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I made them on time. Speaker 1: So you didn't have a problem with-- Speaker 2: No, I, I made first lieutenant in eight months, I mean, eighteen months. I made captain in five years. In three years I made major and three years later I made lieutenant colonel and so I made all of my promotions on time. Speaker 1: Okay, now did the black officers ever form an organization or a group? Speaker 2: Oh, we have a group we call The ROCKS [The ROCKS, Inc.] here in, in Washington [D.C.]. It's named after Roscoe Cartwright [Roscoe C. Cartwright] who was killed in a plane crash and that's a group of, right now it's all services. It started out as just purely Army and, you know, we did social things and, and that's, that's the only-- Speaker 1: Is this kind of an alumni group or rather that are active-- Speaker 2: You have, you have retired and active on the, in the-- Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I just wondered if the, like in those days of '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], a lot of black professional organizations formed organizations like this. The police officers formed a group, the black firemen, the teachers, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never knew or never participated in that as I was coming up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never, never saw the need for that. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered if, yeah, there was a need for that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Um-hm. Story_ID: 571081 Speaker 1: So, well tell us about Vietnam now. Speaker 2: Well Vietnam for me, I commanded that battalion in Pleiku [Vietnam]. Pleiku was an active site but I'm, I won't tell you that I was a frontline soldier because I wasn't. I was in the supply and maintenance business. We got rocketed one time but that's, that's the only, only experience I had there with it. It was a, it was a good experience for me commanding all of those type units for the six months and it's, I was, it was a real background for my future assignments. Speaker 1: Okay, about how many men did you command at that juncture (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that particular, I'm over there, it was about, it was about a thousand folk in, in the 62nd at that time. Speaker 1: And it was the 62nd, it was the 62nd-- Speaker 2: Sixty--62nd Maintenance Battalion. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 571082 Speaker 1: So what happened after Vietnam [Vietnam War]? Did you-- Speaker 2: After Vietnam I came back and went to the Naval War College [United States Naval War College]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which is a senior service school, that's a year's course at Newport, Rhode Island. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I guess, the obvious question here is why Naval War College 'cause those who don't know don't know why you would go (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yeah, well the [U.S.] Army, each service has a senior service school and there's the Army War College [United States Army War College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania] and the Navy War College and they interchange officers. The Navy sends a group of officers to the Army War College and I went to the Naval War College. I think there were maybe twenty Army officers at the Naval War College but there were also [U.S.] Air Force officers and Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] at the Navy War College. Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, 'cause people will say, well, he's not in the Navy, why's he going to the Naval War--? Speaker 2: Well, this is a senior school that really looks at socioeconomic things and looks at strategic planning and those kind of things. So it, it stood me well because I went to the Joint Staff [Joint Chiefs of Staff] after that and, you know, there were all services there and I had had the experience of going to school with a number of people in other services and knew a lot of people when I came to the Joint Staff. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, how long were you in the Naval War College? This is-- Speaker 2: That was a year. Speaker 1: This is '71 [1971] to '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971], '72 [1972]. I came out in, in June of '72 [1972]. Story_ID: 571083 Speaker 1: And then you joined the Joint Chiefs of Staff? Speaker 2: I came to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, J4-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I stayed there eighteen months. Speaker 1: Now what did you do there? Speaker 2: I was a staff officer in guidance and procedures branch and we did the rewriting of orders and, and guidance papers for the Joint Staff--for the logistics part of the Joint Staff. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so in essence, you kind of set a model of how to write orders and (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you, you, you took orders that needed to be reworked, we reworked those. You did new orders. You also worked with the services in making sure that they provided men and equipment to the, to the unified and specified commands and the Joint Staff is, is the, you know, the senior staff of the [U.S.] military. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a goal to streamline and make more effective the communication? Speaker 2: Well, yes, and, and to, and to plan for various contingencies. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So, now you were there how long? From '72 [1972]-- Speaker 2: I was there, in the J4, for eighteen months. Speaker 1: Okay, so you come out in, I guess, '74 [1974], was that? Speaker 2: I came out of there in '74 [1974] and then I became chief of the Ordnance branch [U.S. Army Ordnance Corps]. I was over the, all of the assignments for all Ordnance officers and warrant officers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so then you, all right. So you're doing the same thing only you, now you're the chief of the whole lot (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was chief of the Ordnance branch-- Speaker 1: For the [U.S.] Army? Speaker 2: --for the Army, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, that's a big, yeah, it's a big-- Speaker 2: Well, it was one that I, I was very proud of and I was very surprised to get it. I was the, certainly the first black to get that job and I had the responsibility of assigning all Ordnance officers from lieutenant colonel down. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, what's your rank at this point? Speaker 2: I was a full colonel. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 571084 Speaker 1: Any interesting stories about that period? Speaker 2: Well, this was a time when a couple of things happened. The [U.S.] Army was, was downsizing at that particular time after Vietnam [Vietnam War] and you had to, I would say, select out folk and, and that was a very hard thing to do. You had to tell people that the Army no longer needed them because of their, you know, as you evaluated them as opposed to someone else, and you get some, some pretty nasty calls sometimes as a result of doing that. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so, some guys who were, saw themselves as career Army were just no longer needed? Speaker 2: That's right, and you had to, you had to tell them. Speaker 1: Now, I think that kind of runs counter to the general perception that people have that if you want to be a career man in the Army, Army's going to just let you do it, you know. Speaker 2: No, that's, that's not true. Speaker 1: That's not, okay. Speaker 2: There is a process. If you don't make a promotion after two times, you are, you are released from the Army. So there is a, is a way of making sure that you have quality in the Army. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I didn't realize that before this, okay, that makes sense that they should-- Speaker 2: But also, you know, there were some good things. Some of the guys that I hadn't assigned went on to make general officer, things of that nature, so, it was, I think a highly responsible job that I thought that as I was coming up, I didn't think that I would ever have, and to have that job, was a, was very, very satisfying. I came in the Army, I wanted to make major because if you made major, you could stay in twenty years and retire but as you make a rank, you then look at the next rank and say, I can do that and that's kind of how I thought, that was my thought process and it worked well for me. Speaker 1: Okay, so being a major is kind of a safe, a safe place to be? Speaker 2: That was, at that particular, that was a safe place to be and you would retire twenty years with half of your base pay so that looked pretty good and, but, by the time I made major, I wanted to make lieutenant colonel and when I made lieutenant colonel, I wanted to make full colonel and when I made full colonel, I wanted to be a general but when I came in the Army, there were no black generals. When I came in the Army, there were three or four black colonels-- Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: --full colonels. So there was not much to look to, to say what you were going to do and I, when I came in, I said I was going to get out and after my first tour, but then I had good jobs and I decided, the wife and I decided, let's stay in the Army and, and I did and, I don't regret that decision. Story_ID: 571085 Speaker 1: Okay, I'm just thinking now, now when you entered, Benjamin O. Davis was out, right? Speaker 2: No, Benjamin O. Davis was, was, I'm not sure of his rank at that particular time but I was in the Pentagon when he was on the air staff so he was, he was around during my career. Speaker 1: Junior, Benjamin O. Davis, Jr., yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Junior, yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, and he was [U.S.] Air Force? Speaker 2: He was Air Force, right. Speaker 1: And, but there were no [U.S.] Army generals or was there? Speaker 2: The first Army general in this particular, in the modern army, was about 1960-something. He came out of Vietnam [Vietnam War]. I can't think of his name now. I'll think of it before we finish but he was the first black general. He made brigadier after coming out of Vietnam. Speaker 1: Okay, and Brooks [HistoryMaker General Harry Brooks, Jr.] became one-- Speaker 2: He became a two star. Speaker 1: Yeah, two star, that's, that's after (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was a two star. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 571086 Speaker 1: All right. So we were talking about you having to, the downsizing of the [U.S.] Army and some of the decisions, tough personnel decisions you had to kind of make to bring it down. Speaker 2: Yeah, you, we had boards, had met to look at officers' records and those who were scored the lowest were, were told that they had to go as the Army downsized, after Vietnam [Vietnam War]-- Speaker 1: So they kind of, you said some of them were really upset about that? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. You can get some calls with people saying, you know, "How could you do this to me and I'd done such and such," or "You, you take a young fellow and you had to put him, have him go out," and I've had the general officer say, you know, "How can you make that decision? I have this guy work for me, such and such," but when you look at his record, it didn't support that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you think that in some cases people see the Army as like a comfort zone, you know? Well, when once they get in it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's not a, yeah, it's not a comfort zone. You have to, I think, continually upgrade, you have to continually perform at a high level and, and there's a selection process that will select you out. There's a selection process that will promote you or not promote you and if you don't get promoted after a certain period of time, you're, you're out. So there is a quality system in the Army. Story_ID: 571087 Speaker 1: Tell me, now when did you first meet Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell]? I thought I'd raise him around now, so-- Speaker 2: I first met Colin when he was a major and he was here in the, in the Washington [D.C.] area. I don't know what job he had at that particular time but that's when I first, first met him and then he and I served on the [U.S.] Army staff when he was a sec- executive officer to the secretary of defense. I was the executive officer to the secretary of the army. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but that doesn't come until the, what the, eight--in the '80s [1980s] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, that came when most of us were colonels. Okay, I was an executive officer, secretary of the army from 1975 'til 1977. Speaker 1: Okay, so you met him way back then? Speaker 2: Oh, I met him before then. Speaker 1: Before, oh, okay. Speaker 2: I knew him before then. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And he was a colonel at that particular time and, and I was a colonel, both of us were colonels but I met him when he was a major. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in the '60s [1960s] you actually met him and I guess you think, okay (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it would be, it would be in the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 571088 Speaker 1: Now what else about, when you were head of Ordnance for the (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was head of the, of the Ordnance Corps [U.S. Army Ordnance Corps] for approximately eighteen months and after that I went to Fort Riley [Kansas] and I commanded the division support command in the 1st Infantry Division and I did that for eighteen months. Speaker 1: Now about what year is this? Speaker 2: Say again? Speaker 1: What year is this? Speaker 2: This would have been '75 [1975], '76 [1976] until early '77 [1977]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in early '77 [1977], I became the assistant division commander for the 1st Infantry Division. There were two assistant division commanders and I was one of those and I did that for approximately three months and then I was selected by the secretary of the army to be the executive officer to the secretary of the army, and that's the highest military officer in the secretary of the army's officer--office. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was the first black to be an executive to the secretary of the army who was a black at that particular time, Clifford Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Now this is in '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: Seventy-five [1975], '76 [1976], '77 [1977], I was his executive officer for two years. Speaker 1: Yeah, now Clifford Alexander was appointed by Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]? Speaker 2: By Jimmy Carter. Speaker 1: All right, okay, all right. Now, were you surprised when you were selected or did you-- Speaker 2: Oh, very much so. I was out at Fort Riley as the assistant division commander, I was waiting to go to another command to command a depot in Red River, Red River Depot [Red River Army Depot] in Texarkana, Texas and I'd been out in the field with checking troops and training and I came back and the commanding general secretary said, "They, secretary of the army's office would like for you to call him," and I said, "Fine." I said, who's the secretary of the army because at that particular time, there was a transition and I didn't know who had been. So they said, come up and they wanted to interview me and I said I'll never get that particular job, first being a tactical service officer as opposed to a combat arm's officer and my daughters [Deborah Holmes Cook and Sharon Holmes Key] were back here so I said, I'll get a free trip back here to see my daughters and my interview with the secretary of the army lasted approximately ten minutes and I walked out of there saying, well, you know, that was a, that was a good time, I got to see my daughters, and I went to the airport at Dulles [Washington Dulles International Airport, Dulles, Virginia], getting ready to go back to Kansas and I got a call that said, "Colonel Holmes [HistoryMaker Major General Arthur Holmes, Jr.], would you pick up one of the courtesy phones," and I picked it up and the guy who was the acting executive said, "The secretary of the army wants to talk with you," and so I was hang--holding on and he came back on and said, he had to go up and see the secretary of defense so he will call you tomorrow. So I said to him, "Hey, you can't keep me hanging like this. What is it?" And he said, you know, "I can't tell you that." He said, "The secretary of the army has to tell you his decision," but he said, "I don't think you'll be disappointed," and when I got back to Fort Riley, the next day, I got a call that said the secretary of the army wanted me to come to the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and be his executive officer. Speaker 1: Well, okay then, that doesn't get too much better than this. Speaker 2: It does not. Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--that was one of the happiest moments in my life-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my military life, I should say. Story_ID: 571089 Speaker 1: So what happened? I mean, what were some of the events, the highlights of, of that period of time? Speaker 2: Well, you know, being the commander of the support command in the 1st Infantry Division, I was the first black to do that. That's a brigade level command and we went on an exercise in Germany and I think we were the best trained division in the [U.S.] Army at that particular time and I was complimented by the commanding general for doing a very good job on the exercise. He called me, Slick Sick--Six [ph.]. Six is the number that you give a commander and he said that because I would, I would duck out on his staff meetings because he said if you didn't have something to do--and I, but I kept my unit going, I kept the division running. And so, he was saying how, how good support he'd gotten and before everybody on the post assembled in the officers' club and when I came out of the division, I got a special efficiency report when I was going to be the executive to the secretary of the army and a special efficiency report is one that you get out of cycle. You normally get an efficiency report when you change jobs, or once a year, and a special efficiency report really means a lot to you and when I went to the secretary of the army's office, that was what I went with and to get the job as the XO [executive officer], the secretary of the army [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.], it was above my wildest dream. Speaker 1: Now what were some of the issues, other than downsizing, what were some of the other issues in the Army then? Speaker 2: Well, that was, that was when the all volunteer army was just starting and you had to make sure that you did things to get recruits in. That was a time when the Army was getting, what, as they say so-called black because blacks were staying in the Army, that was a place that they could, they could move. And so, those were some of the things you, you dealt with and also you had a drug problem in the Army at that particular time. And the secretary of the army is responsible for the training of the troops and providing the forces to the, to the combat elements of the Army. So that was a, that was a busy time, a very busy time. Speaker 1: Okay, is there any single thing that stands out as a highlight of that period of time? Speaker 2: A highlight, I don't know of any, any highlights. I guess I was in awe of the fact that as a colonel I got to talk to four star generals and three star generals and what have you. A highlight of that, I don't know of anything that sticks out except the, knowing the magnitude of your job. Here you are at the, at the top of the Army, you're handling instances, you're handling cases that affect the whole Army and I remember when I went there, I said to myself, boy you will never remember all of this stuff but you get so you can triage stuff and things and you, you do that. The highlight was the fact that I was operating at a high level at that particular level. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: High proficiency level I should say. Story_ID: 571090 Speaker 1: Now, do you have any reflections on Clifford Alexander [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.]? Speaker 2: He was an exceptionally smart individual and an individual who knew what he wanted to do and some folk didn't like that. They wanted the secretary of the army to just kind of go along with whatever the [U.S.] Army staff said and he wasn't that kind of person and I admire him for that. He did those things that he thought was right for the Army. Speaker 1: Okay, and what about Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. Did you come in contact with him very much? Speaker 2: The only time I came in contact, I went to one cabinet meeting that he had invited the secretary of the army to and that's the only contact that I had and that really wasn't contact but I did sit in on that meeting. Speaker 1: Okay. I know that during that period of time, I think President Carter offered amnesty to a lot of people that left the United States rather than, you know, go to Vietnam, that resisted the draft (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was not, that was not seen very well by, by Army folk. You know, guys who had gone over, risked their lives in Vietnam and then here we come with those individuals who had shirked their duty as we would say, are given amnesty. I personally don't think that that should have happened but I, as we say in the Army, that was above my pay grade. So, I said, I don't think that if you don't serve your country, that you should be, then be forgiven for not serving your country. Story_ID: 571091 Speaker 1: Also, I guess, people have speculated when the Iran crisis broke out in 1979 they, people began to wonder, especially in the aftermath of it, when people began to talk about the, you know, what happened in the October, when the election was going on, of '79 [1979], what, how, tight a connection Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] had to the [U.S.] Armed Forces. I think there was an attempt to rescue the hostages where the helicopters crashed or something and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and there was rumors of sabotage within the [U.S.] Army and, is that, did you ever hear of anything like that? Speaker 2: No, there was, there was a time in the Army where there's a lot of, what do I want to say, disruption. There were, in Vietnam as an example, they had what they call, fraggings where people would throw grenades into, some of the soldier would throw grenades into their commander's office, office, and when I was in Vietnam, the first day I was there, somebody threw a fragmentation grenade in the orderly room of my, one of my companies and I had the troops in formation and I indicated to them that we were going to have the Ordnance disposal folk [U.S. Army Ordnance Corps] find all the little grenades that they may have hid some place but the next time an incident like that happened, they were going to find the grenades and that meant that they would have to go in and look for the grenades themselves and they were not enamored with that. I never had another incident like that. Speaker 1: Okay, so it didn't go off, in other words? Speaker 2: No, one went, went off, the one I'm talking about, went off but I never had another incident after that because I told them that if they had another incident that they were the ones that I was going to send to find out and look in the sandbags to find the grenades that they may have hidden and that never happened again. Speaker 1: Well, the entire, the fragging stories seemed to, I know there are a lot of bitter black soldiers, I know, in Vietnam that came back with a lot of stories-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --that weren't pretty and the fragging stories I've heard from people on the street, you know, underlie this bitterness against the racism over there and other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were saying that most black soldiers were put into the frontlines and they were not given promotions as they should, in Vietnam there was a very bitter taste among black soldiers in the, in the Army at that time and I experienced some of that and being a black, sometimes they expected you were then going to give them an extra break. I didn't do that but, and I think that, you know, that was just something that I try to treat everybody the same way. On the other hand, there were, there were blacks who were not doing their job and, and I took action against them. When I went to my command in Vietnam, the previous commander would not walk around the compound without a weapon and I never carried a weapon when I was inside the compound. I, I think I commanded the troops with fairness and know that's, that's a way that I try to work. Story_ID: 571092 Speaker 1: Yeah, can you think of a, of a incident that really tried your capacity to be balanced? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. When I got to Vietnam, I don't know whether you know very much about the [U.S.] Army, but when you're getting ready to go on guard duty, you have a formation and you check all the people's weapons. You make sure they're ready to go on guard and do their job but when I got there, they had a buddy system and you and I, if we liked each other, we were the one's that went up into the towers and they slept most of the night, or they smoked pot most of the night. Well, I stopped that. I would, I would walk up to the--and climb up in the towers and find out what was going on. I also made them have guard, a guard formation and they were assigned according to number and they didn't like that and most of these were black soldiers who didn't like that and one soldier said that I was not blackinized [ph.] and I wanted to know what that was and he was saying that you're not, you're not black and he and I had a talk and he ended up in jail, not because he called me that, because he wasn't doing his job. There were other soldiers who weren't doing their jobs that we were able to, to turn around and by the time they left Vietnam, they were, they were okay but there were a lot of drugs going in, in my--when I went to Vietnam, I could go through my barracks and get you, you know the grocery bags, about the big grocery, I can get you a half of grocery bag of marijuana going through the barracks. I could get you five or six vials of 95 percent pure heroin that was about the size of, of the tip of my finger. So you had to, had to deal with those particular things. Speaker 1: Now, I, we, I know we've heard these stories before and lots been written about that period of time and drugs in the Army, it must be, gee, it must made it all the difficult to-- Speaker 2: It was. It was difficult but I think, I was, I was lucky. I had some good training from other commanders and you start doing things that make, keep soldiers busy, have them do their job and they don't have time for that and you also, as a commander, have to go and check, check the soldiers, go in and find out where they live and what they're doing and that way you can, you can keep a real handle on things. A very small incident but one I think was very outstanding is when I came to the unit, soldiers were not, some were not wearing their rank. That meant they could get away with, without doing their job of their rank. They were not wearing full uniform and particularly hats. I don't whether you know what a boonie cap is but it's a kind of floppy cap that you, you wear, you-- Speaker 1: The kind that has to tie under your chin, like-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's it. They wanted to wear those. And so I had a formation in my, my commander, my next level of commander was there and I said, "Would you mind if these soldiers wore the boonie caps," and he said, "I don't care what kind of caps they wear." So, that formation, I told them, "You can wear the boonie cap." About 50 percent of the soldiers, right then and there, put the hat on. I told soldiers, "If you don't wear your rank, you don't want your rank." They put their rank on and they started doing their jobs. And so, I think you can take some, Vietnam--Vietnam to me was a place where I think I learned to command. You do things for the soldier, the soldier would do things for you. Story_ID: 571093 Speaker 1: And we had some dangerous missions. We had to go through Vietnam, some Vietnam territory to provide ammunition and supplies up to one of the units in Kon Tum [Vietnam], yeah, Kon Tum, and we had gun trucks. All the gun trucks had on it was some steel on the side and the people who worked on those gun trucks, you had to be sober, you couldn't be in drugs and, and the crews would make you work. They'd make you work and clean your gun when you come back. They'd make you, make sure the truck was working. You didn't want your truck to break down where the Vietcong was. So, you, you made sure that they worked. So I think it was a great learning experience for me and I think I, I did a good job. Speaker 2: Okay, it would just seem to me that any army, no matter what side they're on, could ill afford having soldiers that are on drugs, you know. Speaker 1: That's right, but it was, it was rampant over there. You could get it if you saw a person with a black glove on, you knew that they had some drugs that you could get and it was very cheap. Speaker 2: So, a black glove was the, the-- Speaker 1: That was the, yeah, that, that was kind of a sign of, "I'm a, I'm a dealer." Speaker 2: This is, this is on part of the soldiers or the civilians (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, this was part of the, you could go outside the post and the Vietnamese they would have that on. No, I, I don't know of any selling on the post that I was on. Speaker 2: Okay, now was the, were off duty accommodations segregated unofficially or officially (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But there were--well, up in Pleiku [Vietnam] there was no place for you to go off duty, you know that, you had, you were in a compound and that compound was where you, where you stayed. You could go to another compound like, there were other compounds and you go through the city of Pleiku but there was no, at night, you were through. You were in a combat zone so you had to have guards and those kind of things. Story_ID: 571094 Speaker 1: Well back to the secretary of the army [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.]. Now-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --now what happened after you, well, tell us about the end of your days as secretary of the, as the executive for the secretary of the army? Speaker 2: Oh, you know, we, we did some, some things. At that time, if you remember, we were negotiating the Panama Canal to the, to give it back to the Panamanians and secretary of the army was the sole stockholder by position in the Panama Canal so I did get to go to Panama three or four times. I met Torrijos [Omar Torrijos], the dictator who was over Panama and one of the most clandestine things, we were put in a car and we were moved around the city and eventually we came to his place. I don't know where it was and I was there with the secretary as they were negotiating a treaty and I saw the life of the, of the Panamanians there and the life of the Americans, or Zonians, people who had been born in the zone there [Panama Canal Zone], had never-- Speaker 1: They call them, Zonians? Speaker 2: Zonians, yeah, and they were living good, very good down there and there was a lot of resistance to turning the canal over to the Panamanians. Speaker 1: Had, did you ever meet Noriega [Manuel Noriega]? Speaker 2: No I, I did, never met him but I was at a cocktail party where he was there and he was pointed, he was a major at that time. He was pointed out to me as, this is Noriega, but we did meet Torrijos and then after he was assassinated we, I met some other Panamanians. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, you were there, were you there through, I guess, through the end of the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration in '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: No, I was there two years. Speaker 1: Just two years, okay. Speaker 2: And at the end of that, at the end of that two years, I was selected to, as a brigadier general and after two years, I left there and went to the Tank Automotive Command [U.S. Army Tank Automotive Command] as a deputy commander. Story_ID: 571095 Speaker 1: So this is 1978 you're a brigadier general (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was 1979. Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was selected as a brigadier general. Speaker 1: Okay, now was that a surprise to you? Speaker 2: Yes and no. People expected that I would make brigadier the year before and I didn't and my former boss at Fort Riley [Kansas], who had, at that time was a three star general, and a, the IG [inspector general] of the [U.S.] Army, came to me and he said, "Don't you let anybody know that you're disappointed," said, "your file's not one of those they just take and throw on the floor, you have a good file," and he says, "If you don't make it next time, come on down to Fort Hood [Texas] and work for me," and I didn't let anybody know that I was disappointed but I was 'cause I thought I'd done all the things that you should do to be a brigadier but the next board I was selected as a brigadier and that was, I guess, the most thrilling day in the Army for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The secretary of the army [Clifford L. Alexander, Jr.] called me in and said, they told me who's on the brigadier's list and I thought he was going to tell me well, you didn't make it again and he said, "Do you know who's number one on that list," and, you know, he's just very poker face and I said, "No," and he said, "Art Holmes [HistoryMaker Major General Arthur Holmes, Jr.]," and I was selected and I was the first guy in the order on that list and I was promoted. Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was on that list and so that was a great time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Never expected to do that but did it. Speaker 1: Okay, so when they, when you're made a brigadier general, is there like a ceremony or something? Do they give you a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, you have a promotion ceremony and, you know, you're given a flag, your uniform changes, you have black stripes down your, side of your, your trousers and a wider black band and, of course, the stars you have and it's, it's what you look forward to as a, as an officer. Story_ID: 571096 Speaker 1: How did your duties change when you became a brigadier general? Speaker 2: Well, at that particular time, you certainly, you have a larger unit that you're working with and your responsibilities are greater because you have the planning and strategic planning responsibilities. I went to the Tank Automotive Command [U.S. Army Tank Automotive Command] as a deputy and I was over the, what they call the national inventory control point for tank automotive equipment, the maintenance for tank automotive equipment but you're over, over a lot more people. There were six thousand people in the Tank Automotive Command and they were spread all over the world. You had tank automotive specialists in Germany, Korea, throughout the [U.S.] Army so you were responsible for the development of tank automotive equipment. You were responsible for the production of tank automotive equipment. You were responsible for the procurement of tank automotive equipment and support of tank automotive equipment. Speaker 1: Okay, a lot of different-- Speaker 2: All of the Army's rolling stock, that's trucks, the materials handling the equipment, tanks, personnel carriers, armed vehicles, those were the responsibility of the Tank Automotive Command and I went there as a deputy. It was what I wanted to do. I always wanted to do that because my time in the Pentagon as a lieutenant colonel, I was the staff officer for tanks. I was the one who made up the budget for tanks and for what they call the armored bridge vehicle. I was the, the staff officer for that. Story_ID: 571097 Speaker 1: And we talked about this before we started the interview but not since but, at a certain point, I guess in the '60s [1960s], you went to Kent State [Kent State University, Kent, Ohio] and earned a M.B.A., right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, when I came back from Korea, I was in Korea in '63 [1963], '64 [1964], and I was selected to go to the staff college [United States Naval War College, Newport, Rhode Island], this was a year's course where you learned tactics and, and strategic thinking for the [U.S.] Army. It's a, it's a eleven month course and while at the staff college I was selected to go to graduate school and there were five of us at Kent State in the M.B.A. program and so I was at Kent State for eighteen months. Speaker 1: Okay, so did you live on campus or near campus or in the town of Kent [Ohio]? Speaker 2: No, we lived out in the, in the civilian community, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, in Kent itself? Speaker 2: In Kent itself, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. So, so I'm just, I guess I'm just, I forgot to make that point because it takes an advanced, you know, management-- Speaker 2: Management, um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, training to be able to manage all of this. Speaker 2: That's right, and I, I went from, from Kent State I went to what they, at that particular time, the Army's combat development command and I was in a, what they call the institute of special studies and if you see the, the helicopter with all the armor on it, now it's the Apache helicopter [Boeing AH-64 Apache], I worked on the prototype for that vehicle and when we were writing scenarios, I wrote the low--high intensity warfare scenario for, to be used to war game, that particular tank, I mean, that particular helicopter. I'm not a helicopter pilot but I was given that particular job after I came out of graduate school and I stayed there for approximately a year in the institute of special studies and then I was selected to go and command a battalion at Fort, Fort Campbell, Kentucky. They were organizing a division, a new division down there, the 6th Division [6th Infantry Division], and I had the 706th Maintenance Battalion and we activated that battalion and got it to working and I stayed there at Fort Campbell for six months, then they, that was a turbulent time in the Army. They decided to deactivate that division and so then I went to the Fort Riley, Kansas and I was the battalion commander in the 24th Infantry Division. Story_ID: 571098 Speaker 1: All right, now back to, as a brigadier general, now did you have to, so would you meet with the various manufacturers of vehicles to determine (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes. One of my jobs was to go to the various manufacturers, and particularly the trouble manufacturers who weren't producing the material on time and that was one of my jobs. We had an aircraft and I did that with the quality control of the, of the parts that we were buying and so, yes, I did that. Speaker 1: Okay, and would you also meet with the engineers about prototype vehicles? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. You see we had a R and D [research and development] element right there at the Tank Automotive Command [U.S. Army Tank Automotive Command] and as a deputy I had a responsibility for that also and I would go and talk with them. They would make, the process kind of is, you brief the deputy and see what he has to say, then you brief the commander after you've had, you know, the deputy's input and what have you. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were, you would meet with the various, various manufacturers about prototypes and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --and then help develop them as a-- Speaker 2: I, I rode on a prototype on the test track for the Humvee, as an example. So, yes, you had to do those kind of things. Speaker 1: Now were you, were you there when they switched from jeeps to Humvees or-- Speaker 2: I was the one, I was the commander that fielded the first Humvee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I put it in the field and I was the very first commander. Speaker 1: Okay, now it's become such a popular recreational, well, amongst the basketball players and other millionaires. Speaker 2: Well they have the, what is it, the Hummer, that's, that's kind of taken off from that but the basic Humvee was a lot, a lot different. It was to replace the jeep, be a little bit larger but to replace the jeep and you had several variants of it. You had an ambulance variants, you had one that was like a jeep and you had one that had a, a tow missile on it, so you had various variants of that particular vehicle but I was the commander of the Tank Automotive Command when we put that particular vehicle in the field. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, well, what are some, are there any other highlights of, you know, your career as a general? Now you served from '79 [1979] to '87 [1987] as a-- Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987] as a general officer. Speaker 1: And when you retired you were, what? Speaker 2: Major general-- Speaker 1: Major general. Speaker 2: --two star general, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Highlights. My highlight was commanding the, coming back to command the Tank Automotive Command to be the commanding general that I command. As I said, it was about six thousand folk. In every post there was equipment that I was responsible for to get the repair parts to them, to make sure they were maintained properly from a higher level if they couldn't do it on the post. We had people out there that were experts that could do it. So, the highlight there was, as I said to them as I was retiring, an old Tennessee boy, that now is the head of the [U.S.] Army, as a Tank Automotive Command and I was the first black commander of the, of the Tank Automotive Command. Story_ID: 571099 Speaker 1: Now, so what happened in '87 [1987] when you retired or, or why did you retire, really? I mean, did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you, if you don't make lieutenant general and, let's go back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a selection process with the board for brigadier general and major general. After that, it's at the pleasure of the chief of staff for the [U.S.] Army. He selects the individual. There's no board selection and if you, after you have thirty-five years of service, then you're asked to retire. They, you know, they like to keep the people young and what have you and so I retired at the end of my career--thirty-five year career. Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you do after you retired? Speaker 2: After I retired, I became vice president of Automated Sciences Group [Automated Sciences Group, Inc.]. It was a black owned high tech firm that had sales of about $28 million. I was vice president when I came in and by the time I left, I was the president and chief operating officer. Speaker 1: Okay, and you did that from '80s [1980s]-- Speaker 2: I did that from '87 [1987] to '95 [1995], I think it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I believe it was '95 [1995]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, and so, so did you find that your services as an administrator, a manager (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, that's-- Speaker 1: --in really high, in high demand? Speaker 2: The management training I had in the Army, the management experience I've had in the Army allowed me to do what I did there. We had a crisis at one time with the [U.S.] Navy in, in terms of, of the work that we were doing. My military background allowed me to talk with Navy folk and we came out of that without any problem whatsoever. Story_ID: 571100 Speaker 1: At some point, you served as commissioner on a Montgomery County Planning Board? What was this (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was, I was sitting in my office one day at the Automated Sciences Group [Automated Sciences Group, Inc.] and a lady called me and said they need to have a person apply for a commissioner's job on the planning board and they said there's never been a black on the planning board and she said, "Do you know anybody that could do that," and I said, "Yes, I could do that," because I'd been in that business of building communities in the [U.S.] Army when I was at the Tank Automotive Command [U.S. Army Tank Automotive Command]. So I was selected as a commissioner on the planning board and I served as a commissioner for seven years and after that I was selected as the chairman of the, of the planning board and the planning board's a very powerful board. It's semiautonomous so it, it can get above the politics of the county and so I served there. You can only serve eight years so I could only serve one year as the chairman of that particular board. Story_ID: 571101 Speaker 1: Now in 2001, you, you became the, the director of public works and transportation [Montgomery County Department of Public Works and Transportation; Montgomery County Department of Transportation]? Speaker 2: No in 2001, I became a director of a special project for the county executive. I became the director of a program called, Go Montgomery! I don't think it's in there. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: It was Go Montgomery! and what he was trying to do was to spend approximately $10 million over a five year period to upgrade the transit and the transportation system in the county and I, he asked me at the very last day I was on the planning board [Montgomery County Planning Board], he asked if I would take that particular job and I held that job for two years. Then, the director of public works and transportation retired and they asked me if I would take that job and I said, yes, and that was in 19--I'm sorry, it was in 2004, I became the director of public works and transportation and that was a job that had about sixteen hundred folk and it had various activities. We had the solid waste where we did the, all of the solid waste collections in the county [Montgomery County, Maryland] and the burning of, of items and the recycling of items. I had also the responsibility for the maintenance of all of the vehicles in the, in the county. We had the responsibility for all of the buildings in the county, building them, designing and building them and then maintaining them and then we had the transit system in the county which is about three hundred buses called, Ride On, and so we had all of that and the county executive came in and said he wanted greater focus on just transportation so we reorganized as of last, of this month, first of this month, and now I have just transportation items. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, but the, the responsibility split up, you said recently, they recently split up, public works split from transportation? Speaker 2: Right, yeah, public works, the solid waste element went to the Department of Environmental Protection [Montgomery County Department of Environmental Protection], the facility's part went to the Depart- a new department, Department of General Services [Montgomery County Department of General Services] and now I have just transportation elements. Story_ID: 571102 Speaker 1: Now what's the difference or have you noticed a difference between army life and civilian life in terms of the management responsibilities you have? Speaker 2: I think the manager's responsibility are about the same. Now when you, when you have to manage a place like the Tank Automotive Command [U.S. Army Tank Automotive Command] where you have to do as a commander, that's a business and so when you come out and I, my skills and the experiences that I had were very transferable when I came into, out of the [U.S.] military. Speaker 1: I think when people, people think of a general, they think of someone in combat and leading troops and strategically planning-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --battles and those sort of things but, but a lot of the military is management, is it not? Speaker 2: That's, that's exactly right and that's why they sent us to school to get M.B.A.'s because we got to come out and manage things and so when I came out of the [U.S.] Army, I never, I make sure people know that I'm not a war hero. I did serve in Vietnam in a war zone but the management skills I had, the management techniques that I had to, to put forth in the Army, served me well in the Department of Transportation [Montgomery County Department of Public Works and Transportation; Montgomery County Department of Transportation]. I'm not a transportation engineer. I have a B.S. in chemistry and an M.B.A. and I told, and I said, I'm not a transportation engineer but I can manage the Department of Public Works and Transportation and that comes from my Army training. Story_ID: 571103 Speaker 1: Now the--you did have like some opposition from the, the head of the Montgomery County [Maryland], let's see. Well, you had some political opposition (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there, when I came, when I came into the planning board [Montgomery County Planning Board], there were groups that did not, wondered why they were putting a black person in there, why they were putting me in there as a general but when I was the commander of the Tank Automotive Command [U.S. Army Tank Automotive Command], we had a full community. You know, you have to have the recreation facilities and we were on an [U.S.] Air Force base but I was responsible for the health and welfare of the families on that, on that place and we also had an outside housing area that we, we did have to plan it. So I had some, some background to be on the planning board and I went through the vetting process and the interviews and they selected me. Speaker 1: Okay, and as of today, you still function as director of transportation for the-- Speaker 2: I'm the director of transportation and that's about fourteen hundred fifty folk that I have responsibility for and responsibility for the county's complete bus system [Ride On], responsibility for the maintenance and repair of all the roads in the county and I guess that's it, and all the transportation responsibilities of hiker/biker trails, the transit and the roads are mine. Speaker 1: And from what I understand, you really like what you do? Speaker 2: Oh, I do. I enjoy it. My wife [Wilma King Holmes] asked me when I'm going to retire. My daughters [Deborah Holmes Cook and Sharon Holmes Key] say, "Daddy it's time to retire," but I enjoy going to work every day. There are frustrations, yes. You go before the council and sometimes you wonder why they make a decision but they have a perspective. I'm going before a council today to support a position that we have and, and that to me is invigorating. I don't want to come home and sit. I'm not a golfer so I wouldn't be good at golfing with the boys. So I don't want to come home and sit. I think I can make a contribution. I think I do a good job and I like it. Story_ID: 571104 Speaker 1: Okay, now what are some of your hopes and concerns about the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, my concern, I think we, we have a generation, a generation that does not understand from whence it came and I'm saying the history. When I came up, my parents, Grace [Grace Bradley Holmes] and Arthur [Arthur Holmes, Sr.], would indicate to you, "Look, you got to be better, you can't be just as good." I think that's not the way the youngsters think. They think right now that, okay, I've been to school, I've gotten the skills, I'm due something. You are due something but that's not the real world. You've got to make sure that you put forth that effort. I'm concerned about, and this may be trite, about our naming of people. I can go into a roll, a roll of the, listing of people and I can pick out 95 percent of the blacks in there. I'm concerned that we don't think that we have to be part of society, necessarily, that we can be outside of society and there's certain things you can do and you should be an individual, don't get me wrong. I'm proud that I'm black. I don't ever try to be anything else. I try to help black folk. I try to do things in the black community. I was head of the education committee for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. So I'm black, I know that. When I go into, into my job, I know that people are looking at me and you're Arthur Holmes [HistoryMaker Major General Arthur Holmes, Jr.], you're black, you can't help. I'm 6'3", 240 pounds, black and I guess sometimes I work harder because of that. I know that, I don't want anybody to say that I can't do a job. I don't want anybody to say that I shirked--I don't think that some of the young people do that. I'm concerned, I'm concerned about our young folk. I'm concerned that some of the things they do. Naturally, being an army guy, I'm not enamored with the, with the dress but, and I had a son who he and I fought sometimes. I say, fought, in not a literal sense but, about the way he wanted to dress, about his hair, but he graduated from the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] with honors. All of my kids graduated from college with honors and I don't want people to be just like them but I think in some ways we have been too lax and some of our children aren't getting the foundations to, to work in our society. Story_ID: 571105 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently? Speaker 2: Do differently? No, I, some things I wish I could have done. I was out of the country for a lot of the civil rights activities. When they had the March on Washington, I was in Korea. I, I was in Tennessee when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated. I was at Fort Campbell, which is in Tennessee and in Kentucky and I sent troops out there, and support troops into Memphis [Tennessee], you know, when the rioting started. I identify very much with the movement and I never thought I'd see the day when a guy [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] would be running, seriously, for president. My step-granddaughter [sic. stepdaughter, Sharon Fairley] works very close with him in his office in Chicago [Illinois] and my son-in-law is one of his greatest supporters, John Rogers [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.] is my son-in-law, and so, would I do something different? No, I'm, I'm, I think I'm proud of what I did. I think I tried at all times to be all I could be. I got that from Grace Holmes [Holmes' mother, Grace Bradley Holmes] and if I look back over my career, and did I make some mistakes, yes, I made some mistakes but I also tried to be somebody that people in my race could, could be proud of at all times and I have been the first and I have been the only a number of times but that didn't bother me. Story_ID: 571106 Speaker 1: Now you mentioned your family but you've got a son and you've got a-- Speaker 2: My son is deceased. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I have two girls [Deborah Holmes Cook and Sharon Holmes Key]. One is a zoologist at the National Institutes of Health. The other, who was a journalism major at Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], has a master's degree in procurement and is a project manager for a large construction company in, in Virginia. They stay here. One's in Hagerstown, Maryland, lives in Hagerstown and one lives in Springfield, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, and you, you've remarried, right? Speaker 2: I remarried, my wife, Wilma [Wilma King Holmes], and I've been married, we celebrated our twenty-fifth wedding anniversary on the 19th of February and she's the love of my life and I must say that she has been a big motivator in my life. I told you that my mom [Grace Bradley Holmes] would always say, you know, you can do it and that's been Wilma. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When we decided to go for the planning board [Montgomery County Planning Board], I said, "You know, they're not going to select me for the planning board," she said, "you can do it," and that was the motivator for me. Story_ID: 571107 Speaker 1: My last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? I'd like to be remembered as Art Holmes [HistoryMaker Major General Arthur Holmes, Jr.] who gave his best at whatever he tried to do. I'd like to be remembered as an individual who was compassionate and tried to treat everybody fairly. I'd like to be remembered as an individual who tried to help people do better than they, than they were doing, to motivate them to do certain things. So, I know I've made some mistakes but I think overall as I look back over my life, I'm fairly satisfied. Where am I now? I'm at a place that I never thought I'd be, making more money than I ever thought I'd be. We were talking the other night, if, if my dad [Arthur Holmes, Sr.] were alive and he, told him what I was making, he'd say, "Hoss, what are you doing with all that money," you know. It's, I've been lucky. I've met good people, worked for good people and I'm happy. Speaker 1: Well, thank you sir. Speaker 2: Thank you...