 Story_ID: 624724 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers archive. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: My name is Wesley L. Harris, W-E-S-L-E-Y, L. is the middle initial, H-A-R-R-I-S. Speaker 1: And what is your middle initial stand for? Speaker 2: My middle initial L. is Leroy, L-E-R-O-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth, October 29, 1941. Place of birth, Richmond, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: I am the Charles Stark Draper Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And I'm also an associate provost for faculty equity at MIT and I am housemaster of the New House Residence Hall at MIT. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is Friday, April 26, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in Building 4, Room 250 on MIT's Campus, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, Mass. Story_ID: 624725 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as kind of a warm up and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite food is rib-eye steak. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall in England. Fall season in England. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Probably going back home to Richmond. I'm not that much of a vacation guy. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. The greatest gift is to give. The greatest gift is to give. Story_ID: 624726 Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately and then we'll put them together. So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Yes, Rosa Minor. Rosa is R-O-S-A, Minor is M-I-N-O-R. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother was born April 15, 1914, in Chesterfield County, Virginia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about what they were doing? Speaker 2: We can trace my mother's side of the family back to 1839. Matilda was sold as a slave on Franklin Street in Richmond, Virginia in 1839 and that is as far back as we have been able o trace the Minor, Taylor side of the family. Speaker 1: Now that's interesting. A lot of people can't give that kind of detail in terms of where their ancestors were actually sold. But Franklin Street was the place--? Speaker 2: The slave block on Franklin Street in Richmond. Speaker 1: Okay. And so are there any stories about Matilda? Speaker 2: No. We, we've traced her back by going to look at the registry of slaves, property on the various farms in Chesterfield and Henrico County. And by looking at those records we've been able to trace the Minor/Taylor back to Matilda in 1939. There aren't any stories about her. There are hand me down stories of other succeeding generations but not about Matilda. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story on, on your mother's side of the family about emancipation, about the fall of Richmond or any of that? Speaker 2: No, only that the Taylors and Minors did participate in the Civil War, but there aren't any stories of jubilation during the Emancipation Proclamation or during June 19, I think Juneteenth it's called. We have no-- I have not been informed by word of mouth of any such response. Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell us about the service of the Taylors and the Minors in the Civil War-- Speaker 2: What-- Speaker 1: --with Richmond being the capital of the confederacy, one of the focal points. Speaker 2: Right. Okay, please re--it's important to know that the Taylors, Harrises, Minors all were either in Chesterfield County or in Powhatan County. They were not residents of the city, they were on the farms as laborers, slave laborers on the farms in the counties surrounding Richmond. So they would not have been involved in any of the bombardments of Richmond by the federal or Union troops. But they would have been participants as soldiers and suppliers to the Union army when the Union army marched up from, up the James River into Richmond through Petersburg. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So are there any stories passed down about the Civil War activities as such, or do you just have the records that they actually served--? Speaker 2: No, these are stories. Now there's no record-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: ---of any of the Harrises, Taylors or Minors as registered conscripts or paid Union soldiers or fighters, no. These were records that were passed down primarily from my grandmother on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is something that your family talked about-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and passed down. Story_ID: 624727 Speaker 1: Was your family able to acquire any land after the Civil War? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's no record, there's no record of large acres of farms. Clearly the Minor clan in particular had their own homes and properties in Chesterfield County. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: And still--and descendants still do. Speaker 1: So they had enough to, you know, grow some vegetables and to do, you know-- Speaker 2: We'll come to that in during the [Great] Depression. They did have enough to a certain extent. Speaker 1: Okay. Well what kind of occupations did they pursue in--? Speaker 2: Oh, they were all farmers, sawmills in Chesterfield County [Virginia]. I remember distinctively, Grandma telling us about Grandpa Ben, Grandpa Ben's brothers and relatives working in the sawmills as common laborers. Speaker 1: So that was major employment in Chesterfield County? Speaker 2: Well for our clan, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So the women basically did you know what, housewives or-- Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That, they did not work in the saw mills. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So-- Speaker 2: Highly unlikely. Speaker 1: So was the tobacco industry big, I mean in Chesterfield County? Speaker 2: Well my recollection is as follows, the tobacco value was grown in the Carolinas, trucked to Richmond. Value added was provided in Richmond [Virginia], cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco. Those products, the value added from the raw product was provided in Richmond so you had the great tobacco companies, Lucky Strikes, Liggett & Myers, Philip Morris, that's where the value added was provided. But the trucks would come in loaded with barrels, probably six feet in diameter and maybe if you stood them on a side on the top or bottom, seven and a half feet in height. But that tobacco was cured, grown and cured in the Carolinas and trucked north to Richmond. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That whole industry played a major part in our family. And as you, we can talk about it now if you want to progress to, along another line we could do that. Speaker 1: Sure, we can talk about it now I mean on your mother's [Rosa Minor] side I guess we're just trying to figure out what people were doing on your mother's side. So-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: (That's?)-- Speaker 2: All right, so the Minors, not the Taylors, walked to Richmond from Chesterfield County during the Great Depression. They would have starved had they remained on the countryside during the Great Depression. Being uneducated they found jobs as common laborers in the tobacco industry doing menial jobs. There is a process called stemming. Stemming means you remove the hard core stem on the tobacco leaves. You pull it off with your hands and then the leaves are put on a belt that the leaves are then transported to a point where they are grind, mixed into products for cigarettes. Some of it's folded leaves into cigars, some is chopped very finely even to a greater degree for snuff tobacco, for pipes, etc. But the most, the first hands are called stemming and that's the very deadly carcinogenic part of the process. You need to stem, you need to sweep the floors and that's where our family got their start. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is the toughest part of a tobacco business basically there involved. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the front end. Speaker 1: The dirty work. Speaker 2: That's correct. You pull open the barrels, yes. The barrels of tobacco that's bought to Richmond, trucked to Richmond from the Carolinas. Speaker 1: Okay. So the stories that are passed down was it really bad in Chesterfield County then that they had to walk to Richmond to--? Speaker 2: Yeah, well that's during the Great Depression. Maybe you're walking thirty miles, forty miles to Richmond. I mean, you work in a sawmill, you walk to the sawmill, you don't have a car or truck and how do you get your family to Richmond? There's only one way and that's to walk. Speaker 1: Okay. Well that can be done in a day but that's a long day. Speaker 2: Yeah, it is. Speaker 1: That's a long day's walk. Story_ID: 624728 Speaker 1: Now your grandfather's name was Benjamin, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what about your grandmother? Speaker 2: Alice. Alice Minor. Alice Taylor before she married Benjamin Minor. That's why I keep saying the Taylor/Minor clan. Speaker 1: All right. Now what did your mother [Rosa Minor] say about growing up? What experiences did she have, did she share with you about growing up? And did she grow up in Chesterfield County [Virginia]? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yes. Wonderful stories of walking five miles to the school, walking through snow. I think she had a wonderful childhood. I remember only cheerful conversations, wonderful--well she remembered and shared with us the bright, wonderful things of growing as, in the countryside, fresh eggs for example, from the chickens. She was a daddy's girl, really loved her dad, Benjamin, really, really just attached to him, good thingsn you know. None of the Taylors, Minors, including my mother, finished high school now. They had very, very limited exposure to formal education although they all read the newspapers and did all the kinds of things you must do to be able to participate in citizen voting, paying taxes. You know they, without formal education somehow they were able to do this, a very religious group as well, not fanatics, not reading the bible everyday but extremely moral, extremely moral. Right from wrong was preached and practiced every single day, never from the bible but just, you know, you don't do this. It is wrong. You treat your neighbor fairly, you serve the sick, you feed the hungry. Speaker 1: Okay. Did--is the name of your mother's school passed down that she attended? Speaker 2: No. That would be a real stretch on my memory. She probably did tell us but I certainly can't recall that. Speaker 1: Okay. I ask 'cause often the name of the school is the name of some black person in town that really you know established the school or first principal or something. But-- Speaker 2: Well this is Chesterfield County you know and you're talking about the 20s [1920s]. Hmm, good question. I don't recall the name of the school. Speaker 1: Okay, or the church they attended? Speaker 2: Yes, the church. Yeah, Grandma Alice Minor and Grandpa Benjamin Minor are the only Minors, Harrises, Taylors that I am aware of that's buried out in Chesterfield County. They are buried together. Oh, it's a Baptist church. Again, for the record I should not try to guess the name cause that simply may be wrong. Speaker 1: Okay, but it's a Baptist church though? Speaker 2: Oh yes, very much so. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so your mother went to school, I guess she didn't go to high school but she got, you know-- Speaker 2: Limited training in Chesterfield County, yes. Speaker 1: And did she get married after, I mean as, during, as a teenager or did she--? Speaker 2: A teenager, yes, right. No, she wasn't in her twenties, no. Story_ID: 624729 Speaker 1: I'm going to go to your father's side now then we'll try to get them together. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes it's William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, M for McKinley, M-C-K-I-N-L-E-Y, Harris. Speaker 1: I suppose he's named after William McKinley the president. Speaker 2: I think so. I would assume that sir. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, and-- Speaker 1: McKinley was killed too and was one of the presidents that people wouldn't remember because he was shot-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know in office around the turn of the century. So William McKinley Harris and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Okay. I am going to guess this, older than my mother. I would say 1890s, probably '98 [1898] or '99 [1899]. Speaker 1: I'm thinking that was probably in the news a lot in those days, the shooting of President McKinley 'cause it was like the big national-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --disaster. So, and where was your father born? Speaker 2: Powhatan County Virginia. Like the Indian Powhatan. I think it's P-O-W-A-T-A-N, Powhatan County Virginia. Now in terms of geography, it's a bit north and west of Richmond [Virginia]. Chesterfield County, my mother's line, is on the southern side of Richmond. So the Harrises and the Minors and the Taylors did not grow up in the same area, okay. But the Harris clan also walked to Richmond during the Great Depression for the same reason. They could not survive on the country sides in the Great Depression. Speaker 1: So what did the Harrises do when they got to Richmond? Speaker 2: Menial jobs initially and it was my father who began to have, to be, to demonstrate the entrepreneurial spirit and develop his own businesses, especially restaurants. He was, he was an extremely capable manager and even a better cook, if you will. Actually taught my mother how to cook various things so he was quite good at that. Speaker 1: Okay. So he was a cook and he established restaurants? Speaker 2: Yes. Yep. Speaker 1: Now did they do, his family do that kind of work in Powhatan County? Speaker 2: Oh in Powhatan, no. I know less about the Harris clan from Powhatan than I do of the Minor/Taylor clan in Chesterfield. Jimmy [James], my uncle, my father's brother, his sisters all moved north, my aunts and Jimmy remained in the Richmond area. No, they would work with my father in the restaurants but they were not of the entrepreneurial spirit as intensely and as successfully as he was. But Adele and the sisters, my aunts, they all went north and they never came back. They-- Speaker 1: Now was your father the first person in the family to establish a business or had his--? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh definitely yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, well what did his father do? What did your grandfather do? Speaker 2: Okay, that I don't know, okay. That I don't know, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they--yeah. Speaker 1: Now did your dad have a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 624730 Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of his [William McKinley Harris] restaurant? Speaker 2: Norfolk Grill. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh yes, there's no way I could forget that, Norfolk okay, N-O-R-F-O-K, Norfolk, like the city Norfolk [Virginia], Norfolk Grill. Speaker 1: Is there a reason for that you think, Norfolk Grill is in Richmond [Virginia], but, yeah. Speaker 2: Let's see, could be. Seafood lover, don't know, could be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I can say for certainty that none of the Harris, Taylor, Minor clan have any connections on the coast. We're all central part of Virginia. But that's an interesting question, why Norfolk Grill. Speaker 1: There's probably a story there somewhere but-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --yeah, okay. Speaker 2: That's interesting. I better check on that. Maybe there is a connection in Norfolk. Speaker 1: Now was he able to hang onto that, you know, through most of his life or did he have to start another one or--? Speaker 2: No, no, he died as the owner, operator, manager, cook, bottle washer of Norfolk Grill. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, that's something, that's something to be proud of. Speaker 2: Okay, there's a story there. First & Merchants Bank on Main Street in Richmond, my father wanted a loan to expand the business and they refused to give him the loan. That was a real hard part of his life. He never really got over the fact that that bank refused to give him a loan to expand his business. That was the strongest instant of racism that he never let us forget. He never did. First & Merchants, things like that. Well he said it so much and with such intensity that no way any of us could ever forget it. Speaker 1: So he had to do everything the hard way. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: Week at a time, get a little profit, by some wood, nails, expanded little bit at a time. Speaker 1: Was-- Speaker 2: See, what First & Merchants Bank or the racists didn't understand was that through that kind of determination and effort some important values were transmitted to the children. This idea of persistence, this idea of hard work, this idea of staying with it until it's done, now those points come across and they become lasting parts of one's way of life. An unintended consequence of First & Merchants but that's what we have. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did he, did Norfolk Grill specialize in a certain kind of food? Speaker 2: The things that we black folks like, fried seafoods, fresh cooked breads, rolls or biscuits, you know, chicken, occasionally beef but not what you would call New York strip or any, not steak of that kind, certainly hamburgers, hot dogs, greens, candied yams, soups, desserts, chocolate cake, what we call pound cake in Richmond. I don't know what other parts of the world would call it, a lot of pork, pork chops, pig feets, things like that. Things that black folks love to eat or survived on, let's put it that way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This was not a French cuisine. Speaker 1: Okay. And, but was it strategically located near a place where people would eat lunch or something or--? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, right. In the heart of the district where common laborers going to the tobacco factories. That was the whole idea, common laborers, black folks working in the tobacco companies were not welcomed in the white owned and white served restaurants. So if black folks working wanted to eat, they had to eat in the restaurants owned and operated by black folks. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there a story about how your parents met and got together? Speaker 2: No, it's nothing that was shared, at least I don't remember. Probably, my mother working in the tobacco factory, my father with his business, probably no, I'm assuming that's the level. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But there aren't any grand stories of romance and running off to New York or Atlanta [Georgia], nothing of that sort. So I'm assuming just common day to day interaction bumping into each other in the industrial district around tobacco companies or tobacco factories. Story_ID: 624731 Speaker 1: So when you think back at your parents' personalities, their disposition, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, how they approach problems and situations, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think I look more physically like my father [William McKinley Harris]. He was bald, probably a mix of personalities. My father was always more direct and my mother [Rosa Minor] was the calming element, you know, always there but always wanting to find a way to provide some comfort and relief whereas my father was just determined, always straight ahead, fearless. My mother was fearless in a different way, and my Grandmother Alice was afraid of nothing, maybe four feet five [inches], four feet eight [inches] at best, but there was nothing she was afraid of, no person, no situation, nothing. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have any stories about her character? Speaker 2: Protecting us, her grandchildren in the community. Yeah, Alice Minor was a, was a warrior when it came to protecting the grandkids, yeah. She was always quite physically present when she detected or when she thought she detected any danger or any assault or potential assault of any sort. Just protective you know, just fearless. No matter who raised their voice or concern with regarding, with regard to the children, the grandkids, they had to pass grandma. Speaker 1: Okay, so can you think of any specific stories where it happened that you can share with us? Speaker 2: A detailed one probably not. Speaker 1: That's okay if you can't. I just thought I'd ask. But you know that, so she was the-- Speaker 2: Grandma was a shiel-- a shield, a spear as well. She was all, both--she was both. Story_ID: 624732 Speaker 1: So did your grandmother [Alice Minor] live with you too in the--? Speaker 2: Well no, not in the same house, all in, within two houses of each other. It was a small community in Richmond [Virginia]. It doesn't exist anymore. We were located at basically the corn--the interaction of 25th and Main Street and East End, that corner. I think if you go there now you won't see anything on the northwest corner which was where we were. The old tobacco factories have been converted to condos, the buildings still stand. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Essentially, so, you lived right across the street from the factory? Speaker 2: Yeah, industrial district. We grew up smelling tobacco all the time. Speaker 1: Okay. So let's see. Well, can you-- now you had brothers and sisters I-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: There were five of us and two-- Speaker 1: Can you name them all and put yourself in order? Speaker 2: The oldest is my sister Mae, Mary Elizabeth Harris. Mae is at least eleven years older than I am so Mae is about eighty-four or eighty-five, still alive and still lives in Washington, D.C. And she was the first of the Harrises to finish high school. Mae married, left Richmond for Washington, D.C. and never returned to Richmond to live. She was a civil servant in the Department of Agriculture and she retired there as a statistician. She would tell us stories of a, tons of fish that were caught in the U.S. waters annually. She was as, in the Department of Agriculture and the Bureau of Fisheries I guess, she was, her team monitored the fish, the catch of fish in the U.S. Okay, Mae, we called her Mae but her name is Mary, M-A-R-Y, but we called her Mae, M-A-E, that's how we pronounce that. I was at the department store in Richmond and Mae was, we all were growing up, Thalhimer's. Okay, now that's a German-Jewish name so don't ask me to spell it. It no longer exists. But Mae worked at, in the stock room in Thalhimer's and she began to show all of the traits of my mother and--when she worked there. She would, she was able to buy at a discount so we were always well-clothed with sweaters and jeans and stuff because she loved her little brothers and would buy things for us and bring them home to us. I remember that very distinctly. See, Thalhimer's would hire blacks in the stockroom but you couldn't try on the clothing if you were black in Thalhimer's. The next department store, (Melonrose?), you couldn't even go into, much less try on clothes, so that was also a part of Richmond in the 40s [1940s] and 50s [1950s]. And my oldest brother, Roosevelt and my next oldest brother, Sylvester have all passed. I have a twin brother, Bill Harris and Bill and I were the first of the Harrises to finish college. Both of us have Ph.D.s, we both of course finished Armstrong High school in Richmond. From high school, my brother Bill or William Harris, William McKinley Harris went to Howard University in Washington, D.C., majored in physics, earned his degree in physics from Howard University and from there he next earned a Ph.D., University of Washington in Seattle [Washington] in urban planning. When I finished Armstrong High School in Richmond, I went to University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], earned my undergraduate degree there in aerospace engineering and then on to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] where I earned my Ph.D. And that's the formal education in broad brush strokes of how we were educated. Story_ID: 624733 Speaker 1: So, so your brother [William Harris] is, is he a--? Speaker 2: A junior. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean but is he a professor of physics now or what is--? Speaker 2: Oh no. Oh, Bill, what he's, where is he today, is that your question? Speaker 1: Yeah. I know he studied physics at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] then the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington]-- Speaker 2: Ph.D. in urban studies. Speaker 1: Yeah, urban studies okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So he's, so what does he do? Is he an urban planner or is it he teaching or what--? Speaker 2: Right, okay. So I'll do it, I'll answer your question by giving the history of what he's done. Immediately following his B.S. degree in physics at Howard University, Bill worked for the Atomic Energy Commission in Dayton, Ohio, the Mound Lab, M-O-U-N-D Lab. And from there he then moved the Hanford Nuclear Complex in Hanford, Washington and that's where they make the real enriched uranium. In those days that uranium was of course being enriched for nuclear weapons. That's in East Central Washington, out in the flat plains, semiarid part of the State of Washington. He left there and moved further west to Seattle where he worked for a time for Patel Memorial Institute, Patel Labs, and then from there to the University of Washington in Seattle for his Ph.D. in urban planning, urban studies. Speaker 1: Now is there a connection between his work, you know, with uranium and urban planning? Speaker 2: It's not obvious to me. Speaker 1: It's interesting though, 'cause you know I'm from Dayton, Ohio and there are so many rumors about radioactive materials from Mound Labs being stored somewhere near Dayton. I've heard several different rumors about it and some were from people that worked for the City of Dayton that said it used to be here and they moved it there or they had closed it and something and they did--I mean there's all kind of little stories. So I just wondered if urban--you know cause that's the urban planning link I have to it, I mean how do you get rid of some of this stuff in the city-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, context, but you know I don't know. Speaker 2: I--that may be one of the drivers that moved Bill from physics, from nuclear material to urban studies, urban planning. Story_ID: 624734 Speaker 1: I suspect also that it's in his gut, people, communities were as much of a drive as the experience at the Mound Labs in, in Dayton. His first job following his Ph.D. was at Portland State University in Portland [Oregon]. And I don't actually remember if it was a position in urban studies or if he was in African American studies. But I'm certain it was Portland State University and from Portland State University he became a professor in urban studies at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville [Virginia], my undergraduate school. He was also Dean of African American affairs at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, and about twenty-five years he worked there. From the mid-70s [1970s] to the late 90s [1990s]. He retired from the University of Virginia, spent another decade building a graduate program in urban studies at Jackson State University in Jackson, Mississippi. Two thousand six, 2007, he was on this campus, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], as a Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. visiting professor in our department of urban planning here at MIT. And he used that year to write another of his books which has been published. He returned to Jackson State University for about one more year. He retired from Jackson State University, moved to Evans, Georgia which is a suburban of Augusta [Georgia] where the Masters Golf Tournament is played. He is currently completing requirements to become an Episcopal priest so from physicist, to urban planner to Episcopal priest. Speaker 2: Okay. And did he grow up as a Baptist though, or did--? Speaker 1: Okay, Bill is interesting. All of us did very young, through baptism for example. But once we started playing football in high school, Bill would hang out with George Davis, one of our buddies in Richmond [Virginia]. And George and his family, the Davises were Episcopalians. So Bill would go to the early Episcopal service on Sunday and then come back to Cedar Street Memorial Baptist Church where all of us were. I did not do that but Bill did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He's an interesting-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a very interesting guy. I don't have all that flavor and color in my career, but he does. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So you said there's an eleven year gap between the oldest and you being the youngest, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Right Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 624735 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Let's see, there are so many. My first great dog was Jack. Dad [William McKinley Harris] bought us a pure bred Airedale [terrier] male, Jack. And Mae and Roosevelt and Sylvester, they're all going about their business. There was Bill and myself, so we had to raise this dog and we did. And the dog was extremely devoted to us. We had to walk from 25th and Main up to the grade school and we had to walk through the white community to get to the black school and Jack would walk with us to the school and come home everyday and would, waiting up, looking up, on the hill as we returned. And Jack was a very, very jealous dog, no one could come near us. And Airedales are not like Goldens or like Labradors. Airedales can be, can be damn right aggressive and Jack was when it came to Bill and myself. So we could handle him, mom [Rosa Minor] and dad could handle him, our siblings didn't care. I mean they were just, they were in their mid-teens and they were not focusing on a dog, whereas Bill and I were the younger ones focusing on the dog. So the dog was very aggressive and mamma asked us if we wanted to go to a movie and we said yes, so she said well go. This was a Saturday afternoon and when we returned Jack was gone. So, and my mother had to get rid of him. He was just too aggressive. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: So that was Jack. Speaker 1: This is a different world we're talking about too and I often tell my kids about this, that dogs, being able to walk them down the street like people in those days, I mean they had dog catchers but often the family dog and the neighborhood dogs would just walk around the neighborhood. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you'd know their names and this is something you don't see. You don't see this anymore. Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Anywhere hardly. You know I don't know if there's anyplace in the United States where that takes place but that was a feature growing up in those days, right? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: The dogs. Speaker 2: Yeah. Jack was my dog, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, the idea that a dog would follow a kid to school and wait outside until he comes out. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly that's what Jack did. Speaker 1: He wouldn't play with his other dog friends I guess until-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. And we didn't train them, they just did that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right, they just, the bond was there for some reason. I guess, well the bond was there, I can't explain it. But that was Jack. That was my first dog. My second oldest brother Sylvester teaching us how to ride a bicycle, I remember that. Oh, I remember teaching my brother Bill how to tie his shoes. A bow in the shoes, I learned that before he did. He worked before I did, but I learned to tie shoes before he did so I would tie his shoes and eventually taught him how to tie shoes. Speaker 1: So you are all very close in age then, he's--? Speaker 2: We're twins. Speaker 1: Twin, oh okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we're twins. Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't hear that. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no Bill and I are twins. Speaker 1: All right, so-- Speaker 2: He's my twin brother. Speaker 1: --are you identical? Speaker 2: I think so. Others say no but hey okay, let's say we're not. We're not going to argue that but we certainly are very close. I've talked to him this morning already. We talk two or three times a day on the phone. So, there are many things, baseball in the summer, bicycle excursions between the ages ten and twelve. There was, even in the city there was a fairly dense green area, overgrowth and all and we used to call it the jungle. So we would hike through the jungle leading from where we live basically 25th and Main, going further east to 32nd and Main or so, through a relatively thick green area to we reach the park, Simarazzo Park. And Simarazzo Park is important in the, in the Civil War. It-- Speaker 1: Now what's it called again? Speaker 2: Simarazzo. Speaker 1: How do you spell it? Speaker 2: Don't--it's one of the Italian names. Speaker 1: Simarazzo. Speaker 2: S-I-M-A-R-A-Z-Z-O, Simarazzo Park. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, it's a, if you go there today it's a fairly large building which was a hospital for confederate troops. I suspect it's still there. Speaker 1: So it had a, it was a site of a hospital for confederate troops back in the--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Sits up on a big hill. I remember those excursions and all so yeah, I had a wonderful childhood. Wouldn't, I wouldn't trade it. Alfred Jones, Jane Simpson, the Perry Brothers, that's my vacation and I go back home and laugh and talk with those guys. Story_ID: 624736 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Tobacco, certainly was the smell, traffic I thought was excessive being in an industrial district, cars, trucks, horns. Story_ID: 624737 Speaker 1: Many times we fought our way to school and from school in that we had to pass through the white district. That was not unusual at all. Speaker 2: Was that where you had to fight? Speaker 1: Yeah. Oh yes, right. But we had to go to school and so you had to fight. There was just no other option. Speaker 2: So the way the city was situated or the black community was situated, you'd have to pass through the white community in order to get to your school? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Which is a black school right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So what did they have like, black folks in separate pockets? Speaker 1: Yes, exactly on the east end, exactly. Speaker 2: Yeah. There are different ways that these cities are ran on, in--where I grew up they tried to, you know, herd all black people on one side of town. You know Columbus [Ohio] is the same way. Cincinnati [Ohio] is like pockets of black people you know. So you-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So Richmond [Virginia] is like--? Speaker 1: Let me put this in context. Twenty-Fifth and Main down in the bottom where the tobacco factories are, up on the hill you have St. Johns Church. That's the church where Patrick Henry said, "Give me liberty or give me death." okay. We had to pass through that district, St. Johns, the white district in order to get to George Mason, black, great school or J. Andrew Bowler School. Both of those were between where we lived and the St. Johns Church, white community. St. Johns Church, it's a historical monument, I mean it is definitely still there. Across the street from St. Johns Church is a Catholic church, St. Patrick's, which also was white Catholic. So we had to walk through and fight our way through those communities, make you tough, make you value your education. Speaker 2: So as you walked through I mean it was-- Speaker 1: "Niggers" calling, occasionally somebody would actually really want to confront you and you had to fight. Speaker 2: Did they throw rocks at you stuff? Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so you had to strategize how you were going to get through there and--? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So what was the name of your school? Speaker 1: The first one was George Mason Elementary. That was K [kindergarten] through probably third grade and then the J. Andrew Bowler [School], fourth through eighth and then Armstrong High School, eighth--ninth through twelfth. Speaker 2: What was the second one, I'm sorry I didn't hear. Speaker 1: J. Andrew Bowler. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: B-O-W-L-E-R. George Mason was the first, J. Andrew Bowler was the second school, Armstrong High School was the school that we graduated from. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: K to three, four through eight, nine through twelve. Speaker 2: Okay. So did you like school? Speaker 1: Loved it, yes, absolutely loved it, yeah. Speaker 2: And I would just guess that your twin loved it too cause-- Speaker 1: Yeah I think so, yeah. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Yeah, we had good times. Speaker 2: So you guys are really lucky in a lot of ways. You both liked school and you both, I would guess now, I'm just guessing this that you all fed off each other I guess in terms of your enthusiasm for school? Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And we were competitive. We actually fought a lot as youngsters. But once we finished high school and went our, went separate ways, we couldn't get enough of each other, begged for telephone calls, letters, visits on the weekends, etc. So, the bond was very strong. Story_ID: 624738 Speaker 1: Were you drawn to any particular subject matter in school at first or did it make any difference? I mean in elementary school I guess everything is important, right? Speaker 2: Well I can always remember loving math, always, always, always loving math. And in high school I remember loving science. I had science projects, won first place in the [Virginia] State competition. Speaker 1: Now were there any serious mentors on the elementary level? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Mrs. Edmonds. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Mrs. Edmonds, yes. Speaker 1: And why is she significant? Speaker 2: A quiet African American woman that as I reflect on it, a very elegant person but so damn intense about getting it right. The grading, symmetry, the demand that everything be perfect. And at the same time a hard or tough love as we called it, she really cared about us. She just really cared but not a member of our community. She was with the Walkers if you will. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was in the what we would call a middle class black community in those days or--? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: --in the black community would have been the high class community? Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, exactly, but Edmonds, Mrs. Edmonds really, really cared. In the fourth grade there was Mrs. Hartley. Speaker 1: Okay, and what--? Speaker 2: Rougher, a lot rougher than Edmonds but still cared, seemed to be somewhat in a hurry as well and maybe I mean impatient. And then the first time I can ever remember looking at a woman and thinking about sexual beauty, Mrs. Judon, this was the eighth grade. Speaker 1: And how do you spell her name? Speaker 2: Judon, let's see, the last three letters are D-O-N. Judon is probably J-U-D-O-N. I can see her now a strikingly beautiful woman with, with a body that Beyonce would, would love to have. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: (laughter). I remember this, okay. You're talking sixty-seven years ago. Speaker 1: (Unclear) this is eighth grade. Speaker 2: I mean a strikingly beautiful woman, Judon, taught us history. I'm sure she's probably dead now but one of those women that, that at least in my life I may have seen one or two that's comparable to that but they are rare. And then life, this was eighth grade, then life got very serious. Go to Armstrong High School [Richmond, Virginia] and get your first course in biology, your first course in chemistry, your first course in physics. I mean two, I meet many outstanding teachers but two in particular, Eloise Bose Washington. Eloise Bose Washington, my physics teacher and Rosier Diamond my math teacher, and I'll come back and qualify math in a moment. Okay, so here comes the junior year, my senior year and I had taken all of the algebra and stuff that Armstrong High School offered. So Ms. Washington says, "Okay Wesley," never called me Wes, "Wesley, why don't you take physics a year early?" Which I did. And I built a cloud chamber or actually built a cloud chamber, identified a source of alpha particles and track the alpha particles colliding, being emitted from the alpha source and colliding with vapor, water vapor molecules and that project I won first place in the State competition for black students. It won third place in the white competition at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]. My very first experience with the University of Virginia, with Eloise Bose Washington and the cloud chamber we built with the alpha particles, with the condensation of moisture colliding, so alpha particles colliding with the water vapor. Story_ID: 624739 Speaker 1: You were talking about this cloud chamber in the break, but how did you build that? I mean you say kids ask you today, how did you do it without the internet, right? Speaker 2: Right. So the idea was that you wanted to observe, in my case, the trajectory of alpha particles and so how do you do that? Alpha particles are fairly large and high energy so if you have a, an environment where they can collide and you visibly can see the collision or the results of the collision then you could in fact track them. So if you had in those days these old radioactive Rayon watches, you could clip off a piece of the dial and that would serve as your alpha particle. To get the condensement atmosphere you build a box that was insulated, put in that box dry ice, okay, and on top you would put a damp wet cloth which when it interacts with the dry ice would form a cloud. And then you look at the, look through the top, alpha particles projecting through the cloud coming down, you see the collisions and you could track it. So the idea was to generate the correct environment. And the cloud chamber is what we called it in those days, still call it a cloud chamber. But you had to build a box, put ice in there, dry ice, not water ice but it had to be very cold and get the condensation, get the alpha particles, there it was. So, but Eloise Bose Washington, who is this woman, who is she, why do I remember her name so distinctly, why do I remember her even more so than Edmonds and Street and Mrs. Hartley and even Judon? Eloise Bose Washington one of the rare black women that went north in the 40s [1940s] to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to earn a masters degree in physics, you may ask well why in the hell would a black woman go north in the 40s [1940s] for a masters degree in physics and come back to the south? What could possibly be on her mind? What was she going to do? What job was open to her? None, other than the classroom, but she had a degree in physics. So the blessing was that I was one of her students. Not only was she a good teacher but she had the foundation. She knew physics okay, and therein lies the success. Therein lies the opportunity. Therein lies the greatest gift, all right, that Eloise Bose Washington was there or I was there when she was, let's put it that way, a tremendous spirit, a short woman, rather wide, rather big, again the tough love. "Wesley, you will go to the University of Virginia, okay?" And she said that because she never forgave herself for the third place finish at the University of Virginia. We had won first in the black community, the black competition and then she said "Wesley, we'll go to University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] with the cloud chamber and we finished third and she always thought she was the reason for it. Speaker 1: Hmm. Speaker 2: Yeah, she did. She--so I said "Yes, Ms. Washington, I will go. But tell me why do you want me to go?" She said, "Two reasons." She says, "Wesley, you are black and there's no way those white folks up there would ever misinterpret who you are whenever they see you." Second, she says, "You will be successful and that's very important to us that you succeed at the University of Virginia." Okay. Speaker 1: So this is, I just want to go back to that for a second cause she's saying something really significant here because it's often said when someone, some African American succeeds that it's because he's part white or something, you know, he's a lighter guy and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So she's actually saying, she's focusing on your color? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She's saying-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you're the perfect person to-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --you'll really shake things up to let people know what our capacity is cause you're unmistakably-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah that was a part of her calculation, make no doubt about it, yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because in her generation and also in mine-- Speaker 1: [BRIEF INTERRUPTION] Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So-- Speaker 1: Yeah, so Eloise Washington did want to make that point that it was about demonstrating scholarship by, for and about black folks in a way that's unmistakable, that it is of this, it is of black folks. And that was something that she wanted me to understand that that's the--remember now just a rising senior in high school and she made that point very, very clear, "You are black and they will not misinterpret that and you will be successful." Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So that's Eloise Bose Washington. Story_ID: 624740 Speaker 1: Can I go back a little bit to some of your aspirations in grade school I forgot to mention. You had the aspiration in grade school, I think in the fourth grade of becoming a test pilot, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now this is during the advent of the jet age I guess. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Of jet planes and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so, well, tell us about that aspiration. Speaker 2: Now this was the fourth grade, this was on Mrs. Hartley's class. Hartley taught math and there was an English class as well, language class and there was a competition. All students at J. Andrew Bowler High School [Richmond, Virginia] was, in the fourth grade were asked to write an essay on what you want to be when you grow up. And my essay was on I wanted to be a test pilot. Okay, so some background, one, why is Wesley Harris talking about a test pilot? I had always built model airplanes and I had quite a few. Even my twin brother and two other brothers, my sister had gone on by then to Washington [D.C.], would tease me about the number of airplanes I had. They would say to me, "You have more airplanes than the U.S. Air Force." I built a lot of them, I mean they were all over the house. Some were just models on a stand, others were kerosene fueled or fueled by a propeller, rubber band method, but I built airplanes. So that led to being concerned about a test pilot, okay, fourth grade, okay, nine, ten years old. Speaker 1: Now did you have any, had you been reading about test pilots or--? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --you have any model or maybe to, in the movies or on TV or anywhere that you could you know where you had actually seen a test--I know you'd have to know-- Speaker 2: No, read about them yes-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --in the 'Britannica Encyclopedia' for sure but I never met a person who was a test pilot, no black folks in my community were test pilots. Okay, so and I continued to build airplanes, even model planes even up to my enrollment as an undergraduate at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Now did, what were you learning from building these planes I mean when you look back on them? You built so many. You would have to really learn something. Speaker 2: I learned about how to trim an airplane for performance. I learned about weight balance, I learned about controls. I learned about materials, wood, plastic, molding, etc., all the little subtle things, the workarounds, what happens if you, if the schematic is not what it should be, how do you modify it to get the performance you want? Learn how to do things, you know how to do things. You learn how to depend on yourself too, yeah. There just wasn't any help you know, you had to just figure this out, yeah. And I guess I learned that I loved airplanes, you know. That must have been a part of what I took out of that as well. Okay, so that begins to set the tone you know very good math teachers in that point and the technology if you will, the engineering if you will, of airplanes. Story_ID: 624741 Speaker 1: By the time you got into high school were you able to connect math and physics to an engineering, you know, goal? I mean this is what you need, you're on a path towards being able to actually build these things? Speaker 2: Well the answer is no, and here's where the life gets rather interesting. So when I get to high school I meet these two outstanding people, Eloise Bose Washington and Rosier Diamond. And Washington and I do the science project, physics, and Washington says, "You'll go to UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia]," and we've talked about her reasons, the two reasons. I'm unmistakably black and you will be successful. Okay, so I want to go to the University of Virginia because Ms. Washington said that's what I must do. Remember now my twin brother goes to Howard University [Washington D.C.] for physics. So here goes Harris up to the University of Virginia, 1960. Speaker 1: Okay, now was it, 1960, had University of Virginia been recently desegregated? Speaker 2: It had. Speaker 1: It had only been segregated-- Speaker 2: Yeah, recently right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now so-- Speaker 2: So no black student at the University of Virginia could major in physics or chemistry or math or English or economics or French, couldn't, not allowed. The only school that blacks were allowed in the late 50s [1950s] and 60s [1960s] was the school of engineering. You could not matriculate in the school of science-- school of arts and sciences, the commerce school, could not matriculate. You could not earn an undergraduate degree in education at the University of Virginia. Speaker 1: Now this is very odd. Now this is, what accounts for this? Speaker 2: The State of Virginia had two systems, one black, one white. Virginia State College, now Virginia State University offered a degree in physics so if you were black in Virginia and wanted to earn an undergraduate degree in physics, you go to Virginia State College in those days. Virginia State College did not offer engineering so you could go to University of Virginia if you want to major in engineering. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For example, to show you how ridiculous the system was, Bill, my twin brother went to Howard, majored in physics. Who paid the tuition, the State of Virginia. They would actually pay black students to go out of state rather than going to the University of Virginia, they, meaning the State of Virginia. That's how utterly ridiculous the system was. Speaker 1: So this was at the undergraduate level-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --actually paid his way to Harvard? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean it is unbelievable racism. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's how I got into engineering and obviously once into engineering, the passion was for aerospace as opposed to electrical or chemical or civil or whatever. Story_ID: 624742 Speaker 1: Was, was it difficult to get into the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]? Did they have a quota on how many blacks they'd let in or, even in the school of engineering, or was it--? Speaker 2: I probably did. I had all "As" in high school, did fine on the SATs [Scholastic Assessment Tests], had good letters of recommendation. I got into every school I applied to, including Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. So no it wasn't--I had no, I never had any impression it was difficult for me to get into the University of Virginia. Remember now this is 19-- 1960. What was University of Virginia, okay? Twelve thousand students, all white males, not even a white female on campus, right? Okay. Twelve, nine to twelve black students, all in engineering. What do those twelve thousand white guys do, some thirty-two fraternities? They'll get drunk on Thursday, stay drunk until Tuesday, right, just drinking, falling out on the, on the lawn. It was not an environment of academic excellence, Virginia was not an environment of academic excellence. It was not. Speaker 1: But wait, I would ask Dr. Harris, isn't this not the university founded by [President] Thomas Jefferson in Charlottesville, you know the--? Speaker 2: Yes, it is. Speaker 1: How could such a thing be true in this country? Speaker 2: Well all what you say is exactly correct, it was founded by Thomas Jefferson in 1919 I believe, but 1960s, it was a place for southern gentlemen to get drunk and to misuse their white women. That's what it was about. They would bring them in by the bus loads from Sweet Briar [College, Sweet Briar, Virginia], from [University of] Mary Washington [Fredericksburg, Virginia] or whatever and that's what went on. It was an amazing eye opener to me to see such waste on the part of people that I thought were the leaders, but it was just a waste. Speaker 1: Now this is also, let me just interject, also these are the people that Thomas Jefferson himself wrote about a notes on the State of Virginia that were so superior to the black population-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --who are naturally inferior-- Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly. Speaker 1: --(unclear) these people, right. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I don't know if Mrs. [Eloise Bose] Washington knew I would observe all of this or not but I'm glad she sent me to the University of Virginia. It certainly gave me a perspective on life that I would not have had otherwise. I probably paid a price for it but I certainly expanded my world view. Speaker 1: Now did you, could you stay on the campus? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: Did they--oh, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. I remembered for three years to be assigned to housing on the grounds, not called the campus. You never say campus in Charlottesville, it's the grounds. I was assigned to a double room with another student. The other student was always white. The other student always left okay. I always had a double room where I paid only the cost of a single or half the price of that double. I had two beds, two desks, everything because the white students would not remain. They would say look, I can't stay here. I'm in a fraternity. They can't, they would not allow me to stay with a black, anything they would say like that. So that was a part of the experience. Speaker 1: That's interesting. So you get more space, more living space and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --because of racism. Speaker 2: Right, exactly. Speaker 1: Now how was your tuition handled? Speaker 2: My, my scholarships. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. I don't remember having mamma writing a check or anything like that, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's because of your academic prowess? Speaker 2: Yes, oh yeah right, yes. That was never a question. Speaker 1: I guess your brother's was a combination of the State of Virginia wanting to get him out of Virginia and also-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, so they paid him to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. Story_ID: 624743 Speaker 1: This is 1960 when you start right? Speaker 2: Yeah, '60 [1960] to '64 [1964] on the grounds of the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]. So staying with mentors, remember that we have Emmonds--Edmonds, Street, Hartley, Judon for other reasons, Eloise Bose Washington and Rosier Diamond. And Rosier Diamond like Washington went north in the '40s [1940s] to earn their masters degree in mathematics at Columbia University [New York, New York], and she came back to Richmond. She taught me calculus in high school. Okay, even in those days I learned calculus before going to the University of Virginia because of Rosier Diamond. We also did Boolean algebra [a subarea of algebra] in high school. All right, so now we come to University of Virginia and mentors, two white men played a major role in my life. One is George B. Matthews and the other is John Edward Scott. Matthews and Scott earned their Ph.D.s at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and there's a connection there that will last for life. So my first two years at Virginia I was a regular student in the school of engineering and did very well. Matthews and Scott said, "Wes," not Wesley but Wes, "Why don't you become an honors student and participate in the honors program?" Okay, now remember this is 1962 now, these are white guys and this is University of Virginia. So they encouraged me to become an honors student. Matthews was born and reared in, in the coal mining district of Pennsylvania, out in Pittsburgh area, Ph.D. from Princeton. John Edward Scott is an aristocratic, blue blood native of Virginia. His father, I believe, was an outstanding banker in the Tidewater area so he's all over Virginia for generations. If you see him you'll think he's still in the military. He was very, very formal so--and it wasn't any office of minority education, it wasn't any support structure, just students. So they encouraged me and I said, "Okay, I'll try it. I'll do that." And I happened to be the first person in the history of the University of Virginia to earn an honors degree in engineering, all right. But it was those two gentlemen who encouraged me to do that and who are really my tutors. John Scott told me in the fall of my senior year, "You aren't going to graduate Wes unless you go to the University of Virginia--go to Princeton University for your Ph.D. No MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], no Stanford [University, Stanford, California], you have to go to Princeton." That's where he earned his Ph.D. Story_ID: 624744 Speaker 1: Before you leave, before you leave I want to ask you about Virginius Thornton [an activist with Wesley Harris who worked for interracial equality]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, now he was one of your classmates? Speaker 2: No, he-- Speaker 1: No? Or was he--? Speaker 2: No, I am certain that he was a graduate student at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] during the time that I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. He may have been a graduate student, resident tutor in one of the dormitories in which I lived in. But he was older than the group of us who were undergraduates at the university. Speaker 1: And were there other black undergraduates there? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay. I mean it's a small number of us. I can remember some of the names, Charles Yancy in engineering of course, from the City of Charlottesville [Virginia], itself. Elmer Dandridge from the same high school as myself, Armstrong High School in Richmond [Virginia], James Trice from Maggie Walker High School in Richmond, Aubrey Jones a, also from Armstrong High School in Richmond. He had gone to--he had military service, so he was much older than the rest of us. Let's see, Walter Payne from Charlottesville from Burley High School. He never did graduate from the University. Douglas Roundtree from Booker T. Washington High School, he never graduated from the University. Leroy Willis from Booker T. Washington High School in Norfolk Virginia. He did not graduate in engineering. He transferred out of the school of engineering into the school of arts and sciences at the University of Virginia and is the first person to earn a degree from arts and sciences at the university and in chemistry. So it's, it's a small number of people, black men. Notice, I've not named a woman yet, who were there on the grounds and we were, we formed rather decent bonds. I wouldn't say we are the group that keep in touch regularly. We know where each other is and if in the area we usually make a call, at least by telephone, if not a visit over a meal or something. But it was a small group of folks. There were successes sand there were clearly failures, that is people who did not graduate. For example, I don't know whatever happened to Walter Payne or to Douglas Roundtree. I don't know if they are alive, if they survived, they graduated from any school and I, they were all both very, very gifted intellectually but the other requirements to negotiate, the navigate in a racist environment like UVA in those days, they probably didn't have that skill set, at least not sufficiently strong. Story_ID: 624745 Speaker 1: Now, before we get out of there, now this is a, when you're in school and its a really hot period for civil rights in the country, you come in 1960 with the election of [President] John Kennedy but also you know Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] has come off with victories you know in Montgomery [Alabama] and other places and was, you know the things were really going on in the deep south. Now you, from what I understand-- Speaker 2: Don't forget Emmett Till before that, before I went to high-- Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, do you remember when you first heard about Emmett Till? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yeah. I was in Richmond. 'Jet Magazine,' I don't know if you know about 'Jet Magazine,' his casket was open in Chicago [Illinois] and I couldn't understand a pipe being drove through someone's skull. But I can see the 'Jet Magazine' photograph right now and my twin brother Bill [William] presented it to me, the body, he was underwater. You know I can see the horror and only could imagine the pain that he must have suffered. No, I remember that, I just, I shall never forget that, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now you were at the University of Virginia, chair of the Thomas Jefferson Council on Human Relations. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And as such you introduced Dr. King when he spoke at Old Cabell-- Speaker 2: Cabell Hall, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So tell us about that experience. Now this is-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So this is Charlottesville and this is University of Virginia. This is Albemarle County, Central Virginia. Rather then respond in a positive way to the Supreme Court Decision regarding separate but equal not being equal, they want to integrate the schools. Charlottesville, Albemarle County closed its public schools. There was massive resistance, okay. "Before we have niggers in the class with us, we'll close them." They did. Story_ID: 624746 Speaker 1: Earnest Jackson Oglesby was on the faculty of the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] in the school of engineering and mathematics teacher. He was also chairman of the White Citizen's Council and the founder of one of the so-called private schools in Albemarle County. Here come this little black nigger from Richmond and enters Jackson Oglesby's class and all these little innuendos about crawling and walking and never being able to run. He would just look at me and offer that to the class. Speaker 2: As a critique of black people? Speaker 1: Yes, right. My response was to work every problem in the textbook, to demonstrate to him that what I was there for I would get, obtain and I did. That was my response to his racism. Work every problem in the textbook. Now the greater university, what is this Thomas Jefferson Human Relation Council, whatever it's called? So we could not possibly get the undergraduate student association to approve a chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], that was not going to happen on the grounds, right, it was not going to happen. So we decided to call ourselves the Thomas Jefferson Chapter of--how could they possibly say no to TJ? Right, they couldn't say no to TJ. TJ is their god. TJ walks on water. TJ floats above the clouds. So we called it Thomas Jefferson, okay, you know, just playing that same game that they play. They love TJ, prove it. Then we had an opportunity to invite Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. to the grounds and we did that and we met him. He came down solo, he drove down, had dinner with him, showed him around the grounds, introduced him to the university community as well as the greater community of Charlottesville and Old Cabell Hall. Speaker 2: Now is this before the March on Washington or after? Speaker 1: Before. This was the late winter of '63 [1963], in August of '63 [1963], the March on Washington. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yes. So I saw Dr. King twice that year on the grounds of University of Virginia in late winter of '63 [1963] and in August of '63 [1963] in Washington [D.C.] at the Lincoln Memorial during the March on Washington. Story_ID: 624747 Speaker 1: All right, the Thomas Jefferson Council on Human Relations brings Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] to campus. So-- Speaker 2: Right. First, Dr. King, who is he and what impressions I have. A quiet man, a very strong man, a very gentle man. He reached out to the cleaning staff at the hotel, "How are you ma'am, how are you sir?" These are black laborers in the hotels. Never once showing any arrogance or any difference between himself and others, never, firm in beliefs, extremely busy. The Selma [to Washington] March was in the planning that spring while he was there, probably the March on Washington as well so he kept taking phone calls. Again, he was alone, nothing extravagant about his choice of diet, very straight, very ordinary. I was concerned that he would give a sermon in Old Cabell Hall, just the opposite, just the opposite. He quoted the great philos-- great Western philosophers at that as well as [Mohandas] Gandhi. It was a lecture, the philosophical basis for equality. It was not scripture at all, okay. He did this without notes by the way, no preparation, no handwritten speech at all. So Dr. King, we must remember is a very, very gifted, multidimensional person. You can't just say he was all shouting and marching and reading the scriptures. This man did many things and did many things well and understood the world perhaps as deeply and as broadly as any person of his generation, not just civil rights, but human rights, hunger, gender differences, this war mongering, his position on Vietnam, I mean all of this became very clear to me after listening to him and reflecting on that late winter of '63 [1963], yeah, truly remarkable person. Speaker 1: How was he received by the student--did you have a good turnout for his--? Speaker 2: Oh, I remember it as a good turnout. I, I'm willing to bet you if you go back to the archives at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] you will find very little, I don't know if the 'Cavalier Daily,' the student newspaper ever wrote up his visit, okay. I know the 'Charlottesville-Albemarle Tribune,' the local newspaper was very silent on him, okay. We had a very difficult time to get approval. Edgar Shannon was the president, he flat out refused to greet him, would not great Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Edgar Shannon never did say a word. [B.F.D.] Runk, the dean for students likewise never greeted him. Paul Sonje [ph.], one the other senior officers never greeted King, senior officers are on the grounds at the university. There was a white faculty member, Paul Gaston who did a fine job in hosting and working with us to welcome Dr. King. There was no heavy security right, there were no sharp shooters around or anything of that sort. King was totally exposed. Speaker 1: That's interesting, no heavy security at all. Speaker 2: No. Well no police, no, there was no one protecting King. I don't know if they were protecting themselves but there was no security for King. Speaker 1: Now this says a lot about the courage of Dr. King. Speaker 2: Yeah. Oh sure it does. Speaker 1: This is a man whose life had been threatened-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --probably hundreds if not thousands of times-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --before he gets to University of Virginia. Speaker 2: Yes. And remember now he drove down by himself. He said I've been through this university many times on Route 29 going home from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] to Atlanta [Georgia], right. Twenty-nine was, if you wanted to go inland as opposed to along U.S. 1, you would come down 29. He had said I know this place, yeah. Story_ID: 624748 Speaker 1: So you attended the March on Washington [Washington, D.C.] later that summer [1963] too, (correct?)? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, right. I met my twin brother at the Trailways Bus Station, northwest Washington, probably New York Avenue and 12th. That's where the old Trailways Station was. And we walked from there to the reflecting pool to the Lincoln Memorial. Speaker 1: Now did--I think, now I talked to a lot of people who were there who didn't have a since of the historicity of the moment, but I would guess you did. Did you really think it was historical when you were there? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, a March on Washington for a little old person like me from Richmond [Virginia], it was pretty, pretty, pretty damn important. You know just emerging, coming out of the junior year, one more year left for undergraduate days, having met Dr. King, all the write-ups in the newspapers about this march, the celebrities, Harry Belafonte [American singer, songwriter, actor and activist: King of Calypso], Marlon Brando [American screen and stage actor, activist], Tony Curtis [born Bernard Schwartz, American film actor], yeah this was something. This was unusual. There's no black person in the South didn't think this was unusual, no. Freedom rides, all the fights and stuff and people hit on the head with baseball bats, the dogs, the fire hose, this was real now. This was not something for the faint of heart or those who don't, who have not yet grasped the significance of the moment. Even among some in Charlottesville there was tension. Some people said King should do only one thing, serve his community as a pastor, leave the rest of this stuff alone. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: There was a lot of that. Speaker 1: I know that was the position of the National Baptist Convention, you know? Speaker 2: Right. Right. Yeah, it was important. It was very important. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624749 Speaker 1: Now, also, the early 60s [1960s] are the time when the U.S. space program was really cranking up. Were you, was that really something you focused on I would think, you know, since you're in aerodynamics? Speaker 2: Yes. The space program I think is as important as anything I've said about my career. First of all, Sputnik [the first artificial satellite launched into orbit], the launching by the Soviets had a profound impact on Richmond Public Schools [Richmond, Virginia]. We were all of a sudden richer with equipment. Armstrong High School was recently built in that time frame. You had teachers like Rosier Diamond, Eloise Bose Washington, Mr. Gibson in chemistry, Thelma Fields in algebra, Mrs. Gaston in biology, so--and Mrs. Brown, yes Ms. Brown in biology as well. So we were exposed to probably the best high school education in the public sphere for blacks in the South I would say as a result of Sputnik and what happened in Richmond Public Schools for blacks. Speaker 1: Now Sputnik was like '57 [1957]? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, right so I got in, we got in on the tail end of that but it was useful. Speaker 1: Did the lab facilities improve and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yeah. Eloise Bose Washington's physics lab was well equipped. And that's where I built my cloud chamber, in her lab, yeah. Okay, so we had that and all through undergraduate days, NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] provided resources to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia]. My NASA traineeship at Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey] was the result of JFK [President John F. Kennedy] saying we will get, will have a human on the moon in a decade. Remember all during that decade now I was a graduate student or an undergraduate from '60 [1960] to '68 [1968], I was either an undergraduate or a graduate. So all that march toward the moon I was in a period of formal education and clearly amply supported by NASA. The laboratory at Princeton was heavily financed by money from NASA. Speaker 1: Okay. So your Bachelors degree with honors, you're the first student to receive a Bachelors of Science with honors in Aerospace engineering, is that correct? Speaker 2: In engineering period, certainly in aerospace, yes. Speaker 1: In engineering period, okay. Right, and in terms of aerospace engineering what was your research focus as an undergraduate? What were you--what was it? Speaker 2: Okay, yes. I did--my senior part, undergraduate project was on turbulent boundary layers. And I did some experimental work. I presented that work at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Regional Conference up at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] and had won first place so, in fluid mechanics. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: George B. Matthews, one of the men I mentioned at the University of Virginia was my faculty advisor on that project. Story_ID: 624750 Speaker 1: So [George B.] Matthews and [John Edward] Scott your mentors and was it Matthews and Scott who suggested you go to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Yeah, Scott said I won't-- Speaker 1: Scott. Speaker 2: --wouldn't graduate unless I agreed to go to Princeton. He's a funny guy at times. Speaker 1: All right. So- Speaker 2: He's still alive. Matthews has passed. Speaker 1: All right. Scott threatened you so you get to Princeton, this is in 1964, I guess right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated in '64 [1964], it was probably the fall of '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: For example, when I was a student at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] as an undergraduate, John Scott, John Edward Scott offered a graduated course in fluid mechanics. I took that course as an undergraduate so he saw me not only as an honor student, but as a student who took his graduate course in fluid mechanics while I was an undergraduate. Speaker 1: Wow, okay. So this, all right, so well, tell us about Princeton and--so you arrive in Princeton in what is it, '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Yeah, not--July of '64 [1964] I think, certainly by August of '64 [1964]. Speaker 1: All right, and-- Speaker 2: Probably the shock of my life in terms of, at least in my formal education. I'm going off for the very first time in my life, I'd never been further north than Washington, D.C. So I arrive at Princeton and to my surprise, Princeton is much like the University of Virginia. It is all male. There are no women, much smaller in number of students than the University of Virginia. I think I was one of five black graduate students throughout the entire university of Princeton at that time, no more than five of us working toward a Ph.D. So the whole adjustment to the north and it's differences, it's nuances took some time. And I think I'm correct when I make this statement, I'm the first African American to earn a Ph.D. in the sciences, math, engineering fields at Princeton. I'm fairly certain of that. Story_ID: 624751 Speaker 1: Like Virginia, UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia], like Armstrong High Schools [Richmond, Virginia], there was one person that was a strong mentor at the University--at Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey] and that's a man by the name of George Bienkowski. Speaker 2: George-- Speaker 1: B-I-E-N-- Speaker 2: B-I-E-N-- Speaker 1: --E-N-K-O-W-S-K-I, Bienkowski. Okay, now who is George Bienkowski? Polish background, I think Catholic or they could be Polish-Jewish, immigrated to, from Poland to England [United Kingdom] and from there to here to the U.S. He earned his Ph.D. here at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics. He was a young assistant professor at Princeton when I arrived, untenured and I told him what problem I would--I had difficulty at Princeton with Seymour Bogdanoff, the first faculty member I was working with and I was clearly not going to every graduate if I had worked with Boggie. And Bog and I eventually become good friends. He, Boggie has passed now as well as Bienkowski has passed. So when I changed advisors I had in my mind what problem I wanted to work on for my Ph.D. and the only theorist that I felt comfortable talking to was George Bienkowski. He was not an experimentalist, he was a theorist and I wanted to work on a theoretical problem. So I presented the problem to him and asked him would he be my advisor and he said yes without hesitation. And it became a very supportive relationship, he would invite me to his home whenever he invited his other graduate students. He really taught me what a well posed problem is and what is a valid solution to that problem and he did it in such a way that it was a skill that I could transfer from my given research area to any area. My first teaching assistanceship was under him. It was teaching an undergraduate course in complex variables at Princeton. Spring of 1968, when [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed, I was teaching a recitation section in that complex variables course. George Bienkowski drove from his home to Princeton's campus to tell me, broke into the class to tell me that Dr. King had been assassinated. It was a warm spring evening, little drizzle rain. George died early, Bienkowski. He was an avid sports person, including marathons. He was on his bicycle, laying out a bicycle route through Princeton for a bicycle race or competition. He was thrown from his bicycle, broke his neck and died extremely early. George--I finished in '68 [1968], by '78 [1978], George was dead. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Of my mentors, he's the first to die. He died before the rest. But George Bienkowski. Story_ID: 624752 Speaker 1: Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] was, was the school that [Albert] Einstein you know called home when he came over, right? Did he--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, he was never invited to join the faculty though. He was at the advanced institute but he was never invited to be a professor of physics at Princeton. Princeton has a history not only of not inviting blacks, but also being anti-Jewish, yeah. That has slowly changed, maybe it has changed completely now, but it was notorious for being anti-Semitic as well. Speaker 1: They got you know, I think people don't really realize the extent or the depth of anti-Semitism in the U.S. until you know when you hear--I know a girl in school with me on college day was told by one of the Ivy League schools that it was not a good school for a Jewess to attend. Now this is 1967 we're talking about. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh I believe it. Speaker 1: So it's, I mean you just don't-- Speaker 2: I believe it. Speaker 1: Sometimes you just don't understand it. Speaker 2: And, well including this place, I mean Jews as faculty members and even as students didn't really come to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] until the 60s [1960s]. Yeah, I mean fifteen years after the Second World War they began to come in small numbers. They come in reasonably good numbers now but Jews were not welcome here, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A man named [Jerome Clarke] Hunsaker who founded the Department of Aero and Astro [Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics] here at MIT, did a lot of other things as well, including one of the founding members of, the predecessor to NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] , staunch anti-Semite. His desk is the desk that I now use. That big desk in there is Hunsaker's desk. (laughter). It's amazing what happens in this world. I don't know if Hunsaker would like that but I'm using it. Speaker 1: That's interesting. So now your--but, so at Princeton there were very few black students, other black students you were saying-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and, but you did have a good mentor. Story_ID: 624753 Speaker 1: And you worked from what I understand on aeroacoustics, is that true? Speaker 2: Okay, yes certainly that's been the lion's share of my work here at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. But at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] my Ph.D., remember we're just emerging as a space faring nation or the world was, the Russians and the U.S. So one theoretical problem we had and this is my thesis, what happens if you would probe a foreign atmosphere, send a projectile into Venus' atmosphere or to Mar, to a Martian atmosphere or there, god forbid Mercury or even further out, not going toward the sun but away from the sun, toward Jupiter. And if you have a probe in front of that projectile you're going to disturb the flow. And if the gas surrounding the planet consists of a mixture of components then you want to know what is the degree of disturbance, what theoretical model could you construct that would help you understand what the probe does to the gas. Therefore your mass spectrometer on the back side of that probe would read a certain value, determined, influenced by the disturbance of the probe. So that shockwave in front of that probe is what my Ph.D. thesis was about. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A theoretical model for strong shockwaves and gas mixtures. Speaker 1: So was this problem approached computationally, you know, based on what you knew the, what properties were in the atmosphere of different planets? I mean-- Speaker 2: Okay-- Speaker 1: --was this a specific, Venus, that you looked at? Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. It was certainly-- It was a typical problem of, you were concerned about the gas molecule's ratios, how much larger are the molecules of the heavy gas compared to the light gas. It was a mass ratio normalization so it would be applicable to any atmosphere for which you had large differences in masses. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, it was, is a purely theoretical model. We did run calculations, computer codes to map out what would actually happen to profiles themselves. All right, so that thesis with George Bienkowski. Story_ID: 624754 Speaker 1: Mid-winter, 1968, let's say February 1968, I'm near completion of my Ph.D. I come to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to give a, part of my thesis at an international conference on verified gas dynamics. George [Bienkowski, thesis advisor] did not come, I was here alone. I give my paper, in the audience is a man I do not know, that I'd never met. His name is Leon Trilling, T-R-I-L-L-I-N-G. Leon Trilling was born in Poland, left Poland with his family, his father and all during the Nazi's run through Europe. His older brother was killed either by the Poles or by the Russians. Trilling is Jewish. He--they moved to France, from France to Portugal, from Portugal to Cuba and from Cuba to the U.S. They settled in Pasadena [California]. His father was an industrialist, rather wealthy. He goes to Cal-Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California] for his Ph.D. and becomes one of the first Jewish faculty members here at MIT. So he's in the audience in the session which I give my paper. He speaks several languages by the way, still alive, we still have dinner together, very, very formal, always with a tie on for example. So after my paper he comes up and asks me would I want to teach at MIT? I said, no. Not of interest at all. Leon says "Okay, let's stay in touch." I go back to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], I finish up my Ph.D., I go to University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] to take on my first job. Leon Trilling calls two or three times every semester and I constantly tell him no, he constantly calls. I leave Virginia, go spend a year at Southern University in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], I come back to Virginia. Leon Trilling is still calling. Speaker 2: So he wants you to go out to California to-- Speaker 1: No, he wants me to come here. Speaker 2: Oh to MIT. Speaker 1: Yes. So-- Speaker 2: Okay, allright. Speaker 1: --I say to myself, either I'm going to give up the telephone or I'm going to go to UVA cause this guy is not going to stop--I'm going to go to MIT. So I come to MIT in '72 [1972] at the, at Leon's invitation and I've basically been here ever since. Speaker 2: Oh okay. Speaker 1: But Leon Trilling now becomes like [Mrs.] Edmonds, like [Mr.] Street, [Mrs.] Hartley, [Mrs.] Judon, [Eloise Bose] Washington, [Rosier] Diamond, [George B.] Matthews, [John Edward] Scott, [George] Bienkowski, now comes Trilling. That's the mentor at this stage. So those are the people that I've bumped into along the way in terms of formal education that have been, I would say mentors. Story_ID: 624755 Speaker 1: So let me go back to your research for a minute and can you tell us what your findings were for your dissertation? Speaker 2: Okay. A researcher at [University of California at] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] by the name of Sherman, we called him Rick [Richard] Sherman, had performed a series of experiments in which he actually measured properties within the shockwave, this probe and a gas mixture. And his measurements, his experimental measurements showed some enormities in the data that no one had observed. There's a property called a stagnation temperature and everyone though nothing could, that no temperature could be higher than the stagnation temperature, yet Rick Sherman's experiment showed a peak within the shockwave of the stagnation temperature. So the question was if Wes' model is worth anything it will have to mimic the experimental observation that's unique, that only Rick Sherman has observed. We then input into our theoretical model the same parameters, gas mixture ratio, mod number that Rick used in his experiments and we demonstrated the peak in the stagnation temperature. So that--the thesis basically closed out an unknown problem, a problem that had been existing for several years. What about the stagnation temperature, shockwaves or very large gas mixtures? So the thesis was, was an entirely success. I haven't checked recently but I suspect no one will go to that problem again, that our theoretical model explains it entirely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was a useful result. Speaker 1: So the findings were published with you and Dr. [George] Bienkowski's name? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Yes, we published yes, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yes, 'Physics of Fluids.' I don't know the, probably 'Physics of Fluids,' '72 [1972], '73 [1973], something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, that's the journal right, 'Physics of Fluids?' Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: If you have the resume there, if you look for Harris and Bienkowski, 'Physics of Fluids,' you'll see the publication date [1971]. Story_ID: 624756 Speaker 1: Your Ph.D. is 1968, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so what did you have in mind to do immediately afterwards? Did you stay at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for a while or did you do a postdoctorate? Speaker 2: No, no postdoc. I left Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] in summer of '68 [1968]. Let's say I did my Ph.D. and all of my children or some of my children in all in the four years and then came directly south. I remember loading up in a U-Haul rental and driving back to the South, back to Charlottesville [Virginia] in fact and started my career in teaching and research there [University of Virginia, UVA]. And even went further south in two years to spend a year in the Department of Physics at Southern University in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Then I think I returned to UVA for one year only and then by that time Leon was such a pain that I said yes and came up to MIT, fall or late summer of '72 [1972]. Speaker 1: Okay. So were there any interesting experiences you know between you know going to graduate and then going to MIT? I mean you went to Southern in Baton Rouge to teach physics-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --instead of engineering. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well what was that like? Speaker 2: Okay, so this is still in the heat of the battle for equality. Seventy-one [1971], Kent State [University, Kent Ohio], the murder of black students on Southern University's campus and at South Carolina State University I think it-- Speaker 1: Yeah, South Carolina State in Orangeburg [South Carolina] and-- Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly. Speaker 1: I think Jackson State [Jackson, Mississippi] had-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --a shooting too. Speaker 2: Right, so all that was going on okay, that's a part of the whole context. Four black engineers, physicists from Ivies [Ivy League universities] were together. You had Edgar Link, Ph.D. in physics from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Joe [Joseph] Johnson, Ph.D. in physics from Yale, Carl Spight from Princeton and Wes Harris from Princeton. And we were the Young Turks. We were going to transfer physics at an HBCU [historical black college and university] into physics period, second to none. I think it was the first time ever you had four black Ph.D.s from the Ivies in a physics department like that. Speaker 1: So you're all at Southern at the same time? Speaker 2: Yeah, sure was. Speaker 1: Gee whiz, I--I've heard--well we've interviewed people that, what, Keith Jackson and some others have talked about the influence of Carl Spight you know when they were in-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in school at Atlanta U [Atlanta University, Atlanta Georgia], I think. Speaker 2: Yeah, Carl was definitely at Atlanta. He left, when I left Southern he left a year later. I came back to Virginia and eventually to MIT, he we to Atlanta, yes. Speaker 1: Right. Right, and you talk about the--some of the issues on black college campuses were that, I think a lot of the young scientists were dismayed at the level of the physics being taught on the, in the black college campuses in terms of, they were teaching things like physics for teachers and things that didn't, that weren't quite physics. They were not--either it is or it isn't, is what Jackson was saying. He kind of-- Speaker 2: Okay, I don't remember that part of it. Here's what I remember. An over, on the part of the four of us, Link, Johnson, Spight and Harris, an oversimplification of what it means to build and maintain a world class physics department. The requirement of support resources from secretaries to laboratories to equipment to other colleagues to talk with, communicate with. Story_ID: 624757 Speaker 1: I remember the opportunity that we took advantage of. We had a group of young students, black, from Louisiana who we taught who went on to earn Ph.D.s. Two of them earned Ph.D.s here at MIT. That convinced me that you didn't have to be in a white university to have brains. These kids came out of the backwoods of Louisiana and were extremely gifted and they certainly interacted with us on the campus of Southern University but they went beyond. Two did come to MIT and earn their Ph.D.s and I think there's more talent like that in Louisiana. If you can find it and nourish it and support it, I think there's just good gobs of success and good intellect and positive contributions waiting to be had. Roosevelt Peoples is one of them. He finished MIT with a Ph.D. in physics and this is probably in the late 70s [1970s], went to Bell Labs. He died of a massive heart attack but he was extremely gifted, Ros Peoples. A young woman, trying to remember he name, also did well, earned her Ph.D. here in physics as well, still alive. Several of them did not go beyond their masters. I do not know what schools they went to but they were extremely capable researchers at the Johnson Space Flight Center in Houston [Texas]. So these are the kind of things I remember about the year at Southern. They stick with me. These young people had gifts and I'm convinced if you were to nurture them and bring them along, they would be extremely successful. Now I was shocked going north to Princeton, but you imagine coming out of Louisiana up to Massachusetts, that's some adjustment even in the '70s [1970s], that would be some adjustment. Speaker 2: Yeah that's more of an adjustment than the one that you made. Speaker 1: Yes, exactly. Easily more, much more difficult but they found a way to do it. So that's what I remembered of the year, okay, an oversimplification of what's required on our part. And young, fresh Ph.D.s, full of energy, motivated by this horror of racism and murdering and killing of young black people and of course the warm, sweet positive experience with those young people majoring in physics at Southern University. Speaker 2: Now who was the president of Southern at that time? Did you remember--and well did you have the support of the Southern administration at that time, I mean or I guess even a deeper question and what I'm really asking as I'm trying to formulate this into my head is who brought all of you there at the same time, it seems like--? Speaker 1: Joe [Joseph] Johnson. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, Johnson was the chair of the physics department. Speaker 2: Okay, so he was already there at (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yes Joe was already there. Speaker 2: So he brought the other three of you here with a conscious-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --idea of producing this strong department of physics. Speaker 1: Yeah, Joe was a nice guy, a bright guy, walked around with his dashiki and his beard on and stuff and Joe was fine. I think he's probably in poor health now but Joe was fine and his wife Lynette. It was a different world man, it was a time when we thought we could change anything, we could move any mountain, we literally could move a mountain. Story_ID: 624758 Speaker 1: How did you all get dispersed so quickly though? I mean from, from, it seemed like you really all, you really were on to something you know? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, maybe-- Speaker 1: [Carl] Spight doesn't stay, you don't stay? Speaker 2: Right, things just wasn't moving fast enough maybe. I wouldn't say there's any one thing. Speaker 1: Did [Edgar] Link move on too? Speaker 2: I think Link eventually did. It may be, speaking only for myself, perhaps for the first time and hopefully the only time in my life saying I can't do this. I won't put it on Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] no it's not fair, not fair. It's probably, that's probably, reflecting on the experience that's probably what happened that I said I couldn't do it, you know. Speaker 1: Was the salary too low, the working conditions tough or--? Speaker 2: No, salary was not a problem. I never was a person that needed any excesses. My wife at the time, two children, we had more than enough resources to take care of our needs. No, I suspect it was the inability to see far enough ahead where we, the team, all of us would in fact overtake Yale or Princeton or MIT, yeah. Maybe a fear that we couldn't do it in my part, on my part, not Spight, not Link, not Edgar Link or Joe Johnson, but I'm going to focus only on what went on in my mind, what I thought yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So I take it-- Speaker 2: I think this is important. I can only point at myself, I cannot blame the president, the dean, the department head or my immediate colleagues, can't do that, that would not be fair. Speaker 1: Well one thing I noticed just looking at this is that you're teaching physics instead of engineering, which is what you focused on in school. So you're still, you know, I mean you hadn't shifted focus in terms of your research focus? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: So you really couldn't do what you wanted to do on some level? Speaker 2: Well, no, I could perform my research. Again, see I'd always been a person who did analysis. I did not need big, experimental facilities and stuff. No, I could do what I wanted to do, that was not another problem, didn't have graduate students now as I did at U-Virginia [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia] that was a big difference. Speaker 1: So, I would guess it was a heavy teaching, you know the research side would be-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a smaller percentage of your time? Speaker 2: Right, but I knew that going in, right, was not an unknown, it was not a surprise, right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You walk into that. Story_ID: 624759 Speaker 1: All right. But it's for a lot of the people in science and engineering that we interview that's a significant, it has some significant impact on whether they stay some place or not, I mean the ability to do more research rather than less you know is what people seem to want. So-- Speaker 2: Well, well, I like them would like to have done more research, an opportunity to do more research. I cannot and will not say that it was the institution that made the difference. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know people stay. Not every leaves Southern, people stay and contribute and I didn't and it's primarily as far as I'm concerned, what went on in my head. I won't blame the institution, I won't do that. Speaker 1: Okay. So but at the same time you're getting calls from Leon Trilling like a lot? Speaker 2: Right. Right, oh yeah, Leon wouldn't stop. Speaker 1: Yeah. And so when you finally did decide to come to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], did you have a pretty good you know situation to come to? Speaker 2: I think so, I don't regret it at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I would like to make one other comparison. Roosevelt Peoples is as bright as if not brighter than Woodrow Whitlow, okay, and when you think of Southern University and you think of MIT, I had both young people in my classroom, Peoples physics Southern, Whitlow fluid mechanics MIT. Both earned their Ph.D.s at MIT, both are black African Americans. You know, again when you, when I reflect on these experiences you know I can't say that Southern itself was so bad. You know there's a weakness, there's--I have a duty and responsibility to engage my environment. Hell, MIT in its own way has many negatives as Southern did, maybe different negatives, but negatives right on. And maybe when I'm ninety I'll change my mind and say it's all Southern, but I doubt it. I seriously doubt it, no. And I, I've never really done what I've just shared with you, to put on the table at the same time Peoples and Whitlow and both young men in my classroom, one at Southern in physics, one at MIT in fluid mechanics, both earned their Ph.D.s. You know Wes, what went on? What was the relationship between the two? What skills did they bring to the table? Did the locus, the place itself make a difference, okay? And you know what did they each have to deal with and to engage to negotiate to overcome? Different hurdles but each had their own heroes, their own barriers and each were able to negotiate those and move forward. So I won't blame Southern, I don't think that's fair. Speaker 1: Okay. It sounds like that Southern was performing heroically in a lot of ways? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. Still is. Story_ID: 624760 Speaker 1: So before you go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you go to University of Virginia [UVA, Charlottesville, Virginia] as an associate professor, is that true? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what is it like being back on the campus of the University of Virginia as a teacher rather than as a student? Speaker 2: A lot different. You come armed with a Ph.D. and from a northern school, your whole attitude toward Virginia changes. By then I had put in perspective the all-male thirty-two fraternities, drunkenness compared to a more serious environment like Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] so you know Thomas Jefferson just doesn't stand any longer. It's just some semi-god that these white boys want to hold onto. But when it comes to excellence and scholarship it's not what goes on with Virginia. So I come with a different attitude entirely, perhaps incorrectly one of dominance, one of superiority. Yeah, that's probably what was going on in my mind that I was the damn best theoretical mathematician on the campus. Speaker 1: Okay, now were your former mentors, [George B.] Matthews and [John Edward] Scott still there? Speaker 2: Oh yes and they were quite welcoming, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you were just there a year, right? Speaker 2: Two years, then a year at Southern and then back another year at UVA. Speaker 1: Oh okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, '68 [1968] I left Princeton, '70 [1970], '71 [1971] was Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], '71 [1971], '7 [1972] was UVA and then fall of '72 [1972], MIT. Speaker 1: Okay. So well tell us how you, so you got a call from Leon Trilling again and what was it that broke the ice with, I mean--? Speaker 2: I got tired of talking to him. He wouldn't stop calling. Really it's about as simple as that. I said you know, "Damn, Leon I don't want it," and he kept calling, kept calling. So I said okay Leon, we'll come up for a year and we did. Remember now Charlottesville right, that's sixty-- sixty-five miles from my hometown, Richmond. All my buddies are there, all the good evening, all, things that--toasts of the town, dances, stuff like that, we'll go back for things like that. So why would I come up to Boston [Massachusetts]? Where is Boston? Never heard of it. I mean this, Boston's a long way from Richmond. I heard of New York City [New York] but Boston, why would I want to go up, what's up there? It was truly a foreign country. I finally said, "Okay Leon, I'll--we'll do it." Story_ID: 624761 Speaker 1: We haven't talked about your wife but you got married-- Speaker 2: Early. Speaker 1: --when, in--when did you meet your wife and when did you get married? Speaker 2: I met my wife in eighth grade, my first wife in eighth grade, yeah. My first foot on Armstrong High School [Richmond, Virginia] campus is when I first met Myrtle, M-Y-R-T-L-E. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: So did you all get married when you were in--? Speaker 2: Yeah, early. Speaker 1: Early-- Speaker 2: Before, just before I went to UVA [University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were married at UVA when you got--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay. Speaker 2: I've been married as long as I've known myself. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you got married as a senior, I mean as you finished high school? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So were you still married to Myrtle when you went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Went to Louisiana, we were married, yes oh absolutely. Speaker 1: All right. So you all go to Boston [Massachusetts] and was it okay with her to go to Boston? Speaker 2: Oh yes. She was a very, very supportive spouse. Yeah, she didn't mind. She like myself didn't know anything about Boston. None of us had ever visited Massachusetts so this was all new stuff for us. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had never been to Boston even when you were at Princeton [Princeton, New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Well I did go up to Boston for, to give the paper when I first met Leon [Trilling]. That was on this campus here at MIT but I never lived here. I never you know, I didn't grow up here, I never lived here. I never been in the city anymore than two or three days during that conference in the early winter of '68 [1968]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were you a follower of the Boston Celtics in those days? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No, I was a lover of the Brooklyn Dodgers with Jackie Robinson [Jack Roosevelt Robinson, first African American to play in major league baseball], Campanella [Roy "Campy" Campanella, one of the greatest African American catchers in major league baseball], Donald Newcombe [in 1949, became the first black pitcher to start in a World Series game]. I knew that the Red Sox never wanted to ever hire a black baseball player. I had heard of Bill Russell [William Fenton "Bill" Russell, first African American to achieve superstar status in the NBA] in American Greatly and only after arriving in town in this community did I understand some of the horror that he had to endure as a professional athlete in this community. For example, people breaking into his home and defecating in his bed, yeah that's what they did to Bill Russell. If you look at the old photographs of the Boston Gardens when Russell was playing, what you see more than anything else are empty seats, right? Think about this now, this man was the leader to eleven NBA [National Basketball Association] Crowns, Championships. Why in the hell is the Boston Gardens empty? They weren't when Larry Byrd was playing. Why defecate in a man's bed? What was going on? Why such intense hate based on race? All Russell was doing was bringing fame to the city. But that's the part of Boston, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, now when you got here Boston was-- Speaker 2: Segregated. Speaker 1: Yeah, and on a verge of a, one of the most intense battles on bussing-- Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: --in the country, the most intense probably. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And Leon Trilling shielded me from that. He said, he says "Look, Wes, take your family to Newton [Massachusetts] and don't live in Boston." He said, "Raise your kids in Newton," actually helped me find a rental in Newton. But he was very concerned about that, yeah. So the kids grew up in Newton, went to public schools in Newton and did very well. Speaker 1: So what's the demographic in Newton, Massachusetts? Speaker 2: Probably 40 percent Jewish, 20 percent Irish, 20, 35 percent Italian and the rest would be black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Strong Jewish, Italian community and then Irish, a lot of Catholic churches, Irish and Italians are Catholic primarily and a few, several Jewish synagogues. Speaker 1: Okay. And so that's where you lived and did you have children by the time you moved? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Yeah, plenty of kids, man. I'm a father of six kids. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we never knew where they came from so we kept having them. [Laughter]. We love our kids. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624762 Speaker 1: MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] 1973, now you're an associate professor-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --appointed, yeah in aeronautics [aero], astronautics [astro] and ocean engineering. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I came here in '72 [1972] as a visiting professor in aero/astro and then, that's visiting okay? Speaker 1: Um-hmm. Speaker 2: Then the idea was, Leon [Trilling] said, "Okay why don't you stay?" And then I become a tenure track faculty member. And where do I apply my skills, aero/astro and ocean engineering so I was jointly in both departments, performing research in both departments. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was your, how was your time you know split? Were you--how much time you have for research as opposed to teaching? Speaker 2: Oh, I would say 60, 65 percent research, teaching only one course a year, yeah, far different from Southern [University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So I had an opportunity to engage graduate students and delve into the research. Speaker 1: Okay. Well can you, I guess in terms of the research side, well what course, did you teach the same course all the time or did it vary? Speaker 2: I taught fluid mechanics in general and aero/astro. I taught undergraduate aerodynamics and taught a graduate course in theoretical fluid mechanics. In ocean engineering I always taught the mechanics course, both solid and fluid mechanics combined, a full year of courses there whenever I taught that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now can you kind of I guess summarize the high points of your research? Speaker 2: Yeah, I--they would be in several areas. First, helicopter rotor acoustics, that was my first attempt to perform high quality experimental work. And a handful of Ph.D.s came out of that with experience, most of whom were African Americans. Speaker 1: Okay. About how many would you say, a handful? Speaker 2: Right, James Hubbard, he's an African American. He's an endowed chair, a professor at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] now. Kishna Avanmutan [ph.], Nechum Humbag [ph.], Albert Chang, yeah they're all Ph.D.s in that area. Speaker 1: Okay, so those are your grad students at--? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And then in the theoretical fluid mechanics area there is Woodrow Whitlow the very first Ph.D., he's African American, Patrick Hanley of African descent from St. Kitts [West Indies], African American basically, Dale Carlson, white guy from Oklahoma. Okay, so those were the early Ph.D.s, there are whole host of masters students I can't even remember all of them. And I will say this about some of the masters students, some performed work on wind turbines to generate electric power. Let's say generate energy or extract energy from the wind. That was both experimental and theoretical work. Story_ID: 624763 Speaker 1: In terms of research on helicopter rotor acoustics, what problems were you solving? Speaker 2: Okay, the U.S. was just coming out of the Vietnam War and we, the Vietnam War provided real field data for the U.S. Army as to why it, the U.S. Army was losing helicopters in the Vietnam conflict. It turned out that the Viet Cong could detect approaching helicopters due to the acoustic signature, the aeroacoustic behavior of the main rotor. They could determine if the helicopter is an attack Cobra, a rescue Chennault or a cargo Chennault or a Huey, they could--each helicopter had its own main rotor acoustic signature. By determining which helicopter was approaching and that it was approaching in fact, led to an easy target. The Viet Cong could very easily shoot down our helicopters, sometimes with hand pistols, not rocket launchers or anything of that-- that heavy. So the U.S. Army asked us, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, University], "How do you make them, helicopters that is, quiet without a loss in performance?" How do you reduce the acoustic signature of helicopters, army helicopters, military helicopters, that was the problem we solved. Speaker 1: Okay, so how is this problem solved? Speaker 2: Blade design, tip blade design and migrating from a two-bladed configuration to a multi-bladed configuration for the attack helicopter from two blades to four blades which meant we could reduce the RPM [rotations per minutes] of the blades and maintain, in fact, increase performance, at the same time reducing noise. Speaker 1: So you reduced the blades from four to two--? Speaker 2: No, from--increasing. Speaker 1: Increasing. Speaker 2: --from two to four. Speaker 1: From two to four. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And reducing the RPM. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, the two-bladed helicopters had blades that rotated very, very fast and created a lot of noise, okay. So we said look, increase the blades, reduce the RPM, change the tip geometry, in so doing, reduce the noise and increase the performance. And that's, in a nutshell is what our data showed. Speaker 1: Okay, that's seemed like, so, seemed like an easy solution I mean from here. I didn't have to work on it, but how long did it take to--? Speaker 2: Oh, that work lasted probably, let's see. We got started in '72 [1972], certainly a decade. That's about a decade of work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: By the early 80s [1980s], we were done. We were sure that we had it right. Story_ID: 624764 Speaker 1: What other problems were you solving with the research? Speaker 2: The unsteady transonic flow problem. That's what [Woodrow] Whitlow's thesis was on, that's what Patrick Henry's theses were on. Modern day big tail airplanes, 777s for example, 787s, 8300s, 8330s fly at about six hundred miles per hour at cruise. And that's fast enough that there are pockets of transonic flows on the upper surface. And the question was how to prevent shockwaves from forming near those pockets? It's an unsteady phenomenon. It's also what we call a nonlinear phenomenon. So Hanley and Whitlow and some of the master candidates examined that particular problem and provided some insight as to how to design the cross section of the wings or we call them air foils to reduce that unsteady shockwave on the surface, upper surface of the air foils. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now what else? What else? This is from, between, you know I'm taking you up I guess to 1979 when you started working with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh okay, yeah. I took a year off to go to NASA headquarters but when I returned I continued to work on the transonic, unsteady nonlinear transonic problem as well as the aeroacoustic problem with helicopter rotor blades. I have since that era of research moved on to blood flows and in particular the onset of chaos in sickle cell anemia patients when they are traumatized at a crisis state. Speaker 1: So that's a medical-- Speaker 2: Yeah it is, but if you think about it, it's a fluid mechanics problem, blood flow, blood plasma, oxygen transport, it's all fluid mechanics. It's internal in the sense of blood flow through a capillary as opposed to external flow over a rotor blade or an air foil. Story_ID: 624765 Speaker 1: Let me just point out before we leave that period at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], the first ten year period, the Woodrow Whitlow go, he's now the assistant director of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And so you know-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --one of your students. And like in '75 [1975], when you went--in '79 [1979] rather when you went to NASA and spent a year there what were you working on at NASA? Speaker 2: I was in what's called CODAR [coastal ocean radar], the aerodynamics director at--building or help build with other's there NASA's capability in computational fluid dynamics, buying big computers for Ames Research Center in [Mountain View] California and for the Glenn Research Center out in Cleveland [Ohio] and for Langley Research Center in Langley [Virginia], the three big aeronautic centers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The big supercomputers were just coming available in Langley, Ames and Glenn wanted to upgrade their facilities to increase their capability and performance in computational fluid dynamics. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were working on what kind of capacity the computer would have to have or what kind of programming it would have to have to solve--? Speaker 2: Permanent hardware. We did offer support through headquarters to the centers for the development of code software. But it's primarily making sure the new state of the art computers were purchased and that NASA could maintain those from power requirements to chilling, cooling requirements, personnel to maintain systems, all of those things had to be worked out. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what kind of computers did you all, I mean did you choose for these? Speaker 2: A whole host of different stuff. Some Crays [Cray supercomputer] for example were purchased, certainly some IBM machines, a permanent IBM and some Crays, yeah, C-R-A-Y's and IBM machines. Maybe some CDC, yeah, Control Data Corporation machines as well. Yeah, I'm sure we bought some CDCs. Story_ID: 624766 Speaker 1: In '79 [1979], you received the Irwin Sizer Award from MIT for the most significant improvement to education at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Right. Okay, so here we are early in my career at MIT and in addition to teaching and forming research in aero/astro [aeronautics and astronomics] and ocean engineering, I was also the first director of the MIT Office of Minority Education, the OME. So MIT at that point had no way of tracking the performance of undergraduate students in their first year, male, female, black or white. I developed with the help of MIT faculty a fifth week flag system, the fifth week of the freshmen of the first year of the first semester of the first year. I would or develop with the faculty a way of determining the performance and therefore the likelihood of passing of the required undergraduate subjects in physics, chemistry and math. And the idea was that I wanted to know how well or how poorly students of color were performing. Turned out that it was of universal interest for all students so by developing that system that was a major, considered by the Seizer committee a major achievement in MIT education, for the first time they knew where the students were, first year students academically. They had no way of knowing that before. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Okay. Yeah, it's interesting when something that's designed to help minority students actually is good for everybody else too. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean it's not that big a stretch sometimes when-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --something's good for one group of students it's going to be good for everybody. Speaker 2: Right, the point is MIT was not very serious about education. They're more serious about research, right. I mean not as--you said it's very simple, it wasn't like it was a Nobel Prize, it was just common sense. And MIT just didn't think about that, the fact that they primarily were researchers. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So okay, so now after 1980 like what were your major topics for research? Speaker 2: Well I'm sure in the 80s [1980s] [Woodrow] Whitlow had, maybe '81 [1981] Whitlow or '79 [1979], then [Patrick] Hanley and then Carson, all those guys. [James] Hubbard is after, came after Whitlow, [Albert] Chang, Emma Newton [ph.] before Whitlow, Neechum Humbag [ph.] was after Whitlow. So it was a mix of theoretical fluid mechanics and rotor acoustics still going on in the early 80s [1980s], yeah. Speaker 1: I know we have an article here that we have cited about the Falkner-Skan equation that you wrote. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was a young man who earned his masters with me. Shit, it was a, let me think-- Speaker 1: Was that Thomas Sharpe? Speaker 2: Yeah, Tom Sharpe, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's a white kid, he's a marksman. He's with guns all the time, did, okay. There's a technique in applied mathematics of something, nonlinear differential equations and the Falkner-Skan equation describes a certain class of flows and we wanted to make sure that we understood how well or poorly this particular method, these pseudo-expansions would work in that nonlinear case and so Tom Sharpe and I worked on that problem and it was published and he got his thesis and all and his masters degree. Interesting piece of work, I wouldn't say anything profound about it. No one had done it before, we pointed out some advan-- advantages, some limitations of using these pseudo methods to solve these nonlinear equations. Story_ID: 624767 Speaker 1: So in 1985, you were appointed dean of engineering and professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Connecticut in Storrs [Storrs, Connecticut], is that true? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, it's true, yes. Speaker 1: So that's a, so does this mean you're on leave from here or what? What-- Speaker 2: The first two years was leave. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that was the beginning of my five year hiatus from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. All right, so why Connecticut and why are you doing this Wes? I'd been at MIT since '72 [1972] okay so now '85 [1985] so I put in my twelve, thirteen years or so. I really had begun to believe I knew how to build a school of engineering, how to have an, maintain an excellent school of engineering and I wanted an opportunity to do that. I knew the cue for the deanship here at MIT, dean of engineering was very long, very deep, full of all sorts of outstanding people. And that I, Wesley Harris, didn't have a snowball chance in hell of building anything of that magnitude at the school of engineering at MIT. But there was a school, a state school nearby, Eastern Connecticut University of Connecticut, Storrs. Tony [Anthony] DiBenedetto was the provost, interviewed with him, he says, "Come on Wes, I want you to be my dean of engineering. By the way, you've got a lot of problems that we need to solve." So I said, "Fine, let's go." Probably in terms of academic administrative, the best job I've ever had. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, well, what were you able to accomplish in (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well first and foremost, getting all of the departments within the school of engineering at the University of Connecticut, Storrs to be fully accredited by the ABET [Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology] accreditation group. Being a state school, if the department is unaccredited, the state tends not to support them. So when I arrived, they were not accredited, that's the point I want to make and Tony made that very clear, "Wes, they're not accredited." So one of the things that we did working primarily with Pratt and Whitney, the big aircraft engine manufacturer in East Hartford [Connecticut], was to go to Hartford, the state capital and meet with the elected officials and convince them that engineering was important to the economy of Connecticut and that can be made stronger, the value if we have a good, accredited engineering school. And oh, by the way we're not currently accredited and we need equipment, among other things to become accredited. And working with Pratt and Whitney, we convinced the state legislature to give us sufficient funds to move that school to a point of excellence, so much so that we had equipment on the loading docks not--we had to hire extra people to uncrate it, install it and get it operational. So that was a real positive learning experienced. Never had I worked with the state legislature before. Never had I worked with industry with such, with so much on the line as at the University of Connecticut, Storrs. We established an engineering program to encourage, recruit and guarantee or at least work toward graduation of people of color. They had not done that at Connecticut before. I learned how to fundraise, work with alums, work with industry to bring money and resources into the school of engineering at the University of Connecticut, Storrs, so it was a good job. Speaker 1: So you were there until 1987, I guess? Speaker 2: No, '85 [1985] to '90 [1990], five years, one full term. Speaker 1: Oh till '90 [1990] oh okay, that's right, okay you're right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 624768 Speaker 1: In 1990 you went on to the University of Tennessee, right? Speaker 2: The Space Institute [UTSI] in Tullahoma [Tennessee], yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So are you still associated with MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in any way at this point? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I would come back, visiting committees, things of that sort. Yeah, I never really left the place. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you're still a tenured person? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay, all right. Speaker 2: No, no, no. Members of the visiting committees for both aero and mechanical engineering I believe, but MIT gave me two years of leave with full professorship in place. Beyond the second year I would no longer be on leave, I would be a non-MIT employee. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's, all right. So you're actually away from MIT now in terms of the employment. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So 1990, you become vice president of the University of Tennessee's Space Institute in Tullahoma? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now where is Tullahoma? Is that outside of--? Speaker 2: Okay, Tullahoma, the only city in the world I think that the name of Tullahoma--there are many Richmonds okay, Richmond, Virginia, Richmond, California, I think there's a Richmond, Indiana and so on and so-- Speaker 1: Indiana, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, Tullahoma, Indian name, Native American name, it's sixty miles to the north of Huntsville, Alabama so it's in the Tennessee Valley. The world's largest aerospace test facility complex is in Tullahoma, the Arnold Engineering Development Center, AEDC is there, a huge army--I'm sorry, a huge--Arnold, A-R-N-O-L-D, Arnold Engineering Development Center, AEDC is in Tullahoma. It's a major U.S. Air Force experimental test facility. It is on the various Tennessee Valley Authority power systems, you need a lot of power to run these wind tunnels. It's located there. The research committee or the need for research was provided by the University of Tennessee's Space Institute at Tullahoma, primary customer, the researchers at AEDC. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A bit of cultural history, the captured German scientist in space and rocketry, Wernher von Braun, and his team of researchers and developers, went to Huntsville. And at Huntsville today there's something called Kraut Hill where the Germans are. And if you look at the U.S. from western Carolinas right on through Arkansas there's a band of Germans, okay. Slightly to the north by sixty miles, there's Tullahoma. The captured German aerodynamicist, not rocket scientists, a man named Goethert [Dr. Bernhard H. Goethert], not von Braun but Goethert was there in that part of Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, so and to the south in Huntsville, rocketry, space, Red Stone Arsenal, to the north, Air Force Base, Arnold and UTSI, Goethert, another group of Germans. That's the U.S., that's part of what we did. Those scientists were bought by--to that part of the U.S. and settled there, German families and German influence, still there. Story_ID: 624769 Speaker 1: This is about 1990, at the University of Tennessee Space Institute in Tullahoma [Tennessee], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you were explaining the German connection around there. Speaker 2: Right, right. Some folks say there's nothing in Tennessee or in Alabama and there's no high-tech there and you may ask is that true or what part, if it's not true where is the high-tech? And again if you go back to the Second World War and what the U.S. Army and the U.S. Air Force, basically U.S. Army did was to look at Tennessee Valley, Huntsville to Tullahoma primarily in terms of north/south and then going east/west on into Arkansas, you'll find this, the German communities and a lot of high-tech, almost all of it directly traceable to what the Germans were doing in their country prior to and during the Second World War. The great wind tunnels that the Germans built, the rocketry that [Wernher] von Braun and his folks did. So you had, you have that tradition, most Americans don't know about in the Tennessee Valley. Speaker 1: And those dams are huge engineering feats I guess-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --the Wheeler Dam-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --the Barkley Dam and other names-- Speaker 2: Right. The Tennessee Valley Authority provided the power needed to perform that kind of research, run those wind tunnels, build those rockets and so forth. The Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, again highly dominated by Germans as well as Red Stone, all of which was quite important, critical to getting up the first American satellites and eventually the Saturn missiles or rockets all came out of that tradition down there. But Tullahoma, why aero [aeronautics] and why the wind tunnels? A German by the name of Goethert [Dr. Bernard H. Goethert] is the father of that. Speaker 1: And that's G-E-R-T-H-E-D, Gerthed? Speaker 2: Goethert is G-O-E-- Speaker 1: G-O-E, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, Goethert, F-E-T-T- maybe. I can spell it for you at some point but I don't--it's Goethert. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it was an opportunity to even do a more senior position in terms of building and maintaining an institution, this time an only, graduate only, only graduate students were at the University of Tennessee Space Institute, no undergraduate programs. So everyone, all the faculty there was concerned with research. And even greater opportunities to work with industry because of the applied research dimension, a continuing opportunity to work with state legislature. It was a part of the State of Tennessee University System, an opportunity to go deeper into aerospace, deeper than I did, than the opportunity at the University of Connecticut in Storrs [Storrs, Connecticut]. Limited in terms of being in that part of the world, from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to Connecticut to Tennessee is a major change. Change in terms of an appreciation and performance and a level of excellence, a negative change culturally, bias, limited, rudely so in some, in a lot of situations. I stayed only a short while. Story_ID: 624770 Speaker 1: [President William] Bill Clinton was elected president, I was asked to come to Washington [D.C.] to run the nation's aeronautics program which is what I did do after two and a half years on, at UTSI [University of Tennessee Space Institute, Tullahoma, Tennessee]. I think it was winter of '92 [1992] when I finally said yes to Clint--Clinton was elected in the fall of '92 [1992] and by December I had made a decision to come to Washington to serve in, to run, reporting directly to the administrator of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], serving as the associate administrator for aeronautics. Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1993 to 1995. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Right, okay. So you directed NASA research and development efforts then, right? Speaker 1: In aeronautics, not space, aeronautics. Speaker 2: In aeronautics. Okay. Speaker 1: The centers, Ames [Research Center] in [Mountain View] California, Glenn [Research Center] in Cleveland [Ohio] and Langley [Research Center] in Virginia, Hampton, Virginia were the centers that reported to me. Those were the three large aeronautical centers. The Dryden Flight Research Center and Edwards Air Force Base, [Lancaster] California also reported to me. So I had about a $2 billion budget to manage, distributed through those four centers and through the aerospace industry, the aeronautical industry in particular. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, so what-- Speaker 1: Okay, we had such programs as the advanced high speed civil transport program. NASA, working for industry, developed technologies that would lead to an airplane that would fly the Pacific ocean twice a day, twice a day with two hundred passengers, okay, an eight hundred thousand pound airplane is what we had in mind, bigger, faster than the Concorde [research aircraft for NASA], twice as big, two and a half times as big as a Concorde and two times as fast as a Concorde. Speaker 2: Now one of the problems associated with a plane that big flying that fast is sonic boom, right? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Now when we interviewed Christine Darden, she worked on the sonic boom team-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --to solve sonic boom problems. What was, was that something that you were coordinating from the (unclear)? Speaker 1: Right, and she was a major participant in that program as well as her colleagues at NASA Langley, yes. So the idea is sonic boom is proportionate to lift which is proportionate to weight, so eight hundred thousand pounds you're not going to eliminate the boom. You can soften it. You can soften it okay, and how you do that without loss of efficiency is one of the contributions of Darden, okay. Sonic boom is proportionate to lift, lift is proportionate to weight. Lift holds the airplane up therefore it holds up, it's proportionate to the weight and if you're going to have an eight hundred thousand pound airplane you're going to have a boom. How do you soften it? That's what the (unclear). Speaker 2: How was it solved? Speaker 1: Oh, several things. First of all you can change the configuration of the nose of the airplane. That's a major influence on weakening or reducing the strength of the boom. Second, the actual design of the fuselage in the wing, wings, where or how are they fitted on the airplane. And of course you can move them about but the center of gravity of the airplane will change so those trades have to be made. Configuration is, in short is the best way to soften the strength of the boom. Speaker 2: Okay. Now she told us that the reason why we don't have these big planes today in making these runs is 'cause we didn't have enough people to pay to do it. I mean that's what she, she said that's why the Concorde stopped, there just weren't enough passengers. Speaker 1: Okay, I will state it differently. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I think I'm saying the same thing but a bit differently. To build a new airplane like a supersonic transport of that size and speed requires about $4 billion in tooling to lay out an assembly line. How many airplanes must you sell to recoup the cost of manufacturing? The tooling itself is $2 billion, okay? Then you have to actually get technicians in there to build the airplane. Story_ID: 624771 Speaker 1: What city pairs are there that would make a difference? Well you could fly from Johannesburg [South Africa] to New York [New York], right? You could fly from Johannesburg to Hong Kong. You could fly from Japan across the arctic to New York. You could fly from Sydney [Australia] to LA [Los Angeles, California] or from Melbourne [Australia] to LA. You could fly from Shanghai [China] to Melbourne. It turns out that there are not enough city pairs okay, to guarantee enough airplanes where the manufacturer would actually make a profit, would even break even, so in that sense there are not enough people. If you can't find city pairs to have routes where you would use the airplane, then it's not ever going to sell enough. Now the routes that I've indicated are very long legs. On today's speed you're talking sixteen, seventeen hours. And the routes that I named are primarily across the oceans, not populated areas so those are the reasons. Speaker 2: So you could have that softened sonic boom in a place where it wouldn't affect that many people across--? Speaker 1: Yes, well populated areas that's the idea. If you could fly across populated areas then you could, say New York and LA is a city pair. You reduce the time in half, rather than five hours you could fly from New York to LA in two and a half and that's, that's worth it. But you can't do that with a large sonic boom because you're flying across populated areas. Speaker 2: It's actually federal law that says you cannot, right, is that true? Speaker 1: Probably federal laws. Certainly if you don't have federal laws if you start cracking windows and shattering plaster over people's homes you'll soon have a federal law that will prevent it. Speaker 2: Yeah, I seem to remember as a kid hearing sonic booms as a kid near Wright Patterson Air Force Base [Ohio]. Speaker 1: Yeah, probably would. Speaker 2: For a period of time but then they, we didn't hear them anymore and I think something happened legally to stop it. Speaker 1: Planes accelerating from takeoff will certainly generate an intense boom and you will definitely hear them over Dayton [Ohio]. At cruise the boom is there but not as strong as accelerating for takeoff. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So what other problems did you work on at NASA? Speaker 1: Oh, the Advanced Subsonic Program, how do you include the efficiency of airplanes like the 777, even techniques or technology even we now find in the 787? That same program had an environmental component, how do you reduce the NOx [nitrogen oxides] produced by the jet engines that are damaging our atmosphere? Speaker 2: Now, what are these now, the--? Speaker 1: The Advanced Subsonic Transport Program had elements of efficiency of the engines, air frame modifications for again, improved mileage, green or environmental concerns, the pollutants that come out of the rear end of jet engines, NOx and sulphur compounds, how to reduce those because those would eventually destroy the atmosphere and have an adverse effect on climate control, fly by light, fly by wire improvements, free flight navigation tools which FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] is just beginning to implement. All those were parts of that activity we were involved with in the early 90s [1990s] at NASA. Story_ID: 624772 Speaker 1: While at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], you were elected a fellow of the American Helicopter Society? Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes. Yes, that's--okay, so the rotorcraft community obviously since the work I did here at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in main rotor acoustics has always been a part of my aero portfolio. In a lot of ways, rotorcraft was a stepchild. Most of NASA's effort was focused on fixed wing aircraft. The U.S. Military, especially the U.S. Army has always needed better, more efficient helicopters. So working with a man named George Stingley, we developed a joint program involving NASA and DOD [Department of Defense], three-headed program after-anyway, involving the rotorcraft industry to share, to develop and share common technology. And that, no one had done that before to bring those four, those three players, NASA, the rotorcraft industry and the U.S. Army together to solve common research problems related to rotorcraft where NASA put in money, DOD, U.S. Army put in money and the rotorcraft industry put in money. So that was bringing together those three stakeholders in a way to find a common solution to common problems and that's, was, I guess enough for the Helicopter Society to say, "Make this guy a fellow." Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And also you were, you received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal. I guess be-- is that just before you left? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think those things just, you just breathe long enough you get them. I, I attach no significance to those things at all. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you look back at your stint at NASA, what are you the most proud of? Speaker 2: High-speed civil transport, that technology, fascinating stuff, fascinating stuff. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now-- Speaker 2: There's something else too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Most Americans know of the Russia-U.S. Space Treaty. At the same time that was developed there was a treaty or an agreement on aeronautics okay? So a group of us went to Moscow [Russia] several times to develop the document that Chernomyrdin [Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin] on the Russian side and Vice President [Al] Gore on the U.S. side signed, so-called agreement in aeronautics, a similar one in space, okay? Speaker 1: Okay, so this is signed by Al Gore the vice president? Speaker 2: Right and the vice premier Chernomyrdin of, for Russia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, so I led that delegation. A member of that delegation was Woodrow Whitlow and many others as well, but that was an interesting, exciting time, couldn't leave the hotels at night. We were certain our bags were always searched when we left, riots on the Moscow subway. In the early 90s [1990]s, they just had collapsed the Soviet Union so you saw abject poverty in Russia, I mean unbelievable poverty, buildings with holes in them, government buildings, no toilets, no heat in the winter. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's really critical in Russia. Speaker 2: Oh goodness, yes. We were in meetings all day with overcoats on and gloves. Speaker 1: In a government facility? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is (Saugi?) [ph.], that's--this was their corresponding, this was their facility corresponding to our Tullahoma [Tennessee]. We have AEDC, the Arnold Engineering Development Center, the world's largest aerospace test facility, they had something called (Saugi?), comparable with no heat, holes in the walls, grass never cut. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That was Russia in the early 90s [1990s]. Not like that now but they had a really down period man. We were told to do this by the way, to develop this agreement not by NASA but by the State Department because they didn't want the Russian scientists to find their way to Iran or North Korea or some other place that would cause trouble later. Story_ID: 624773 Speaker 1: Now had you planned to only be at NASA [National Aeronautic and Space Administration] until '95 [1995] or--? Speaker 2: No, no, no. This is import-- important I think so I've got to reveal this. One morning there was an altercation in the exercise facility at the basement of NASA headquarters and I won and that was a no-no. The other combatant was a white guy and let's say he was severely embarrassed and that led to my return to--that led to my exit from NASA and eventually back here. Speaker 1: Was this an important guy, I guess or--? Speaker 2: I don't think he was important to anybody, he just was white and I was black. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I think the fear of, I was at that time a senior ranking black government official at NASA, probably one of the senior ones in Washington [D.C.]. So the issue was not so much who this insignificant white guy was, the issue, this "Nigger ain't going to be hitting no white boys," that was the issue. That is, no blacks are going to hit white boys. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So (unclear) you know, it was a, not a comfortable situation at NASA then after that incident I guess? Speaker 2: Repeat that? Speaker 1: So it was an uncomfortable situation at NASA after--? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Oh yes, you had to get out, yeah you can't be hitting white folks man, you can't be doing that, embarrassing white folks. You can't do that. That's not allowed. You cannot do that. That is not allowed. Speaker 1: So did they, did the members of the administration come to you and, this is, this would be like in the [President] George Bush years now, right? Speaker 2: No. No, no. Speaker 1: Right, no, no, no-- Speaker 2: This is [President William] Bill Clinton's first administration. Speaker 1: --(unclear) still Clinton, yeah that's right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, still Clinton administration but I don't know how NASA was affected by that but okay so they, people actually came to you and pushed you to resign or--? Speaker 2: Well it-- "Wes, you can no longer be the associate administrator, you cannot, no longer help us run all of aeronautics. Why don't you consider being," what was it? A chief technologist or something, some title, office did not exist. "You know you don't have to leave Wes. There's a little small area over here that you can hang your hat." Not going to do that, no. There would never be so blatant and say, "Nigger, you got to get out." They would just give you something that they know you won't accept. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know how far you want to, well what you want to tell us about but what happened? I think I should ask what actually happened? Speaker 2: Okay. So I'm a very early riser. At six o'clock I'm in the exercise room and fairly well equipped gym. And then there is the men's shower area and the woman's shower area. And the men's shower area is kind of congested, not much space whereas the exercise facility is, the treadmills, steppers, free weights, all that stuff is fairly well laid out. So I'm hanging up the clothes I think in the men's area. Before you go in and shower you, before you actually go out to exercise you robe up to exercise clothing and your street clothes, your day, work clothes are on a rack, all of them together, everybody that's exercising. So there's a name calling and attempt to spit at the men's area and you can't do that to Wes Harris. You just can't do that. You're going to pay a price to do that. Speaker 1: So was it a dispute over something or--? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: You can't do that to me. And the person understood that. I'm willing to bet he will never ever do that to another black person. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So in the middle of the altercation he decides to name call and spit in this, in the--? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. This is something that happens. And so any rate, so-- Speaker 2: It's not important, man. Speaker 1: It is important but it's you know it's something that, it's not anything that I think a lot of people would, would--you're wondering why, I mean-(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (simultaneous). Well anybody would ask me, yeah, "Wes, why in the hell it took, what could you possibly do in two years, Wes? No, come on. No, four years, two, or something must have happened Wes," obvious question. Speaker 1: Okay. So in '95 [1995], you return to MIT, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and I've been here since. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624774 Speaker 1: You came in as the director of the Lean Sustainment Initiative, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. The first year I was in the Lean Aerospace Initiative and only around, that was '95 [1995], around '99 [1999], 2000, I developed a Lean Sustainment Initiative. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what is the Lean Aerospace Initiative? Speaker 2: Okay, so in the 90s [1990s] the U.S. automobile manufacturers realized that Toyota made the best cars in the world and they also could build a new car, a new model quicker than anyone else but they had the best cars in the world, so happened they built them cheaper than anyone else. How did they do this? How did the Japanese do this? So the U.S. automobile manufacturers and the Europeans, Mercedes Benz, BMW, contracted with MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] researchers to discern the elements of success they observed in the North Star, Toyota. That led to the concept of lean. The machine that changed the world is the history of that research. What did, what is it that Toyota does that make it so good at building very, very good, capable automobiles, cheaper and faster than anyone else? Okay, so--and you built cars in the order of millions of units a year okay. The U.S. Air Force says can we do the same with airplanes? Can we get the cost down in building fighter airplanes and tankers and bombers and at the same time keep the quality up, costs down, quality up? The Air Force, the federal government wanted to do that. So rather than Lean Automobile Industry or initiative it's called the Lean Aerospace Initiative, that's what that was about. Now Lean Sustainment, the (unclear), answered the question of how do you maintain and repair airplanes in a lean way. B52s are fifty, sixty years old, right? C130s, also very old, jet fighters, F14s, 15s, helicopters all wear under or exist under great stress as military airplanes. How do you maintain those? How do you repair them in a lean way? So that's what that was about. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it came out of the automobile industry. Why in the hell is Toyota so successful? Speaker 1: So lean in this scenario actually stands for stripping it down to the essentials or something to--? Speaker 2: Getting rid of the waste. Speaker 1: The lean--getting rid of the-- Speaker 2: Eliminating waste, at the same time adding quality. When you eliminate waste the idea is you are reducing costs but you cannot do that without the same time, at least that's the objective, to increase performance, quality okay? Toyota does both, no waste or limited, almost infinitely zero waste. Approaching zero waste but at the same time the Toyota cars are very, very reliable. Story_ID: 624775 Speaker 1: Okay. So MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Now '95 [1995], you're elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering. Now this is an honor right, this is a-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Not everybody gets into that. Speaker 2: Right, that's the highest honor I've ever received. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Right, so in a very, very interesting time in my life. On my way out of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] right in Washington [D.C.], the National Academy says, "Okay Wes, you know your contributions are recognized, you are now elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering." And the boss of NASA at that time, Dan [Daniel] Golden was not even a member. "So here is this nigger hitting, slapping white boys and being elected into the academy, we got to just put him in his place." A lot of things were going on, okay. "Wes, you ain't supposed to be there yet. I mean, there are people around you who are white and your boss and boss, they aren't there. How can you get there?" And they had no part in it. They didn't recommend me, no one asked them any questions about Wes. Others that observed Wes said, "You are now ready for election into the academy." So it was an honor. I can remember going to Neiman Marcus, this is a black tie affair okay, you--this is very stiff backed and laced up and no loafers. This is very, very formal. The night before you are elected there is a, this dinner so the question is, there's an issue of seating and who is in-"Who's your mentor?" Who, who's going to put their arms around you? Turns out that Norm Augustine [Norman Ralph Augustine] was my mentor, he's the CEO [Chief Executive Officer], at that time of Lockheed Martin, had no idea that he would be my mentor. I walk in, he says, "Wes, you are at my table, you are at my left side Wes. That's your place tonight." Perhaps the most visible figure in aerospace in the country at that time, Norman Augustine. So that was a time to exhale. I knew you might say that I was safe. I knew I was going to leave NASA, no question about that, but I knew that I was fairly, fairly safe. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Yeah that kind of puts, as you said this is an important honor that I had to learn about doing this job interviewing scientists. I didn't know what it meant to be a member of the National Academy of Engineering. I mean that's-- Speaker 2: Right. There's no other black faculty at MIT who's a member, not [James] Williams, none of them, you know. They will, some of them will someday be, but at the present moment, I'm the only African American faculty member, the only faculty member of color. There are no Latinos here on this campus who are members of the National Academy. Speaker 1: So that's really quite, that's quite an honor. Story_ID: 624776 Speaker 1: So while you were at NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] you were a visiting professor here [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts] before you--? Speaker 2: No, when, that was right out of NASA, I left NASA in '95 [1995], I came directly to MIT. So June, July '95 [1995] to '96 [1996], I was the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Visiting Professor. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you became the director of the Lean Aerospace Initiative after that? Speaker 2: Right and at the, and during that same year I was asked to resubmit my credentials for rank of professor at MIT. So I had to earn tenure all, go through the tenure hoop all over again, which I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I've been tenured twice at MIT, twice for professor at MIT, tenured at [University of] Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], tenured at University of Connecticut [in Storrs, Storrs, Connecticut] as well. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right, so now you're at, so you're ensconced here but in 2000 now you went to Arizona State [University, Phoenix, Arizona], is that true? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, as the Berry Goldwater Chair of American Institutions? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Is that true? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that. There's got to be a story there. Speaker 2: Arizona State University has this endowed chair, the Barry [Morris] Goldwater Chair of American Institutions and prior to I being selected to fill that chair for a year, it's always one year, the occupants have been of the traditional American institutions like economics or history, political science. I was the first engineer and the first person of color to hold the Barry Goldwater Chair of American Institutions. A friend by the name of William Saric, S-A-R-I-C, was the person that made that happen. I didn't know anything about ASU, Arizona State University and certainly didn't know anything about the Barry Goldwater chair. But Bill Saric was a full professor at Arizona State University, a person I've known since the sixties and he invited me out. He says, "Wes, do you want to come to Arizona?" And it was a good experience, it really was. I really needed the year off, had never spent time in the Southwest, any place west of the Mississippi, refreshed myself, reenergized my teaching, continued with my research, maintained the Lean Sustainment Initiative, it was good, good for me and good to me too. Story_ID: 624777 Speaker 1: In 2003, you became the head of the Aeronautics and Astronautics at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: The department head? Speaker 2: Yes, that's the department head. That's five years of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Were there any other black faculty members in the department? Speaker 2: Yes, Dan [Daniel] Hastings, H-A-S-T-I-N-G-S, and he still is a member of that department. Speaker 1: And how big is the department in terms of--? Speaker 2: Oh maybe thirty-five. Speaker 1: About thirty-five? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Professor John Paul Clark, African American, of Jamaican-ish background, Professor Charles Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N, were all, along with myself were all members of the faculty during the 2003 time frame. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A couple of Hispanic faculty members as well, Manuel Martinez Sanchez, Jaime Peraire, Paulo Lozano, Raul Radovitzky, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So over the years then, have you observed that MIT is making progress in terms of diversity, in terms of its faculty and-- Speaker 2: Slowly. Speaker 1: --students? Speaker 2: Very slowly. For a quarter of a century the percent of faculty of color and probably even today the percent that's African American is not north of 5 percent, even today. If you put in all of the faculty of color, Latina, Native American, Alaskan, Hawaiian and black, it's probably 7 percent. Speaker 1: Okay. Now in 2007, you were appointed as Charles Stark Draper Professor of Aeronautics and Astro-- Speaker 2: That's not right. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No, it should be 2001. Speaker 1: Two thousand one? Oh okay. Speaker 2: When I returned from ASU [Arizona State University, Pheonix, Arizona], should be 2001. Speaker 1: Okay, well I got it 2000, I'm correcting it. Okay, so that's, now tell us about that. Speaker 2: Okay, a bit about Charles Stark Draper, first of all, who is he? He is perhaps the best known faculty member in the history of the department. He is the founder of Draper Laboratories, the Draper Prize, Draper Foundation all track back to Charles Stark Draper. He was head of the department when the department welcomed the first Jewish faculty member. Some said he more than anyone else, enabled a success in the Second World War. And some folks said radar made the big difference and it probably did. But the question he, that he, the problem he solved was this, how do you track movement of an airplane if you're trying to shoot it down with a recoilless rifle? Okay, he developed the gyros to do that. He also developed the capability of the big naval guns to lock in. So he's quite a, quite an engineer and quite famous and quite successful. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So the truth be told, I made it very clear that I was not going to come back to MIT unless I had an endowed chair and the offer was to start Charles Stark Draper professorship. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so-- Speaker 2: Not [Jerome Clarke] Hunsaker, who didn't like Jews, but Draper, who did like Jews. Speaker 1: Yes. I think the dislike of Jewish people is probably an indication of how one feels about black people. Speaker 2: Yes, I think so. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Most assuredly. Speaker 1: Yeah. So-- Speaker 2: I remember when the chair was announced or I was announced the holder of the chair, how pleased Leon Trilling was. He was, and also the president, the former president of MIT, Paul Gray, he was very pleased. He says, "Wes, not a better chair for you." Leon said, "That's the chair Wes, that's the one that makes a difference." Not any of the other chairs that were in the department. Story_ID: 624778 Speaker 1: Now didn't Leon Trilling win some award, I mean some big, really big award? I know, I thought we talked about it when we had, when we went over the research, it wasn't a Nobel Prize but it was some-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. No, Leon, Leon shuns anything like that. You would never know he speaks many languages and published seminal work. No, Leon would never do that. He is a fellow in AAAS [American Association for the Advancement of Science], but he's not a member of the academy. No, he just, he's just a renaissance man that has no desire to have a presence at all, just all inward. Very gifted, shares with anyone but he won't, he shuns the spotlight. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He is a recipient of the Martin Luther King Award, faculty award [at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Leon Trilling is. Here's an interesting guy, man. This man has every reason to hate everything and everybody, his experiences in Europe in the 30s [1930s] and the 40s [1940s]. His brother gone, don't know if the Russians or the Germans or the Poles who killed him, but gone. How he was, how they were bounced around from Poland to France to Portugal to Cuba and waiting in Cuba to get into the U.S., and he still is a gentle soul, rare kind of person. Speaker 1: Okay. Is he still with us? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His wife has passed but he's still with us. Story_ID: 624779 Speaker 1: Okay, now you were also the associate provost for faculty equity too. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, okay, that's where I'm now phasing out of, thank god. The provost in 2008 was Rafael Reif who is now the president. He had a problem that he couldn't solve, namely how to bind this place, MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], following the James Shirley's incident. And so he asked me to help him do that, that's basically what it's about. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got to tell us what the James Shirley incident is. Speaker 2: James Shirley is an African American. He was a professor in the Department of Bioengineering and did not, was not awarded tenure and he protested that for right, for all the right reasons. That protest took the form of a hunger strike and it was very visible and MIT received appropriately a lot of negative press. And it was devastating to the black community on this campus, it was divisive and splitting that community but it also presented MIT's white or dominant community in a very negative light. And that's what bothered, I won't say bothered. As an, as a senior officer in the institute, Rafael Rife, the provost, wanted to bring some peace and quiet to that. I think that's why I was asked to do it, for no other reason. No, it was pure selfishness on the part of the institute wanting to change its image if you will. The fact that I was supposed to accelerate the careers of faculty of color was secondary. So that's about, brings us up to date I think or at least getting close to it. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 624780 Speaker 1: Now you serve on the engineering committee of the National Academy of Engineering, right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I--several of those studies, boards I've been on, chairing panels, yeah still do that. Speaker 1: And you testified before the Congress in 2012, before the subcommittee on space and aeronautics, right? Speaker 2: Yes. [Nodding head]. Speaker 1: And what was the nature of that testimony and--? Speaker 2: Okay, I chaired a committee of the national academy that looked at NASA's [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] capability to perform flight tests, full up airplanes, tested out of Dryden [Flight Research Center] at Edwards Air Force Base [California]. The committee which had Neil Armstrong on it that I chaired and some others outstanding aerodynamicists and test pilots in the U.S., made some observations and drew some conclusions and recommendations that were rather sharp and depending on which side of the fence you were on hurtful toward NASA aeronautics. The subcommittee wanted to know more details so they asked us to come to the [Capital] Hill [Washington, D.C.] to talk about the study, that's what it was about flight tests, NASA flight test capability. For example, we've been talking several times today about sonic booms. One of our recommendations for that study was for NASA to immediately accelerate sonic boom testing for the business jets, smaller airplanes, not eight hundred thousand pound airplanes but let's say a one hundred thousand pound airplane. With little, lesser weight, new aerodynamic shaping, body contours, we think we can, the technology is now ready to build supersonic biz [business] jets. We predict a whole new market opening up for biz jets around the world that the U.S. industry could take the lead on. You're talking about high-skilled, high-wage jobs, you're talking about dominating a niche in aviation. And we felt that the bottleneck was NASA's inability due to funds or whatever to test supersonic biz jets. Now what are we talking about? What about the UAV [unmanned aerial vehicles] market, why is it so rich? It's rich because NASA played a major role in demonstrating the effectiveness, aerodynamic efficiency of biz--of UAVs, oaky, a whole new industry of developing unmanned aerial vehicles. We predict the same thing for biz jets if NASA would get off their duff and complete the testing. So in that sense you know you're talking about high skilled, high wage jobs, taxes, gross national product, of course the subcommittee is interested. Speaker 1: Have there been any moves since 2012, to do testing of supersonic--? Speaker 2: I have not recognized it if it is. I've, I don't stay on top of the literature every day but I go to the AIAA [American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics] meetings, I get the AIAA Lodge every morning if there's been any breakthroughs I think I would have observed them. Speaker 1: Do you think the sequester has something to do with the tightening of the belt, that tightening-- Speaker 2: Could be. Speaker 1: --the federal government? Speaker 2: Could be, federal, the federal government is certainly in a disarray as is NASA but it could be that. Speaker 1: So I never heard anyone talk about that before but a supersonic-- Speaker 2: Biz jets. Speaker 1: --business jet, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's who would want to be someplace faster, the business community. Speaker 2: Right, New York [New York] to LA [Los Angeles, California], two, three people, senior executives, two, two and a half hours, oh, that's real. New York to London [England, United Kingdom], three hours, back and forth the same day. Do your one hour meeting, sign your contract, worth a billion dollars, come back home. Speaker 1: Why do you think testing on that has been dragging you know, do people not see the potential of that? Speaker 2: Yeah. NASA today is risk averse. What if you have an accident, what if you don't prove to the level you might want to project, is that egg on your face? No, NASA is just risk averse, not aggressive the way it was in the 60s [1960s] and 70s [1970s] about flight testing, flight testing, full scale airplanes, taken through all the maneuvers, risk averse. Maybe some poor planning as well, you know you just can't wake up tomorrow morning and go out and test biz jets, you have to plan these tests. If they--it does take time, years and to program them, plan them, execute them, make the literature available to the industry, takes some effort. Not like getting up tomorrow morning and going out and flying something. Story_ID: 624781 Speaker 1: Do you have any predictions about where NASA is going to go in the future in terms of future projects and that sort of thing? I mean 'cause we just finished an era of space shuttle flights and that sort of thing. I mean what's next do you think? Speaker 2: Through 2025, I predict robotics, robotics. We'll do some more exploring of Mars with robots. Speaker 1: So you think robotic exploration will be--? Speaker 2: Right, right. We'll do some more, I think we'll launch some more distant observations, the moons of Saturn, the rings, the moons of Jupiter. Speaker 1: So you think like robotic exploration will take precedence over man's flights? Speaker 2: Right, through 2030, I think for sure, certainly 2025. We'll continue to look back toward earth with our satellites for weather prediction for example. For changes in our climate looking back toward earth you can observe changes in the glaciers very easily from satellites looking back toward earth. We will probably use those satellites to enhance crop production, have a major impact on food security for all humankind. By 2050, we will have capability to send a human to Mars and back. In the interim we'll go to the, some of the asteroids, maybe even return to the moon just to poke an eye in the, poke a splinter in the eye of the Chinese. There's no real reason to go back to the moon but I think we probably will by 2050. But by 2050, we'll have the capability to go to the moon--go to Mars if we want to. Speaker 1: So do you think the Chinese are going to go to the moon this-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh they have to, yeah. Speaker 1: --soon? Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, they have to. Story_ID: 624782 Speaker 1: Now what about your thoughts on science and technology education in the country, the STEM [science, technology, engineering, mathematics] education, cause I know you mentioned before that it had a big boost after, during the U.S.-Russian space race. But what's the condition now in terms of government support of STEM education? Speaker 2: The federal government as I understand the U.S. can provide guidance and some support but education is primarily under the control of states, even out of local school boards, not even state. So the federal government can incentivize, they can, things like Head Start, programs like that, make resources available, provide some requirements, really requirements for testing and assessment. So I think education will be advancing slowly. I don't see any great leaps in that because it is so balkanized with all communities having its own stake in the ground, in this county, this is what's required for graduation, in an adjacent county there's something different. Not necessarily inferior but different, so it's harder to gel that. California will never be Virginia, Virginia will never be California when it comes to public education and the requirements of graduation, etc. What will actually happen is I wouldn't dare be so firm about what 2050 would look like in education as I am about going to Mars. And I think it, the changes are so rapid and so localized that it's hard to predict, so hard to predict, potential breakthroughs in individualized learning where every person, every human is guaranteed an optimum environment to progress at their own strength and pace. Those are possibilities you know and one can really do that. I mean I think that's possible. Education can, STEM or any other kind can take off at rates and directions we just can't predict. Story_ID: 624783 Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wanted to ask you maybe a follow up question on fluid dynamics of blood flows. Speaker 2: Right. One of the world's greatest chemical engineers is a former colleague by the name of Gordon Lightfoot. Gordon Lightfoot wrote the bible on diffusion. He and I were on a committee together serving at the request and pleasure of the dean of the school of engineering at Duke University in [Durham] North Carolina. Gordon Lightfoot and I were talking about nonlinear mechanics, bifurcation and chaos. That conversation led to his concern about his own medical problem, namely he was, he's diabetic. At that time I'm sure he was well into his sixties, maybe even seventies, a slender built person, Caucasian. You would not have thought he was diabetic. He, during this conversation of nonlinear mechanics and bifurcation and chaos, he said "Wes, you know this crisis of sugar in diabetic patients, this onset, the beginning of this crisis is probably chaotic and not random." So we had a conversation about that, that stuck with me. A relative of my second wife is sickle cell impacted. So this youngster was on the beach in Galveston [Texas] one summer day and she kept playing around, having fun with me and would not go into the water, into the sea unless I went with her. And she played all day in the sun, Camsey [ph.] was her name, and did not stress herself to the point of a sickle cell crisis where the excruciating pains in the fingers, elbows of this sort. So I asked myself, why? How is it that she did not go into crisis? So since then I've always asked myself what is it about sickle cell patients that some go into crisis and some do not? Is it a matter of diet? Is it a matter of exercise? Is it a matter of sleep or lack thereof? Why do some patients, some sickle cell impacted patients go into crisis? So that, if you ask that question you have to analyze blood floods, not any large arteries, the large vessels like arteries but in the smaller vessels, the capillaries where the pain is. You have the blood plasma, you have the red blood cells, both a mix of regular or normal cells and sickle cells. You have a blood cell that is loaded with oxygen coming from the lungs. That oxygen is transported to the surrounding tissue. It always happens if you are not sickle cell impacted. It does not happen if you're sickle cell impacted. The cells become sickle, they break and there's no transfer of oxygen and therein sets the pain, the hurt. When the nerves are starved of oxygen, it means, you feel it as pain. Story_ID: 624784 Speaker 1: So we had to model the fluid dynamics of the plasma, the motion of the sickle cells and the defamation, the actual change in the shape of the cell of the sickle cell patient, blood cells of the sickle cell patient. And, now does the oxygen move from the cell, across the membrane, through the plasma into the surrounding tissue and that's what we modeled and no one had ever done that before. That's what we had done. We have a very detailed model. We have a, an approximate model. The detailed model was, the Ph.D. was Francois Le Floch. He was a, he is a French citizen and he came to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with an enormously well versed, solid foundation in applied math so he could do the analysis that needed to be done, under my direction but he clearly was quite capable. So that's the idea. Now Louis Eschaves is a current graduate student working on the problem and the formulation, the general formulation that Francois Le Floch's thesis is based on has now been advanced to look at a Lorenz type analysis of that general formulation which will clarify the onset as to whether it is or when it is in fact random or when it's chaotic. All right, so we do all of this stuff. What does it mean? Why are you doing this Wes? What does Camsey care about whether it's random or chaotic? She's, she is in pain. What's going on here? The idea if it's random, there's probably no way, absolutely no way to prevent the onset of the crisis. If it's chaotic there are limits. There are limit cycles and based on the physiology of the impacted patient as modeled in our calculations, not theory, we can suggest clinical trials that would prevent and certainly mitigate, reduce significantly the onset of, of the crisis, that is the painful part of sickle cell. What is one major problem we confront? Sickle cell disease is not reproducible in lower animals. You can't impact a rat or a pig or a dog with sickle cell, it's a genetic thing. Okay, so what does that mean? Even if we prove mathematically that it is chaotic and not random, even if we demonstrate certain physiological properties of the person who is impacted governs the onset of crisis, what chemicals, what pharmaceuticals do we recommend and what are possible dangers of clinical trials since you can't try it out on a dog or a pig or a pigeon or a monkey, what do you do? Who's going to run the risk of allowing themselves to be treated with these pharmaceuticals, these drugs just to demonstrate their effectiveness when it can produce great harm? So that's what we're doing. It's all fluid mechanics. Look, in aero [aeronautics] I would look at the transfer of heat, skin friction. In this problem I'll look at the transport of oxygen molecules. It's a transport phenomenon. It's all the same calculus for me. So that's what it's about. Story_ID: 624785 Speaker 1: In terms of administration do you see yourself at some point becoming the president of an institution? Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no, no, no. I'm going home to my grandkids, no. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: No, I've had enough of this. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And you're still able to do research now, you know you're-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, right. But I'm still going home to my grandkids. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's a part of my life that I can't miss out on. Speaker 1: All right. Now I'm going to ask you about that in a second but before I ask you about the grandkids, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Black males are viewed in two ways. Number one, as being extremely dangerous and second, as endangered species. That perception is not, in my opinion, not limited to whites but I think a lot of blacks see black males as dangerous, I mean really physically afraid of them, intimidated by their very presence, even if they wear bow ties, even if they shave. Don't have to wear hoodies, black males are dangerous in the eyes of most. And second, they are endangered as a result of incarceration, drugs, murder, discriminations, whatever, AIDS, black guys are endangered, soon to be extinct. That's my greatest concern. Speaker 1: So well what, you see any avenue towards solving the problem? Not a solution but what's the avenue towards the solution? Speaker 2: Well I think it has to start--we, I can't do anything about a--what folks do if I'm on an elevator and they get on that they clutch their pocketbooks, they pull their dress down a few inches and they think I'm going to rape them on a fucking elevator, I can't do anything about that. I mean they want to think that I'm dangerous, they will continue to think that. The endangered part is something that I think we do have some control over and some discipline, some commitment to that has to, has to start with us. But one's perception of whether, that I'm dangerous, that I'm going to rape or steal or rob, I can't do anything about that. I don't intend to steal, I don't intend to rob, I don't intend to encourage any black male to do that but I can't, I have no control over that. Story_ID: 624786 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done till this point in your life, is there any major thing that you would go back and change or, if you could? Speaker 2: No, no. Life has been good, yeah. For me, the glass is still half full. Life has been good. I, I don't feel like I've been shortchanged in anything that's important to be a human being. I don't think that. I've been challenged, I've been rewarded, I've learned, I've grown. I've been blessed with many gifts, many, many gifts. Life has been good. Story_ID: 624787 Speaker 1: If you look back over everything that's happened till now, professionally especially, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: That's easy, Woodrow Whitlow, Jim [James] Hubbard, the group of young men and women, including Francois Le Floch and [Louis] Eschaves, that group of young people that I worked with, yes, professionally that's it for sure, right. It sort of goes like this, when you're young, your children are known by you, that's Wes' son, that's Wes' daughter. And when you're old and I am, you're known by your children, right, right, yeah. For example, let me tell you what I mean. My twin brother's [William Harris Jr.] daughter, one of his three daughters is Melissa Harris Perry. She has a, on MSNBC every Saturday and Sunday she has a program. You don't know anything about Bill, my brother, you know something about his daughter. He's known by her and I'm known by the kids I've touched, my children, Whitlows, the Hubbards of the world. That's a natural order of things you know, that's the way it goes. That's the way it should be. Story_ID: 624788 Speaker 1: Well tell us about your, your children, you've got six children right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you told us about how you met your first wife [Myrtle]. What about the second one? Tell us-- Speaker 2: Yeah, okay which--now I have no wives, I'm divorced. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First of all the wives, mothers, are very, very fine women, all African American women and have added tremendously to my life, to my health, to my success. If I have a sense of balance about life, those women have played major, positive, supportive roles in that. And through all the suffering and buffering--not suffering in the sense of lack of food or shelter but nuances of being in this professional world and being who we are so I owe all that to them and proud to say that, very pleased to have known them, loved them. I would say equally important, respect them. That's so very important, maybe even respect before love, yeah. I think it's very, very important. The kids, the children, the six are just fine, Wesley, Jr., Zelda, Marcus, Kamau, Kalomo, Alevia, their own families, husbands, wives, children, my grandkids, careers of various sorts. I missed some of my grandchildren growing up. The oldest son, Wesley, Jr., his kids, the youngest one is a sophomore or a junior in high school, so I missed a lot of theirs. Zelda who, the oldest girl has the youngest of children, her youngest is less than a year old and that's where I, that's what I mean about jumping in now to make a, sure I get a piece of that action you know before they are in high school or in college and I would have missed that. So you know this has been good. I still have an opportunity to engage grandkids and that's what I don't want to lose. Story_ID: 624789 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't discussed or haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Yeah, we--on a side bar we talked about Armstrong High School [Richmond, Virginia] football. And we haven't talked about that. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right. So you had a coach that was pretty, figured prominently in your--? Speaker 2: Yeah, Maxie Robinson is the coach. Speaker 1: That's Maxie? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Robinson, okay. Speaker 2: His son is famous, Randall Robinson. I believe all of his sons are, yeah. Speaker 1: We knew Max Robinson too in Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah, the same one, ABC [News], yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He died very young. Speaker 1: So Maxie Robinson is the father of these two men and he's, he was your coach at Armstrong? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was. Speaker 1: Okay. Football was very important in our community. You know if you didn't play football you were a sissy. That is you were timid, it wasn't like you didn't like girls or anything it was, but you were a sissy. But Bill [William Harris Jr.] and I played, my twin brother and I played football and played all four years in high school, captain of the football team. I feel very, very good about that experience, first real introduction to teamwork. Early introduction to the value of staying healthy, exercising, actually pumping a sweat. That perseverance that I talked about that I picked up from my father [William McKinley Harris] to stay with it piece at a time till you get it done, you saw that again in football. I was the offensive center and it was a position, one of the skilled positions you don't learn how to long snap for the punt without practice. You get better each time you go out, each year. I was a lot better in my senior year than I was in my first, freshman year. All sorts of personalities, serious guys, laugh-- some guys would laugh and play all the time. You just get a good cross section of human diversity when you have forty guys on a football team. So it was very important. And Eloise Bose Washington was always there to put it in perspective you know. "Wesley, you're not going to play basketball, you're going to come into the lab." So all that fit together, right? And Maxie the coach, an interesting guy, old fashioned in everything he did, his coaching styles, his selection of uniforms for the team, somewhat timid toward whites and here's what I mean. He would accept leather helmets from the white high schools and used football cleats from the white high school kids rather than buy state of the art helmets and new shoes for the team, okay, and those kind of things. Now remember right, I finished high school in 1960 so he was a product of the 30s [1930s] and 40s [1940s] and coming into the 50s [1950s] but that was Maxie and there were some good things about him as well. Story_ID: 624790 Speaker 1: Being of old school he [Maxie Robinson, high school football coach] was a strict disciplinarian. We could not date girls during the season, we could not eat dessert before practice. I don't know what the hell it's about. It's something about metabolism in his mind that said dessert was bad for you. He was also somewhat restrictive on water intake and today you know that's a no-no. Everybody drinks all the water you can as much as you can as often as you can, but not with Maxie. We would have long practices that started four o'clock, it'd be nine o'clock when you get home. Run twelve again, run twenty again, do eighteen again, you know. Do it until you get it right. I mean in that sense he was like the basketball coach for UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] that won all the basketball championships. Speaker 2: John Wooten. Speaker 1: Yeah, John Wooten. John Wooten was simple but repetitive and got it right. No one ever missed a layup on John Wooten's team, you never missed 20 or a 12, these are running holes for blockers on Robinson's, Max Robinson's team. So it was positive, football was good. It's an important part of my life, it really is. When Bill and I talk, when I go back to Richmond, we usually are laughing and talking about Maxie and some game, some block, some exercise, some practice. Yeah, you don't forget it, it's important. Speaker 2: Okay. So did the team do, I suppose now being the times the way they were, did, was Armstrong playing other black schools around there? Speaker 1: Yeah, only black schools. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, we went to the Tidewater, played Huntington High School in Newport News [Virginia], Phoenix High School in Hampton [Virginia], Booker T. Washington High School in Norfolk [Virginia], Booker T. Washington High School in Crestwood [Virginia] or wherever the place is down there and Maggie Walker in Richmond [Virginia], we played Peabody High School in Petersburg [Virginia], yeah. The major cities had one high school. Richmond, a larger city had two black high schools but that was the competition. And we didn't go out to Roanoke [Virginia] or small schools like that but the bigger cities and Richmond and the Tidewater area, including Petersburg, Peabody High School is the ones we played. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So did you ever win anything special in football? Speaker 1: Yeah, we beat Maggie Walker quite a few times. Speaker 2: So that was most important? Speaker 1: Yes, it was. Oh, we had twenty thousand people in the stands on Thanksgiving Day for that game, yeah. Speaker 2: That's a lot. Speaker 1: A high school game, twenty thousand people. Story_ID: 624791 Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, I'll go back to one of the earlier comments or questions you asked. Do I have any favorite sayings or--and it's simply this and I hope I remember correctly. The greatest gift is the give...