 Story_ID: 66849 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I am vidi--(laughter) producer/interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Shirley J. Hughes, spelling is S-H-I-R-L-E-Y in the first name; "J" stands for Jean Hughes, H-U-G-H-E-S. Speaker 1: All right, and please give us your date of birth and place of birth (unclear). Speaker 2: Date of birth is 12/6/45, place is Minneapolis, Minnesota. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a senior executive at a company--at a corporation. Speaker 1: All right, that's--okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm not supposed to say-- Speaker 1: You can say the name if you want to. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, it's Ceridian Corporation, which is headquartered in Minneapolis. Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: C-E-R-I-D-I-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 9th, 2002. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in my home in Minneapolis, at 2716 Thomas Avenue South. Story_ID: 66850 Speaker 1: Okay, before we ask any in-depth questions, we, we are compelled to ask you five "People" magazine-ish-type questions that just require a brief answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the first one of those questions is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: What is my favorite food? Oh, there, you're throwing me for a loop. That's something I just asked my godchild last week, about her favorite food--broccoli. Speaker 1: Okay, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, the fall. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: A couple of places: Barbados would be one, out of the United States, and in the United States, Coronado, California. Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite--I'm proba--I'm sure I probably do, but I need to think about that, what it is. We all have phrases or sayings. I need to think about that. I can't answer that right away. Speaker 1: Well, if it comes to you during the course, you know, please, you know, just interject, you know, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 66851 Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family, your--can, can you give us the name of your, your mother, and spell it for us and the date of her birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Certainly, my mother's name is Bessie Mae. Her maiden name is Cunningham Hughes. She was born in Birmingham, Alabama, November 19, 1911. My father, who is now deceased, his name was Solomon Hughes--after King Solomon in the Bible--Solomon Hughes, Sr. He was also born in Alabama, I believe, in a place called Turkey Town. His birth date was April 15th. And right now this is terrible, but I have to come back to the year--1908 I believe-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause he was four years older than mom. Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell their names for us, their first names? Speaker 2: Oh, sure, Bessie is B-E-S-S-I-E; Mae is her middle name, M-A-E. My father's name, first name, is Solomon, S-O-L-O-M-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay, do they have a--did they ever tell you a story about how they met? Speaker 2: Yes, they did tell me a story. We--I asked them how did they meet, and they met through a friend of my--a family friend of my mother's. She was a schoolteacher. And I guess back in that time schoolteachers didn't go out to social things, to dances or parties, and that they were to be very circumspect. But anyhow, she had good friends in Gadsden, Alabama. I believe she was teaching there. And they wanted her to meet this young man who was gaining some notoriety on the-- at the time, the Negro Golf Circuit. And so they met over dinner. My mother played the piano. He asked her to play some song. She didn't know it. She said there was no such song; he said oh yes there was. He went and got her the sheet music the next day. And that was an excuse for him to bring it to the house, and then they started dating. And I wish I could remember--I can't right now--the name of the song. But I'll never forget his telling me--sitting in a big chair, telling me about this song. And then he started singing it, you know, this song that he had mom play. Story_ID: 66852 Speaker 1: Okay, while we're on him, can, can you tell us something about the background of your father [Solomon Hughes], you know, and his family, where they came from and, and-- Speaker 2: Just know very little. His father died when he was very young; I think three or four. As I mentioned, he was from Alabama, I believe raised in Turkey Town. He was one of--he was the oldest of three children, or four children. A sister died, I believe, at a relatively young age from either not having--having an accident with something and not being able to get appropriate treatment as a black person, either from tetanus or something that today people did not die from. He left school when he was about 14. He was always a provider. He provided for his mom, his brother, younger sister. And one of the things he did, he worked at the--I think it was the Gadsden Country Club or either Birmingham Country Club. And that's where he learned to play golf when he was very young, like, nine, ten, eleven. And that became one of his great passions in life. He taught Joe Louis to play golf. He was kind of the forerunner of Charlie Sifford and those guys, who were the first African-American men to be recognized in the profess--professional golf circuit--worked very hard, naturally good with numbers; he could add up a column of numbers in his head quicker than I could still ever do. He was almost faster than the calculator--very much a gentleman. I asked my mother once--I never, ever, in the whole time that my father lived, ever heard him swear. And I didn't know whether that's 'cause he had three daughters. And then she said the whole time that they were courting that she never heard him swear either. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know what else I can tell you about, about his family. Speaker 1: Did he have any stories about what, what his family was doing during slavery or, or Reconstruction or? Speaker 2: No, and he didn't know--one of the things that he felt badly about, he didn't know a lot about his father. The only thing he had remaining of his father was a gun, a rifle, or I guess it's sort of rifle/shotgun. Unfortunately, I don't know the difference but anyhow, something like a rifle or a shotgun, and that was all he had of his father's. So he didn't seem to know a lot about his father's people or his mother's people. Speaker 1: Okay, but he was, he was born and raised right there in Turkey Town, Alabama, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I ba--believe that was the name of the place. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any idea why it was called Turkey Town? I mean, it seems obvious on one level, but then, you know. Speaker 2: Well, I'm making an assumption. I don't remember his talking about where he was born as much as his living in Gadsden, Alabama. I'm assuming it was called Turkey Town, there must have been some turkeys around, but I don't know; that, that may not be true. Story_ID: 66853 Speaker 1: Okay, and what did your father [Solomon Hughes] do for a living? Speaker 2: Let's see, he did several things throughout his life. Let's see, he was--ran on the--he ran on the road-- was a Pullman porter. He did--he worked at a restaurant called McCarthy's at one point in time. I should remember. He did a lot of dif--oh, he was a skycap for Northwest Airlines. It wasn't Northwest originally when he was a skycap. And then after he retired from the airlines, he was, like, a guard at a bank, but he didn't carry a gun. And it sounded to me like mostly what he did was greeted people and have a good time. Speaker 1: Okay. There's nothing wrong with that. Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 66854 Speaker 1: Now, what about your mother [Bessie Mae Hughes]? What did--did she have any stories? What was her background and did, did her family have a story--(unclear)--stories about slavery and Reconstruction and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Not so much about the slavery, but in terms of her, her, she seemed to have had a much, much easier time in life. She was the fourth or--fourth of six children. On her mother's side, her mother's people, apparently her--yeah, it would have been her mother's father and mother owned a lot of land, had people working for them, including white folks working for them. And this was after slavery, I guess at a farm--horses, what have you, quite prosperous. And I asked her. She didn't know. I wanted to know how her grandfather got this land because it would have been shortly after slavery, you know, how he got it. She didn't seem to know. But anyhow, on that side of her, her--they seemed to be rather well off. Her father sounded like he was an excellent carpenter. He built not only the home that she grew up in, but other homes in that area. And he worked for the Birmingham--whatever the Birmingham newspaper was and apparently was like a supervisor for people who would go distribute the paper. But she mainly talked about how handy her father was and that she always thought that all men could build houses, do things with their hands until she married my dad, and he didn't even know what a hammer looked like basically, she'd say. But I don't remember her talking that much about her dad's side of the family. There are some people who, who's--some of her relatives, she said, assumed that her father's father was white, which was, was nothing to be proud of. It was just the opposite--don't know whether that's true or not, but she didn't, she didn't know a lot about his side of the family, never talked a lot about his side of the family; him, yes, a lot of affection with him. And I remember meeting him when I was young. Story_ID: 66855 Speaker 1: Okay, so, well, what did your mother [Bessie Mae Hughes] do? Speaker 2: When we were growing up, a homemaker, raised us. My father wanted to--I mean, they kind of split roles that he worked very hard for a living, and she raised us. Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear)-- Speaker 2: We also had--can I mention, though, that there is another person that, because was a constant in my life, my father's [Solomon Hughes] brother came to live with us after the war, after I guess it was World War II. And he had called my dad and asked if he could come with us. So I think originally it was gonna be for a short time. I believe someone he was engaged to was killed in a car accident. But anyhow, he ended up living us with throughout life. So it also was like having two fathers. And we also got more things because he didn't have any children, so he would give to us. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 66856 Speaker 1: Okay, how many brothers and sisters do you have, or how, how, how, how many siblings are in the family? Speaker 2: Three. Speaker 1: Three. Speaker 2: So it's a family of four. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm the third of, of four children. Speaker 1: Okay. And can, can you name them--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure, my eldest sister, who unfortunately died two years ago, her name was A. Antoinette. And she was a very vivacious, lively--she was the first weathercaster in this area who was a person of color, and was on TV for a long time. Anyhow, she was the oldest; second oldest sister is, is Joyce; and I'm the third child; and I have a younger brother. His name is Solomon Hughes, Jr., but he goes by Soli, S-O-L-I, and he's a musician. Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Second sister is a lawyer. Speaker 1: Okay. What, what does your brother play? Speaker 2: Guitar. He's a guitarist. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 66857 Speaker 1: All right, can, can you, you know, go back and, and, and, and in your mind and tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up here in Minneapolis [Minnesota]? Speaker 2: Geez, I'm trying to think. I always felt very secure, very loved, and certainly knew that we were part of a broader, broader family. One of the things I should mention that drew my parents here from Alabama, my dad gave my mother a choice of Minneapolis or Baltimore [Maryland]. She didn't know a thing about Minneapolis, didn't know a soul but selected Minneapolis 'cause a fellow he had grown up with lived here. And so Uncle Tommy and Aunt Lenora for years I thought they--that it--they were real blood relatives. This was the person who was my dad's best friend. I can remember a lot of times they were also taking us to do things, taking us to either Saturday matinees or things at the community center, you know, as kind of an aunt and uncle, remember big Sunday dinners. The, the TV thing, "Soul Food," in the movie, reminds me very much, in terms of growing up, that we always had big dinners every day. But Sunday, in particular, was, was special and had big dinners, and everyone was expected to be at home, sit down at the table and converse. It wasn't like today where people seem to eat at lots of different times--a lot of laughter, a lot of joy. Story_ID: 66858 Speaker 1: Okay, anything else? Speaker 2: No, I was thinking that-- Speaker 1: Did you--what--did you ever visit Alabama when you were a young--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember twice when--I remember, I remember once 'cause I remember the plane ride. I happened to like planes. And I think one of the reasons I liked planes is at five I remember looking up in the sky and asking my father to take me on a plane, which he did to Wisconsin, and that seemed like, you know, big deal trip. But I remember once we went to Alabama, and went via Pittsburgh and apparently a very bad storm, and it was a very rocky plane ride. My brother, to this day, remembers it. He swears he remembers it to this day and hates flying. And I just remember meeting some of our relatives, some of mom's uncles, and one uncle in particular liked a great deal. I remember the clay being red, red plain and red dirt, or red clay, in Alabama. And I, I remember being struck by how the setting was more rural than where I grew up in Minneapolis [Minnesota], but how tight-knit the community seemed to be, or how everyone seemed to know one another. Story_ID: 66859 Speaker 1: Okay. What, what was some of your favorite activities when you were growing up? What did you like to do? Speaker 2: When I was real little (laughter) or later on when I was older? Speaker 1: Oh, either one, you know, when you were real little I guess. Speaker 2: When I was real little, let's see. There weren't that many clid--kids--in the neighborhood my age, so I also had imaginary playmates, imaginary playmates I would talk to and then (laughter)--one can be very creative that way. But then there were also two girls on the block, or within that block, and I think we just kind of played outside. When I became older, a teenager, church was a big point of activity. And there were lots of kids in our age group, and so we had a youth group, did a ton of things, you know, a lot of sports things: bowling, tag football, you know things like that. Story_ID: 66860 Speaker 1: Okay, now, the community you grew up in, did it have a name and was, was it an all-black community or what was it? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't an all-black community. It was Southside of Minneapolis--(unclear)--what people at the time would have referred it to. At that time, it was probably--I don't know--it was a fairly desegregated neighborhood. And the name of the communities kind of went by the schools that you went to. And unfortunately, both the grade school I went to, the junior high, and the high school are all gone. The grade school's literally gone; the junior high school is now a community center; and the senior high school is a community center. Speaker 1: Okay, well, what, what was the name of the high school in and the grade schools that you attended? Speaker 2: Warrington Grade School, Bryant Junior High School, and Minneapolis Central High School. Story_ID: 66861 Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about school. Now, when--did you like school when you started? Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school. Yeah, I loved school; in fact, I couldn't wait to go to school, and I couldn't wait to get my first library card. By having older sisters, they could go and check out--we lived--we grew up kitty-corner from a library, and they could check out books. And the other thing I liked about the library: When I was little, they did puppet shows, and they did readings to kids, so I became very drawn to library, to books, just a lot of good exposure. And I remember I was so happy when I was old enough to have my own, my very own library card. But I liked school, yeah. I liked school, did very well in school. And then, neighborhood schools were the thing, so you went to--I went to grade school [Warrington Grade School], junior high school [Bryant Junior High School] with kids that, you know, lived in the broader neighborhood and that you knew and had kind of known for years-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --was a good student. Speaker 1: What were your favorite subjects in school? Speaker 2: English. In junior high school that was one of my favorite subjects. One of my least favorite, I remember, was typing. I was president of the Student Council, and that was the same hour as typing. But I was very fortunate that the typing teacher was also my English teacher, and he knew I was a good English student. And I remember once in typing when he gave me grade, he whispered this is a gift, but I know 'cause you're doing stuff on Student Council. Math was okay, but it wasn't my favorite. Story_ID: 66862 Speaker 1: Okay, who were your mentors in school, or do you have--did you have any teachers that, that you considered mentors or people that helped you, you, you know? Speaker 2: Yes, I, I, I have people that I remember, including one to this day. First of all, I thought of my two older sisters as mentors 'cause they were older and they set great role modeling, great examples, got good grades, were always active and things. And then I can remember in, in grade school [Warrington Grade School] I had my first African-American teacher, and that was cool. And it was a person who--a very tiny lady. I mean she probably wasn't four feet eight inches. And there was a boy in the sixth grade who had run away the permanent teacher, a couple of substitutes, and I'll never forget when she came she said he was not gonna run her away (laughter). I can still remember her leaping over a desk (laughter) after this kid. But anyhow, Mrs. Fraction was also someone who was known in the community, in our community. And I can remember she entrusted me to do, do--to do several things. And I would have considered her a mentor or a teacher I remember. And-- Speaker 1: How (unclear) spell her name, Mrs. Fraction. Speaker 2: Fraction? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: Just like it sounds, F-R-A-C-T-I-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. That's an unusual spelling of a name, right, in a way; I never heard it before. Speaker 2: Oh, they were from St. Louis [Missouri], and her brother is a minister at one of the oldest Baptist churches in Minneapolis [Minnesota]. But anyhow, I'd considered her a mentor. In junior high school, the, the drama coach became a mentor. And when there were assemblies, for whatever reasons, even though she taught drama and I think she taught English too, Mrs. Dalstrom (ph.) did not like to get up in front of a group. So for assembly, it could be the last minute, and she would say, Shirley, you've got to introduce whoever we had talking to us. But anyway, she became a mentor, and she's someone, to this day, I see at various things. And she was a person who convinced me to try out for "Alice in Wonderland." My English teacher in junior high school [Bryant Junior High School], Mr. Stitsel (ph.), I consider him a mentor. And then in high school [Minneapolis Central High School], the counselor, Mrs. Jackson, she later on became principal of schools. She was also--she was the only--I'm trying to think if she was the only African-American person in administration at that time in the Minneapolis schools. But anyhow, she I felt very much was a mentor-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and role model. Story_ID: 66863 Speaker 1: Now, you were involved in--you, you were with Student Council. Were there any other activities that you were involved in that you wanna talk about? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was involved in lots of stuff. In fact, I used to tease my mother and tell her she'd double dose my secretary. But I was involved in a lot of things, Student Council, All-City Student Council; in high school [Minneapolis Central High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota], was a cheerleader and captain of the cheerleaders--part of a group called Y-Teens (ph.) Triets (ph.). And we did a lot of things that are the same as what maybe Girl Scouts would do but also tried to do a lot of good deeds in terms of either helping with those less fortunate, whether in this country, somewhere else. But we definitely had community projects--was in Spanish Club. I guess I was kind of a joiner; I was in a lot of, lot of different things. Story_ID: 66864 Speaker 1: Okay. So, when, when it--around graduation time then did you have a sense of what you wanted to do with the rest of your life? Speaker 2: No, I knew I'd go to college. In our family it wasn't a question of, of if we were going to college. It was always a question of where. I mean, that had been either hardwired--somehow it just was never--there was never anything thought that we wouldn't go to school. And I think maybe at first when I got ready to go off to school I thought I wanted to be a shrink and that I would be a bio major and a psych minor and go to medical school and then spend four years learning to be a shrink, but I changed that later on. Speaker 1: So you were really in--interested in-- Speaker 2: I was interested in psychology and also interested in chemistry at the time, did not take a lot of bio in highs school; in fact, I took bio one summer, which is probably one of the reasons I'm alive today. I had two guys who were very good friends in high school that we were running buddies, and they used to like to go canoeing. They were both good swimmers; and in fact, they would canoe at a lake not far from where we are today. I would be sitting in the middle of the canoe just running my mouth, when I think about it, of no (laughter), no benefit. I wasn't doing any rowing. I was just kind of talking. Anyhow, unfortunately both of them drowned that summer, and had I not been in summer school in biology, I'm sure I probably would have been with them. But yeah, at the time I liked chemistry. And I was interested in psychology and kind of what makes people tick and why do people act the way they do, and what have you. I just thought people were fascinating. Story_ID: 62380 Speaker 1: So, so, did you have like a great social life in high school? Speaker 2: Terrific, a great social life. But at the time, in Minneapolis--it's really funny--there were lots of boys that were in my age group, so had lots of people to date, and Minneapolis [Minnesota] and St. Paul [Minnesota] are very close. And for some reason, grass always looks greener on the other side, and Minneapolis girls, we always thought the boys were cuter in St. Paul. And so they'd trek over to Minneapolis and date us and vice versa, but yeah, great social life, active social life, both with black groups and with things at school. I think I mentioned--yeah, I participated in a lot of things. Story_ID: 62381 Speaker 1: Okay, so, you, you knew you were gonna attend college, but where did you decide to go your senior year? Speaker 2: It was decided by the college that gave me the largest scholarship. I ended up--one of my older sisters--my oldest sister [A. Antoinette Hughes] had gone the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota] and then switched to St. Catherine's [St. Catherine University, St. Paul, Minnesota], a women's Catholic college; second oldest [Joyce Hughes] sister had gone to Carleton [College] in Northfield [Minnesota]. And so I looked at other schools in that area. And Coe College in Cedar Rapids [Iowa] was one of the schools that ended up where I got the largest scholarship from them. And I also got several other scholarships as a graduating senior that local businesses gave, like, bank gave one, American Legion, what have you. Speaker 1: Okay. How do you spell Coe College? Speaker 2: C-O-E. It's in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. And at the last minute, I wanted to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. I wanted to go to Howard because I thought, well, my goodness, I'd grown up in Minneapolis [Minnesota]; I'd pretty much gone all through school where there were other kids of color but not tons in my class. And so for some reason, at the last minute I thought, you know, I should go to a Historically Black College and University. And this was kind of at the tenth hour. However, my father [Solomon Hughes] said I think you are going wherever you got the largest scholarship. There I had gotten some scholarships from some other places, but Coe was the one where pretty much the first year I wasn't gonna have to pay anything; so that was decided. And then that was in the early '60's [1960s]. At one point, Coe did a--they were doing an exchange with Howard. And I remember applying for it and the faculty telling me, well, it wasn't for me. The purpose was for (laughter)--the purpose was so that-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --a black person would come there, and white students would go to Howard. I remember applying for it and my advisor saying, well, Shirley, this isn't for you. And I said but I'd like to go. Anyhow, so that's how it was decided. When I was a freshman, there were--there was one other freshman girl from Chicago [Illinois] I believe who was black. There was one upper class person and very few--I think there were a couple of guys, and that was it. Speaker 1: (Unclear)-- Speaker 2: And I can remember when my family dumped me off in Iowa, and I was so sad. Our family is really pretty close and pretty tight-knit. And my oldest sister I remember--no, my second oldest sister, Joyce, spent the whole night repacking me, that apparently the way I had packed up she said there was no way that we could get all that stuff into the car and whatever. But I remember she totally repacked me. We toddled off to Iowa, and I remember that they just kind of--I felt like they just kind of, boomp (ph.), dumped me; and we may have had dinner and then it was goodbye. And at first I thought, uuh. Story_ID: 62382 Speaker 1: Well, well, what was Coe College [Cedar Rapids, Iowa] like? Did you, did you like it or? Speaker 2: I ended up liking it. It was super--it was, it was small, which I wanted a small liberal arts college. At the time, I think there may have been a grand total of maybe 2000 students. And so classes were exceedingly small. And also because I was high visibility, you did not miss class. I can remember some seminars as a freshman where probably there were maybe ten, twelve students; largest class was a bio lab and a biology course where there were maybe forty students. And that seemed like a lot to us, but got a very excellent education. All our tests were essays. And so it ended up being okay. Story_ID: 62383 Speaker 1: Okay. Did--were there any college instructors or, or administrators that you, that you saw as pivotal to your development? Speaker 2: Absolutely. The person who ended up being my advisor, Dr. Taylor--I, I think I mentioned I--when I started out, I was gonna be a bio major and a psych minor. Well, I'd discover I really didn't like bio. I really didn't like cutting up animals at all. And I dated a bio major my freshman year. And, and I didn't like the bio department, and then I discovered I didn't like the psych department. And so I thought, well, my goodness, what am I gonna major in? I picked a major based on liking the professors. I ended up majoring in political science. The person who chaired the department, for whatever reasons, kind of took me under his wing. He also was a Quaker, and I think I liked very much many of his personal values. I can remember babysitting for his family. But he, he was very instrumental all throughout, throughout college. Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the values that you liked that, that he displayed? Speaker 2: Oh, I liked very much--at the time that I went to college was at the beginning of the Civil Rights Movement, of which he was very proactive about. I liked his, his belief that, you know, any student or anyone could do anything, and also at the time he was far more favorable to women and women students than many male professors were. There was another student who became--woman who became his protege--liked his emphasis on family, integrity; there were just a lot of things that I liked, liked about him. He was very helpful and just seemed to be valued--value centered. I also think that if I look back at it now, he was also at a point in his career, and since he was chair of the department, where I'm sure he felt very secure, both about what he was doing; he clearly enjoyed what he was doing, but he wasn't a, you know, a new professor starting out trying to get tenure. Although another professor in the department, who, who was relatively new, I, I liked a great deal too, a man who was very difficult. And I was determined that I was going to end up in one of his classes getting an A plus 'cause he was--he didn't give any A pluses. And I can remember something I took from him, I was so disappointed that I got a B plus or an A minus. And it-his were some of the few classes I studied for. But the people in my department were people that were pretty instrumental. Story_ID: 62384 Speaker 1: Now, were, were you involved in any activist activity in, in, in college, you know-- Speaker 2: Not in terms of going away--activist in terms of Civil-- Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous) Speaker 2: --Rights Movement? Speaker 1: Mm-hmm. Speaker 2: No, not in terms of, you know, going South or leaving the campus. Speaker 1: Did you know pe--people that went South and, and worked with SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee] or any of the other groups? Speaker 2: Yeah, not for that school, but from other avenues, yes. And also I decided when for--the school had a Washington term, where they would select ten--I think it was ten or twelve--students that would go to Washington, D.C. as juniors and that beforehand you had to give to faculty an idea for a paper how you were gonna do the research. And it had to be some topic where you needed to be in Washington. And I selected the passage of the Civil Rights Act--was mine. And that's what I did my research on when I went to the Washington term. Story_ID: 62385 Speaker 1: Okay. Did--so when, when you--were, were you, were you still involved in, in a lot of act--activities like you were in high school [Minnesota Central High School, Minneapolis, Minnesota]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah, was a cheerleader in, in, in college. And then, at the time I went to Coe [Coe College, Cedar Rapids, Iowa], there were primarily--there was the Greek system, and they were, they were all not predominant--I was gonna say they were predominantly white sororities and fraternities. They were all white sororities and fraternities, and they weren't quite sure what to do with black folk. And I can remember during the rush time there were a couple of sororities who wanted to pledge me, and one, that they couldn't, they couldn't find any reason not to, other than race, meaning they couldn't find--'cause I'd been a good student, blah, blah, blah. Anyhow, there were two people in that sorority who didn't like the idea. And they, they somehow got the word to me that they wanted to--that group wanted to pledge me but on an exception basis, which they thought didn't make a lot of sense, that why not have a sorority where you can have who you want and not have folk have to have an except for race? So they started a new sorority, which was one that I joined and became a member of 'cause that made a lot more sense to me. What else was I in? Student Encampment, which is like Student Council, was a dorm counselor; yeah, was active in, in things. Speaker 1: So you were somewhat of a leader then I guess on, on campus, even though you were a minority student. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Okay. Story_ID: 62386 Speaker 1: So, what did you think you would do after, after Coe [Coe College, Cedar Rapids, Iowa]? Speaker 2: After Coe? Well, I wasn't sure. I can remember my advisor kept bugging me, Dr. Taylor, about what was I going to do. And I said I'm gonna go home and sit and think about what I wanna do. And he said, "You can't do that." And I was thinking, yeah, I think I can. He literally enrolled me in a graduate program at University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. It was a new program in Urban Affairs, and it was Interdisciplinary of Economics, Politic Science, Social Science, Physical Planning, 'cause I was interested in the cities. And at that time I did have an interest in "saving the cities"--was also a time when black people were gaining more political clout in urban areas, and so I toddled off to University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee. I hated Milwaukee, did not like it at all. Speaker 1: You--(unclear)--so you--so, so you went at UWM [University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] there-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --in--okay. Speaker 2: --rather than Madison. I didn't like Milwaukee. I, I wasn't that keen on their program. It was new, and so I think they hadn't ironed out the various departments, kind of who was on top because, of course, each thought that theirs was most important. I did work for a short time for a guy who was a physical planner, which in some ways is funny, because directionally I think I'm dyslexic. And for physical planning you have to read these plate maps (laughter) in terms of where things are in an urban area. But anyhow, I left there and then I worked for the State of Wisconsin for a short time to try to help them develop a better relationship with community agencies in Milwaukee. And then after that, I came home and I worked for the city of Minneapolis, the Model Cities Program. And then I thought, my advisor was right; I should have had a double major in political science and business administration. The thing I discovered I didn't like about government is how slow it moves, that I thought it was just incredibly slow. And at that time I was young, probably thought I knew far more than I did. thought I should be in the business world. Story_ID: 62387 Speaker 1: I ended up in the business world by accident. I was originally hired because I knew how to write training contracts, and the company at the time, Control Data Corporation, was expanding in inner city areas and in rural areas, that their whole thing was to use technology to solve society's unmet needs, and also that wherever they expanded to, make sure that was an area of low unemployment--I mean of high unemployment. So I wrote training contracts, which was, was their attraction to me. So I started out in a corporate setting. I also started out working for one of the few black executives they had--or it may, may have been the only one at the time--a person who was a buffalo from the standpoint of, of there were not that many guys who were vice presidents in corporate America then. And just happened to be lucky that I got very quick exposure to some of the top people in the corporation, and kind of went from there. Story_ID: 62388 Speaker 1: Now, this is at, at-- Speaker 2: At Control Data Corporation-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --which is the forerunner of the company I'm with today. And at that time, Control Data made large-scale scientific computers. Later on, they went into lots of, of other areas where they were using technology. They did computer-based education, had some projects with cities where they were trying to do a holistic approach in urban areas with housing, jobs, what have you. At one time it was a company of 60,000 employees and about $6 billion dollars in revenue. And I, I would call it that we were in everything from soup to nuts, because it was just a range of things. The founder, William Norris, who I think is--who is very brilliant, he was about twenty, twenty-five years ahead of his time on, on a lot of things. Some of them didn't work, and the company ended up having some real severe financial problems in the '80's [1980s] and divested a lot of businesses, laid off a lot of people, and in '91' [1991] reformed itself and called itself Ceridian. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, 'cause that--I've heard of Control Data, but before I didn't know what they did, except I could imagine that they controlled data (laughter). Speaker 2: The-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --built at one time the largest scientific computers in the world. And-- Speaker 1: So they made those big mainframes where they ran COBOL and, and-- Speaker 2: You got it. Speaker 1: --Fortran and all that stuff. Speaker 2: Big mainframes that were used in defense, that were used like for weather systems. Also, some technology was exported to, to Russia--remember we had an import/export group, but the, the name in--in the Twin Cities, people either worked for Control, Data 3M or Honeywell. I mean those were the three companies that were the big prestigious companies that-- Speaker 1: They've got the flour com--companies too--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: General Mills. Speaker 1: Yeah, Mills and, and Pillsbury--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And pill-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well, Pillsbury is now part of General Mills; it was acquired by General Mills. Story_ID: 62389 Speaker 1: All right, yeah, okay. So, you eventually became involved in personnel management, that sort of thing. And, and, and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I went from this, this corporate job where I was writing training contracts to--at one point there was an idea to help working mothers and to have a plant that operated around the times of schools, so that a person could get to work at 9:00, be home at three, so they could be with their kids; got involved in writing a proposal for that. And then after I did some of this training stuff, went into the world of human resources, went and did a compensation job and started doing various jobs in, in human resources and discovered I liked it and just kept-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --going. Story_ID: 62390 Speaker 1: Okay, now, back in the--in ancient times or maybe just a few years ago, some-- Speaker 2: It was ancient-- Speaker 1: --corporations Speaker 2: --times (laughter). Speaker 1: Corporations had personnel departments and people that hire and fire and kept track or had files on, on their personnel, and they didn't--then, then, then it became like human resources, which is a little bit more involved. Can you explain the difference--I mean how the hun--the human resources field developed, you know, in a way. Speaker 2: Yes, I'll try to explain it from a historical perspective, although Control Data was somewhat different, in terms of at the time I joined it and what they were doing. But his--the personnel field started out to, as you mentioned, to hire people. When found that they needed to hire a bunch of people, they started these personnel departments, and that became the focus. Then after a while, people did administrative things, like insuring that people got paid, you know, and doing--and helping on time and attendance and, and that kind of thing, but really things that were more marginal than totally integrated with the business. Probably in the '70's [1970s], and particularly as, as there became a shortage of skilled workers, and particularly technical workers, personnel started transcending to HR [Human Resources]. And people started getting more involved in the strategic aspects of the business, not only how people were paid, how they were trained, how you developed a culture, to continue to track and maintain you workforce or how you would help your workforce shift its skills if the business shifted skills. So things started changing to make it a more sophisticated kind of function. Also, graduate programs started in industrial relations. And about that time, a number of research psychologists started publishing more works in terms of what motivated people in the workforce, what have you. And so it changed from being the sleepy little kind of back office, you know, hire people, get in as many folk as you can, to something far more sophisticated and integrated with the business. Story_ID: 62391 Speaker 1: Control Data's history--the founder of Control Data was an engineer, and he happened to hire a very bright young man out of grad school, out of Minnesota's [University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota] IR [International Relations] department, who became not, not only his right arm, but who ended up becoming deputy chairman of the company. So the function was an exceedingly powerful function within that company because of, of who started the HR [Human Resources] function in, in Control Data. And also, for a while we had a ton of HR people. And that was at a time where it was hard to find engineers, and then it was hard to find software people, and companies were doing a lot of acquisitions. And people finally figured out it was people that would make acquisitions work or not work, and so they needed a function to help people with managing change in getting businesses integrated and everyone working as a team. And then later on, they eventually needed an HR function to help in terms of figuring out how they could have a more elastic workforce when times got bad. Speaker 2: Meaning that they could, they could be used for more, more than one thing other--or--? Speaker 1: Well, or how they could have, have, have different relationships. So, let's say that maybe part of your workforce was part time; part may have been full time--but that you wouldn't have this, this standard workforce where everyone was working full time and then crash, bang, all of a sudden if times got bad that you're laying off a bunch of people, I think companies started trying to figure out how they could, could change the skills mix and the working hours and the complement of their workforce, so they didn't have these big ups and, and downs, you know, hiring a bunch of people and then two years later laying off a bunch of the same folk. Story_ID: 62392 Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a time when--I'm not sure--I, I think it was in the '70's [1977] when we started here that Japanese had a, had a, a way that they deal with personnel was radically different from what American corporations (unclear)--did, did--is--was, was Japan an influence on, on--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, I think Japan was an influence on all American manufacturers 'cause there was--back in the '70's [1970s], Japan supposedly was more "productive," and it-- particularly as it related to manufacturing. And there were some people who felt that because it was a homogeneous population and they had a different work culture, in terms if you hired someone, it was almost like making a commitment for life, than if, you know, you hired that person, you weren't gonna subsequently terminate them or lay them off. And they also had these quality circles, where they got their workers involved in how they could be more efficient and be better at quality. Some of that was adapted, not only by Control Data, but several American manufacturers. But they Americanized it and put an American twist on it, and appropriately so. Story_ID: 62393 Speaker 1: Okay, what, what when, when you, I guess, matriculated into this position, had you--you had been involved with personnel issues in, in, in the human resources-- Speaker 2: The current job I'm in? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, you spent the last thirty years in the world of human resources. The, the job I'm in today is the senior human resources person and an officer in a publicly traded company. I spend my time in four areas. One has to do with executive compensation and how we're gonna pay other officers, other executives. And so the things that--we are not doing the things that you read about in the paper today (laugher) in terms of how well compensated some teams and CEOs have been. But I spend a fair amount of time in the whole area of executive compensation, stock options--and not just for executives, but what we do with our various stock programs for the rest of our employees--board relationships with our board of directors, work with a board comp committee and the board nominating and governance committee, which looks at how the board governs itself. And then the other area is policy development, and in those things where we want either a common, consistent approach or from a value standpoint, if you want people to do the same thing, would be involved in areas like that. An example might be--and it not might be an example is we use alternative dispute resolution. And so that if--and it--at all levels--if someone has an issue that they can bubble it up, but they can go outside of their business unit, and someone inside of the company can be a third-party neutral and listen to it. So, for example, the general counsel might look at a situation that someone feels that they have not been treated fairly or someone perhaps feels that they have been--that either they've been passed over for a promotion or that their position has been workforce reduced and they don't feel it's fair, and a senior level person will be a third-party neutral and try to get it resolved immediately. And that's 'cause we would prefer to resolve things inside rather than have people go file lawsuits. Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So that's a policy area that not only am I involved with, but I have someone working for me who does manage the dispute resolution process. That would be an example of a policy we'd want all of our business to work with. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And spend no time in staffing other than if it's an officer that's gonna be hired. Story_ID: 62394 Speaker 1: So you deal with policy basically more than anything else and then how to manage relationships in a--on the board and, and (unclear)--(unclear) items you just-- Speaker 2: In community affairs that, as a company, we give to. And we're involved in various community things. We partner with a high school called St. Paul Central, and we've been partnering with this school for about the last five, five, six years. And we have a team of employees who partner with the school administrator and people in the school. And we do various things within and for the school, including donating equipment, including having students come for job shadowing, to follow many of our people around to see what it is they do all day long and if that's an occupation they're interested in. And one of the programs as part of that is called the YUP program, Young Urban Photographers. So they do videos, much like we're doing, to start getting some experience with doing videotaping. We've done a, a range of things with that school. But it's very--it's fun and very fulfilling for both of our employees to be in contact with the future leaders of tomorrow and also for them to have some early exposure to corporations and what people do in a corporation so they can determine whether they want that to be one of their choices. Story_ID: 62395 Speaker 1: How do you--what do you consider your successes? We ask you the same question (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I think for a black woman to be in corporate America as long as I have, over thirty years, and to have gotten this place, would say my presence is a victory; and meaning by that, one's very presence changes, the tone, the culture, than if you were not there, so being there is somewhat of a victory. But when I think of, of success, I think more in terms of people who have helped me on my journey and people that I've helped. I don't think so much in terms of specific, concrete things. And when I look back, and even think about various jobs that I've had in the last thirty years, I think of it in terms of people and people who have been extraordinarily helpful, gracious to me, and people that hopefully I've helped. And to me that's more important and is more about success than some other things. Also part of that could be is I do believe--I don't believe what you do is who you are, at least is not for me. For many people in corporate America it is. And it may sound sexist: I also think it's even more important for men. However, if you lose your job, and if that's totally how you define yourself, then you kinda no longer exist. So, work and corporate America is one aspect of my life but not, not it totally. Speaker 1: Okay, so you stayed, stayed involved in other, other things? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 62396 Speaker 1: I think--can you tell me if this make sense: What, what is your philosophy of, of human resource development? And be--of all the things that you've learned and seen, what, what--can you boil down with your philosophy is? Speaker 2: My philosophy is you always treat people with dignity and respect; always be authentic, that people really cherish that, and people also very quickly, in all situations, at all levels, I think, pick up when people are not being authentic or they're not being honest; and I think it's important for companies to build what I would call nutritious environments. And I'd liken it to just like you don't wanna put a bunch of junk into your body that's-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --gonna do bad things. Speaker 1: Well, a lot of people say it depends on how that junk tastes (laughter). Speaker 2: Well, but even if the junk tastes good, that over time if it becomes corrosive-- Speaker 1: And you wish-- Speaker 2: --that-- Speaker 1: --you hadn't done it. Speaker 2: Yeah, you wish you hadn't. And I think it's important that people are spending so much time today working, whatever it is they're doing. They're spending a tremendous amount of time working, that it's important for it to be what I'd call a nutritious environment and to try to build a culture, a place where you'd want your friends and loved ones to work. And that if there's anything present in that work environment that you wouldn't want your friends and your loved ones to experience, then you ought to try to change that, because I think for most of us, that we only want what's absolutely the best for our loved ones. And that the best thing that to say about a company, a work environment, and institution, if it's a place that you'd--that you would like to see your children, your spouse, a loved one work, that's a complement. Story_ID: 62397 Speaker 1: Okay, now do you, do you find that, that, that the, the, the value that you philosophically committed to actually help the productivity of a other corporation? Speaker 2: Oh, I believe they do. I think that there's a lot of--I think that there's a big relationship between employee satisfaction and customer satisfaction. And when you ask employees what it is that they want, or when people talk about the kind of work environments that are aha, or they really feel good about or passionate about, seems to be some of the same things, that they want to be treated with dignity and respect. Most people wanna do a good job. They wanna be recognized for doing a good job. They wanna have very adult kind of relationships and not have people treat them like a child or like they need someone watching over them. They usually wanna be able to share in, in the rewards, contributing to a, a work environment. And they also want--I think even increasingly, people talk about generation X, Y'ers, boomers, what have you, but across all generations, people also seem to want a much better balance between work and their life. And for so many people, what they do eight, ten, twelve hours a day may not be their avocation. And also they may be trying to juggle lots of different roles, being a parent, helping older parents, that it's important to have some support for balance in their life. And, and I think people feel very positive about companies or work environments that offer that. In fact, one of the things that we sell as a business that we sell to other companies is something called life works. And it's so that other companies can help their employees manage their work life, and it ranges from things of having someone help look at, say, assisted living, if one needed to put a parent in some kind of assistant living situation, to if one wanted to know daycare center within a certain mile radius, to concierge services, to maybe where people just because of travel schedules, what have you--need help with just the everyday living things of someone picking up dry cleaning, kids uniforms, what have you. Story_ID: 62398 Speaker 1: I've got a lot of questions, and this is, this is--I mean American labor relations have been colored by a stig--a cloud of exploitation in going back to slavery. And you got the sweatshops in the Northeast and long hours and you know, you've got the Haymarket Riot in Chicago [Illinois], where they were fighting for an eight-hour workday, you know. And they, and they were shot down by the police, you know, a lot of bloody strikes, and you know, in the history of this country, and, and pa--positions taken by management that were--that have led many to believe the only way to change the work environment is through an organized labor force. And you know, there are those who would say that unless people organize and agitate, things will never change, and they don't. What, what do you think about that? Do, do you think that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, I don't believe that. I'm almost anti-labor. From the standpoint that I think today if one looks at their own--there's only about seven percent of the American workforce that's organized anymore. Philosophically, I think a company ought to have such a superior work environment to make a union unnecessary. But that's because my belief is that any time that you've got a third party in between people trying to talk that it gets distorted and it gets people into camps; and that I think that there's a fundamental, even moral obligation for management to listen to its workers and to try to reach some kind of conclusion. And part of my philosophy may be colored by having spent pretty much most of my time in a place that's nonunion and where that has been the philosophy to have progressive programs, progressive ways of communicating, resolving conflict to make a union unnecessary. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Do that ans--does that answer it or? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's it. Speaker 2: Or do you wanna-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I mean I don't know if everybody would agree with what you said, but that, that's, that's--I mean it's still being--it's still a struggle out here, you know, with labor and management. And many--I know many union pe--people feel that if there's no struggle, there isn't any progress, you know, because you can't expect a person who--management to-- Speaker 2: To voluntarily try to-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: --to do good. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well, for businesses where your capital is human capital is the asset, it's very shortsighted not to have a partnership, I think, with your employees, that they're as important as a constituent. I mean I see where companies have three constituents: their shareholders-- they're a publicly company--their customers, and their employees. And each of those three I think are very important and would look at it as a triangle, in that there is no--one is not on top of the other, but, but you've gotta have really positive relationships with all three. And maybe saying I'm anti-union is too strong, but I've also seen some examples where unions have not effectively helped the workers that they've pledged to help, and where union management either seems to be getting all the goodies or perks, or that they're still not helping, you know, the, the rank and file membership. Story_ID: 62399 Speaker 1: Okay. Do you think that that, that the progress has been made in labor in the United States in terms of the eight-hour day and other benefits-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure. Speaker 1: --and health benefits and so forth would have-- Speaker 2: I think it-- Speaker 1: --taken place if it hadn't been for union agitation? Speaker 2: No, I don't think the--that the progress would have taken place without union agitation. And our history would suggest that not only did people have sweatshops, but this whole thing of the company store where the company pretty much owned and controlled, you know, families, that it seemed to be more sophisticated or accepted form of sharecropping, you know, almost the same kind of system. So I don't, I don't think that some of the benefits would have come about without people agitating in, in the struggle. And I, I think that in each generation or each time that people do have to advocate to make advances. How they do it I think changes over time--and so that you unions were a way in the past to get people decent hours, benefits, worker's comp, things that one could point to probably some heinous situations where the individual worker suffered. Story_ID: 62400 Speaker 1: Today, and maybe this example doesn't affect the rank and file, but, but it may be an example of how, over time, people have changed the way they advocate that people will listen--give an example that I heard from one of our customers on a panel - J.P. Morgan, that they hire these young MBA [Masters in Business Administration] kids. And I guess they work, you know, just incredible hours, and that particularly if they're working on a deal, that they're pretty much almost expected to work round the clock. Why is it, a group of them decided they were tired of that? They sat down and had a list of demands that they sent to senior officers at J.P. Morgan. And the person who was telling this story, who was an em--an executive at J.P. Morgan, said people at first thought, you know, all these kids are gonna get fired. They're crazy to think that someone's gonna pay attention to them. Well, and some of their demands were that they have cots so that they could--if they were gonna be working around the clock, that they could at least get a nap in, that they have some concierge services so that people could at least get their cleaning and different things that's just part of everyday living. Anyhow, they had apparently ten, twelve different demands. Well, management paid attention and met their demands, decided that they did not want them leave, and that it sounded like a situation where they just didn't have any concept of what they were requiring of, of these young people. Now, you can also say, well, you know, little young hotshot MBAs, they're getting paid pretty well. That may not be the best example. But the point is that I do think that, that how people push maybe has changed a little bit. Speaker 2: Okay, but they, they still have--still organize themselves to-- Speaker 1: Yeah, they-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --didn't call it a union-- Speaker 2: --yeah, or that-- Speaker 1: --but they did get together and, and sit and write a letter. And I'm--I also think that my perspective may be colored by the kind of firm that I'm part of, which is service but with a very high tech underpinning. And one could say that there are many other jobs that people probably feel like they're not treated totally fairly or in an equitable way-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and where maybe they feel like that they need more formal avenues. Story_ID: 62401 Speaker 1: Tell me this, now, you, you are in a position where you are probably one of the most liberal people, I guess, to--for want of another word--on the, on, on the scene, in the environment-- Speaker 2: (Laughter)-- Speaker 1: --that you're, in the milieu that you're thrust into. And you're, you're different. So, I mean, how do you--how does that, you know, affect you? Speaker 2: I'm both different in terms--color, gender. I mean, if I look at the officers in my company, the other five people, they are all middle age white males. If I look at some of the business associations that I'm a part of or meetings I go to, they are overwhelmingly white male and pretty traditional from the standpoint of not having a perspective of either having lots of different kinds of people as friends and you know, realizing that the whole world doesn't live on a certain amount of money, or what have you. And so I think it's important for me to lend that different perspective. And that one of the reasons diversity is important is to expand people's thinking about situations and also solutions to things. There was an article that Anita Hill wrote. It was an editorial in the "New York Times," and it was called "Inside vs. Outside." And it was about some of the recent situations of "whistle blowing" with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agent in Minneapolis [Minnesota]. One of the people with Enron--and one of the things she postulated in her article is that it was interesting that these women had been the whistleblowers, but maybe it was because even though they were on the inside, they knew that they still were not part of this old boys' network, where they were not totally part of, you know, this fabric, so that maybe they felt they had very little to lose by either being a whistleblower and also genuinely having a different perspective. And I mention that as a backdrop, 'cause I think I do have a different perspective. And it probably is a more liberal one, and it's also one shared from my experience of being a black woman. Story_ID: 62402 Speaker 1: Okay, okay, is there anything that we haven't asked you that you think that, that ought to be addressed in, in terms of your career, and, and how you approach it? As I said before, I don't know as much as I need to know may, maybe, but what--is, is there something? Speaker 2: Well, I would say a couple of things, that it's still only been in the last--you know, it's really been in the last twenty years that we really entered corporate America. And there's some wonderful examples of people who are heading up corporations, from Ken Chenault, A. Barry Rand, and other people who have been terrific pioneers, role models, what have you. But I think we should continue to encourage young people to look at corporate America as an avenue of careers, 'cause corporations still have a tremendous, tremendous influence on everything that happens in this society. And in fact, I think one of the--that they're one of the most influential institutions. So I think it's important for people of color to be part of corporations. I think we should encourage our young people not to get discouraged, that once they enter corporate America and find that it may not be exactly as they thought it would be, or if they start hitting a glass ceiling-- there are some people who call it a concrete ceiling--and I think it's, it's very important for us to mentor them and give them encouragement to continue to operate in this particular arena. Story_ID: 62403 Speaker 1: Okay, you are still somewhat young here and--but I'm, I still have to ask you--have to ask you like what (laugher), what, what do you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm not that young. I hope it would be to--I would hope my legacy would be a couple of things, and maybe this sounds too intangible, but I would hope it would be having been a good role model; having shared whatever I've learned with some younger folk coming behind me, because I think we all stand on the shoulders of one another. And I think the fact that of what I'm doing and how long I've been doing it and where I am in that, that I think I've been true to myself. Story_ID: 62404 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you're involved in, in, in--even through work, you're involved in a number of different activities that reach out to the community and give back to the community. Now can you describe some of those? Speaker 2: The ones through work as well as the ones personally? Through work we have a community affairs department. And one of the things that we do is also try to help employees, support them in, in their efforts in the community, and so we have a, a grant where people can ask for $500 for anything that they're involved in. It doesn't matter whether it's, you know, feeding the hungry, Habitat for Humanity, Big Brothers Big Sister, what have you. We also get asked on a daily basis to give money to various thing within the communities in which we operate. And we're in--we operate in the U.S. in thirty-five states, and so we get lots of requests, you know, to make donations. And our focus has been on children, things that will help, help children, and things that will help families. We have not given as much to the art, like the symphony, the opera, what have you, because in many communities, companies--many companies have had very long traditions of giving to the arts, but not always to some of the other social service programs. I wish we had more money to give than what we do. Personally, I have an interest in both ends of the spectrum, young people and senior citizens, so I'm on the board of Big Brothers Big Sisters and also have several godchildren that I'm close to, mentor, and in the past have done some activities and been associated with some organizations that focus on seniors, people seventy-five years and older, the most frail--sometimes the most neglected in our society. Story_ID: 62405 Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: How, how would like to be remembered? That's different from the legacy. Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? Hmm, these are hard questions, makes me think about death (laughter). I think I would want to be remembered as a person of joy, as a person who was giving, as a person who was able to live out her, her, her dreams-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and that really for me the medium has been people and hopefully remembered for some people that I've touched. Story_ID: 62406 Speaker 1: Okay, did your parents get a chance to see you become a success? Speaker 2: Pretty much. I'm--when I became a vice president--I'm trying to remember--I think my father had died then. But yes, my mother is very much living. And one of the things that I think one has a responsibility for the--is to share, too, of many of the perks, and so one of the things that I have access to is the company plane. And when my second oldest sister [Joyce Hughes]--when some students were celebrating her 30th year of teaching at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], that I took my mother there. And it was possible by using the company plane. And I remember she doesn't like flying that much anyhow, but she did appreciate being able to, to fly in, in that kind of way. And she said, boy, it's something to look at her little, her little daughter and what she's doing. Yes, but I think that they'd also say that even though we've been successful in terms of outwardly, materially, I still think our parents would say that they had seen us grown up through the biggest success, that they tried to raise kids who honest, had a lot of integrity, and concern for others, and involvement in the community. So, in that sense, I think yeah, my father [Solomon Hughes] did live to see me be successful. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 62407 Speaker 1: Oh, this is a photo of Shirley Hughes as a cheerleader from Minneapolis Central High School [Minneapolis, Minnesota]. The photo was probably in 1962. I was a cheerleader for, for the two years in high school and captain of the cheerleaders my senior year, loved doing it. Speaker 2: This is a picture of Homecoming. And students would vote on people to be up for Homecoming queen. And I was elected Homecoming queen in 1963. I (unclear) was the first identifiable, visible black Homecoming queen from Minneapolis Central High School. Speaker 1: This my uncle, Uncle Fern (ph.), my father's brother, who lived with us from the time I was conscious, born, and remember, and was like having a second father--wonderful uncle, wonderful role model. And today I can be a good aunt to my niece and nephew with his role modeling, how he helped us with extra things, money for special things, lessons that we wouldn't otherwise have the money to do. Speaker 2: How do you spell his name? Speaker 1: F-E-R-N, and middle name is Wood, Fern Wood Hughes, wonderful man. Speaker 2: Oh, this is a picture--I spent a brief time in Michigan, three and a half years outside of Detroit working for a company, Mercy Health Services, and we partnered with a school called Cornerstone. And I'm sitting in school that day with two students--found it to be a wonderful, fulfilling experience, where you were paired with the student. And the idea was for you and the student to have a relationship from whatever point it started, whether it was kindergarten, first grade on through. That particular school went through the eighth grade. It was a school that was started by Cardinal Maida. Speaker 1: Oh, it's so important to have family, and I feel so fortunate to have two older sisters. This is a picture of the three of us taken in Chicago [Illinois] about two years ago and my oldest sister, Toni [A. Antoinette Hughes], who subsequently died of multiple myeloma, a form of leukemia. We were having a reunion. Each year the three sisters, we would have--we used to take a trip somewhere. We hadn't done that in a long time because Toni had been sick. We decided to get together in Chicago around Joyce's birthday to celebrate that Toni was in remission and to thank many of the prayer groups who had prayed for her there. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my younger brother, Soli, who's a musician in his beautiful dreads, and our cute mother--at that time she was 88--and myself. We were at my home in Michigan, in West Bloomfield, Michigan. And I got my family to come for my first Christmas there, and it was just terrific having them there. I love photography, and Vander Zee is one of my various favorites. And in Michigan, I ran into a--an art dealer who carried Vander Zee, so I have a true Vander Zee in the house. But then this was a poster that he gave to me as a bonus for buying the Vander Zee. Speaker 1: This is a picture of--it's so important to have support, people who are supportive in your life and to surrounded by good nutritious people. And for a while, I started having a tradition that for my birthday, I would invite many of my women friends, but we do something very different. This particular year, in '93' [1993], we went and visit artists around the Twin Cities as they were working, and that they told us about their work. And then we ended up in a art studio in a clothing gallery and had lunch and just a wonderful time. And this is a (unclear) picture commemorating that. Speaker 2: Can you name them? Speaker 1: Oh, I can name-- Speaker 2: Or did you like 'em? Speaker 1: Oh, sure. Speaker 2: Okay, let's go left to right from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: We're gonna go left, the camera left. The person on the left is, is Jonah Turner, and she'd just came from being an appointment secretary to Mrs. Chaney. Immediately next to her--may I point to this person--is my very, very dear friend, Norma Anderson. We've been friends and colleagues for a long time. Then I'm there. The person here is the owner of this--is the owner of the art gallery and the studio. The person next to her is Sandra Biel (ph.), who is one of my very dearest, closest friends--Wildred (ph.) Alcan (ph.). Then I think the person next to her is being covered up a little bit, Judy Baker. Speaker 2: Let's go back--(unclear). Speaker 1: Okay, this is my niece, Roxanne Allen, whom I'm very close to and was happy to have with us. That's Alli (ph.) Davis, a person who loves to read. Next to her is Pat Roberts. Next to her is Judy Baker, and then is Linda Jadwin (ph.), a person who--very, very close friend--artist, who unfortunately is now deceased. And I think Barbara Butts is next to her, is being covered up, and then Wildred Alcan. Speaker 2: One of my responsibilities at Ceridian had--was I ended up with a project manager for a brand new corporate headquarters. And this is a picture that we had trooped over to see at least the skeleton of our new building. They were still working on it, so we had hard hats on. The person standing next to me was one of the finance executives of the company at the time. It was also raining that day, so we, we had umbrellas in addition to our hard hats. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Year? Did I get the year? Speaker 2: Two Thousand [2000]. Speaker 1: This is a-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: This is my graduation from Coe College, Cedar Rapids, Iowa, June 1963. Speaker 2: That's a picture that was taken when I had left Ceridian, gone to Michigan to work for Mercy Health Services for three and a half years. And then that was a photo taken that was being used when I was returning to Ceridian, so that was taken in the summer of 1998. Speaker 1: This is a picture of yours truly when I was about six years old. I'm looking pretty innocent there. Speaker 2: I believe in three things, three F's: faith, family, and friends. And this is my family, my mom, dad, my two older sisters are on each side of me, and my brother is sitting on the chair. I remember that day because my mother was insistent that we have a family photograph, a recent one. And I remember my brother didn't wanna have one taken. And as a musician and just who is as a free spirit, he does not like suits and ties and all that kind of thing. And I remember there was a little discussion about his attire. And mom and dad decided, okay, it was not worth having a big hoopla to try to get him into a suit. And we're glad we did this photo at the time we did 'cause shortly thereafter as I recall, my father got sick. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Do you wanna identify the individuals and (unclear) years? Speaker 2: Sure, second oldest sister, Joyce, Shirley, Antoinette, also known as Toni [A. Antoinette Hughes], daddy [Solomon Hughes], mom [Bessie Mae Hughes], brother, Soli [Solomon Hughes]. And the year, I'm not sure. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Can you give us like maybe pra--like a decade or (unclear) or? Speaker 2: It would have been in the '70's [1970s]; I think probably the '70's [1970s]. Speaker 1: One of the joys in my life, I was married for 16 years but didn't have any children. And one of my real joys today is to be a godmother, and this is my godchild, Khuaten De Macedo. And we are at my home in November of 2001 for my mother's 90th birthday party. Speaker 2: Okay, now, can you spell her name? Speaker 1: Yes, her first name, Khuaten, K-H-U-A-T-E-N, De, D-E, Macedo, M-A-C-E-D-O. Her father is from Cape Verde, a (unclear), so she's a child who speaks three languages: Portuguese, Spanish, and English. Speaker 2: There in (unclear)--and this picture was taken at the wedding reception of my oldest sister, Antoinette, or also known as Toni. I feel exceedingly fortunate to have been born of these parents who were so loving, kind, gracious, and gave us a most wonderful foundation. I would think Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE): Ms. Hughes, I know it may be difficult. Try if you can to give us a rough time period that this photo might have been taken, approximate. Speaker 2: I would think 1961, as a guess...