 Story_ID: 28087 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Johnny Lee Houston, J-O-H-N-N-Y, middle name L-E-E, last name Houston, H-O-U-S-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind your name? Speaker 2: There is a bit of a story because--not one that I can authenticate, but a legend has it some people used to call my grandmother Houseton because in New York they called the same name--they have a Houseton Street and a Houston, Texas and one part of the family say our legend came from the Texas part, and the other part say it came from the New York part but these, I think, were just legendary tales that people wanted to defend. Whether or not there was any justification for calling her Houseton and calling us Houston. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is November 19th, 1941. I was born in the United States in the state of Georgia in a county called Washington County, and the city in that county is Sandersville, Georgia; it's in Eastern Georgia halfway between Macon and Augusta. People might know about Macon or Augusta, but very few know about Sandersville-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and Washington County was actually named after President [George] Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well, I'm delighted to say that my occupation now is Professor Emeritus from Elizabeth City State University, the last institution where I worked, and I worked there for 26 years and retired in May, on May 8th, 2010 and they awarded me the title of Professor Emeritus. Prior to that, my title was that of Senior Research Professor at Elizabeth City State University in the department of Mathematics and Computer Science, and I was also the director of two centers here at the university--there at the university. These centers were the CSSV Center, the Computational Science Scientific Visualization Center which I established in 1996 at the university, and the second one was the African Studies Center which was established in 2002, of which we did some very fascinating things with regard to producing original text books for the country of Senegal; we actually wrote text books in mathematics and science for that country in that center. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. And Sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is February 25th, 2013. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're presently on the campus of Elizabeth City State University in its Graduate and Continuing Education Center in their larger conference room doing this interview. Story_ID: 28088 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask, and they only require short answers. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: A favorite food. Not really; I enjoy food but I don't relish food. There is not one type of food--I just love vegetables. I used to be a vegetarian; I just love vegetables-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but love well-cooked vegetables. Speaker 1: When did you become a vegetarian, or how long were you a vegetarian? Speaker 2: I basically start being a vegetarian of such--I had a chance to spend a year in France studying, and many times, I could not recognize the meat or the entree they were giving me but I could always recognize and appreciate the vegetables (laughter) so I could always eat and enjoy vegetables and salad even when I was suspicious about the meat and I came to enjoy-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --and that was in 1966, '67' [1967] that I studied a year in France. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite food? [PAUSE]. Oh, I'm sorry, favorite color. I'm sorry, I misspoke. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, favorite color. Speaker 2: A favorite color--I don't know; not really. I have had a chance to an extreme amount of travel in Africa so I like the red, black and green colors but I really don't have a favorite. If I had to pick one, I'd probably say gray (laughter), but I don't really have one that I'm very--have a great affinity for. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes; I love the spring and I also love the fall of the year. Now I can tolerate winter and summer, but I love spring number one, fall number two. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: I have a favorite type destination. I love the mountains and I love the sea. Hot Springs, Virginia in the Allegheny Mountains is one of the most impressive of my mountainous vacations that I've been there several times, and I love Nags Head--we're about an hour away from the sea here; I go down there often. And I love being in Savannah, Georgia (unclear) went along the Atlantic frequently; I love the water; I love mountains. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now Yellowstone was impressive to me when I lived in California but I don't go that far just to vacation anymore. Speaker 1: Okay. Now the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I do, and that phrase is that life is very kind to me or life has been very kind to me, and I thank God for it. When I think about my life, it's beyond my imagination from what I was as a child and I am just so thankful of what has unfolded and where I am, so most times when people ask me "How are you?" I say "Life is very kind." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Life is very kind and I thank God for it. Story_ID: 28089 Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Mrs. Catherine Houston Vinson, that's C-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E H-O-U-S-T-O-N and V-I-N-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is November--I'm sorry, June 28th, 1919. Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born? Speaker 2: She was also born in Sandersville, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well, the--there were--I had a lot of interaction with my grandmother, my mother's mother; her name was Mrs. Ruth Heard Houston, that's R-U-T-H H-E-A-R-D H-O-U-S-T-O-N. And she was from Washington County also, and she was just a little south of Sandersville--excuse me, in a place called Davisboro, Georgia where she was born. And she had brothers and sisters that I related to. And then she had another brother named Roger Perry; he stayed in Cochran, Georgia, south of Macon, Georgia and we used to--my brother and I used to go down and spend some summers with him down on his farm, and that's when I learned how to plow a mule, ride on the back of a wagon (laughter), and drive a wagon and do all kind of agricultural kind of things living down there with him--with my Aunt Cora, his wife. Now my grandmother, Mrs. Ruth Heard Houston, she actually raised me during the first nine years of my life. Story_ID: 28090 Speaker 1: Now are there any stories that have passed down through the family about emancipation or what it was like during slavery and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: What happened was they did not pass specific stories around but I do know--they used to tell us to--that we always had to be careful and alert as to where we were, what we did, and how we behaved. In Sandersville, Georgia, it's of course in the deep south Georgia is. And you had very strict communities; there was the white community and the black community. And they would tell us not to be in the black community--white community after a certain time of night, not to do certain things or not to be alone in certain places because an accusation could easily be made of you--false accusation--and they've known things to happen for which there was no retrogression. Now, one of the things in particular I remember as a child, there was a gentleman who told me to come meet him down at the courthouse downtown; he wanted me to go with him and live with him at Wrens, Georgia and work for him; he was a white man, white gentleman; and they said "No, no, no, you go down there to Wren, we'll never see you again" (laughter). Say "People are still taking people and holding them as indentured servants, etcetera." Say "Never do anything like that." Speaker 1: Okay, so the danger--you'd actually lose your liberty when you were growing up. Speaker 2: Precisely. So they told us to be on guard, that if we were not vigilant and alert, people would take advantage of us, especially white men. Story_ID: 28091 Speaker 1: Now Sandersville, Georgia is known by some historians as the home of Elijah Muhammad who founded the Nation of Islam; his name is Elijah Poole, growing up--he grew up in Sandersville, Georgia. Did you know--did your parents know any of the Poole's in that area? Speaker 2: My family on my father's side--I had an aunt named Aunt Daisey Jordan, that's D-A-I-S-E-Y Jordan, J-O-R-D-A-N; she lived to be a Hundred years old but she told me that she knew Elijah Poole quite well when he was in Sandersville, Georgia, and she used to describe with him--us--the kind of person he was. And in fact, there were still some Poole's there that was in my generation that was alleged to be related to him, but I never knew him personally, but my aunt did; she said she knew him well. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Did she have any stories about him? Speaker 2: She talked about how he was a person who was very curious and a person who was very observant about things and he was concerned about certain civic activities that people were not becoming engaged in. But there were not any radical things that she told me about but that he did have--seemed to be someone who was focused about people in civic involvement. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28092 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Catherine Houston Vinson] have a chance to finish school in Sandersville [Georgia]? Speaker 2: My mother did not; what she did was she had children early and she actually did not even finish elementary school. We used to say that she was a fourth grade--fifth grade scholar, but I was very impressed with her even though she did not finish school. In the nursing home in Atlanta, Georgia where she was at the age of 89, she was taking courses in computer. She constantly wanted to learn; in fact, she even had a typewriter and a computer at her house at her later age because she was interested in learning and she pushed in us to do as much learning as we could that she didn't get a chance to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did she have any stories about growing up that she shared with you? Speaker 2: Her stories about growing up were simply about the things we just said about education. She told us to get an education because her now having a formal education, or an education beyond fifth grade, that she was extremely limited in what she could do and she had seen her mother, who was my grandmother, work as a domestic in the home of rich white persons all of her life, and she said she just didn't wanna do that and she didn't want us to have to do that. In fact, that is the underlying reason why she left Sandersville [Georgia] and went to Atlanta, Georgia to find employment and to improve her skills so that she would not have to be a domestic in Sandersville, Georgia as her mother was and has so many other black women end up being. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So were you born before she left? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. I was born in Sandersville, yeah. And she was there the first couple of years of my life, two-three years--a couple years of my life; and then I think that's when she left for Atlanta. And she would come home at least once a month from Atlanta back to Sandersville. Speaker 1: Now that was during the war, it had to have been about 1943, I guess, that she left-- Speaker 2: Yes, it was in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--1944? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--early '40's [1940's] Speaker 1: When she would get a job through the--you know, because the government was looking for women to work because of the war--all the men being at war. Did she get a job in Atlanta--one of the war time jobs? WPA [Work Projects Administration] or something? Speaker 2: No she didn't. What she ended up learning was that she had an excellent forte; she enjoyed preparing food and she was--she got a job as a dietician in Atlanta and there she improved herself to the extent that one of the larger cafeterias exchanged there in Georgia put her to be director of one of their units, but she didn't deal with the WPA or something of that nature. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 28093 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Okay. My father's full name was Bobby Lee Harris, B-O-B-B-Y L-E-E Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S. He and my mother [Catherine Houston Vinson] never married and what--that was an interesting story behind that but he lived in Sandersville as well, and he was born in Washington County there as well. Speaker 1: Okay. What was his date of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth was November 24th, 1911. Speaker 1: Okay, and there in Sandersville. Speaker 2: Yes, in Sandersville, Georgia. Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about your father's ancestry? What do you know? Any stories about his side of the family and where they came from? Speaker 2: They were also born there; all of them came from Washington County. He was an only child and his mother was named Lucinda Harris, L-U-C-I-N-D-A Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S, and his father was named Nolan Harris. And I came to know those two and one of his aunts very well. Mrs. Daisey Jordan, the one I told you who knew Elijah Poole well, and they all came from Sandersville though in that area and so my--it was ironic that my grandfather did something similar to my mother; he left Sandersville early to go north to look for decent employment and he end up going to Canton, Ohio and he would come back periodically there but once he got up there and got a decent job, he never really came back to live in Sandersville. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28094 Speaker 1: Now did your father [Bobby Lee Harris] have a chance to finish school? Speaker 2: My father did finish high school. In fact, I think he got at least one year of college. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you remember what high school he went to? Speaker 2: Oh, there wasn't but--not but one high school in Sandersville [Georgia] (laughter). It's T.J. Elder, T period J period Elder High School--T.J. Elder School-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --They had one school in Sandersville, Georgia during my father's time and during my time and it went from grade one through 12, and if you went to school as an African American in Sandersville during that time, you went to T.J. Elder. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now do you know who T.J. Elder was? Was he a black educator or was he-- Speaker 2: He was a black educator and actually the T.J. stands for Thomas Jefferson Elder. He was one who took and took seriously what it was alleged what Thomas Jefferson. Say "If you ever educate black people, they can have wings like eagles." And he wanted to be an educator; he wanted to help educate people, and he came to Sandersville pushing education first, I understand, as a teacher and then he pushed to get a full school there and was principal for a number of years, and they named the school after him and in fact his grave site was put on campus when he passed. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So do you know what college your father attended? Speaker 2: I am not sure exactly what college he--he left town and--for a year or two, and that's when I think he attended college and I think he went to Atlanta [Georgia] part of the time, and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] maybe the other time, but I'm sure exactly but he did not finish college; I think he just took some college courses-- Speaker 1: Emm hmm. Speaker 2: --but I know he did not go through and matriculate to get a degree. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28095 Speaker 1: Now did your father [Bobby Lee Harris] share any stories with you growing up about, you know, what he wanted to do, you know, as a career or--when he was young? Speaker 2: No. In fact, my father and I were not very close and we did not discuss a lot and, as I say, it was--that was a peculiar situation. He and my--at the time he was dating my mother [Catherine Houston Vinson], he was also dating another young lady in Sandersville [Georgia] and both of them got pregnant the same year (laughter), and his grandmother end up arbitrating. I understand that my grandmother and the other young lady's grandmother or mother went to my father's mother and told him he had to do the right thing, but he--they--his grand--my grandmother say "He can't do the right thing by both of 'em" (laughter), so he end up marrying the other young lady and I have half sisters and brothers through that relationship, but I did not do very much exchange or was not very close to him in terms of conversation or direct hello. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 28096 Speaker 1: Did your parents meet at school or is there another-- Speaker 2: They met in the neighborhood. Sandersville [Georgia] is not that large. Sandersville has, I suspect today, only about 10,000 or less, and it was a community in which there was three or four black neighborhoods in the community and almost everybody knew everybody in that community or knew people's relatives in that community so they just met in community. Speaker 1: Okay. So everybody basically knew each other. Speaker 2: Everybody basically knew each other. Speaker 1: Your parents now, about a seven-year difference I guess in their ages, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, maybe being an older guy-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and you would think a little slicker, I guess, than, you know-- Speaker 2: Yes. He got around; he was getting around more (laughter) before my mother was so he knew more about Sandersville, and I can imagine either he had access or knew somebody who could loan him a car or he could get one to get around, so-- Speaker 1: Now what did he end up doing for a living? Speaker 2: He end up doing different kinds of things. He basically was what I call--he tried to have what I call a business sense about him; he ended up working with a mortuary where he helped them with some of the business activities and with some of the funeral activities. Speaker 1: Okay. So he worked with funeral homes? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So this was a black funeral home in Sandersville [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: What was the name of it? Speaker 2: The name of it was Smith Funeral Home-- Speaker 1: Emm hmm. Speaker 2: --and the--it was Ed Smith--I'm trying to get the exact initials; he used initials for his funeral home. But--it'll come to me shortly. Speaker 1: Is it like E something Smith? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28097 Speaker 1: Concerning your parents, when you think about their personalities and their talents and their dispositions and what they liked and what they look like, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother [Ruth Heard Houston] who raised me the first--my maternal grandmother who raised me the first nine years of my life, she had a tremendous impact on me and I look--I have picked up a lot of what they used to call mother-wit habits from her. She was an excellent disciplinarian but she was a very gentle and kind person and she was also extremely religious and she would even take me to church with her and church service etcetera, and so I picked up quite bit from her; she was--had quite an impression on me. She was my first mentor which impact me tremendously. And it was quite a transition in my life when I had gotten to school, elementary school, and she suddenly passed while I was living with her. That was a shock I never expected. I--at that time, I was a small child, I thought people lived forever and I certainly expected her to be around forever. Speaker 1: How old were you when your grandmother passed? Speaker 2: I was nine years old Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I was nine years old when she passed. Speaker 1: Yeah, that had to be a shock. Story_ID: 28098 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your grandmother [Ruth Heard Houston]. Speaker 2: She was a--she was what we liked to think of as a pillar in community. She was one of those persons that people had a lot of respect for and they would come for--to her for advice or for assistance and, as I said, Sandersville was a very small place and it was the kinda thing where I understood the phrase later in life that it takes a village to raise a child. People knew one another and they could say "Ms. Houseton" or "Ms. Houston," whichever they called her, different people called her different names, "We saw"--they used to call me John L. when I was a child. They'd say "We saw John L. down the street there and we wanted to make sure that you knew that he was down there" (laughter). So she would thank them, she would ask me what was I doing down the street, where would I go, etcetera. But it was the kinda thing--a community in which people looked out for one another and one another's children and she was a person in that community they had a lot of respect for. And as I said, she was very religious, she went to church on a regular basis, and they just saw her as a nice hard-working honorable woman--lady in community that they could rely on, and they could rely on her word; if she told 'em something, if she say she's gonna do something, they could depend on it. Speaker 1: Now did she work for one family for most of the time that she, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--She worked for one family all the time that I knew her. And the name of the family was Ed Holmes, H-O-L-M-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the Holmes owned a cannery company. In fact, my brother and my wife--somebody pointed out to me recently that that company is still in existence now. And they put out products under the name Margaret Holmes and they saw the products here in North Carolina, so it wasn't just local for Sandersville. Speaker 1: Margaret Holmes Products (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Margaret Holmes Canning Company, yes. Speaker 1: These are like canned vegetables or something? Speaker 2: Like canned vegetables, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, and so with her, you know, working with them for a long time and having a good relationship, was she able to enhance, you know, the household by, you know--I know there are some relationships in domestic work where you can get more things than others; I mean there--in some relationships is just work, and others is like they extend themselves a little bit more but-- Speaker 2: Well she was--as I said, she was a pillar in community, in the African American community, but she exhibited the same kind of character at work, so much so that I remember her carrying me to work with her as a child because there was no one else to keep me, and she would tell the employer she was bringing me to work because she couldn't leave me home by myself and they well her "Fine," say "I know you will make sure that he behaves himself and does things." In fact, it was ironic that when I was very small and she did that with me, that the employer at the homes did not object to my playing with their children, even the--they had a girl about my age, and they did not object. And--in fact, you wouldn't have known that the kind of racism existed (laughter) in Sandersville [Georgia] around when I went to their home. They went there and they would always--they knew my grandmother was struggling and so was my family, and so when they would have big Christmas dinners or different things, they'll make sure that we had sufficient for her to take home for us, and if they had something to give away or some extra stuff, they would share it with us. So they saw her as an extended, or should I say they saw her as an employee that they valued and they shared with beyond just the paycheck. Story_ID: 28099 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Earliest? Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory. It, it--I, I, I do, I have a few. My mother [Catherine Houston Vinson] tried to get me to remember one that I don't quite remember, but I guess the earliest childhood memory that I had was I had a brother named Joe Houston--Joe Willie Houston, and Joe went to school a year before I did; he's 19 months older than I am. And at that time, we were living on a an off-road in Sandersville, Georgia and it was about a mile and a-half from the school, and I remember Joe and I had gone to school one day and Joe knew this man in the community who was a local self-trained barber and he had a mule and wagon and Joe asked him whether or not he was going near our house and he say "I'm going over in that direction," and we hitched a ride on the back of his wagon (laugher). I do have that childhood memory; and I think I was in first grade at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28100 Speaker 1: Now you mentioned your brother Joe, so he's older than you. Can you list all your brothers and sisters and put yourself in the order that you come? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I--let's start with my mother's [Catherine Houston Vinson] side because I call that the Unit Family because we all stayed in the same household. And my older sister is named Sarah Ruth Houston, that's Sarah, S-A-R-A-H Ruth, R-U-T-H, Houston, H-O-U-S-T-O-N. She was born August 26th, 1932; then my second oldest sibling on my mother's side was Christine Houston Colley, that's Colley, C-O-L-L-E-Y and Christine, C-H-R-I-S-T-I-N-E and she was born September 13th, 1934; and then my brother Joe Houston--Joe Willie Houston, that's J-O-E W-I-L-L-I-E, Joe Willie Houston was born March 8th, 1940; and then I was born 19 months later in November 1941. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, so those are all your mother's children (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Those are all my mother's children. As I said, that was the Unit Family I grew up with; I knew of my father's [Bobby Lee Harris] children and it's the other family he had but I did not--and we relate today, but we didn't really relate in childhood very much at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. So your household growing up--at a certain point, your mother moved to Atlanta [Georgia], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did she take the other children with her or did she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, all of us were there; all the children were there with my grandmother, Ruth. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So everybody was there and you were the baby. Speaker 2: Yes, I was the baby. Speaker 1: Alright. Story_ID: 28101 Speaker 1: So you lived in the town of Sandersville [Georgia] and you said there were several black communities in Sandersville. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what was the name of yours, do you know? Was there a name for it? Speaker 2: The name of the one I was in was Brownville (laughter); Brownville. Speaker 1: Okay. Now is that unusual down south, to have several different communities? Speaker 2: No, that's not unusual-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --what happens is they frequently will have either some kind of geographical or historical landmark in a certain area town, or some particular family in a whole--a family that has been there, you know, that generations up, and many times they name them; just like for example I remember in Sandersville, there was a place we used to call Miss Matt Moses--Mattie Moses Quarters. She had grown up there in her family, and everybody knew if you were in Sandersville, you knew Miss Mattie Moses. So everybody in a certain area around her, that was Mattie Moses Quarters and so (laughter) you had names coming up like that either after people or after groups of certain things. And there was another one called the Tindle (ph.) Road Area. There was a road between Sandersville and a town called Tindle and everybody who was in a certain part going toward Tindle we called it--they were in the Tindle Road community. So it was not unusual, no it was typical. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. I know segregation in the north has often taken the disposition where you have like a black side of town and a white side of town or maybe a couple of black sides of town but, you know, very much either one or two places (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, and I remember too, that when I got to Atlanta later in life, they had several communities like that we could identify; and when I was in California, the Fillmore District. This bottom here in Cleveland, etcetera, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Right, right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--so, so you finally guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah. Speaker 2: --so I found I didn't know how many there were but I found those names associated with certain areas of town again. Story_ID: 28102 Speaker 1: You grew up in this area called Brownville [community in Sandersville, Georgia], and where did you go to school? Speaker 2: One school in town, African American (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Okay. So that's the one you went to? Speaker 2: T.J. Elder (laughter). Speaker 1: T.J. Elder, okay. Speaker 2: If you went to school, you went to T.J. Elder. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were you always interested in mathematics? Speaker 2: No. In fact, actually, I was just curious. I did find myself wanting to understand how things work but I was not a child prodigy with numbers or anything in particular, but I was--I had a high curiosity and I was--I found myself fascinated to how did things work. My brother and I would sit down sometime and make wagons or bow and arrows, etcetera and we wondered 'how do you fit this thing together to make 'em work?' This was something that was of a fascination for us. Speaker 1: Now did you like to take things apart too? Speaker 2: Later on, yes, but not early on; early on there was nothing to take apart (laughter). We were trying to make something, put something together because we were in--at Sandersville, Georgia, we were, we were poverty stricken; we didn't have that much. In fact, the houses that we lived in had no indoor plumbing, had no electricity, and the only heating was a fireplace, you know, and a stove in the kitchen, so there was not very much to take apart (laughter)--and kerosene lamps, so we--there was not very much that we went around trying to take apart. Speaker 1: So this--even in 1941, basically in Sandersville [Georgia], in your community, you all were living basically like people lived in the 19th century-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Fireplace-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --that's all that you had for heating so you'd go get your fire and--did your grandmother [Ruth Heard Houston] have a proper stove to cook on? Speaker 2: She did have a stove to cook on; it looked like a--closer to a potbelly stove; it was not a regular kitchen stove. But she had the little eyes on there where she could cook things. She basically had to cook on top of the stove; there was not oven or anything for baking or anything. Speaker 1: Okay. So everything was cooked (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Everything was cooked on top of the stove. Speaker 1: So it was like a potbellied stove and so that and a fireplace were the two things, I guess, to keep you warm. Speaker 2: That was--those was the only things that could keep us warm. Speaker 1: So going out and getting wood and coal and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--My brother and I got wood. In fact, my first--the first job that she permitted me to do as a child was to work on the wood truck because we relied on wood and that also could help us get wood easily-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so we had to either--we chopped wood (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. How many rooms did you have in your--in the place you grew up? Speaker 2: There were three rooms; a front room, a middle room and a kitchen; so that was it. Speaker 1: Now was that like based on what they call now a shotgun house in the sense that you got like one door going through and the hall--all go straight through? Speaker 2: Yes. In fact, it was a duplex, the one we lived in longest; there was a smaller one we lived in where we only lived in it, but later most of my time was spent in that duplex and there was-- it had three rooms on one side for one family, three rooms on the other side for the other family. You open the front door and they open the back door and the wind just never stop blowing (laughter). Story_ID: 28103 Speaker 1: Now how big a school is T.J. Elder? Speaker 2: It was not a very big school. It was basically you had (laughter) one class room per grade. There was a first grade (laughter), there was a second grade, there was a third grade, and etcetera, and when you got up to high school, they might have had a couple of classes where you did your math and science, your math and some things in one class and your reading and social studies in another, but it was basically one classroom per grade all the way up until probably the 11th or 12th. Speaker 1: Okay. And was there a cafeteria in there? Speaker 2: Later--they did have a cafeteria in there later, yes. Speaker 1: Or an assembly room or something? You know. Speaker 2: They did have an assembly in there; they did have an assembly room, yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but it was interesting too that even in T.J. Elder, I remember as a child that during the winter, the way we were warmed, they had a potbelly stove 'cause I used to have to bring the wood and coal in for that stove and fire it up in the morning just like I had to fire up the fireplace at our house. Speaker 1: And now how many stoves, I mean did each classroom have a stove? Speaker 2: Yeah, one, one, one; one stove. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28104 Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in grade school? Speaker 2: My favorite subject was that I--in grade school I really didn't have a favorite subject. My whole idea was to follow the direction of my grandmother [Ruth Heard Houston] and mother [Catherine Houston Vinson]; that was learn everything you can, learn as much as you can because neither one of them got beyond elementary school, and they said "Learn as much as you can so you can improve your life." And so I--my thing was to pay attention and to learn everything that they taught; that was my focus-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and as a result, teachers thought I was smart; I was just--I felt I had to learn. I didn't feel that school was a recreational place for me, I thought it was an opportunity to learn, and so I tried to learn what they taught and so much so that when they say "Well okay, tomorrow we're gonna be doing such-and-such and so," I'll probably go ahead and read ahead and try to find out what the such-and-such and so was gonna be (laughter). And when we come to classroom, it was both a help for me and it also might have been a handicap for me because if the principal or somebody would call and say "I need for you to send a report or send a note down--I need you to send a report to the office" or "We need a few students to help with this." They would always tell me to go, say "You know it because I know you read it, you've done it, so you go up there and help them" (laughter). So that way it might have been a hindrance for me, but the end thing was just to be alert and try to do whatever I was requested to do to stay on top of it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did you have a favorite--favorite teachers at T.J. Elder? Speaker 2: No. There was a teacher there named Miss Hall that I kept up with for a long period of time but I didn't, I guess I didn't gravitate so much to teachers or what--all of them I thought were out to help us, help me learn, and so I appreciated all of them. And, as I said, many of them used me as an errand boy or to do certain things for the class or for the school because they thought that I was responsible and I was on top of my lessons-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and I just appreciated them, but I didn't see them as overly special, I just thought they were good teachers (laughter) and went from there. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28105 Speaker 1: Did your family keep up with the news and what was going on in the rest of the country? Speaker 2: We had no newspapers; we had no--in fact, television hadn't really come into being and we didn't take the newspaper or anything. We would hear about things on radio, or things people were talking about in community and--but other than that, we didn't keep up with anything. If something special was going on that everybody was talking about, you know, we--now we knew about World War II because my uncle--my mother [Catherine Houston Vinson] had one brother named Richard Houseton--Richard Houston, Jr. My grandfather's name was Richard Houseton, Sr. He had really left the house by the time I was growing up, but Richard Houseton, Jr.--they told us how he kind of falsified his age so he could get into the Army and he joined the Army in the early '40's [1940's] so that--he had been born in 1921 but--actually '22' [1922], I believe it was, but they say he upped his age so he could go to the Army early and he went to the Philippines and overseas and fought in World War II in (unclear) and my mother--my grandmother [Ruth Heard Houston] kept up with anything she could about the war that she heard because he was over there; in fact, I remember when she used to carry me to church at times, and that's the first time I start getting a picture about God. She was telling God to keep his arms around her son and help to bring him back home. I said "God has those kinda arms?" (Laughter) "He can reach over there or wherever he is?" But the war was the only thing I knew that we kept up with because of my uncle. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now the local--I mean in reading about Elijah Muhammad growing up in Sandersville, one of the features--now this is the generation before you basically, but one of--I mean the theme is the brutal racism in that area. I mean I think he witnessed at least two lynching's growing up as a kid. Did you hear about anything like that growing up? Speaker 2: Well, as I told you earlier, they cautioned us to make sure we were not caught in certain places at certain times especially alone because people were still doing cruel things. But I never witnessed a lynching but I did see and knew that cruelty took place. I never witnessed it, it never happened to me but we used to have what they call the high sheriff in town and they would talk about the fact that the police or the sheriff could do anything they wanted to, or also certain rich white men, and nothing would be done about it, "so don't you get caught out there and give them an excuse to do anything to you." So that was obvious that they were aware of it. Story_ID: 28106 Speaker 1: What was the name of your family church? Speaker 2: Springfield Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you have--as a youth, did you have like leadership roles in the church? Speaker 2: It was--again, you have to visualize Sandersville [Georgia]. It was a very small community, so much so that the church didn't even have preaching every Sunday; I think it was once a month and, if they were lucky, sometimes twice a month because you had--they didn't have a local preacher; the preacher came through town, and on the fourth Sunday or certain Sundays, he came to Sandersville to preach. And the rest of the time, what you had was that the local people would have prayer meeting, they would have class meeting, and they would have a fellowship service. But the church in Sandersville was not--furthermore, it was what we call not in town, it was on the outer rural areas in the country, and we had no car or anything so you didn't--there was not very much around the church except what happened at the church. Late in my life I did some things but not early during those first nine years. Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't have too much going like the Baptist training? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, none of that, no; none of that. Story_ID: 28107 Speaker 1: Now when your grandmother [Ruth Heard Houston] passed, you were nine years old-- Speaker 2: Nine years old. Speaker 1: --so how did that change your family and how did that--what did that mean for you? Speaker 2: It was the first transitional change in my life. It was very abrupt and--she had a heart attack and they came to--my brother and I were at school and somebody came to get us from school early that day and we usually would never--I don't ever remember having been picked up from school earlier for any reason, and so we were curious as what was going on and they told us something happened to our grandmother. But it abruptly changed my entire family's life on my mother's [Catherine Houston Vinson] side because it was like the foundation went out from under us; she was it for me, for my siblings, and for my mother, she was it. And so my mother took leave and came from Atlanta [Georgia] where she was working, and we were still there in school and everything and so the question came up what were we gonna do, and so my mother thought about it, we talked about it, and etcetera, and my oldest sister Sarah Ruth at the time--there was an agreement that my mother could go back to Atlanta to work and she would keep us there in Sandersville [Georgia]. At the time, Sara Ruth was--she was almost--she had become a teenager; she was a teenager; she was 17 years old and she had had a child, and she had stopped school and so she was working so she told my mother to go back to Atlanta, there was an agreement that my mother would go back to Atlanta, and she would keep us there and she could come back, you know, and forth from Atlanta 'cause there was nothing in Sandersville for my mother to do. And so we adjusted to that but the biggest thing that had registered through my mind after my grandmother's death was who could I rely on now? Who could I depend on? She was it; I knew my mother but I had relied completely on my grandmother; she was my go-to person; she was my mentor, she taught me everything, she took care of everything, she did all the cooking and ironing and everything, so she was the go-to person. And so she had allowed me to start working outside of the house when I was eight, one year before she died, and after her death, it dawned upon me that I'm gonna now have to rely on myself, that she's no longer with us; it took me a little while for that to sink in and I became--I think that caused me to become a very self-reliant person at that point because she--her death taught me that I wasn't sure who else I could rely on other than myself. Story_ID: 28108 Speaker 1: So what kind of job did you have? Speaker 2: Oh, I mean I was a--odd job--I was in elementary school. I mean--like I say, used to work on wood trucks, I would go out and pick berries for people, I would run errands for people in the community, even would go out--I think I went out in the cotton field to pick cotton sometime (laughter), and--but there were just any odd jobs that a child could do, I did it because anything that could make me an honest amount of money, I was willing to do it. Speaker 1: Now did you get a lot of interest in your--I mean your ability to--I mean you're a smart student and you're known as reliable, so did people like ask you to go to the Post Office for them or to write letters and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: In fact, they asked me to do all kind of things for them because they would send me to the store, trust me with their money, know that I would bring back the right change and would be honest, they would ask me to do things, they would leave me sometime in their houses to keep--certain things to do for them because, as I said, I tried to pattern after the character I had seen in my grandmother [Ruth Heard Houston], that people would know you and trust you, and respect you, and believe in your talents or, or what you--believe in your word as they say; your word was your bond. What you told them they could do, they could take it to the bank. If Johnny L. say he's gonna do this, he's gonna do that; he'll take care of it, he'll take care of it. So I did a lot of errand running, especially for the elderly. And the interesting thing was in Sandersville [Georgia], most of us in the African American community did not have any transportation of our own; there was no bus system and there was one taxi in the entire town, and you didn't get a taxi for errand, you got a taxi for emergencies or if you needed to go to the doctor and you couldn't walk or couldn't do something, you get a taxi. And there was a train that used to come from Atlanta [Georgia] to Tennille, Georgia called the Nancy Hank; every day it came from Atlanta to Savannah [Georgia] and it stopped in Tennille, Georgia right outside of Sandersville and people used a taxi to pick them up from--if they had to go on the train. And so people did a lot of walking in Sandersville; I would walk downtown and get stuff for people, you know. I would walk--I'd go here and there, so it was a lot of walking and I enjoyed it; it kept me healthy and caused me to pick up change. Story_ID: 28109 Speaker 1: Now as school progressed, as you go into, I guess what would be like the middle school years, sixth, seventh, eighth grade, did you focus more on mathematics then, or did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay now, we need to jump to two things-- Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Speaker 2: --to go beyond that point-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --let me fast-forward you on something to get you in the right bracket. So my sister Sarah Ruth kept us for two years--kept us in Sandersville after my grandmother [Ruth Heard Houston] passed, and less than two years later, in 1952, my sister Sarah Ruth suddenly passed and we're yet to find the exact cause of her death, but--and then that threw us back to where we were when my grandmother passed and so my mother [Catherine Houston Vinson] came down from Atlanta [Georgia] again and she decided at that point that we had to do something more dramatic. It was--in a period of two years, we had had two deaths and it had really rocked the family in a number of ways. And to show you how hard things were when my grandmother passed, she passed on December 13th. The things were so bad that usually they would try to get us a little toy or something for Christmas; nobody got anything for Christmas, nobody got anything--we were just struggling trying to survive in 1950 when my grandmother passed. So when my sister Sarah Ruth passed, my mother came and she looked at all kinda options and she decided at that point that she had to do something dramatic and she decided to move us from Atlanta to--I mean from Sandersville to Macon, Georgia. Speaker 1: Now what was going on in Macon? Speaker 2: She--there was a relative of the family then called Cousin Ethel Edwards (unclear)--Cousin Elinora Edwards, and what was going on was they owned their own house in Macon, and they told my mother if she really needed to come to Macon, they would give her--they would let her have one of the bedrooms until she could get a job and get on her feet in a few months and get her own place, so we went to Macon on that promise that we could live with our cousin for the first month or two or three until my mother got on her feet; my mother was very fortunate, when she got to Macon, she was able to find another job as a dietician with S and S Cafeteria and the--she then, after about three months, three or four months, we moved out in a place of our own to a little house--a duplex on Ross Street, and this was a notch--Macon was a notch higher than Sandersville; Macon was a real town, real city compared to Sandersville. The house we moved into was a duplex, it had--it did have electricity in it, and they had a toilet out on the back porch; it wasn't an outdoor toilet like it was in Sandersville, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Plumbing and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, (unclear) plumbing toilet that you could pull the chain on. And so we stayed there for a year in the Ross--on Ross Street and then we moved to a place called Tindall Heights, T-I-N-D-A-L-L, Tindall Heights, which was a government project housing, and we really was living then; I mean it was a brick place, had electricity, it had--we had a living room downstairs and a kitchen downstairs, and upstairs we had two bedrooms; I mean we were really living, and we were always warm and everything was nice, so that's where we really start living, and at that point, I had gotten to be in fifth grade, sixth grade and from--I stayed in that Tindall Heights project housing until I graduated from high school. So we're in Macon now, we left Sandersville-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --and life did dramatically change after we got to Macon. Speaker 1: Okay. So that sounds like--when you talk about projects now, people cringe and talk about all the problems (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, it was a palace for us. Speaker 1: But in those days, they were--this is a new idea right here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh yeah, new idea; it was a palace. I mean to have a brick house that somebody up-kept all the time and all you had to do was upkeep your yards, you know, it was a palace, it was a Godsend for us; we saw it as one of the greatest blessings ever happened. Now we were extremely poor, and my mother and my grandmother would not allow us to accept welfare monies but she knew we had been struggling with places to stay and when she applied for and they allowed her to get into the projects, we saw that as one of the greatest blessings we ever had-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and we were proud to get in that project. Story_ID: 28110 Speaker 1: Now what was the pop--was the population mostly African American in the project? Speaker 2: It was totally African American; not mostly, it was totally African American. (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, this is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--There was a bus that came in front of the street that was near our house or in front of our house called Plant Street, Plant Street Bus; blacks sat on the back of the bus, whites sat on the front of the bus; there was nothing (laughter) integrated; it was totally African American, that project. Speaker 1: Okay, so is Macon [Georgia] about the same as Sandersville [Georgia] in terms of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh no, no, no. Macon was a metropolis (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--compared to Sandersville (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--In terms of the race relations and the segregation. Speaker 2: The race relation and the segregation were--they were about the same, there were two differences about Macon; one is Macon was much larger, and you had many more communities with choices. There were communities in Macon in which you had actually middle-class black folks in--middle-class African Americans. You didn't have--basically, there were one or two--there were no communities with middle-class people in Sandersville--African Americans; but there were actually some communities with middle-class people in Macon. You had several different churches in Macon; you had several different elementary schools. In fact, when I first went to Macon, I went to George Washington Carver Elementary School for fifth grade, and then when we moved out from where my cousin was living, I went to B.S. Ingram Elementary School, but Macon was much larger and Macon had a bus system where you could go downtown on a bus, on a public bus; we could pay a dime and ride the bus; oh it was totally different from Sandersville. Speaker 1: Okay. Public transportation (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Public transportation. Speaker 1: A number of different schools. Now how did you find the schools? Were the schools--now you were a good student in Sandersville. Did you find that you were on the same level when you got to Macon, or were you ahead or behind or about the same? Speaker 2: I was about the same around--ahead; it was interesting--my sister died in 1952, in about February or March, and so my mother pulled us out of school in Sandersville at that point. And so between March in '52' [1952] and August in '52' [1952], we were in no school but they were giving out paper report cards at that time, and when we got our report card in March, we just kept it, and so in August in '52' [1952] when we went to Macon, my older sister gave us the same grades for the other reporting periods that we had gotten for the previous one and she promoted us to fifth grade (laughter). Speaker 1: Your sister? Speaker 2: My sister did it (laughter). And so we just took that report card up there and took it to them and they accepted us. We started--I started out in fifth grade at that point and I was on par with everybody else; in fact, actually I was a little ahead of them. Again, it was because of my focus; I was a responsible person and I was eager to learn. And they had a concession stand; they would let me run the concession stand because they trusted me with the money, they knew I could count well, and they knew I would not be stealing or doing anything out of the ordinary. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were like ten years old then? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So were there any--now did you become more focused on mathematics at this point? Speaker 2: No, my thing was--I focused on learning everything I could. I wanted to know; my grandmother and mother say "Learn everything you can," and that's what I did. I tried--my aim was, and I didn't think about age, but I wanted to do well on all my subjects, on all my tests. Story_ID: 28111 Speaker 1: Can you remember where--when you were first introduced to science in school? Speaker 2: We did not know about science until we got to junior high; they had a science class in the junior high. Now in Macon [Georgia], it was segregated and they only had one large junior high school when I was there, and one large high school; they had several elementary but only large junior high and one large senior high. Speaker 1: So what was the name of your junior high school? Speaker 2: Ballard-Hudson, B-A-L-L-A-R-D hyphen Hudson, H-U-D-S-O-N. Ballard-Hudson Junior High, and the name of the high school was Ballard-Hudson Senior High. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So you had some science at Ballard-Hudson, you had a science course (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's when I really got introduced to science was at Ballard-Hudson. Speaker 1: Now did you take to it right away? Speaker 2: Again, my aim was to learn everything; yes I did, I jumped on it, you know, because it--it helps to--the curiosity that I had how things worked, what put things--how things got along, that fascinated me and I jumped right on it. Speaker 1: Now were there any particular teachers that you were close to, or you think really helped you out as a mentor, I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--In junior high, there was not; there was a principal there named Mrs. Minnie Butler, M-I-N-N-I-E Butler. Ms. Minnie Butler was a very tiny lady; when I say tiny, in stature; she was short in stature, she was small, but I have seen her take some of those young men who were almost (unclear) who was almost six inches of height or--she would grab them by the ear, "Boy, you know you can't do this in my school" (laughter). She'll grab 'em and pull 'em down the hall (laughter). She say "You can't do these things in my school; you're here to learn and you're gonna learn, or else you can't stay in my school." And nobody, no parents, nobody talk about being brutal or anything. But as she take her rule, she'll crack 'em across the knuckles with it or hit 'em. "You can't do this." So she was a very stern disciplinarian and a focused educator and Ms. Minnie Butler impressed me; she reminded me of my grandmother [Ruth Heard Hudson] but she was not as stern as my grandmother. Minnie Butler would hit you in a minute if you didn't do right. Fortunately, I was able to stay in the middle of the road most of the time and I didn't have to worry about her. Story_ID: 28112 Speaker 1: When I got to high school, there were individual teachers that start to have an impact on me. Speaker 2: Okay, well who were some of them in high school? Speaker 1: In high school, there were two persons in the Fine Arts; there was a Mrs. Leontine Espy (ph.), L-E-O-N-T-I-N-E, her last name was Espy; her middle name--she was Fields before she was Espy 'cause she got married while I was, I think, in her class; Leontine Fields Espy, F-I-E-L-D-S. She taught me English in high school and she was concerned about the fact that I had allowed the colloquialism of the project to form my speaking habit. She say "You know better than that; you're not supposed to be saying ain't or I are, or whatever, speak good English; you know it." And she would be on my case. I would sit down and write things correctly when I turned them in, but a lot of times, my environment had pushed me to not be as careful in my speaking and she helped to mold me and bring that to my attention. And I had--there was another person in English that--Irene Hunter Walker, I-R-E-N-E Hunter, H-U-N-T-E-R Walker; she taught me English and she also was very instrumental in helping me to develop my communication skills; she and Mrs. Espy were very instrumental and I remember those and I appreciate those. In fact, Mrs. Espy is still alive and I saw her about a year ago when I went through Macon. Speaker 2: Now how important is that for a future scientist? Now you didn't see yourself at the time as a future scientist I don't think, but how important are those communication skills? Speaker 1: Those communication skills are extremely valuable, extremely valuable because many times people don't come to you to find out your ability, but if you can articulate your abilities or your ideas, you can get people's attention, and those communication skills made all the difference in the world. They increased my confidence to be able to articulate what was in my mind and what I was doing, and gave me the confidence to go forth and go before groups to do it. And I remember that in high school, because of this grooming they did with me and helped me, that I was asked one time to speak before an assembly program of the entire high school; there were 1,500 kids in that high school and to--they had taught me how to--if you're gonna make a presentation or a speech or something, how you write them down on index cards and you know, you focus and you have a sub-topic and you go from--to the next topic and etcetera. I had written down my speech and had done everything beautifully; got up there on the stage and when I got up from my chair and got--going to the podium, my cards went right across the floor; all my index cards. And I say "Do I sit down here and pick them up and try to get them together or what do I do?" And nobody--everybody on the stage was stunned because they didn't know what to do and how to do it. I say "Forget it." I went on up to the stage and gave my speech (laughter) without any notes because I knew what I had written; and of course I didn't do it, I'm sure, as well as I would have done with my cards, but because of the fact that I had prepared and I had studied and followed the kind of rules they told me, I felt confidence to go ahead and give the presentation. And people clapped; I don't know whether they clapped for me to sit down or they clapped because I had done well (laughter). Story_ID: 28113 Speaker 1: Now what kind of science education did you have in high school? Speaker 2: Now I had--I was very fortunate; I was very fortunate. There was a teacher I had called Robert Washington, he was my biology teacher; he also had been a graduate of Morehouse and he was a very--Morehouse College in Atlanta [Georgia]. He was a very meticulous person and he wanted you to understand how plants and how animals--how they were constituted, how they were made up, how they functioned. And he taught it with excitement and with details. And I got very, very intrigued with this and learning, and then I went to another teacher named Lawton, L-A-W-T-O-N, Lawton C. Thomas, who taught me chemistry in high school and he taught us in a similar way that Mr. Roberts had taught us of how things go together, how you do compounds, how you go through states like the solid state, the liquid states, and the vapor and gas states and what happen and all that, and it was just very intriguing, and so I really found those things to be fascinating and in each one of their classes, they would let us have labs and I would go in there and stay and do extra if I could, and--so that I might move forward and fast. And then I had a math teacher in high school and--the first math teacher I had was not very good; he was good, but my class mates were not interested in math so much--Mr. Sampson--they just wanted to get by, so he didn't try to challenge them; he wanted to increase their knowledge in math to keep them interested, but he didn't try to go very far. So I mean most times, by the time he got through one-third of the class period, I had done everything that he had asked us to do, and I would start studying for the next day's stuff. But then I went to a lady named Ms. Wright, W-R-I-G-H-T; Carrie Wright. And Ms. Carrie Wright taught me algebra and geometry, and Ms. Wright, she was a stern disciplinarian and she had a good, healthy ego; she figured she knew mathematics better than anybody, any of her colleagues who taught math (unclear), and so--I find this to be interesting and I find this to be challenging, so (unclear) I was almost sure I can do math just as well as she can. And so every time she'd give us an assignment, I would go out and make sure I did well on her assignment, and I remember one day in class, she came back and she say "Everybody failed this test that I gave" I think it was on that last Friday--"except two people." And she say "What you want me to do about it? Do you want me to fail all of you or most of you? Do you want me to give you another exam, or what do you wanna do? You want me to curve the grade?" Story_ID: 28114 Speaker 1: We were talking about Ms. Carrie Wright and a story about like what--she asked the class what do you want her to do-- Speaker 2: What did you want her to do? "Do you want me to curb the grade? "Do you want me to fail most of the"--it was a major exam; I think it was the six weeks exam so that's--"Do you want me to give it to you over, etcetera." Well, unfortunately, I had gotten to be a little cocky; I said "I don't care what you do, do what you wanna do;" and of course that angered her. She was a caring woman but she didn't like for any students to talk back or not be respectful, and so she said--and the students were pleading and talking to her and this much, etcetera, and I think she say "Well we got to go over some of this in order for you to be able do the next six weeks well, so I think I'll curb the grades so we can go ahead and get through this review and go forward." I say "Do what you wanna do." And I had made, I had made a B on that exam and the Valedictorian of our class was also in there and she had made, I think, a 60; I had made something like 85, and so she took--Ms. Wright took her grade and moved it up to 90 to be an A; she curbed the grade. And then she pulled other people's grades up from hers (laughter), but when she gave the report cards out, she gave me a B. She say "You don't care then I'm gone give you what you got" (laughter). But it was a nice challenge for me, and what it told me 'Houston, you go and do your best and don't worry about asking people any special favors; you go out there and perform as well as you can.' And I took another course from her after that and I went after her to make sure I did my work well so she would never have to ask me to plead for her for any consideration. And I really got into math from that point of view of making sure I did it as well or better than anybody in my class; in fact, when I became a senior in high school, they elected me treasurer because they knew if anybody could handle numbers, Houston could. Speaker 1: Okay, now how far did you go in terms of math instruction in high school? Did you get to trigonometry or calculus? Speaker 2: No. At the time I was there, geometry was as high as you could go. You went general math, algebra one, algebra two and geometry; that is high as you could go in high school at the time I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: After I left, they started introducing trigonometry but--and they might--they probably now offer calculus, but they didn't--we didn't--they--nobody even told us about calculus or trigonometry when I was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28115 Speaker 1: Were you engaged in extracurricular activities in high school or did you play any sports or musical instruments or anything like that? Speaker 2: I did not play any sports in high school; I did not play musical instruments. We were in Macon [Georgia] and life had changed to be well, but we were still in the projects and we were still highly poverty-stricken, and even though my mother [Catherine Houston Vinson] had a job as--in the title of dietician in a cafeteria, they did not pay the African American women what they paid the white men and the white women, so her pay was very low. We didn't worry about her pay at the time because the project housing rent was based on how much you brought in so they reduced it accordingly, but we were very much aware of how low her pay was and she couldn't do so much. So my brother and I worked outside of school; in fact, we even worked sometimes-- I would go to school--I would work an hour before school; school opened at 8:30, or 8:00 in the morning and I would work from seven to eight--the hour before many times, and so would my brother, and then after school I would work sometimes from 3:30 'til 11:30 at night. I used to--they used to have this where you had these drive-ins where you carry out food to people; they call it curb-hopping where I--we would serve the people at their car when they came up to the curve. And so I worked, and my brother and I worked after school, so we didn't have time to stay around. Now what I did do was when they had things like the--I remember the educators--Future Teachers of America, that was a club that met during the school time; I joined that, and I think they elected me to be their president or spokesman at one time. And they had a few school plays and which they practiced during the day, and I participated in those kind of things, but I was not around after school to do extracurricular activities. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28116 Speaker 1: Now at graduation time now--you said someone else was Valedictorian, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And were you next? Speaker 2: I was six in my class out of 120 graduates; I was number six. I was proud of the fact that I had an A average; in all the classes I had taken in high school, my average was 90 plus, and so at that time if you had 90, you were an A, so I was considered a graduate--an A student in graduation but I was not Valedictorian or Salutatorian or the third per--I was number six in my class. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what kind of counseling did you have about college? Speaker 2: None. What--well, let me--I'll back up; I have to take that back. One day, my principal who was very much interested in college education for students who were capable--students that he thought was capable. He would watch students and say something to 'em from time to time. And one day when I was in the 11th grade, he came into a class and chose me as one of the persons that he wanted to go and take a test and he never told me what the test was; I don't know whether it was an SAT or ACT or was it an IQ exam; I never knew it. He said "Come on up here, I want you to take--I want these students to come go with me and take this test." Well, we went with him and took the test and after we took the test, about three months later--three or four months later, I got a letter of some information from two colleges, from Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama and from Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia and they said "Based on your test results, we're interested in your applying to us, to our college." And say "If you will send this back or send some information back, we'll help your application start--get started." Well, I say "Fine;" so when they sent that back to me, I filled out whatever forms they wanted to and Tuskegee sent back and told me I was accepted into their institution to go to college but--and I put on there on all of them I had no money, my parents had no--my mother [Catherine Vinson] had no money to send me to college or anything, so I told them I say "Well, I don't have any money for college," and Tuskegee said that "We can put you on a work study program; it'll probably take you five years and maybe some loans because you might have to work an entire semester sometimes." And Morehouse sent back and say "Well, we'll give you a tuition scholarship and we will help you with some work or some loans." So I never followed up to Tuskegee; I followed up with Morehouse because no one in my immediate family had been to college and I knew nothing very much about college, so I did something that was seriously wrong and it later cost me. I ignored the word tuition; I told people I had a scholarship to go to college (laughter), and you know I got excited, you know, I got a scholarship to go to college so I'm going to college. And so then after I--during the time when I was graduating from high school, they were telling me to send this back and they were telling me that okay--first of all, they told me that I had to send some kind of application fee to cover--I say "What you mean application fee? I thought I had a tuition, I thought--a scholarship, I thought the scholarship covered my expenses." And then they told me a little later that when I got there in September, to make sure I had all my room and board for the first semester, or at least one-half of the payment for it. I said "What? What happened to my scholarship?" They say "You have a tuition scholarship." I say "That's a scholarship isn't it?" They say "Yes, but it only covers your academic cost for the professors and the equipment, and for the college." It say room and board, it does not cost--cover--it does not cover the cost of your books, does not cover the cost of any other things that you have to do. And so I had already been working, but I start seriously trying to work and save a little money, and the entire year after high school, I worked at a furniture store trying to earn some money to help get the amount they told me I had to bring in. Story_ID: 28117 Speaker 1: And so I earned all the money I could, saved it and went there and was able to meet the threshold of the finance I needed to have with me and--but that was for the first semester, and I couldn't meet the threshold of the second semester. So my mother [Catherine Houston Vinson] had to borrow $300.00 and it took her--she told me what a struggle it was first of all to borrow that money, and second, I learned later, it took her three years to pay it back. And I told her--I thanked her and I would never ask her for a dime again to help me with my education; that was the second semester of my freshman year. And so I went ahead and did that and we got through the freshman year but we got through--I worked in college when I was there in order to pay for my lodging--for my food. And so it was a real struggle; so much so that when they came up the end of my freshman year, they say "Hey, you got to put down a deposit on a room for next year if you wanna have a room in college." I say "I don't have any deposit money." They say "If you don't have any deposit money, we can't guarantee you a bed." I say "Well, you just have to do it 'cause I just don't have the money." And, in fact, I had to stay up there an extra week after my freshman year. At that time, the other students went home early and the seniors stayed for graduation; the other students didn't. I had to stay with the seniors until then because my mother could not find a way to come up there and get me (laughter) until a week later; she finally found somebody who could come get me, and so when I got home that summer, she say "How was it?" I say "The education was great" I say "but the money part is just really challenging." And so I went and became--I start looking for a job the second day I got home from my first year after Morehouse [College] and I went everywhere I heard about a job, I thought they had a job, I read about a job; didn't get a job. For two weeks, I was on the street every day, and someone had told me about Hot Springs, Virginia. It's a homestead--it's a hotel resort up there, and so I had ridden up there and asked them--they would allow young men and women to come up there and work during the summer months as waiters and waitresses at The Homestead; it's a huge five-star hotel resort in Hot Springs, Virginia. It's H-O-M-E-S-T-E-A-D. And so I had ridden up there to--one of the men who was from Macon [Georgia] was in charge of room service; the waiters and waitresses in room service, and so I didn't--I didn't hear from him. I was looking for jobs everywhere, and I went up to pay rent for my mother at the rental office in the project housing; she was still there in Tindall Heights. And this lady looked at me, she say "What are you doin' here Johnny L.?" I say "What you mean what I'm doin' here?" She say "My husband said that you were comin' up to Hot Springs this summer to work." I say "He did?" She say "Yes, he told me you were comin', you were one of the boys comin' from Macon up there to work." I say "He did?" She say "Yes." I went back that day, and there was a lady in community named Ms. Mamie Robinson who was one of the mentors I had in community. I say "Ms. Mamie"--she used to--had a little concession stand, she sold things. "Ms. Mamie, if you would loan me fare to go to Hot Springs, Virginia, as soon as I make some money, I will send it back to you." She say "Now you know I don't have much--I don't make much money, I don't have money." I say "I understand, Ms. Mamie" I say "but I don't have anything." She say "Boy, I believe you." So she gave me the money to go to Hot Springs, Virginia and I went there by train. The train took me within 15 miles of Hot Springs, Virginia and then you caught a bus. Now I got to Hot Springs, I think I had a quarter in my pocket, and so I went up there and found the man who was this lady's husband. I say "I'm here." And somebody say "Well you're not gonna call him and check?" I say "No," she say "I'm supposed to be there, I'm goin'." I say "They gonna have to work me, let me work to get back 'cause I won't have any money to get back" (laughter). And so was very kind, he allowed me to work the entire summer and he was very, very generous and supportive and not only did he allow me to work that summer, he allowed me to work the summer after, which was the summer after my freshman year. Story_ID: 28118 Speaker 1: But I went to Hot Springs, Virginia the summer after my sophomore year and the summer after my junior year, working initially as a bus boy and then as a waiter, both in room service and in the dining room. And that was a substantial source of money for me to help me get through college, plus as I came back into college, I worked on campus and I did some odd jobs around there in the city. Speaker 2: Now I've heard that being a waiter or a bus boy in these situations can be quite lucrative, can be like working in a factory in the north. Speaker 1: It was. It was the mainstay for my staying in college; it was the mainstay for my staying in college. I never could have stayed in college without that kind of a job. Speaker 2: About how much do you think you could make a week, or did you get paid weekly? Was that what it was, or what? Speaker 1: Well, that was the beauty in it; we got paid every two weeks, but the issue was not the pay, they paid us something like--it was a very small amount. We got out money from tips and so that allowed you to have an impact on how much you made, and I learned the system; I knew--I learned how to charm people, I learned how to give them good service, etcetera, and at that time African Americans could not go to Homestead as a guest; you were only there if you worked there. And so I made sure I did my job well and they used to call me School Boy up there because when other people had their off days in the evening, they would sometime go to--go down to a city near Homestead and spend their money with the ladies or doing recreational stuff or do other stuff, and I say "Nope, I got to save my money, I'm not goin', I don't wanna go with you." But it was very lucrative because I could impress people to give me nice tips and that's where the real money came from the tips. You give them good service and you make it very pleasant, and they become more generous. Story_ID: 28119 Speaker 1: And this is a place you were saying earlier when I asked the five questions in the beginning, the places you still go for recreation. Speaker 2: Well, what happened was my brother-in-law--two of my brothers-in-law and I worked at Hot Springs, Virginia and so we decided to go back up there about eight years ago; oh, it's a beautiful place; I mean it's rolling hills of mountain and they have about three PGA [Professional Golfers' Association of America] golf courses up there, all kinds of recreation; spas, etcetera. And so we decide to go back as a guest to see how Hot Springs will be as a guest, and how to--and see how much it had changed. And it was fascinating that--when I went there the first time, I went down on the--to the entrance there, and I was standing on the front porch and even though I had no badge on me, I didn't have on the white jacket as a waiter or anything, one of their typical guests came up and say "Do you park cars, or how do I get my car parked?" I say "I guess you do it the same way I did, go in and talk with the people there at the registration desk and they will give you instructions" (laugher). And he was shocked, he thought I was being uppity but I was a guest; he thought I was there working still because during the time I was there--the first time I went there, there were no other African American guests; I was the first guest; I mean we were the only ones at the time I went there. I've been there three or four times and each time, I think I've only found one other time there was an African American guest there when I was there, so it is still highly segregated but it is a fantastic place for relaxation and for enjoying the mountain; I play golf up there, and it's great if you--now it's interesting that there was a story I heard when I was out front at the desk, at the registration desk one day and there was this little lady there who was a white lady who came by and said--she was talking to the attendant behind the desk who happened to be a young white man and, because of her age, she called people--she says "Charles, why is everything so high?" And she say--I've forgotten her real name, "but Mrs. Danforth, we do that to keep it pure." She say "Okay Charles." And she filled out her money. But there were very few blacks (laughter) up there, and the prices now are extremely high. It's not easy, I mean I--you pay Two and Three Hundred Dollars a night for rooms. So I don't go that often and I don't go that frequently but I still enjoy going in fact every other year or two or something. Story_ID: 28120 Speaker 1: Now, to Morehouse [College] to talk about the academics. Now did you decide on a major as a freshman? Speaker 2: When I went to Morehouse as a freshman, I knew I had an analytical mind; I knew I had a curious mind and I told you I had had these two teachers who had mentored me in English in high school. And something annoyed me about them; they would tell me how to do things correctly and why to do it, and then I would find myself doing it and then they--"No, no, you can't do it at this point." I say "Why not?" They say "Because this is the exception to the rule; this is when the rule doesn't apply." (Unclear) "Oh no, this is the exception to"--I say "Well, if it's a rule, it should be a rule." And so I was not--and then in the social sciences, they were talking theories; this is such-and-such-a theory; this is this. I say "Wait a minute, either something is or it isn't." So I liked analytical things and the things that were pretty much straight forward, so I decided the freshman year when I went to Morehouse that I'm sure I'm gonna major in math or science because those--two and two is gonna be four, don't care what you do with it; they're not gonna change. As Mr. Thomas say, "If you heed this compound, this is gonna happen; it's not gonna be these exceptions they keep talking about." So I went there with the understanding that I would either major in mathematics or science because of my very nature, the nature of my mind and what I was most comfortable with. And so I took chemistry my first year there from a professor named Henry C. McBay, perhaps the most renowned African American chemist that we've had in the United States. And he really--he was the most exciting mentor I have had in college; teacher and scholar, he excited me; I took his class, general chemistry, 8:00 in the morning the first year I went to Morehouse. He had a lecture room with 125 seats in it and I would go there and I would sit up near the front; I wanted to hear and learn everything he had to teach. He was a fantastic teacher, great scholar, and he made chemistry come alive, and he excited me; I mean he excited me so much--and the other thing that made me excited was you knew he was a chemist. In the entire--I took two semesters of chemistry from him during my first year at Morehouse, and I only remember him bringing a note or a book to class only once. He was totally prepared mentally with all the details, and he went in there and he could teach chemistry; he knew chemistry and he could teach it. Now there were things in the room like we call the chart of elements [periodic table] and different things he would point to from time to time to refer, but notes he didn't bring. And he had boards that you--you could write on the board and then you could push it up in the air and then pull the other board down and write on it, and then over the other side it had--so we were trying to keep up with him with his writing. But he was a fantastic and inspiring teacher, and he is perhaps the greatest teacher that I have ever had; he inspired me to want to do science and to want to do it well, and I say if I ever taught, I wanted to be like Henry C. McBay. Story_ID: 28121 Speaker 1: Who else in science at Morehouse [College] was an inspiration to you? Speaker 2: A Professor Claude B. Dansby. Professor Claude B. Dansby taught me mathematics. There had been a person called William Lawton and a Harriet Walton who taught me math, but Professor Claude B. Dansby breathed math and made math electrifying the way Dr. McBay made chemistry. And I got really turned on to math by him, but there were two reasons why I end up in mathematics. One was that Dr. Henry C. McBay told us as a class, say "If you're gonna be a great chemist, you must--if you're gonna be a great chemist, you're gonna have to be an outstanding mathematician; you got to know how to balance your equations, you got to know how to do your math and you got to be able to do it well." So I made sure I did my math well as I was taking chemistry, and when I got to Professor Claude B. Dansby, he made mathematics come alive; in fact, there was a legend about him; I've written a piece about both Dr. Henry C. McBay and about Professor Claude Dansby, and the legend about Professor Claude Dansby was--there were two; one was--at the time I was at Morehouse, Dr. Benjamin Elijah Mays was President, and he had sent to the University of Chicago and asked them--told them he needed an additional math teacher at Morehouse and say "We want you to send us the best that you have, that will come to Morehouse, and preferably an African American." And he say they wrote him back from Chicago and told him "You have the best African American Mathematician we have produced who can teach, and that's Claude B. Dansby." So that was one legend. Speaker 1: Was he already on campus? Speaker 2: He was already on camp; he was the one who was teaching, yeah; he was already there. Now Professor Dansby never got a doctorate, but you would never have known it the way he thoroughly understood and knew mathematics. And so what he did was--the other legend was that if a wayfaring fool wandered into Professor Dansby's classroom and sat down, he would end up learning mathematics (laughter). He could take it and bring it alive and I remember in Professor Dansby's class, it was so electrifying that it was my custom to sit along the front, in one of the front seats, and I would sit up there and I would take copious notes; I would read my lesson in the book at home and do something, but I think--because I learned so much from the way he explained it and the way he broke it down, and that you could ask me the next day or later that afternoon because most of the classes were in the morning I took from him, if you were to ask me who was in that class, I could not have told you because I didn't look around, didn't check out anybody else or nothing; I was focused on learning what he was teaching. He was just that electrifying and just that impressive, and so I got turned on by math and chemistry and when I went to organic chemistry, I was, I was turned off from chemistry. Story_ID: 28122 Speaker 1: There was a lady who taught it who was what I call more of a technocrat than she was a scholar, but apparently she had had a difficult time when she was in school and college, and Morehouse [College] was an all-male college and so I don't think she particularly--she had had apparently some encounters with young men who thought they were smarter than young ladies, so she wanted to come there and show them what kind of a scholar she was. And we would be doing things in organic chemistry and she would say "Okay, time to turn off the Bunsen burner." I say "We're just into this." "I'm sorry, I gave you 30 minutes; you couldn't do it by then, tough." You know, and then you go and you get into the next part, she say "Okay, it's time to go to the--" I say "Wait a minute, we just into this." I was more of a scientist; I tried to do it right and look at it. I wasn't a time person in there, but she was--and she actually turned me off, and she turned me off and I didn't even do--it turned me off from doing my best work and I couldn't do my work in lab and she didn't have extra labs. And so I start focusing on mathematics, and after organic, I really didn't go back to chemistry. Speaker 2: That's a shame that some--that one person could come in and do that, I mean derail, you know, students. Now in terms of mathematics, you had only gone up to geometry in high school so you were introduced to trigonometry in-- Speaker 1: Trigonometry and calculus in college. Speaker 2: --in college, yeah. Okay, so--but you said your math instructor--did [Claude B.] Dansby teach those courses? Speaker 1: Harriet Walton taught one of them and a William Johnson taught one. William Johnson was--he was a fascinating teacher; he wasn't an electrifying teacher, he was a fascinating teacher. He was the first person that I ever ran into that I thought had a photographic memory; he was like [Henry C.] McBay, he could come there and write four, five or six chalk boards full of math with extremely precise details, and he never used a book or anything, and he'd say "Well, now on page 44 in your book, your author made a mistake; he should have put this number there and he didn't put it there so ignore that, and follow what I'm doing." But he was--it looked like anything he saw, he could internalize it and, and, and, and give it to you. So he fascinated me with his ability, and it's the first time I had seen people who could go through so many details and never had to go back or use books and notes. Speaker 2: So what did Johnson teach? Speaker 1: He taught in mathematics first; he taught me the trigonometry-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and then Harriet Walton taught me, I think, a course in calculus. She was a, a caring person and she wanted to make sure you understood, and I appreciated her for her caring and her making sure you want to understand it but it was not electrifying or enthusiastic. Story_ID: 28123 Speaker 1: Do you have any stories about Benjamin Mays? Speaker 2: Yes, I have. Benjamin Elijah Mays was perhaps to me one of the greatest, charismatic leaders that I had ever met. We had what we call chapel that we had to go through--student chapel, and I think at one time it was every day, but then I think it moved to Tuesday and Friday or Tuesday and Thursday. But he usually spoke in chapel at least once a week to the students, and he would challenge us about being our best in what we could do as Morehouse men, and why we didn't have to accept certain things. And he would bring there some of the top scholars and speakers you--he could get from anywhere, and being in Atlanta [Georgia] and with his status, he could attract a lot of good people, and I heard some great minds that came there to Morehouse [College] to speak to us in chapel. But in addition to that, when I stayed in Graves Hall as a freshman, Dr. Mays' house was about 50 feet, no more than 100, from Graves Hall, and every morning at 8:00, he would walk from his house down to the Administration Building and he had an assistant named Butler Henderson and he would confer with Mr. Henderson and he and Mr. Henderson would walk around campus, they would do things and appear, and when he was on the road traveling or raising money or doing things, Henderson was the eyes and ears for him of what was going on on campus. So he stayed on top of everything, and I went to--I got a chance to sit down and talk with him personally on two or three different occasions-- Speaker 1: This butler Henderson? Speaker 2: Henderson--no, no. Benjamin Mays. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he--he was a very wise man and he was also a minister, and he would speak on religious topics in chapel sometime on Sunday, as well as he would speak on a variety of topics in wisdom during the week in chapel. So he was a very inspirational person and he was also a close friend of Martin Luther King, Jr., one of Martin Luther King, Jr.'s advisors; he knew Martin Luther King, Jr. and his father when they were related to Morehouse. Story_ID: 28124 Speaker 1: And so I got a chance to relate to him and three interesting things happened in my life that I hope I'll always remember. One is that they had a special program that was started between Morehouse [College] and Spelman [College] one summer, and he asked me I think a summer after my senior year, he say "Houston, I think you'll be good to work on this program; I think it will do you good and will be--I think you could bring something to it." And I was surprised that he knew anything about me enough--had observed me enough that he would pick me out to work with that program. The second thing is I learned that Professor Dansby went to him and told him that if Johnny Houston--this was some years later--Johnny Houston or if Benjamin Martin finish Purdue University [Indiana]--when either one of 'em finish Purdue University with their doctorate, he should try to get them back there to Morehouse to serve as chairs of Math Department. I did not know Professor Dansby observed me that much or had that much thought about me as a personal mathematician that he would recommend that and he did that without my knowledge; I'd found out about it later. And the third thing happened was that when--after Dr. Mays wrote his book Born To Rebel, I told him I wanted--that I had read it and I wanted him to autograph for it, he invited me to come out to his house and I went out and spent an hour or so one afternoon in his house, in southwest Atlanta [Georgia], and he talked with me very openly and very gracious and joyfully and autographed my book, and was a very impressive person for me. But I loved to hear him speak, I loved to hear him debate, and I loved the way he led and handled groups. For example, one day he introduced the faculty to us--the beginning of one year; he could call every faculty member's name, tell you where they got their degrees from, when they came to Morehouse and how long they had been there; I was just impressed with how he paid attention to details about people that he valued. And the faculty members had--it was alleged that sometime he would meet them on the sidewalk, you know, maybe about the Spring of the year, and say "Professor Jones, we've been looking at the budget, etcetera, things don't look as great as we want to for next year, but we think we'll be able to give you a two percent raise; can you live with that?" And someone said "Yes, Dr. Mays, I can," and they shake hands and that's it. You never got a contract but he got his two percent raise; that's the way things--I mean he was a person who took interest in people who worked with him and who were around him, and you could go to the bank on his word. Story_ID: 28125 Speaker 1: Now was Dr. [Henry C.] McBay's wife Shirley, who was a mathematician, was she on campus or around Atlanta [Georgia]--Clark-Atlanta [University], Morehouse [College], do you know? Speaker 2: Well, it's very fascinating that she was. When I was at Morehouse, she was a little ahead of me and she had gone--she was first at the University of Georgia working on her doctorate; I'm pretty it was the University of Georgia, not Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology]--working on her doctorate in mathematics. And then while I was still at Morehouse, she came back to start teaching at Spelman [College]in mathematics, so she was around--I saw her as a graduate student and I saw her as a faculty member who came back to Spelman when I was around Morehouse. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was a mathematician, she--some of the young men at Morehouse went to Spelman and took some classes from her; I never took any classes from her. Story_ID: 28126 Speaker 1: So you graduated and you had a Bachelor's of Science, right? Speaker 2: I had a Bachelor's of Art-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --from Morehouse [College] in 1964. Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], okay. Were students involved in civil rights activities in Atlanta [Georgia] then when you were in school? Speaker 2: People were--students were involved in civil rights activity in Atlanta; it was the height of--what we like to call the height of that period, and three things in particular stand out for me about civil rights in Atlanta when I was in high school--in college, rather. One was I heard, for the first time in my life, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. give a speech in person at a church one block from Morehouse College. And things had gotten to be pretty rough, and when I say pretty rough, the city fathers were talking about the disruption was going on and people who were protesting were getting a little ill at ease, etcetera, and so he came in to try to calm us down and get us focused. Speaker 1: So this is what? About 1960-what? Speaker 2: This was about 1963. Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And I remember the, the--I remember how he developed that speech for us that night. He talked about the fact--he did a historical speech for us, and he said "You know if I didn't know my fate, or I didn't know how I was gonna--like any view that I was gonna even be born or get to the earth," he say "but I can imagine that the Almighty looked around and he talked about the era when the Greeks were here and the Romans were doing these kinda things, and the fascinating things was happening with the Greeks stake and the development of Roman Empire." He say, "No Martin, I don't want you to go yet; I don't want you in there." And he went up and came all the way up through history and he came up to our time; he said "They're down there struggling with getting civil rights together," and he say "I want you to go down there; I wanna use you as a spokesman; I want you to tell them that segregation is on its death bed and the only thing that's uncertain is how costly they're gonna make the funeral, and I want you to lead 'em on through to the water." I mean he excited us so much and got us so much together that we went back, I mean we were out there picketing, we were out there doing what we wanted to do, etcetera, and I didn't go to jail; some of my class mates went to jail and we would take them their lessons down and bring them back and help them. I couldn't afford to go to jail because I was struggling each year, even through my senior, just to get through college financially and I couldn't afford not to get a college education. The other incident with civil rights I remember was I was out picketing the Retcher's (ph.) Department Store; it was the largest department store in Atlanta; it's now a Macy's Department Store downtown in Atlanta. And I was out there in the picket line because they wouldn't let blacks try on clothes, they wouldn't allow us to eat in the cafeteria, they wouldn't let us do anything of privilege; if we wanted to come there, say "Okay, I want that," they'd buy--they'd sell it to us but we couldn't try on anything, we couldn't eat in the cafeteria, we couldn't get any real service. Speaker 1: And no black employees, except (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No black employees except janitors and menial work. And so two very fine, well-educated white women passed by the section of the picket line I was in there. She say--and they were talking to one another, and one of them told the other one, say "You know, I hope these nigras stay out here all day and night," say "because that way, they won't get an education, and we really won't ever have to worry about them." That struck a chord with me, and the chord it struck with me--I had already had the termination. I say "I'm gonna get my education and I'm gone come back here and challenge you and the rest of the establishment, as King wants us to do." And I already knew I couldn't afford to go to jail because we didn't have any money to do bail or anything, so I decided then to even be more determined to do a better job in college; in fact, my last year or so, I think I made all A's; I know one--I think my senior year, I think one semester, not the whole year. And I was determined to get out of Morehouse and to do well so I could have the kind of job to come back there and challenge that kind of a system because she also opened my eyes to that it wasn't just about right and wrong or black and white; it is also about green power--money. If you didn't have the resources, you still couldn't do anything. And so that was a very good eye-opener and a very good lesson to me in the civil rights movement. Story_ID: 28127 Speaker 1: Now when you graduated from Morehouse [College] in '64' [1964], did you have any special honors? Speaker 2: Yes, I graduated with honors; I had a B-plus average--I had a B average rather, when I graduated from Morehouse and I had done very well I math and science and they nominated me for a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship to go to college--I mean to go to graduate school, but I was given not a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship, but I was given a consolation thing where they offered me--they were gonna give me a summer fellowship, a Woodrow Wilson Summer Fellowship the summer after I left Morehouse, but I declined that. Benjamin Martin, this other gentleman I mentioned who was in math that Professor Dansby recommended to come back to Morehouse as Chair of the department, he accepted a Woodrow Wilson and went to--he was a year ahead of me, accepted a Woodrow Wilson and went to Columbia University, but I didn't get a full Woodrow Wilson so I didn't accept it. I was accepted into a couple or three graduate schools, but to be frank with you, after I left college, I--when I graduated, I was tired. When I say I was tired, many times, for at least three or four days--three or four of the years I was at college, I worked on an average of 60 hours a week either on campus or off--outside of the job, and I was still carrying 18 hours and I was basically using all of my waking hours studying or working, and I was really tired and I wasn't sure I wanted to go to graduate school when I left because I envisioned graduate school to be as hard or harder than college, and it was the finances that was the real issue that I had to make up those differences in finances. So I elected--I was also offered to come to Fayetteville, North Carolina--go to Fayetteville, North Carolina to teach at E.E. Smith High School, one of the top high schools in North Carolina, to teach math there. And so I say "Well that sounds like something exciting because when I got turned off from chemistry in my organic chemistry class, I took on a minor and secondary education so--and I did well on the NTE and I was prepared to teach math, and I did enough chemistry to be considered a minor in chemistry, but my official minor was secondary education and so I went ahead and got to--dealt with--went to teach for a year after college-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --my time did not--I didn't pledge in a fraternity or a sorority--I mean in a fraternity, or get involved in too many groups because I really had to work all the time, and study. Speaker 1: So you went to Fayetteville and taught school; was this high school math? Speaker 2: Taught high school math for a year. They allowed me to cheat the upper-level classes; the trigonometry and the algebra 2, etcetera-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and that was exciting for a year, but three things happened there that helped to turn my life around again. One was that the people--there were very few students who were really interested in math the way I thought they should have been interested, so it was like dragging the class along and teaching a few. The second thing was I was one of the male teachers and I was single, and they always wanted to put me on everything. The married people wanted to go home; if there was a bus duty or if there was a game going on, if there was an activity, say "Ask Houston to do it, we got to go to our family," you know, as though I didn't have to do anything, so I would be utility man that they usually called up; if there was a trip students had, "Ask Houston to do it, you know. They might not get back 'til 12:00 tonight, it's no problem with him; he doesn't have a family." And that kind of turned me off; I didn't want that, you know. I didn't mind doing some things, but they seemed to have--they wanted male chaperones, and to be involved in most things, especially if any young men were involved, it looked like I got picked for everything, and that turned me off a lot about high school teaching; the students not having the great interest at the level of math I wanted to, and their wanting to use me more of a utility person-- Story_ID: 28128 Speaker 1: So you went back to Atlanta University (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, I applied then to go back to Atlanta University to get me a Master's of Science Degree in Mathematics. Speaker 1: Now were the Atlanta Complex professors being shared in those days? Were you gonna have some of the same professors, or did you know the professors there at Atlanta U? Speaker 2: I had heard of some of the professors. The Atlanta University Complex they did do some sharing when I was there as a student, but mostly among the undergraduate schools. You had Morehouse College, Spelman College, Clark College, Morris Brown College; they basically shared the professors. Now occasionally, they would ask a professor from Atlanta University to teach an upper-level class because usually there would be one upper-level class that the other schools--nobody could teach, or they didn't have the manpower or person power to do it and they would ask the--but I really did not know the professors at Atlanta University; I had heard of some of them, and one of them I had heard of was called Lonnie Cross, Dr. Shabazz, Abdulalim Shabazz. Speaker 1: Okay, this is Dr. Abdulalim, A-L-I-M? Speaker 2: No, it's Abdul, A-B-D-U-L-A-L-I-M, one word, Abdulalim-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he had a middle initial A, and the last name was Shabazz, S-H-A-B, S-H-A, S-H-A-B-A-Z-Z, I believe. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, Shabazz. Speaker 1: Okay, he was apparently in the Nation of Islam, right? Speaker 2: Yes, he was--in fact, when I went to Atlanta University, he left to go to the Nation of Islam; he was the professor I had heard so much about that I wanted to go there and study under. Speaker 1: Now he was previously Lonnie Cross. Speaker 2: He was previously Lonnie Cross. Speaker 1: And it's interesting; now that you raised his name, I have heard of him before; he really had a reputation in the '70's [1970's] as a great teacher. Speaker 2: He had--he was a very powerful teacher in the '70's [1970's]. At Morehouse, I know 10 of us who were students of Professor Claude B. Dansby who went ahead and got doctorates in mathematics, and Professor Dansby never had a doctorate but 10 of us who were his students did go ahead and get a doctorate. Now Dr. Lonnie Cross or Dr. Abdulalim Shabazz--a number of students who sat under him at Atlanta University went ahead and got doctorates. He was a fan--a fascinating teacher; I've heard him give lectures since--later, but I never got a--he left Atlanta University as I was going into Atlanta University. Story_ID: 28129 Speaker 1: Well who was your mentor then at Atlanta U? Speaker 2: Well, my thesis advisor and the chair of the department when I went there was Lloyd K. Williams, L-L-O-Y-D K. Williams. And there was a Louis Dale, L-O-U-I-S D-A-L-E. Dr. Williams was a very fascinating mathematician but he was more--he didn't have a lot of inter-personal skills. If you were there to learn mathematics, he could explain to you all day or deal with it, but he wasn't anybody who would tell a student "Come on over here, let me try to find out what you're interests are, what you're trying to do." Once you finish with the mathematics, he left, he was ready to leave. But he knew his mathematics extremely well and he had a doctorate in it. Louis Dale was still working on his doctorate, but he was a fascinating teacher and he had more inter-personal skills, but I did my thesis under Dr. Williams because Dr. Williams taught me topology and topology, at that time, was one of the newer branches of mathematics. Now what is topology? Topology is where you are talking about--first of all, there are two kinds of topologies; the simplest kind of typology is what you call point-set topology, and point-set topology is where if you had a space like a sheet of paper, and you had points all--as you had little dots or little points on that space, then it talked about relationships of those points with one another, and that is it talks about how close the points were, how far away they were, how continuous they were, or how disconnected they were, and that was point-set topo--it explained the properties of those points, that set of points, and we call that point-set topology. And then there was what we call abstract topology and that is where the elements that you studied were not necessarily points but they could be any number of things, and I got fascinated with the elements being not points, but being functions themselves. And you might have seen where we said F parenthesis X equaled to something; that's a function; F of X is equal to 2X plus 3 to the third power. That's a function; and there's a topology that looked at functions as being the elements and I wanted to know how could functions be elements. I understood easily the point-set topology--the points; you could study how points were related. I say "How do you study how function are related to one another?" And so I got fascinated with it and decided to investigate it and wrote the thesis on "Topology for Function Spaces"; how these functions could relate to one another, and the point-set topology is like on a sheet of paper--what we call a plain. The function spaces could be either on a plain or in three dimensions like in space, and they could be running all over the place. And I wonder 'how do you find out how these things were related to one another and etcetera?' Speaker 1: So then is the goal of it to find the, I guess, mathematical relationship between these functions? (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Find the mathematical relationship between these functions and how they connected or intersected or didn't do so, or how they were--missed one another, or what points, how many times they had what we call concave points where they cross one another, or did--so it was find out everything you could of how they were related to one another. Speaker 1: You know, my mind just went to this and I don't know if this makes any sense to you or not, but when you read the statistics for a basketball game you know, they have like mathematical formulas to determine if a player--how effective a player is-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --his points per game, his shooting percentage, his three-point percentage, the number of rebounds he gets, number of assists he gets, number of steals he gets, number of blocks, or how many times he's blocked or how many times he turns the ball over. Now all these things are--is this similar to what you're talking about? The relationship of all those things (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It's similar in two points and from two perspectives; in a function, you have to find out everything--is this a continuous function? Is this a concave function? Is this an increase in function? Is this a decrease in function? And then you find out--once you find out all the properties of the function, then you wanna find out how many more functions, then they had the similar properties, or dissimilar properties, and also how many more functions involved in that that intersected with one another, or was a same or similar likeness, or a total dis-likeness. So yes, it helped you to find out a lot of properties about that function, and then you put them all in there, say "Okay, now I have these (unclear), how do you function themselves alike or dis-alike, based on their characteristic?" In other words, as you were talking about a basketball player, how is this fellow as a defensive player? Or how is he as a guard? Or how is he as a shooter or etcetera, his percentage? How does it compare to this one here? So it's a comparison issue. Story_ID: 28130 Speaker 1: Now when you finished your Master's degree, were you thinking about becoming a PhD? Was that in your mind? 'Well, now, it's time to be a PhD.' Speaker 2: Well when I finished my Master's degree, I related back to Dr. Henry C. McBay and to Professor Claude B. Dansby. I said "I really think I would love teaching mathematics" because they seem to have gotten such a joy out of it and McBay would tell us about new things that were happening, how he was learning math--learning chemistry as he taught chemistry; I mean he wrote papers, he did scholarly work, but he was an excellent teacher. In fact, he was an ecstatically fascinating teacher, and I say "Dog, they can learn and teach and do all this at the same time, and write papers? I would like to do something about that." So when I was in Atlanta University coming up to finish up on my Master's degree, I did what I call the shotgun approach as what my next step would be. I applied for jobs in industry; I applied for a couple or three jobs in the industry; I applied to a couple or three universities to go ahead and get my doctorate degree; I applied for a couple of colleges to go to teach, and they were happy to get people with Master's to come teach at the baccalaureate level--many colleges were at that time. And something else came into my vision that I didn't even know about at the time, and that is there was what they call a Merrill Study Travel Grant that they awarded two people each year at Atlanta University, and Merrill that was associated with the Merrill Lynch firm on Wall Street, he was on the Board of Trustees of Atlanta University and he awarded people so that they could study abroad and so that they could travel abroad and broaden their horizon. So I got interested, I say "This is intriguing," and one young man told me about it, say "You still might wanna look into that." And so I also ran into another young man who had traveled abroad one time; and so I say "Well I have nothing to lose," and I decided to apply for--I put in my application for the Merrill Study Travel Grant when I finished my Master's at Atlanta University. And so what I did was I say "Okay, Houston, you got to organize this thing," and what I did, I say "If all of 'em came through, my first choice would be to take the Merrill Study Travel Grant. My second choice would be to teach, and my third choice would be to go to graduate school, and my fourth choice would be to go to industry." So I gave good applications for all of these and when I studied for the--when I got my application for the--in for the Merrill Study Travel Grant, a young man told me, he say "If you prepare well, you're likely to get it." I say "What you mean?" He say "They wanna know somebody who is focused, who's serious and know what they're doin'." I say "Well, I'm glad." So he gave me some tips and point and so I decided to go out and find out. He say "They don't want anybody who just say 'I don't know what I'm gone do, but I'll find something.'" So I went and found a university in Europe that I would like to study, and I chose the University of Strasbourg in France, and the reason I chose that university is they had two of the top topologists in Europe at that university, and they used to have the topological conferences at Strasbourg. I say "That's where I wanna go to study for a year." Story_ID: 28131 Speaker 1: The second thing I did was I said "I have taken"--I had taken a year of French when I was in college at Morehouse [College] and so I said "I think I know enough French that I could learn some more French to be able to get through the math in Strasbourg" because math is so much of a universal language with symbols and numbers that, you know, I could learn the rest of the French I needed to do well there. And the other thing that fascinated me about Strasbourg was that Strasbourg was in Eastern France; it was right there--in fact, on the map, you could walk across the border to Germany and you could go right down to Switzerland; you could go right up to Belgian, you go right over to Italy; I say "This be a good place." Speaker 2: So is that the area they call the Alsace Lorraine [France]? Speaker 1: That's the Alsace Lorraine. In fact, I'm glad you mentioned that because when I got my French together, I didn't want people to know where I was from and so some of the people say--would say "Are you from Africa?" Because the French people from Africa, a lot of them came to Strasbourg. I would say "No." Some would ask me was I from Haiti; I said "No;" and I didn't want to tell 'em where I was from, and so they would go on, they would find out from talking, eventually, where I was from. But what they would do to people who came there and tried to learn French and use enunciations to sound like they did, they would switch and start speaking in Alsatian--the Alsatian language--and they would know then that you were not local (laughter), that you couldn't have been raised in that area if you couldn't speak their Alsatian language. It's the Alsace Lorraine; it had been under the rule of France, and under the rule of Germany, and under the rule of two other countries; the Alsace Lorraine, on the Rhine River, yes. Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly. I thought that was it. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's it. Speaker 2: Okay. So you got the Fellowship to go. Speaker 1: I got the Fellowship, but let me tell you--the interesting thing about that was that I prepared extremely well for the Fellowship; I had good grades, so my grades were standard to other applicants. And then when I applied, I did two other things; one was I boldly told them that I wanted to do it in the French language because I knew that one of the people on the community was a French professor and he loved French, and I also knew that--another one on there was very meticulous about questions and see how well had you analyzed or thought out things, and so I sat down and projected all the things I thought they might ask me and came up with good answers. And when I went in for the interview, they asked me approximately 15 questions and I had projected and studied the answers for 13 out of the 15 of those questions, and I could answer 'em just like that (SNAPPING FINGERS), and they either thought I was very smart or I was very well-prepared, I knew what I was talking about so much so that after the interview, one of the men did something--he saw me in the hall about ten minutes later; he shook my hand and he shouldn't have shaken it because they had several candidates and I say "Emm hmm;" I say "Either the person who get this Fellowship is going to be extremely talented and more organized and better than I am, or they've already decided who's gonna get it, otherwise I'll be one of the recipients." (Laughter)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I was fortunate to be one of the recipients. Speaker 2: Okay. So this is 1967, right? Speaker 1: That was 1966. Speaker 2: '66 [1966], okay. 1966. Story_ID: 28132 Speaker 1: And so you went to Alsace Lorraine [France] to the University of Strasbourg. So what was it like? This is your first time out of the country, right? Speaker 2: First time out of the country. Speaker 1: And this would be--let me just say at this point, this would be one of over 50 countries that you'll visit in your lifetime, right? Speaker 2: Yes-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --this would be one of the first of 50 countries--I would visit over 50 countries I would visit outside. But first of all, I was so happy for my grandmother, my mother, and my elementary teachers telling me to learn as much as I could. Before I went to Strasbourg, I found a relative--distant relative who allowed me to come to Washington, D.C. and spend a week and a-half with her, and what I did in Washington, D.C. was I went there and went to everything; I went to the White House, I went to the Congress, I went to all the monuments, I came to know Washington, D.C. I say "Because if I meet somebody abroad and they're gonna ask me about somethin', they're certainly gonna ask about the government in Washington, D.C., and so I learned everything I could about Washington, D.C. and the governments, and about statue--I went to the Statue of Liberty, I went to the top of the Empire State Building, I went to Twin Tow--I went everywhere so I could--well, well no, no, I'm fast-forward (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Towers weren't--yeah (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no, no; what happened was--no, no; what happened was I went to--then I, I took a week and went to New York; I went to New York for a week and learned everything about New York; I went to United Nations, I went to the Statue of Liberty, I went to all the, the tunnels, all of the great buildings, etcetera, so I could intelligently talk. And so-- Speaker 1: So this is--just for the record, this is [President] Lyndon Johnson's administration in 1966? Speaker 2: This is Lyndon Johnson administra--in fact, because I was in the Atlanta area when Lyndon Johnson came to Atlanta [Georgia] on a motorcade and I glanced him in a motorcade when he came to Atlanta. In fact, he was the first president I had been able to glance--him first--in a motorcade when he came to Atlanta. And it was also--yeah, so, so, yes that's what it was--but--so I got myself ready to go abroad, and I got me a little book where I studied French a little more; but the reason I was not afraid of France--afraid of French was because I had taken French from the chair of the department at Morehouse [College], and his name was Jones--Professor Lloyd Jones. And they used to call him Mr. Parle vous; he would make everybody speak French who was in his class and so--he would make everybody speak French in his class, and I took a semester of French from him. And then I took my second semester of French from Madam Berma (ph.). She was a French professor who was born and raised in France, and what she did was she forced all of us to speak in French in her class and so I figured I had had a little boost to be able to deal with people in France. And so I chose France and that end up being one of the greatest blessings in my life, to choose France and to be able to get that fellowship. Story_ID: 28133 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about what you learned about topology at University of Strasbourg [France]. Speaker 2: The University of Strasbourg, as I said, I had investigated before I went there, and it was a citadel for topology. And they had a professor there named Professor Ziesman (ph.), and they had a professor there named Professor Bernard (ph.). And so I went there to study under Professor Bernard and Professor Ziesman. Professor Bernard taught what we call Lee Group Theory, and Professor Cies--Ziesman taught algebraic topology. And so I had taken point-set topology, I knew about function spaces, and I say "Hey, you know he does algebraic topology and then there's a topology associated with another branch of mathematics we call group theory and it's called Lee groups. And so it's spelled L-I-E like Lie groups, but it's really Lee (ph.) groups. And so I say "This is a good thing to do." And I was extremely with topology over there because these men knew topology well; they were experts in topology, number one; number two is they taught it extremely well. And in teaching it, they did something that I found fascinating; we would take in a whole afternoon. We would go there maybe on a Wednesday to one of their classes; we'd go there about 1:00 and we'd stay in the class 'til five. And we'd take breaks and eat cheese and drink wine and eat bread, but we went there; and they would just teach topology, and they had--I found out a group called the Boubaki Society-- Speaker 1: How do you spell that? Speaker 2: B-O-U-B-A-K, Boubak, K-I, Boubaki Society. And what it was, it was a secret group that you had to be--of scholars, you had to be elected to; and all the topologists--each year they would elect a--so many topologists to be a part of that and they would write the latest graduate work in topology; not under their names like books we did in America--individually, but as a group; it was the Boubaki Society would write that. And so Ziesman and Bernard, I'm sure, were part of that Boubaki Society, so I got exposed to some of the best topologists in the world. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, I even still have notes I've taken from those guys to this day. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did you write anything that was published during this period of time, or was that part of it? Speaker 2: No, no; that, that was not part of it. Mine was simply was to learn. In fact, what I did was--because I didn't know how things were gonna do and, just like anything else, I wasn't sure. The Study Travel Grant guaranteed me support for one year so I registered as what they call it auditors in their courses because I didn't want to get involved in a doctoral program, and I didn't know how I was gonna pay for it (laughter) out of this country, so I end up getting what they call Libre Auditeur de Topologie [sic]. I got an order to--I got a certificate saying that I had taken topology under them, but it wasn't a degree or any grade. Speaker 1: Okay. But it was something that would certainly probably impress another topologist (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, it impressed--in fact, it opened a lot of doors for me with topologists, and people just didn't know that I knew them, and knew their work, and could talk about what they did, and having been a student in their class. Story_ID: 28134 Speaker 1: So you were there for a year. Now did you get home-sick? Speaker 2: No, no, no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, no, no. Before I left, I sat down and meticulously decided under what conditions would I come back to United States before the end of that year, and I basically narrow it down to three things. If my mother [Catherine Vinson] were to pass, I felt obligated to her to come back, to show her my last respects; or if one of my brothers or sisters in my nuclear who also helped to raise me I would come back; and--but--and if there was some kinda disaster or something where I wouldn't--could make a tremendous difference, I would come back; but those were the only three reasons I would come back. And so what I did when I got over there again, I carried out my mother's and my early mentors'--I wanted to learn everything I could. And so I first start going--I went to Germany to get--to their libraries and get scholarly work, I would go down to Switzerland, I would go to Belgian; I could do these things during the week or on the weekend; they had an excellent train system. And so every time I had a break or an opportunity, I traveled while I was over there, and I traveled through--all over France, I traveled Italy, I traveled in Spain, I traveled in Andorra, I traveled, I even went to Great Britain; I went to England, to Ireland, I went up to Holland; I actually even went to--up in the Scandinavian countries; I went to--so I--in fact, I even went down to Austria; I went there one time just to go to the cemetery and this chapel where all these musicians were--Beethoven and all that been buried there, and went to the Opera House where they were in and I went and visit the great cathedrals of Europe; I went to the--Notre Dame, you know; I went to see the Vatican, St. Peters; I went to cathedrals in Germany; my issue was to learn everything I can. I say "I might not ever get back to Europe, but I'm gone learn everything I can while I'm over here" (laughter). Speaker 1: Did you go to Greece at all? Speaker 2: I didn't go to Greece-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that was one country I did not go to. I did not--they--in the Rome [Italy], they had the Coliseum; I saw the Old Coliseum there in Italy, but I didn't go to Greece to see the Parthenon--I didn't. I wasn't overly gravitated to go to Greece at the time; I was trying to go to those places where the train system was easy for me to get to, and I was trying to stretch my money (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well you sound like you were really busy. Speaker 2: Oh yes, I went everywhere. Story_ID: 28135 Speaker 1: Okay. So you came back in 1967, now you taught at Stillman College [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], right? Speaker 2: Taught at Stillman College. Speaker 1: Did you arrange that before you got back? Speaker 2: Yes. As I was telling you earlier, I had made a hierarchy of what I would do. Stillman--several people offered me a job but Stillman begged me to take a job there. And so I told the dean at Stillman that I would accept the job at Stillman when I got back from Europe. So I did tentatively sign a contract before I left for Europe that I would come back and teach at Spelman. There was a dean that had a lot of respect for B. B. Hardy; his son ended up being a mathematician that I knew. So, he asked me, he said we really need some mathematicians at Stillman and you could do wonders for us. And there was a fellow over there named (unclear) Paul, I wanted to go over there and work with. And also in--Stillman was in Tuscaloosa, Alabama where the University of Alabama was and I saw that as a thing I said, hey you know I might go to the University of Alabama and get a doctorate too while I'm there. Speaker 1: The University of Alabama at that point was integrated right? Speaker 2: At that point--no, what happened is, you had had the George Wallace and (unclear) thing. It had begun to integrate. They were not-they were more open at the graduate level, because first of all you have not had that many people qualified or interested in going in there, at the graduate level. And number two is, socialization did not mean anything at the graduate level. Everybody came home and you did not know where they went afterwards. So, they did not mind. So, I went over for some seminars and things and had no problem. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So Stillman College-so you were there for two years? Speaker 2: For two years. Speaker 1: Alright, and what did you teach? Speaker 2: I taught practically every course of mathematics that they offered. I taught mathematics--Dr. Paul (ph.; unclear) went to Stillman--went to University of Alabama four times during my second year there. He was the seasoned mathematician they had, that been there for several years. He had been working taking a few classes. He wanted to go for a year to finish up a class and to work on his doctorate--I mean write his dissertation. So I taught every class practically that was open; I went through and taught it. Because some classes we taught alternately anyway. It wasn't what the same classes taught every semester. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I taught practically every class at the undergraduate level at Stillman. Story_ID: 28136 Speaker 1: But the most fascinating thing that happened to me at Stillman [College, Tuscaloosa, Alabama] while I was there; IBM [International Business Machines] offered some college teachers, particularly in minority schools, to come and learn how to use the computer and learn how to do Fortran [computer programming language]. And I was one of those they selected to do that. And in one weeks' time, they taught me how to program on the computer in Fortran, and I got so excited about that it just changed my whole nature of my career. In fact, the local high school asked me--they asked me to come speak to them to inspire their students and the topic of my talk was 'The Computer: The Future Custodian of Human Affairs'. I saw that machine as so fascinating, it was going to take over everything and it has taken over far beyond I ever thought. I never thought it would be running all these machines and everything else. I thought it was just going to be controlling it but everything now just about has a chip in it; it's being run by a computer. The computer, the future custodian of human affairs; I saw it as all this record keeping, all this stuff we were doing by hand, the computer is going to take over. Speaker 2: So you learn Fortran in a week; one weeks' time. Speaker 1: In one weeks' time. Speaker 2: So this is--the nature of the computer in those days is a large apparatus, right? Speaker 1: Yes. They were large apparatus, yeah; there were no such things as a lap top. You couldn't take this thing home. Speaker 2: Okay. And you programmed them by feeding them these--? Speaker 1: I had cards. Speaker 2: IBM punch cards. Speaker 1: Punch cards, I fed them with punch cards. You drop your punch cards off and then they run 'em through and gave you your print-out. Speaker 2: Could anybody learn how to--did you have to be a mathematician to learn how to, I mean to program the computer? Speaker 1: Most of the programmers were either people who went into that field or were mathematicians, physicists, or chemists. They were people in science who paid attention to details. That was the most critical thing about programming; if you had a comma off or period off, the program wouldn't run. You have to pay attention to details. There were logical errors you could make, but most people have what we call the--not the logical error but the schematic errors where they--how they wrote it up was an error. You put a comma where a period belonged, for example, this is where you hear about now, upper case and lower case. If you put an upper case character where you are supposed to have a lower case character or you put certain thing--your program would not work. So people who paid attention to details on a regular basis and it become a knack to them, learn how to program look like the quickest and the best. I had come from mathematics and chemistry to learn to pay extreme attention to details. Speaker 2: Okay. Alright, so this is your first exposure to computers? Speaker 1: First exposure to computers. Speaker 2: At 1967, '68 [1968]? Speaker 1: No, no, '68 [1968]. Latter part of '68 [1968], early '69 [1969]; my first exposure to computers. Story_ID: 28137 Speaker 1: Alright. This is the year that Dr. [Martin Luther] King was assassinated, right? Speaker 2: I was at Stillman College [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] when Dr. King was assassinated, in fact, I was teaching class, I had an evening class that evening on April 4th, when Dr. King was assassinated. And after my class they told me about it. And, I drove to Atlanta [Gerogia] that weekend after his assassination and went to see his body lying in state on Spelman College [Atlanta]. I stood four hours in that line just to pass by his body, in Sisters Chapel at Spelman, to give him respect. And it was kind of a special feeling because all the way from Tuscaloosa, Alabama to Atlanta on I-20 [interstate] people had their lights on, especially African Americans honoring King and it was a very fascinating thing. And it fascinated me so that I went back to his funeral that they had and Benjamin Mays [minister, educator, scholar, social activist and the president of Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia from 1940 to 1967] gave the eulogy at his funeral that they had out there in the quadrangle on Morehouse Atlanta University campus. And they had the march down there. The other third thing that I didn't emphasize when I was telling you that I had encountered King in Atlanta; I actually went to Ebenezer Church and heard him preach a sermon there with his father and he did an excellent job. The thing I remember his father telling him when he got to using very scholarly words his father would say, "Break it down son, break it down for them." And he would go through explaining. I had a chance to hear him in person also in Atlanta, preach at his church, Martin Luther King, Jr. Story_ID: 28138 Speaker 1: Tell us about the Summer Institute for College Teachers of Math at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you two things quickly. One is, in the summer of '68 [1968]--I had a friend named Robert Bronson (ph.) who was up at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana] to get his masters [degree]. And I said, Purdue might be one of the places I might want to consider for a doctorate. So I applied to come up there during the summer of '68 [1968] and I was given a scholarship by the United Negro College Fund to go up there and take two courses during the summer of '68 [1968]. And I was impressed with it and so I applied in 1969 to go back up there to enter a doctoral program after that summer of '68 [1968] and they accepted me to come back up there for a doctoral program. And again, the United Negro College Fund gave me, initially, a fellowship to do my first year of studies at Purdue. So I went there, but in the year '69 [1969] on my way to Purdue during the '69 [1969] academic year they had an institute for college students and they ask me did I want to come to the University of Georgia for that institute, and I told them yes. And so I went to the University of Georgia for college students--college faculty member, rather, for that institute and it was fascinating because I was the only African American in the class and I needed to have gotten that field because Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] was an African American institution where I got my masters. I was going now to work on a doctorate where it's going to be practically all white or all white. And, so I wanted to get that and the University of Georgia permitted it for me and they also gave me a full (unclear) as to what I could expect at Purdue, because nobody was studying with me as a group and everybody watched everything I did. And so, they really were trying to see whether or not I fit--whether I was qualified to do graduate work in mathematics. And one of the most fascinating things I was able to do at the University of Georgia, one day we were sitting in class and the professor said, "Who worked the problems last night?" And people said I worked this and I worked that. And he said, "Who worked problem number--?" I don't know which one, problem number seven. Nobody said--. "Nobody worked seven?" And I said, "Well, I attempted. Let me show you what I did." And I went to the board and did it. I had done it right. And then you went from being, 'I don't know who you are, a nobody', to now you are a super person because you had did something that nobody else had done. And that was an interesting characteristic that I ran into at Purdue and also a thing that you were either one dichotomy or another one. They had to size you up to see whether or not you belonged with them or you know, to decide whether or not you were worthy to be in that arena. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 28139 Speaker 1: So now were there any other African American graduate students at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] when you got there? Speaker 2: There was one African American student in the graduate school when I got there; his name was William Johnson. Unfortunately, William Johnson did not finish school. But what also attracted me to Purdue was there had been two other Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] students who had gone to Purdue and they were the only two that I knew who had gotten doctorates from Purdue. One of them was the young man that I mentioned earlier from Morehouse whose name was Benjamin Martin who was a year ahead of me. He had gone to Purdue and got a doctorate in mathematics and so I said at least they have experience having African Americans there and then there was--one other young man named Herman, I think, Riggs (ph.) who had gone there. Herman had gotten his doctorate from Purdue and so I say hey, you know, at least they permit--because we had to watch out for schools. Many schools would not award doctorates to African Americans at that time, don't care how talented they were. So Purdue attracted me for that reason too, that it had awarded two doctorates before I got there, to African Americans. Speaker 1: Purdue is in West Lafayette, Indiana. Speaker 2: West Lafayette, Indiana on the Wabash River. 125 miles--no no it's eighty miles from Chicago [Illinois]--no 125 miles from Chicago, I-65, we could go to Chicago. Speaker 1: In between Indianapolis and--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: It was between what we call Chitown, Chicago, and nap town, Indianapolis. If you want to have an outlet where you find culture, what people did, you would go to Chitown for a weekend or nap town. But you didn't get it in Indiana. Speaker 1: West Lafayette. Speaker 2: Not West Lafayette. Story_ID: 28140 Speaker 1: You were married in 1969, right? Speaker 2: Yes. In fact, I did a lot of things in '69 [1969]. I went to the institute [Summer Institute for College Teachers of Math] at University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], I got married in 1969, I started a doctoral program in 1969 [at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana], and I was one of the group to help to establish the National Association of Mathematicians [NAM] in '69; '69 was a big year for me. Speaker 1: Now how did you meet your wife; had you known her--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: My wife--I was very fortunate, my wife went to high school with me. And she was a young lady I took interest in and started talking to her when she was--I was-when she was a freshman and I was a junior in high school. I started talking to her and then so I talked to her when she was a sophomore and I was a senior. And then--so, when I would go back home I would go by and see her so we just kept dating but we started out in high school together. And we actually dated for ten years before we got married. Speaker 1: That's a long time. Speaker 2: That's a long time, but her mother was very wise, I think. She was two years behind me in school and her mother told her she could not go to Atlanta [Georgia] to school where I was. So she went to Talladega College in Talladega, Alabama, to get her undergraduate degree. And I was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta] so we would only see one another on holidays a certain time. So we were not around to see one another all the time. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Virginia Lawrence, like the state. Speaker 1: L-A-W--? Speaker 2: L-A-W-R-E-N-C-E Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Story_ID: 28141 Speaker 1: And then the other incident is the establishment of the National Association of Mathematicians [NAM; 1969]. Now in our notes it says that you and Scott Williams were the founders, is that true or were there more people involved? Speaker 2: There were seventeen of us. Scott Williams was one of them, but there were seventeen of us. In fact, what happened was, we went to what they called the Annual Joint Mathematical Meeting in New Orleans [Louisiana], in January in 1969 and we had been asking the--they would let us sit in the back in these meetings but we could not be up front and we could not really participate. And we had sent notes and asked certain of the white gentlemen who were amicable to talk with us especially outside of the meeting to do certain things and they kept telling us we are not interested in that or we are not interested in being involved with that or that is not important to us. So we said we can't participate, we can't do this, and this had a group two years ago had thought about forming. So we said let's get together and form our own association. Speaker 1: Now you say they wouldn't let you participate, I mean was that like a rule up front or was it just their behavior; they just wouldn't let you (unclear). Speaker 2: It was both. It was more behavior, that is, they did not--there was nobody on any of their committees or any of their officers who were from HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]. So this is the way they did it. They didn't say African Americans couldn't participate, but you are not from [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], you are not from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you're not from this. And they would do a lot of things, well you are not a research institution, you don't have any institution that offers graduate degrees. There were some called the Mathematical Association of America [MAA] and they said they deal with teaching people but the Mathematical Association of America wouldn't let us have any real activity in it either even though they dealt more with teaching undergraduate school. So we said hey we might as well get together since we're the only people we could really talk to ourselves anyway we might as well get together and form an association; and so we decided to do that. And in 1969 in New Orleans, and we chose the name National Association of Mathematicians and over the next three or four years we developed into a full-fledged mathematical organization and society and practically every African American mathematician was involved with it, directly or indirectly. Story_ID: 28142 Speaker 1: Now, what were your objectives [National Association of Mathematicians (NAM)], primarily? Speaker 2: The objectives were three. One was to promote excellence in mathematics. We had been fortunate, those of us who were doing math that we wanted other blacks--for a lot of people especially black community, they saw mathematics as strange, you know, you had to be a genius or something. We wanted more people to get interested; to like and to learn and do mathematics. So we wanted to promote excellence in mathematics, number one. Number two is, we wanted the persons who had gotten degrees, graduate degrees in mathematics, to have a place to come together to discuss issues about teaching mathematics and about research. And number three was, we wanted to be able to come together and invite people to come in and talk to us; people from industry or anywhere else; so we could continue to grow professionally like other--like they were doing in the society, the American Mathematical Society, and the MAA. So we wanted that continuous nurture and continuous growth in mathematics that they were getting after they had gotten their degrees that they barred us from participating and being involved with. They wouldn't invite us to speak, they wouldn't let us speak, we weren't on their committees; we couldn't influence anything. Speaker 1: You're like an adjunct at the meeting--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: No, no, no, we are like a balcony participant. We weren't even an adjunct. You know, you could sit in the balcony seat. When I was in Sandersville, Georgia, I could sit in the balcony to see the movie but we couldn't go downstairs where the white people were. As long as we sat in the balcony and didn't make noise and behaved ourselves, they would let us come up there to see the movie, but we couldn't go down in the main part of the theater to see it and that's what that reminded me of. Speaker 1: The problem with a professional association is that you need that interaction and that focus of attention, you know between--. So when you invited a speaker to NAM, then they knew who they were dealing with and they had to interact with you, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. That's makes a lot of sense. Speaker 2: And it was also a long running thing, for example, when David Blackwell first got his degree in mathematics, Albert Cox got his degree--the earlier people they couldn't even--these white universities wouldn't even hire these people. They had to go to black institutions. The white universities wouldn't hire them. So they were cut off from being--working with other peers who had done research in their areas and they couldn't hired there so they were also cut off from that interaction. Speaker 1: Even though they earned their degrees--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Even though they had gotten their degrees from these Northern or Western schools, they were cut off, they wouldn't hire them, they would not hire them. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is a first time that black mathematicians actually all came together and congregated and could meet each other and work out issues that were common for everybody. Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. It was one of the most fantastic things--it reminded me of the segregated Sandersville and the segregated Macon [Georgia]. There were no blacks that you didn't know where they were or couldn't reach because they pushed us all in the same category. There were not blacks that could mix with whites or mix with middle class or the upper class. Blacks had to mix with blacks. So we all got together. Hey, we got to where we were by our tenacity and working among ourselves because even when I was at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana], white students would not study with me, I had to study on my own. They wouldn't let me into their study groups. When I was at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], they wouldn't let me into that study group. So we had to do things through brute force. A lot of times they fed off one another and we couldn't do that because when I was at the University of Georgia, I was the only one, Bill Johnson didn't stay at Purdue, I was the only one in that class. Yeah. Speaker 1: Now did you continue to go to the meetings of the American Mathematical Society? Speaker 2: Well, what we do is--they had a joint meeting and what we would do--we would go to that meeting, we would go at the place where they met but we would get rooms ourselves and meet. We did that for about three or four years and then in the '70s [1970s] things started opening up a little more. And so the joint meetings then started saying okay, we will set aside a room for you to meet in and then we start having--we would have our research speakers, we would have our panel, we would have--now mind you they were careful, they would give us a have half day or day where we would do that. When they were having their low-end activities, and they would come and some of the whites would come by when they would get curious; they would drop by to see what was going on, what we were doing. In fact, when they got to the '80s [1980s] we were doing things so well that our annual banquet in the latter part of the '80s [1980s] was larger than their banquet, than the white banquet. And when we had a speaker, we filled up an auditorium and not just a little room on the side. Speaker 1: Now you learned--I guess in those days--I mean did you---cause you've been--you and Scott Williams from the website, 'Mathematicians of the African Diaspora', you through your books about the history of blacks in mathematics. Did you first start to learn that history at these meetings? Speaker 2: Well what we did do--yes, we started learning the history and started writing it. Most of those guys in that book I met personally and we interacted and it was through NAM that we started writing about it. Because we would ask the white, we said this is an excellent topology (unclear) and they would say, it's alright. They wouldn't invite them to do anything so we started doing it ourselves, we started doing it ourselves. In fact, it was also because of NAM that Howard University--a lot of these mathematicians gathered at Howard University and say you know these people are still shuckin' and jivin', so we--the first doctoral program in mathematics was forned at Howard University because we had gotten these blacks together and learned there were certain institutions that were still not awarding degrees to blacks and if blacks weren't careful about what institution they pick and choose, they go up there with all kind of talent and they would be beaten down, to the extent that they would think that either they couldn't do it or wouldn't be permitted to do it. One of my coworkers at Savannah State University [Savannah, Georgia], when I worked there a year, he went to California to get his degree and his major professor--he would meet with the white students at this living room lunch time and he would give J.B. Clemens (ph.) fifteen to twenty minutes on his back step to come back there to talk with him about math. Story_ID: 28143 Speaker 1: Did you have good teachers there at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana]? Does anybody stand out? Speaker 2: Yes. I had two professors to stand out--three professors to stand out at Purdue [University]. One was my dissertation adviser, Eugene Schenkman. Eugene Schenkman was an algebraist, a group theorist, and I did not go there knowing anything about him or even thinking about him but he became my favorite person. And let me tell you why--I went there at--I was following up from my topology in France, so I went to Purdue to do algebraic topology or topological algebra and Dr. Zane (ph.) at Purdue told me, Houston, he said, "You don't want to do that now." "Why don't I want to do it Dr. Zane?" He said this field is so crowded now, people are getting into it, he said, even professors are finding it difficult to write papers because every little problem out there, a manageable problem--somebody has already jumped on it. He said I got two students under me now who's been here six years and they are women. One of them took off and had a baby because we can't find anything that they can get involved with. So I would advise you not to try to do your work in algebraic topology or topological algebra. I appreciate Dr. Zane for that because he didn't have to be candid like that, he didn't have to help me. And so I went ahead and took algebraic topology anyhow. And there was a guy there who taught William Johnson, this other black guy that I told you about was there, and he--his wife was a student, she had not gotten her doctorate, he had his doctorate for a few years. He was about maybe ten years older than she was. And he seemed to have had some problems, personal problems I think, or perspective problems. But anyway, he had been there and he was an okay teacher, he wasn't an inspiring teacher or anything. He took off leave of absence while Bill Johnson and I were there and there was stuff as it came to me--as information came to me and it was too sensitive for me to talk to either one of them about it. The stuff that Johnson was working on or trying to show them and Johnson was almost--when he took leave he went ahead and perfected it and published it and Johnson just left. I felt too close to Johnson to ask him whether that was the truth and this guy told me when I was taking my prelims that if I didn't come over there and do what he told me, he knew that--I should know that he could keep me from getting my doctorate from Purdue. So I was afraid to deal with him. Speaker 1: What is the professor's name? I think you told me but I--. Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, I tried to--his name--blotted out of mind but I will give it to you in just a few minutes. But, and so when I got into algebraic topology--algebraist topology has--the word--algebra has a lot to do with it and I had taken lead groups from Professor Ziesman (ph.) in France and then another type of group called homological group that had come out from topology, homological group. And then the homological group--they are very close to group theory and so Professor Schenkman was just a pure group theorist in algebra and (unclear)--I took group theory from him because I needed to know more about groups if I'm doing homological groups and lead groups, I need more. When I got under Schenkman, he was very laid back but very interesting and inspirational. If he saw that you were trying to do something, he would help you. And so, I took a seminar where graduate students and professors would teach, I mean would give presentations at Purdue and Schenkman was in that seminar and again I had known all my life I was always watched, people watch you, and they judge you, so I didn't dare go before that seminar ill-prepared. I was well prepared and I presented it well, and like I knew what I was talking about, I was a professional and I knew it, and Schenkman was impressed with that and so he would talk to me occasionally. And while we were doing that seminar, most of the presenters in that seminar were faculty members; I think only one or two of us were graduate students who presented. And so, I asked Schenkman, after I passed my qualifying exam, that if I went into group theory algebra, would he be my graduate adviser. He said, "Yes, I would be happy to." I was impressed with that, and the second thing was he took me to a conference, he didn't have any money and I didn't have any money but he took me to a conference and introduced me to some group theorists and other people there, some very powerful people. And he--in the early 70s [1970s] he got a room with double beds so I would have someplace to sleep at the conference. And that to me showed me he was genuine--also when we got back to campus he would have occasionally, once every year--every other year he would invite people out to his house, he was on a farm. He would always invite me--he would invite the students and he was a genuine person and that made me relax with him. Story_ID: 28144 Speaker 1: But he [Eugene Schenkman, Houston's doctoral thesis advisor at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana] told me something up front, he said, "I'm not a person who gives people problems." He said "You are going to have to find your own dissertation topic and I'll help you with it if I know something about it, if not I'll try to get you the help you need." And so I struggled with that, finding what would be my topic for my dissertation. And to show you how what he told me was true and what it meant was--he had a student under him who had been under him six years before I got there and this student was a Phi Beta Kappa [academic honor society] from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]. And this student needed guidance, he was not a person who would push and I say wait a minute, I can't be like this student, I can't stay here this long trying to find the topic (unclear). So I gave him two or three topics, I'm not sure about those he sent them out to some colleagues (unclear). And so the third year I was at Purdue he said, "Houston I'm going to take a leave and I want you to see can you find something and be ready by the time I get back, I'm going to take a one year leave." He went to Santiago, Chile. He said you can write me, talk to me or send me things whenever you want to, but you have taken all your courses and you should be ready when I get back to offer something. So I would go to a lot of seminars where mathematicians and everything would come in. And one day I heard this guy give a seminar from the University of Illinois in Urbana [Urbana-Champagne, Illinois] and so I asked him could I come over and talk to him about it. Because I had an idea that I thought I could talk about a topic. And he entertained me on that idea and we start--I was looking at finite groups and he told me about locally finite groups. And I said wait a minute, and so I took something I had seen in finite groups and moved it up to the infinite set, finite groups are where you can count them and they exhaust if you run out the number. In locally finite, you have an infinite number but they are clustered in groups of finite and so if you know how to manipulate them right, you can use a lot of the properties in the finite group where you have a--you can exhaust them to be able to couple these things to be able to come up with these results. And so, that's what I did and I started working on that when Professor Schenkman was away and when he got back I was at a point where I could go ahead and finish. That was the thing that saved me. The student that had been under him for six years, he stayed under him another two years before he got his degree. In fact, the university threatened to put him out but he went ahead and he was able to find something and he got his degree. So we both were fortunate that we found something and we got our degrees. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 28145 Speaker 1: Can you tell us--I guess like what did you find new in your research? Speaker 2: What I found new was that the--if you would look at that topic I have there, on my dissertation, I think I gave it to you. Speaker 1: Yeah it's 'On the Theory of Fitting Classes in Certain Locally Finite Groups'. Speaker 2: Right. There is a thing in group theory called class and then there was a professor named Professor Fenton (ph.) who worked out the properties for these classes and classes are nothing more than organized aspects of the group. And Professor Fenton had worked on that and came up with some awfully nice properties for these things in finite groups. And people had raised a question, could this thing--is there any similarity to this in infinite groups, and it was left open. And I went to Illinois to talk to this person and said, I'm trying to find out how do I attack to investigate this problem for infinite groups. He said, you don't jump out there in infinite groups altogether. He said let me introduce you to a class of infinite groups that if it does exist you will be able to find it here. He said these are locally finite groups. They are infinite but you deal with them in clusters, you don't deal with the whole infinite things at one time, they're in clusters. And so based on what he shared with me about that, I was able to take the work of Professor Fenton and extend it to infinite groups. He had done it for these finite groups that could be exhausted and I had taken it to another level in infinite groups; by dealing with locally finite groups rather than just the broad infinite groups in general. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28146 Speaker 1: Now what is the impact of that [Houston's doctoral thesis, titled, 'On the Theory of Fitting Classes in Certain Locally Finite Groups', at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana] on the field of mathematics? Speaker 2: Well the impact is this much. To get a research degree, a doctoral, a Ph.D. degree or mathematical research degree, we call it, what you have to do you have to do something that nobody has ever done before. And you have to come up with what they call original research. What the impact of that was, much of mathematics is that if somebody is able to come up with a way to investigate one aspect of mathematics; the question automatically come, how do you investigate something similar in another aspect of mathematics. It goes back to I tell you (unclear) we can do the stuff in point (unclear) topology. What happens when it is not point but your functions, how do you investigate that, you take it to another level. What people have not done it before and what it does is, it tells people how you can take existing knowledge add new concepts and new approaches to come up with similar results in another level mathematics. So it was another example of how people could take something that was in a very fixed and very visible space of mathematics and take it up in a more abstract space of infinite and get people to see that it worked as well. And these are the examples that professors show students is that they are good dissertation kind of topics because you are doing something new at a different level, you are doing something that somebody was able to do at one level; you are able to do at another level. It's like somebody being able to say okay I have learned how to fly in a one engine Cessna [aircraft company] plane, airplane, now to fly a jet is another difference. A jet with jet engine, you don't do it the way you do a Cessna. Can you learn how to fly the jet now? So it's moving from that basic level to the much higher level which is much more complicated. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how would your findings be used? I guess, by or have they been used by other scientist or other phases of science? Speaker 2: What they did--what the other scientist did there was something you called categories and functors. Categories is like you spell categories, C-A-T-E-G-O-R-I-E-S. Categories and functors. Functors is a relationship that you make between one area of mathematics which is a category, how do you take that area and be able to take things you know about that and transfer and investigate other areas of mathematics. So what my research did was it gave them another solid example of how they could take one category of mathematics and investigate another one. And so it helped other people to say okay, maybe we can now take this category here and use similar techniques as Houston to investigate another category. So that's what it did, it allowed one to know, for example, when one talks about [Amelia] Earhart who flew across the Atlantic, the first transatlantic so okay people can fly from New York to Chicago [Illinois], we've got that done but can people have enough gas to go across the Atlantic? Or how do you gas up an engine to be able to go up to a higher level, that's a different story than being able to put a tankful of gas that you know can get you to Chicago. It allowed you to, what I call, do some innovation and being able to do some creativity to take what you know and go the next level and be able to deal with the challenge and the problem there. And so that what--it gave them another solid example as to how you can take something from one category of mathematics to another category and solve similar problems. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 28147 Speaker 1: Has there been like a practical use for this so far? Speaker 2: There is not a practical use for it. When you talk about function spaces in topology, when you talk about fitting classes in mathematics, this is what people call abstract or pure mathematics. It's not what we call applied mathematics that you can go out and do something with it in the real world. Some people say well then why do it? Because the pure mathematics is the one that permit you to learn the principals and the properties, and once you know the principles and properties well enough and how they do, then usually down the road somewhere, it hits you hey, since we know this about it we can do it. Let me give you a quick example. There was a man named George Boole [English mathematician], a mathematician. He did what we called Boolean algebra; he was a pure mathematician. And he did algebra on just two different points like zero and one; he worked out algebra on it. He worked out how you could do addition, subtraction, multiplication, division with just two points, Boolean algebra with just two elements. And guess what happened, if somebody asked him what (unclear), he would say I am a mathematician, it's pure. I worked out all the rules; I know how all this stuff works. Pure mathematics is for the intellectual who wants to open his mind to imagination. Guess what happened twenty years later after he had finished his work, the whole computer is designed on Boolean algebra, yes and no, on and off. Just two options and they knew all this stuff that could happen because of his work that he could do it. They didn't have to explore that. So pure mathematics is the forerunner of all applied mathematics and sometimes it takes a decade, years, or even centuries before some of it find any use for application, and some never at all, and some of them--hey it's abstract. Story_ID: 28148 Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, now you earned your Ph.D. [degree in mathematics] in 1974 [from Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana]. Speaker 2: 1974. Speaker 1: Now was there any drama in terms of defending your dissertation or anything? Speaker 2: There was no drama. The only drama came was with my family. It went smoothly with my professors; [Eugene] Schenkman [Houston's doctoral thesis advisor] read and approved it, about five people on my committee approved it, one person had some questions because he didn't understand the fitting classes that well but there was no drama, he said, fine we will go with it. My family thought that--they say I had completed all my requirements for the doctorate degree, I was officially Dr. Houston but it hadn't been finalized in all the paperwork. So, they wanted to come see me get hooded as Dr. Houston and there were about thirty-five or forty family members who wanted to come see me. Of course, my mother [Catherine Houston Vinson] and my sister and brother, I understood, but all these other people and my wife's [Virginia Lawrence] family members. I said--and they had the false belief that because I had qualified for the degree that I had the resources and benefits--all of them expected me to pay for them to come up there and put them up, to wine and dine them, etcetera. And I ended up not going to graduation. I told them that it was not feasible for me to go to graduation and that they would send me my degree in absentia. Because all of them wanted to come and cheer me on but also they thought I had the money associated with the degree and I didn't have it, and they didn't have it to pay, and so I decided I just wouldn't go to graduation. Speaker 1: Okay. That's sad but I can understand it, I can understand it. Story_ID: 28149 Speaker 1: So while you were working on your Ph.D. [degree in mathematics] you worked for the Krannert School of Industrial Management [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana]. Speaker 2: Yes. I worked there that summer to teach mathematics to them, and I also worked occasionally for the evening courses. They were doing something special that I liked; they were bringing in their minority students in there, who were not as strong in mathematics. They were coming to get business degrees and they wanted people to make sure that these people got the nurture and the tutoring that they need and more push through to get the level of competence that they needed. And they chose me as one of the black students who knew mathematics to do that. They had professors who could do it but the professors didn't have the tolerance and interest, you know, they would come in and give you the lecture, but if you had some gaps to be filled or some needs to be dealt with, they didn't have time for that. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28150 Speaker 1: So, would you describe yourself as a pure mathematician right now, or--? Speaker 2: Right now, believe it or not, I went from the entire gamut. I went from pure math to being a computational mathematician. I took my computer skills and I coupled them with mathematics and went to use it to ways you could apply it, in both math and in science. To give an example, when I was a pure mathematician in group theory working on my--Professor [Eugene] Schenkman [Houston's doctoral thesis advisor at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana], there was a group theorist named Hall. And Professor Hall said, "Houston, you know, one day, we are getting outside of finite groups now, we're getting into infinite groups. We can't count these things you know, on our fingers and toes like we used to. We got to find a more sophisticated way to do this." And after I got my doctorate and got out and started practicing, I found out that he was right and that we could use the computer; we could develop algorithms to let the computer to do the counting and dealt with. For example, one of the problems that I worked with was a problem in statistics, what they worked on in what they called the human genome problem, where they were trying to define the DNA problem. Well, you are talking about infinite number of genes, you can't do that by hand, only with the computer could you do that. And so I started taking what I knew from group theory and there and started applying it, using skills I had in computer and we call it computational science now. Where you are actually computing things and the visualization part was that they were trying, under the microscope, to see what was happening as you go. So we start not only doing the stuff in computational, but also find ways to be able to visualize it as graphs and things that people who were not experts could understand what was going on in the process. So I call myself a computational scientist. Story_ID: 28151 Speaker 1: Now you went on to teach at Savannah State [University, Savannah, Georgia]--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: When I immediately finished my doctoral degree [in mathematics, from Purdue University, West Lafayettel, Indiana], I went to Savannah State [University] to do my first appointment as a professional. I stayed there one year and while I was there one year three things happened; one is they tried to get me to come to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], to work at Morehouse. The president at Morehouse asked me to come there. And the president at Atlanta University [Atlanta], at the time, asked me to come to Atlanta University because they wanted more black mathematicians, African American mathematicians at Morehouse. And also, that's when I found out that my professor, [Claude B.] Dansby [at Morehouse College, where Houston earned his B.A. degree in mathematics] had suggested to Morehouse president that when I got my degree he should try to get me back there but the person at Atlanta University said, "Houston, I need you to not only teach mathematics, I need you to head the department." And so, after one year I agreed to go to Atlanta University to do mathematics rather than stay at Savannah State College, Savannah State University. Story_ID: 28152 Speaker 1: So, we were talking off camera about Luther Williams [also a HistoryMaker] who was also at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] when you were there. He later became president of Atlanta U [University, Atlanta, Georgia] but there was a Jarrett, who was there when you were, as president, right? Speaker 2: Yes, Thomas Garrett--Thomas Jarrett, I'm sorry, J-A-R-R-E-T-T. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Thomas Jarrett was president when I was there and he was also, by the way, on that committee that selected me to do the Mayor of Scholar work in Europe so he was familiar with me and so he wanted me to come back. Speaker 1: So in '75 [1975] you were chair of the Clark Atlanta U [University] department--was it Clark Atlanta U yet, or was it--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: No it was not, no no. They did not become Clark Atlanta until in the '80s [1980s] late in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: Still Atlanta University and let's see so you were chair of the department there and you were also there that same year you served as the National Secretary of NAM [National Association of Mathematicians], right? Speaker 2: Right. This is the organization that I helped to co-found in 1969 and I had told them--I had stayed with the organization and they wanted me to be president in 1970 but that's when I had just gone to Purdue to do my doctoral work and I told them I couldn't be president but I kept up with the organization and told them I would do what I could and when I got out of--finished my doctoral work I would become more involved again. And so what happened was, just as I was leaving Savannah State University [Savannah, Georgia] to go to Atlanta University, they called me up to a meeting. I had been attending their meetings anyway, but they were calling me up and they said we need an executive secretary to run this organization. They said, "Houston you know it better than anyone else. You've been here since we got started and everything and we want you to run it at least for the next three to five years." And I had a passion for NAM and so I told them yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They called me up to Virginia, up to Hampton University [Hampton, Virginia], and asked me to do that. Story_ID: 28153 Speaker 1: So you came into Atlanta U [University, Atlanta, Georgia] as chair of the department of mathematics and computer science. Now in '75 [1975], what was the state of computer science? Speaker 2: The state of computer science in 1975 was very dismal, especially for small colleges and universities. The big universities--the research institutions had gotten involved with them, but smaller universities and colleges were just beginning to look at it, computers. And so what we decided at Atlanta University was that we need to train some college faculty members especially at HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] how to use computers so they could start injecting--. We said we need to train some math faculty so they could start injecting it in their curriculum so that students would be able to take jobs other than teaching. They could go out and work in industry and do certain things. So we formed a--first of all an institute for college students in computer science, and then we went ahead later and came up with a full master's degree program in computer science for college faculty members to be able to come in and get a degree. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. How long did it take to do that? Speaker 2: It took us to get it at the point we wanted to--it took us about at least three or four years to get that going. Story_ID: 28154 Speaker 1: Now, you did some work with the National Center for Atmospheric Research [NCAR], Boulder [Colorado] right? Speaker 2: Yes. The idea was and this is one of the things I can never forget my grandmother [Ruth Houston] and mother [Catherine Houston Vinson] for this, they say you learn as much as you can and so what--I talked to some of the professionals--again NAM [National Association of Mathematicians] helped me on this. We were closed out. When I say we, African American mathematicians and scholars were closed out from a lot of the big research labs, a lot of things. But in the '70s [1970s] they start opening up and start letting blacks come out there for internships, or activities during the summer. And so we said, hey we got to take advantage of these things to learn. And they saw that as a forerunner for being able to hire them as full-time employees and also for us to start introducing the students to what they were doing. So, I went out there to Boulder, Colorado and there is something called NOOA, N-O-O-A. It was the National Center for Atmospheric Research, it's on the side of a mountain and it's fantastic. Every morning, five days a week, I had to get up that mountain to that and I had a window in my office and I could look over the mountains. And it was beautiful. In fact, sometime during the lunch hour we would climb some of the smaller cliffs out there--we called them flat irons--just for the heck of it. But that was a fantastic experience because that's when I really got into computer science. They had the first super computer I ever ran into. A large computer was the forerunner to the big super computer and they allowed us to work on it. And you talking about really crunching numbers and we were looking at data they were getting from the atmosphere. And one of the problems they wanted me to work on was unequally spaced data. It was easy to work on data that end up at exact spaces apart, but they found out then in the atmosphere it wasn't like you draw it on the board in the classroom. You had data that was unequally spaced and so the question is--to give an example, if you had one piece of data right here, another piece here, another piece there that was the same distance, well you always knew what was in the middle; it was half the distance between. But what if you got data where one was here then the next piece was there then the next jumped here, how did you handle that data because we needed to know the previous data in order to make predictions about the one up front. And so that was a big problem, how did you handle unequally spaced data. And that was a good computational science problem that I started working on there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, also this is at the National Center for Atmospheric Research? And so they had a super computer--this is your first experience with one, what was--can you describe what a super computer was like in '76 [1976]? Speaker 2: What a super computer was like in '76, I hate to say, but it was like the desktop computers today. Speaker 1: In terms of the power? Speaker 2: Yeah. I mean, see in '76 [1976], the only thing that could give--if you had a five hundred and eighty megabytes or if you had one billion gigabytes, only super computers do that. Now you can get a gigabyte on your laptop but back then that was big news; I mean, that was speed. People talk, well wow, you were getting--I don't know whether you ever saw it but the computers back at that time people were talking about thirty-two, thirty-two megabytes or sixty-four, you were on the low computers they had. But you got five hundred and the gigabyte you are the super computer thing. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28155 Speaker 1: Now in '79 [1979] it says here, I don't want to skip anything over but I'm just--you were visiting scientist at Lawrence Livermore [National Laboratory, Livermore, California] and you're working on Computer Graphics Project, right? Speaker 2: Right. Lawrence Livermore Laboratory in California, it was a national lab. You were talking about the protest in Atlanta [Georgia]. Out at Lawrence Livermore they were protesting nuclear devices because that's where they built a lot of the nuclear devices at Lawrence Livermore Lab. And I had to have a secret clearance to go out there. And they couldn't discuss anything around me that I wasn't cleared to know about. They taught me what they called a need to know policy; if you're not in that area and you didn't need it for your work, nobody else could discuss it with you. But anyway, Lawrence Laboratory, we had group projects, what you called--they brought people from different specialties, they were bringing chemists together, physicist together, mathematicians, a computer scientist and a biologist and they would sit down and talk about a project they were working on that involved all those elements and so what the physicist didn't know the mathematician could help him out and if the mathematician didn't know, you know, the chemist could help him out. So, like I said, there were nuclear bombs so there were different things going on and we were all--and then they would want to say, how can we take that project now and illustrate it to all of us what is going on and that's why it was a graphic issue. And that's when people got into lasers when they were able to send protons and neutrons about it a certain way we had to find out how did they travel; how does this stuff happen? And so, it had to be graphically defined as well as computationally defined as well as scientifically defined. And so no one person could do it; no one person had enough training to deal with it so they pulled in groups of people from different specialty areas to help them solve it. Speaker 1: Okay. So was this a summer project? Speaker 2: It was a summer project for me, but it was what they called a challenge problem for the laboratory, it was a problem they were continuously working on, because they had several things they were looking at developing they needed that kind of expertise and technology. Story_ID: 28156 Speaker 1: So you were at Atlanta U [University, Atlanta, Georgia] until 1981, I guess, then you went to--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: I was there until 1981. I was still connected to Atlanta University. I was just on leave until 1984. But I took a leave from Atlanta University in 1981 to go help them develop a computer science program at Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And while I was doing that, I would come back during the evening and teach one class; one evening a week for Atlanta University because my home was still in Atlanta and Fort Valley was only ninety miles away. And I would go down on the weekends and come back during the middle of the week, teach my class and do things with my family and go back. So--but I was on leave at developing a computer science program at Fort Valley University between 1981 and 1984. Speaker 1: Okay. So--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: For three academic years. Speaker 1: You designed and developed three academic computer laboratories? Speaker 2: Yes. They had no computer laboratories when I got there; they had no computer science program when I got there. So I developed two degree programs and three different laboratories for them. Speaker 1: This is still--people are still using the big mainframes then, right? Speaker 2: Well yes, people are still using the big mainframe and thing about Fort Valley, it was a state school and what they had to do was to do much of that computing power they had to send stuff to the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] or Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] to get done. They didn't even have the big frames on campus, so they had--laptops or desk tops were coming into being. They had a certain number of desk tops that could do limited--but anything that had anything to do outside of the scope we had to send it to the University of Georgia or Georgia Tech to get it done and then they would send us back the results after they processed it on their mainframe. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now at some point you become the Fuller E. Callaway [Fuller Earle Callaway, Sr. was an American textile manufacturer who was regarded as one of the leading industrial magnates of the Southern United States during the first decades of the twentieth century] professor of, I guess, of computer science at Fort Valley State, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: This is a big deal in Georgia when you become the Fuller E. Callaway professor of anything. Speaker 2: Yes, it was, in fact, the Callaway family that associated with the Callaway Gardens in Georgia and the Callaway Sports thing, they are filthy rich and they are philanthropists. And they decided in Georgia to--apparently several of them attended University of Georgia system school, they decided to give some endowed professorships at various schools. They would give one endowed professorship at each one of these schools. And so at that time integration was being pressed quite a bit so they said, well we can't leave out the black schools. Georgia had three state black schools at that time, Albany State College [University, Albany, Georgia]--four, Albany State College, Savannah State College [University, Savannah, Georgia], Fort Valley [State University, Fort Valley]--Fort Valley, Savannah, Albany. Okay they had those three state colleges and so they had--this is an endowed professorship and so they wanted to use it in areas where they wanted to attract students and also where it was difficult to get professors to come there because of their expertise and to (unclear) pay them a certain salary. So, Fort Valley was trying to develop a program in computer science and so they wanted to--for me to help attract other people to come there they wanted me to stay there to help develop that program. So they chose computer science to be the area they wanted to target and they chose me as their Fuller E. Callaway Professor of Computer Science. Speaker 1: Okay. I know we interviewed another--maybe a couple others. We interviewed Dr. Asa Hilliard (ph. splg.) who was at Georgia State who was a Fuller E. Callaway professor. Speaker 2: Yes. He is in the state of Georgia too, yes. He is a Fuller E. Callaway--. In fact, one of the proud things that made me so proud was eventually this Callaway professorship went to some other schools in Georgia in the Atlanta University Center and Henry C. McBay was a Fuller E. Callaway professor. They selected chemistry there and I was so proud that I was able to be a Callaway professor when my mentor was also a Callaway professor. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28157 Speaker 1: Now in '83 [1983] also you do another stint at Lawrence Livermore [National Laboratory, Livermore, California]? Speaker 2: Another stint at Lawrence Livermore Lab. Speaker 1: Yeah and this is a Computer Graphics Project. Same and similar to--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Yes. It was ongoing. Like I said, it was an ongoing project and they allowed me to come out there and continue to work on another internship. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright, now it was in 1984 you came to Elizabeth City State University [Elizabeth City, North Carolina] and--. Speaker 2: 1984, I came to Elizabeth City State University. Speaker 1: Now how did that come about? Now this is in Elizabeth City, North Carolina and--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: It came about in two strange ways. One was, when I was a student at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana], I met a student who was a biology graduate student up there, graduate student. His name was Jimmy E. Jenkins and so we became friends. I was in math and he was in biology. We became friends, my wife [Virginia Lawrence] and his wife became friends. He was a graduate of Elizabeth City State University and one of things he wanted to do was come back and help to do some things with his university to develop it. And then I came--while I was a Fuller E. Callaway Professor of Computer Science at Fort Valley [State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], I had also been selected on the National Institutes of Health [NIH] MARC [minority access to research careers] committee. Luther Williams [also a HistoryMaker] had been on that committee too, National Institute of Health, MARC Committee. So I had been selected--they also needed a mathematician computer scientist on there to help, so I was the one selected and Dr. Harriett Gordon--and I think Luther Williams had something to do with their extending that appointment to me. But during that time, when I was on that committee, the MARC committee, Elizabeth City State University applied for a MARC program, and they sent me out as one of the site visitors to do a pre-site visit on their program to see whether or not they had everything in order to go with that program. And so, when I came here to Elizabeth City State University in '83 [1983], Jimmy Jenkins was here. He was the acting president at the time, and he invited me over to his home for dinner, we talked about Purdue, etcetera. He said, Houston, I'm acting president now he say but if--acting chancellor not president--he say if they select me as president, I know the kind of work you did at Purdue, I know the kind of character you have; I would like for you to apply for the vice chancellorship here, if I am selected as president. Well then next year he was selected as president, and so he called me and asked me to submit my application, if I would, for that position and so I submitted my application and when I came here I went through all the committees, all the preliminaries and all the interview process and I was in the final three. And so, I was in the final three. He favored me, the committee chair favored me, and so I ended up being the one selected or recommended to the State of North Carolina to be the vice chancellor. Story_ID: 28158 Speaker 1: Okay. So you were appointed professor and vice chancellor of academics affairs here at Elizabeth City State [University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina]. Tell us a little bit about the City State University. You are the first person we've interviewed from it. How old is it, and what was its focus and--? Speaker 2: Elizabeth City State University is a HBCU, historically black college and university. It was started in 1891. And it started out as a teacher college. It was a college--in 1891 they introduced a bill--the founder named Huge Cale, H-U-G-E, and its C-A-L-E. Huge Cale introduced a bill for North Carolina to be able to establish a Normal School in eastern North Carolina to be able to train colored people to be teachers in the area. Because he thought schools need to go up from elementary schools and high schools and there was nobody to teach them, so we need to train some people. So he got that bill through in 1891. Speaker 1: Now he is an African American, right? Speaker 2: He is an African American. Speaker 1: In the state legislature in North Carolina. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was in the state legislature in North Carolina. Speaker 1: Now for some people it would be hard to imagine that going on in 1891. Speaker 2: Right, but what happened was he got in there on the end of Reconstruction before the Jim Crow laws froze African American from being in the legislature and Congress because right after the Civil War between 1865 really actually by 1869 or '70 [1870] after the 13th amendment, there were about sixteen African Americans who went to the United States Congress and about 600 of them went to state legislatures, and Huge Cale was one of them, got elected there and went forward. He was there, he got the bill through, they gave him a lousy budget of less than $1,000 to form this school and everything. And it started out--they got it started as a teacher college to train teachers for the colored race in 1891. And then it went through four different names of development; it went from a Normal School to a Teacher College and then to Elizabeth City State College and the last thing was Elizabeth City State University. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Thank you, that's good information. Story_ID: 28159 Speaker 1: And so, what was the state of affairs when you got here [Elizabeth City State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina]? Did you I mean a--this is--we were saying earlier before we started interviewing, this has been a wonderful experience--. Speaker 2: What was the state of affairs before I got here was this. Traditionally, Elizabeth City State University had been a teachers' college. The big focus was on education, producing teachers. Almost every program here before 1980 had a teacher education component; you know they had the art department, but art education, you were training teachers to go out to teach art. Business education, you train biology education, you are training--every subject you were training teachers to go out and teach. Jimmy Jenkins [president of Elizabeth City State University] wanted to help move it to another level because he was a biologist. Even though he had taught high school for a year or so like I had, he really wanted to focus on science and math at the collegiate level, he wanted to raise that level. He also knew about my international experience. He said, "Houston, I want you to come here and see can you help me revolutionize the focus from just being all teachers to being also, we want to do math and science here, and we want to get that to become the hallmark at the same level as teaching." And so that's what I came here and I find that basically people are facing with math education. And so with his interests and my emphasis and interests we wanted to move it to a different level. So we got--a math degree had just started where it wasn't a teaching degree and then we got a computer science degree started here, so you could do that. And during my tenure as vice chancellor, one of the things I did with his approval was, every office here had a typewriter in it in 19--when I came in 1984, every office had a typewriter. That was just the mode for producing things. And we had to get reports down to the university system in Chapel Hill [North Carolina] what we called general administration and if somebody made a mistake, somebody had to retype the whole document because you couldn't send a report down there with smear marks and all of that stuff. So I asked him and we talked about it and we computerized every academic office on campus, we put a computer in it. We got people to train things on an electronic computer and start all our document production on computers. Speaker 1: Now was this an IBM [International Business Machines] system or--? Speaker 2: We did it on an IBM system, yes. But and--we knew the power of this, and now we could do documents, somebody make a mistake or we leave something out, we just inject it. In a hours' time, we can have a fresh document and you think we been working on it for a week or two. Speaker 1: Now you were able to--you design, once again, you designed and developed a graphics and visualization laboratory, you know, here. Did you--were you able to get funding from or support from any of the computer manufacturers or how did it work? Speaker 2: I got support primarily from the federal government. I got support from the National Science Foundation [NSF] and I got support from the Air Force, United States Air Force, computer aspects of it, and I got it from the [U.S.] Department of Education [DOE]. But what my thing was, I told them that I wanted to design it to help faculty learn how to do these things and to get students involved; so it was seen as a training. We did research, but I had to train people too. I had to train college teachers, and I had to train students. So the NSF jumped on it and were interested, the Office of Education was interested in it and the Air Force was interested in it, for the research part and the other two were interested in it for the teaching. Story_ID: 28160 Speaker 1: Sir, what papers did you--you have written hundreds of papers but what papers would recommend that you have authored for someone who is interested in applied mathematics in terms of computer science? Speaker 2: What I would do is--mathematics is like a lot of other areas. Most times, contrary to what people think, the higher you go and the more research you do, the narrower your focus become. You are narrowed in a very small topic that usually only a few people are interested in at the time, and might go, but if somebody wanted to do--what I do several times, especially for students, I tell them about--let's look at certain--if you want to get excited about mathematics, there are certain things you can look at or do, and one is that I like to show the visualization of statistical data and I have written a paper showing that. And I think that's what gets somebody excited that they can see an application in which they also see in the process how one can visualize how this application has taken place. Speaker 1: Are you referring to charts and graphs and--(simultaneous) (unclear)? Speaker 2: Yes. You have graphs, charts and things that are going on with the dynamics showing what is happening with the data as it goes through different phases of manipulation. Those kinds of things usually excite someone who is curious about mathematics. And so what do people do with it or what happens when you get it going right and that's the paper I would suggest someone write. Now, there's another paper that I wrote if somebody would like to look at. And I was talking about things mathematicians do and can do and it's talking about how people can be impacted by--mathematically. And that's a paper I wrote in a particular journal that I thought it shared with people the things that mathematicians did and the kind of things they did that impact other people. And when you do this, what happens is, is that people get to understand well this stuff is not just about abstractions or about some little figure or number out here, but a lot of people are impact by mathematics. And you will see one, I think I wrote in 2000; it's the top one on the list, where I talk about people who impact and how mathematically what happens to them. And it was one that I thought as one I would recommend to a mathematician or a general reader who wants to understand the impact of mathematics or what mathematicians can do for people. The things when I talked about iterative methods and fitting classes and topological spaces, you don't want to get into that unless you are really--it requires a certain amount of background just to understand it. But the visualization of statistical data and how to impact--mathematics the impact and people who impact with mathematics I think it helps people to understand some of the things mathematicians do. Story_ID: 28161 Speaker 1: Now, scientists or those who study science know that science requires measurement and statistics, and all fields of science do. And there is a trend today that is interesting especially I guess to mathematicians, that biological sciences and chemistry, like physics is doing already, they are relying more and more on computational models. Speaker 2: In fact, not only are they relying on computational models, we have developed here at Elizabeth City State University [Elizabeth City, North Carolina] in our computer science and computational science and visualization center where we did entire segments or courses all doing computational models. We did computational chemistry, computational physics, computational biology, showing people how these things can not only explain what the biologist is doing, explain what the physicist is doing, but it can give them a visualization of what is happening. And that's what our whole computational science center was about. Developing models that scientists could use to help get those who were not as adept as they were about the science to at least understand what was happening. And so the computational models are one of the greatest ways--in fact, that's how (unclear) became really excited about computational science, because it was shown that almost every area of science could use visualization and computation to help explain what was going on. Story_ID: 28162 Speaker 1: Somewhere in the late '90s [1990s], you shift away from research, you know, so much, to more administrative activities, I guess. We see a lot of people in science make that move. They are more involved in administrative duties than they are in pure research. But, when you were doing research, I think I asked you this at lunch but I didn't ask you on tape, who were your research associates here, are your students or colleagues or how did you manage their research (unclear)? Speaker 2: My research associates were--I would write grants and I would include in these grants scholarship or fellowship money for students that they could work with me. I would also write grants that would include money for associates--faculty associates, some a few at this school but many at other schools to collaborate with me. And so the thing that is so fascinating now is that we can do a website or we can send a computer program or send a computer message to someone that now that is virtual. You can be next door to me, in the next building, across the hall or across the world and we can actually collaborate very easily. It is almost transparent as to where you are physically. It is not the type of things where some of the traditional scientist had to be in the laboratory, you need one person there to see you lift this and do this. In the computational chemistry, for example, there is a young man in Senegal, a professor in Senegal, Dakar, Senegal; he came over here to see how we were doing it and ever since then we have been collaborating, all by computers doing what we do. And so my colleagues were near and far, my research associates, but with the computer it really didn't matter. In fact, we have on this campus now something called a global research center, global education center that I helped to start. In fact, actually I organized and set it up for them. We have encouraged other colleagues on this campus to do research with people all around the world, whether locally, in another country, another state or where, because it is so easy to do it visually and virtually. Speaker 1: Okay. Does that sort of minimize the need to travel for conferences and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No. What it does is, it increased efficiency. In the past, someone had to send you a paper to read, or somebody had to tell you to go look at this thing here now. What we can do now is we can sit down and look at the same thing and discuss it together, visually. We would be physically looking at the same thing, and it's just like you are sitting across from me now and I can explain it to you and you can ask me questions. So it's a dialog kind of thing can take place anytime we both take the time to sit down, but we don't have to be physically in the same place. Now what one does need to do, one does still need to travel to what I call professional conferences where you see what is going on in other areas of your discipline. Because many times people are doing things in other areas of your discipline that offer techniques that you can extract from them and enhance your own research. So the need to travel to professional conferences is still there but it cuts down the need for a lot of personal travel for collaboration. Speaker 1: Okay and may even make travel more rewarding, I guess, when you actually know more about the person that you--. Speaker 2: Oh yes it makes all the difference, extremely more rewarding when you actually know what's going on. Story_ID: 28163 Speaker 1: Now you have written a couple of books, right, and you have contributed to a number of text books. I don't know how many, do you want to tell us? Speaker 2: Yes. Here's something that happened in the year 2002. I got a call from the US Department of--it's the United States Agency for International Development, they call it USAID. And they said, Houston we are trying to get some text books written for African countries. So they keep telling us, yes they need money but right now they are in great need of resources. One of their number one resources is text books and their professionals have two shortcomings, one is they are overworked and overloaded and number two is many of them don't have the libraries and resources and things necessary to spend the time to write the quality text books that they would like to have. So they want us to collaborate--come up with a program where they can collaborate and help them write textbooks. And they are particularly in need of textbooks in math and science and they said do you know anybody who can help us. Well I gave them a list of names of people, I said, "These people I know that they can help you." And I thought I had done a service for the USAID and the government. Two months later they called me back and said we've decided that we want you on the team to help do this. I said, "I didn't put my name on there." They said but we want you on there, we know what you've done and what you can do. And it was interesting that they asked six different institutions to write some textbooks for six different countries in Africa. Elizabeth City [State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina] was chosen because we had done a lot in the area of international activities, and I had done a lot of international travel, and a lot in Africa. And they asked me to do it for the country of Senegal because their official language is French and they knew that I had studied math in French and I could do French and I could communicate in French and write. Story_ID: 28164 Speaker 1: And so they asked us to do this and we started out and it was very interesting at first that I went over to Senegal and talked with the people. They expressed the same need to me that they had to USAID [United States Agency for International Development] that they needed these things. But they looked me in the face and said well you probably can write something for us but we don't you know our culture well enough to give us the kind of textbooks that we need. So, why don't you write something and we might can use them as some supplemental reading for students. You know, and it would be of some use and they would have at least something to read. And so we dialoged about this for couple of months or so, and so I tried another approach, I got people from the University of Senegal together with the minister of education, USAID and Senegal and we all agreed on the problem, it was the solution. And I say okay here's what we can do if we do a collaborative approach. And so they finally agreed but then they turned the thing over-they say okay, we have a sense of what we all agreed to but you got forty-eight hours to write it up and give us the design as to how we are going to do it, how we can make it work. So for the next forty-eight hours I slept very little. But we came up with a collaborative partnership where we could write some books together collectively and what we did was I said, allow us in the United States at Elizabeth City to first write the books for you from the international standard point of view and I say math and science is pretty international, it's not very cultural from an international standard point of view. And we will inject culture in there, but then we want you to have a group of your persons in the ministry of education and your superintendent and master teachers and principal to look at these books and field test them, with actually classroom of teachers and then you take the feedback and from your expertise tell us what needs to be done to revise these books. And then after we do that, we want to get together in a joint session of a final revision of textbooks and have master teachers to do a final review. And they say that's going to take a long time isn't it? I say it depends upon how much time you have, I say we can run as fast as you can run. And so we started to write textbooks for them, particularly in math and science and the--when we wrote these textbooks and we went through this refining process, we wrote the first version here and sent them the version over there to test and they critiqued it and updated that version. Then we got together as two groups and finalized the books. They were astonished at two things; one was the clarity of purpose and the clarity of our communication in the textbook, and secondly is that we had injected the culture. But what I did and what we did over here was I find some Africans, some Senegalese who were over here, to get on my team to critique me before I ever sent the first book over there. So that when it was over there, that critique was the second critique. They were not aware of this. I had gotten critiquing over here from Senegalese. Speaker 2: I was going to ask you a specific question; did you utilize Dr. Paul Gueye of Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia; also a HistoryMaker]? Speaker 1: I utilized Dr. Paul Gueye of Hampton. Speaker 2: He's from Senegal. Speaker 1: He's from Senegal, he's one of the first one that I utilized, yes. He was one of those that I utilized. He's a scientist and he is from Senegal. We used him, in particular, when we were writing the books in physics, yes. So we did that, and so when the book got to them they say, "Wow, not only is the math sound, not only is it on the right grade level, not only does it address the subject (unclear) but it also reflects the culture." But we had done our homework over here well, and we had gotten some good people who were scholars here in America who knew Senegalese culture to help us do the fine tuning before we ever sent the first copy over. And Dr. Paul Gueye was one of those persons. There was a Dr. Abdul Mattesen (ph.), Dr. Sek (ph.), two or three others from Senegal that I used very heavily. But the thing that was nice about it was--so when we did that way they went over there and they were astonished. So when we went through the field testing, we went over there with them and we got a team of people over there who did the field testing of books and we brought it back. And when they brought it back to us, and they only find that there were very few things that the teachers or principal wanted changed. We got those things cleaned up, we modified, we went over and met with them and had a joint final revision of it. And the real crowning point of that project was that the books that they told us they might look at as supplemental books, they ended up changing their math and science curriculum and using these as their official textbooks. And it was because it was a collaborative effort--because they had told us earlier people had brought them books and given them in the past and just because it had contents of certain math in it they thought they should use it but it didn't reflect culture, it didn't reflect their language well, it didn't reflect any of these things, and it was more trouble for the students trying to get through it to get to the content than it was for them learning the content. Speaker 2: Okay. So the version that you sent over was written in French, am I correct? Speaker 1: The version we sent was written in French. Speaker 2: And written with a Senegalese cultural, I guess, spin, I guess. Speaker 1: Senegalese cultural spin, that's a good way of putting it. In fact, actually what I did was--I also spent a lot of time over there. Because, I learned--I updated myself not only on the French, but they had a slightly--every country that speaks French outside of France have their own little spin and taste for French, and we learned a lot of their colloquialisms and kind of parcel the language they had there. But we also learned they were ninety-five percent Muslim and so the persons that I got over here knew the Muslim culture and I learned the Muslim culture. So we didn't talk about Christmas, we talked about Ramadan, we didn't talk about snow, we talked about the rainy season, and we talked about the dry season, we talked about how to cope with people over there who knew and lived the culture and that's what astonished them. Because people would send them stuff over there about, you know, we do this in the snow in the winter, they didn't have winters, you know, they had rainy seasons and dry seasons and so we reflected that in the textbooks. Story_ID: 28165 Speaker 1: It's interesting the university, one of the major universities, is the University of Cheikh Anta Diop which used to be the University of Dakar, named for a physicist and a historian. Speaker 2: Yes it is. In fact, it was this university that we did our greatest work with because the--when I first made a trip there I befriended a professor named Rechter Sallr (ph.). At that time he was the dean of science and I went over and we talked in the math and science and he was excited about what we were doing. And that's when he started getting me to work with a chemist when he knew I knew chemistry too. And so the--we got together and he really pushed what we were doing because he loved the collaboration of the effort because he was doing a similar kind of thing. He had this young chemist that he had been his doctoral dissertation person, thesis director for. He had him--after he did his thesis, his doctoral dissertation in French, he had him do it in English and to present it in England. Because he thought we can't just be localized, we must be worldwide. He said in the United Nations they use French and English as both (unclear). So he was very open to this kind of collaboration and movement. Story_ID: 28166 Speaker 1: Okay, now, this project, this USAID [United States Agency for International Development] project was in different phases from what I understand from looking at the [research] outline. Speaker 2: There were two different phases for it. The first phase of it--the first two years was called TAGS, T-A-G-S. And this was a textbook--it was a Textbook for A General Society. We were trying to talk about a textbook--we thought about an international textbook that we could start off with the content for and then narrow it down to any particular country. This is what it was, TAGS and that was okay. The problem was there were six different schools trying to decide what the model should be. And it was not--it was working for some countries and not for other countries. (Unclear) wait a minute, we need somebody who's going to do that one on one and that's when they asked Elizabeth City [State University, Elizabeth City, North Carolina], you concentrate with Senegal and with the French, you know. We want this person here to concentrate--there were some people who were concentrating with Ethiopia in English. There were some people who concentrated with Tanzania, you know, and they did English and some with South Africa. But they say, let's go one country on one so that there was not this bureaucracy of trying to make one model fit everybody. But you can do like you guys started off in Senegal and learn their culture and do the model that's very acceptable in their culture. And so that's when the TAGS spread off from one group to individual institutions dealing with individual countries. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the second phase. That was called the TLMP, the Textbooks and Learning Material Program. Speaker 1: It seems like from 2002, I guess, the project lasted from 2002 to 2010, is that true? Speaker 2: Yes. But the TAGS, the first part of it, only went from 2002 to 2004. We started the TLMP in 2005. Speaker 1: How many people worked on your project here from Elizabeth City? Speaker 2: Well, what I did was, it was a collaborative research. For example, if I did--if we we did a book in mathematics, either I would do the book myself or I would get a mathematician to collaborate with me on the book. And it was not an accident that about a third of the books was in mathematics because that was my favorite and I did most of the work. I set the models as to how we wanted to do it. But then we did in chemistry, we did them in biology, they wanted math and science and so we got--and that's like I got a physicist here on campus to help me with the physics; and I got Paul Gueye to help me with the physics and the English and I got a biologist to help me with the biology here on campus, and we dealt with that. So it was a kind of--I got people who were experts in the content to do a version for me in English first, and then I dealt with a Senegalese, and we put it in French. So it was a collaborative thing here--. Speaker 1: Can you tell me maybe about how many people, you know worked on--? Speaker 2: We would get people according to the need for expertise and we actually kept ourselves in the sciences and so there were actually about, maybe about a half dozen of us who were actually dealing with them. Story_ID: 28167 Speaker 1: Tell us about the [U.S.] Department of Education [DOE] initiatives that you've worked on here at Elizabeth City State University [Elizabeth City, North Carolina]. Speaker 2: Okay. The Department of Education initiative--they were interested in our improving the teaching of mathematics and what we did there I thought was very fascinating and that is, math has gone through several revolutions. For some reason the average person used to have a fear or phobia about mathematics, that it was hard. And so we kept trying to find how we can approach--how can we get everybody down to saying it's not hard, it's just like musical football. If you are going to be good with it, it takes time, you got to practice. How can we get that message to them without them having the idea they got to be a genius or have a special talent to do it. And so we kept figuring out how you do this. And so, one of the things--, and that's when I started with this computational science center. They were saying, how do you get people to understand math. Well, I had done a project when I worked at Stillman College [Tuscaloosa, Alabama] where we did a mathematical workshop with kids in high school, and we did something where we would set up an objective for solving a problem and then we talked about what this does, we tried this and we tried that. And we made progress and we solved the problem. Then we put the mathematical sophistication on it. The math sophistication never was heard; we tried to use as much common language as we could. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're saying that you had students actually solving the problem using higher math but they didn't realize--(simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: They didn't realize they were using--the concepts and techniques they were using in mathematics, they didn't realize it. And it was what we call critical thinking. How do you solve problems using critical thinking, for example, we start out with something like this - if a fire is in this building, how many ways can you get out realistically, you know, knowing you're not Superman, you can't break this wall and it's not likely you are going to break through the ceiling. Okay there is a door here we can get out, there's a door here--look like there is a door that might go over there, we might get out this way and if the door's locked--well we could break that windowpane, you know, it wouldn't take too much to break that windowpane to get out of here. And so we should say okay, let's say it's a false alarm, it's not a real fire, it's a false alarm, which way would we do to try first. If don't no smoke smothering people and we had to do it with the greatest urgency which one--you say let's try the door first. It's already unlocked, It's there and then we look down one way of the hall and would see the smoke of fire, another way and find the first exit closest to the outside. And so that was a (unclear) chart as to how you get from A to B the best way. But we didn't tell them that, we were just trying to solve the problem of getting outside from inside, how do you get from point A to B. The most logical and effective way if you had time, you know, and so it was taking things like that--okay how do you seal this area here if you had--you got this area here and you don't know how much cement you needed to put in that area; how do you figure out how to do it? Well, do you think it would help if we drew a line here and drew a line here and drew a line here, and got part of that area that was a rectangle, you know, it was a little box like thing and find out how much it took to fill that box. And then maybe if we drew another box over here similar to that then we would know how much to fill that box. And then, over here and then here until we get up to the line there and then we can get a good estimate of what it takes to fill the area, right? Yeah, that sounds reasonable. So it's talking through the solution of problems before you put the mathematics on it, the sophistication of the term that the mathematicians had come up as to how you go about with the concept or the limit or how you go about extracting this area under the curve, etcetera. We are just talking about problem solving, critical thinking. How can you go about solving--because that's the way the mathematicians did it initially anyway. And so that's what we used to show the students, show teachers, this is the way you do it. Story_ID: 28168 Speaker 1: And so you are actually saying that mathematicians solve problems, simple and complicated, in ways that people could understand if they really thought about it before they--before the invention of scary terminology. Speaker 2: Right, that's exactly what I'm saying. What happened is that they came up there and when we put all of the language on there and all the bells and whistles, we scared them away, and the problem wasn't that complicated. They were frightened by the way we had presented it to them. Given the same thing that happened is when I went to--and I saw a similar thing when I went to France, they had a course for--they had us--there were about twenty-five of us from twenty-five different countries. Nobody spoke anybody else's language and we were doing a refresher course in French. And somebody say well how I'm going to tell him what this is in French and I don't know his language and he doesn't know mine. You know what, the professor said, we tell them in a natural way and we tell them in French. For example, they would look up--let's say la lumiere, all of us knew that was the light. It said la mur, that was a wall or la porte, that was a door. I didn't have to worry about your language and you don't have to worry about mine. We all start thinking in French and this is what we said, get people thinking about solving the problem. Not about the bells and whistles about Italian or about German or about English or about, no, no--just let them solve the problem. And you can get them a solution quickly. And we can do that and teach them mathematics. Speaker 1: So this is an effective way to teach higher math. Speaker 2: It's an effective way to teach higher math. And one of the things that I find fascinating about both [Henry] McBay and Pop [Claude B.] Dansby, and Professor Dansby [Houston's professors at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], we used to call him Pop Dansby was that they made you visualize what you were doing and what the chemistry was doing and what the math was doing. And Professor Dansby--I remember he told us, if you really know what you're doing, you can sit down on a napkin and show somebody on a step by step basis. It's not the language. You do this first, you look at these things, you put this together, you come to this stage and you move forward. Speaker 1: Now what you're describing sounds similar to Bob Moses' algebra project on some level. Are you familiar with that? Speaker 2: Yes. You don't have to allow the environment to--you don't have to let the forest block you from seeing the trees that make up the forest. You're dealing with the trees. Story_ID: 28169 Speaker 1: You've written a book for NAM [National Association of Mathematicians] about the history of African Americans--Africans and African Americans on mathematics, right? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: I was looking at a poster when we came in which starts with the (unclear) 12th dynasty and then there are other figures on the poster, Benjamin Banneker, Elbert Frank Cox, Evelyn Boyd Granville, Marjorie Lee Brown, J. Ernest Wilkins and David Blackwell. What is the significance of these individuals and why should we remember them? Speaker 2: Well, we should remember them for several reasons. The first reason is that these persons did excellent mathematics against all odds. You say what do you mean against all odds? Benjamin Banneker, for example, he was not permitted to go to the university to study math. He studied math on his own. He was a self-taught mathematician and he studied math so meticulously and he knew how to do math so well that when they designed the city of Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], they brought a person from France over here to design the city of Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Now was that [Pierre Charles] L'Enfant? Speaker 2: Yeah, L'Enfant. And what happened was after a certain point, the Frenchman got mad and picked up his stuff and went home, he said I'm not going to bothered with this, you Americans don't know what you're doing. What he failed to understand was Benjamin Banneker was not a inobservant assistant. Benjamin Banneker studied his whole plan and even improved it and understood what he was trying to do and how to do it. And so when L'Enfant left, Benjamin Banneker finished designing Washington, D.C. And, in fact, he so impressed--that two or three people wrote the President of the United States and the Academy of Science here said this man has awesome power in mathematics. He was not only just in mathematics, he learned to do surveys, all the trigonometry and all the things to lay out stuff. He watched what he did from the Frenchman and then he added his own understanding and then he could teach. And so, he was one of the first persons in the history of America that the people discussed saying you know, this is an example that black folks can have intellect. Because they didn't think at that time that a black man could do that kind of science and not only that, he designed an almanac where he talked about the stars, and the weather patterns, etcetera. and he was accurate on that and he designed a clock that kept perfect time, you know, during his entire lifetime. And he demonstrated what we called basic scientific genius and he used it to help this country and others who would listen to him. And people who watched him or collaborated with him saw his genius. It was the most unfortunate thing happened was that a few months after he passed somebody burned his house and workshop down because they didn't want history to be able to give him credit. Speaker 1: He was a living contradiction to the pseudo-scientific denouncing of African people, to justify slavery (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: Precisely, right, he said--no, this man--they were saying-you know they were talking about blacks being 3/5 of a human being. No, no, this man here was a top scientist. In fact, they wrote the President of the United States and they also wrote the Academy of Science in England talking about what he had done. Story_ID: 28170 Speaker 1: Now who was Elbert Frank Cox? Speaker 2: Elbert Frank Cox is the first African American to earn a Ph.D. degree in mathematics. Speaker 1: Where did he earn that? Speaker 2: Cox earned his degree from---he started off at Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut], and then he followed his professor into Canada. But the degree was awarded at an American university, Yale. But he was the first African American to earn a Ph.D. in mathematics. And the irony in it was that it was a scientist who was fascinated with mathematics who saw his abilities and permitted him to work with him, that permitted that to happen. It wasn't the culture of that day. The person was what we call confident enough in his own right and was so focused as a scientist and not about cultural activities in America. When he recognized the man's talent he said let's go. But he was the first African American to earn a Ph.D. [in mathematics]. Story_ID: 28171 Speaker 1: Now was Marjorie Lee Brown the first black woman to carry one [a Ph.D. degree in mathematics]? Speaker 2: Marjorie Lee Brown, that's an interesting issue. We thought that she was the first black woman for a long time. Well Marjorie Lee Brown and Evelyn Boyd Granville earned a Ph.D. in mathematics the same year. And one we think earned it in May and the other one in August. So we kind of gave those two people--Granville got hers in May and Brown got hers in August, so we say she is the second. But I learned in doing further research a few years ago, that there was a woman who got her Ph.D. in mathematics before either one of those did. At the time we made that poster we didn't know that. Euphemia Lofton Haynes, she did it and we didn't even have her on the poster. And the reason we did not know this was that she got her degree from Catholic University in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] and she did all of her work in Washington, D.C. At the time Catholic University was very peculiar toward people in her faith and she was a Catholic by religion and we did not know she had done it but we knew somebody who knew that she was working on math but we didn't know that she had gotten her degree from Catholic University. And while she was at Catholic, she even taught some courses over at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], but we didn't know she had got her degree in math until later. Story_ID: 28172 Speaker 1: Now what about J. Ernest Wilkins? Speaker 2: J. Ernest Wilkins was a world class mathematician extraordinaire. Now you say, what makes him world class, what makes him extraordinaire? J. Ernest Wilkins was close to a child prodigy, if not that. His father was well educated and they lived in Chicago [Illinois]. They lived near the campus of University of Chicago. J. Ernest Wilkins learned his subjects well at school, etcetera, and so he would go over to the Chicago campus and talk to some students and do some things. And some professors met with him and started letting him come to class. J. Ernest Wilkins earned a Ph.D. degree in mathematics at the age of sixteen, I mean, I'm sorry, he earned his baccalaureate degree at the age of sixteen, got him a master's [degree] by the time he was seventeen, and a Ph.D. by the time he was nineteen in mathematics from the University of Chicago. Not only did he do that, but he produced several books, he produced a lot of referee technical papers, and he then got a degree in engineering, then one in physics. And so he worked in academia in physics, with the government, and mathematics, and he went to Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia] and helped them to start the Ph.D. degree program at Howard in mathematics. And he came down to Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] and helped them to improve that program, their graduate program in mathematics. So he was--he did mathematics as well or better as anybody out there in his field and he was brought into the Academy of Science; he was elected to be a member of the Academy of Science in both, I think, physics and engineering. And they had elected one of his colleagues, [David] Blackwell in the math Academy of Science, but when they noticed him, he was doing more engineering and physics than he was math at the time. But he was a extraordinary mathematician. And there was--I don't know of anybody else who had gotten a Ph.D. at the age of nineteen and was as productive as J. Ernest Wilkins was. Story_ID: 28173 Speaker 1: Now David Blackwell is a name you hear from physicists and mathematicians all over the country when they talk about someone who's a real genius. Tell us about David Blackwell. Speaker 2: David Blackwell went to University of Illinois in Urbana [Urbana-Champagne, Illinois], studied mathematics, and his aim was to be a high school teacher of mathematics. But he got turned on to mathematics while he was there, two or three faculty members saw his talent, and they encouraged him to stay on. Because when he first went there, they had to find housing out in the city for him because they didn't allow blacks to live on campus. They had to find somebody to let him stay at their house. And so he went out there and he got turned on to math and went all the way and got his Ph.D. degree. He did it at the age of twenty-one. But the fascinating thing was that David Blackwell couldn't find, wouldn't--nobody would hire him in the white universities. He was basically a statistician. And so he went to Howard University in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] to work, and he was running that graduate program and turning out good mathematicians at Howard, at the master's level. But what he would do was every summer he would find anywhere he could to go collaborate with statisticians and sit down and write up concepts and papers. And so he started writing papers, and anybody who would talk to him about statistics and mathematics--and there were a few white mathematicians that would talk to him but they were not administrators, they didn't have the power to hire him anywhere. And so they did it--and so one guy told him after he had been doing this for about ten years at Howard, he said, "Look, I'm going to see if I can get you to come out to California, I'm going to see if I can get somebody to let you come out there as a visiting professor for a semester or year, because we really would like to collaborate with you and talk to you. I would and I got couple of colleagues." And so, he was able to arrange that. And when he got out there, California thought it was kind of a liberal state at the time. I mean the quality of his papers, and he wrote a couple of books on statistics, fascinated them so that when he went back to Howard, a couple of years later, they asked him would he come out there and join the faculty. And he came out there and joined the faculty and kept being very productive, wrote another book, more papers and he got elected to be the chair of the Department of Statistics at the University of California, Berkeley; one of the top mathematical institutions in the world. And people would come to study under him, and he was the first and as I said, when he went out to Berkeley and the impact he had, he was elected to the Academy of Science in Mathematics because all of these people he had impact over. And so every African American mathematician who came up after Blackwell and say, we got to see how Blackwell did it, how he broke the color line and how he went through and how he was able to get into the mainstream of mathematics and people to accept him without having to fight all of the stuff that the other black mathematicians had been fighting to try to do their mathematics in the mainstream. So he was kind of the, say the Martin Luther King of civil rights. You know, he was a trailblazer that--you always had blacks who had protested against the cruelty of segregation and discrimination. Marcus Garvey, you had A. Philip Randolph, a lot of them. But you didn't have them getting the attention of the White House and the President of the United States, you know, and getting laws changed. Martin Luther King took it all the way to the White House, you know, he took it all the way through. And when he stayed down there and broke Bull Connors' [Theophilus Eugene "Bull" Connor was the Commissioner of Public Safety for the city of Birmingham, Alabama, during the American Civil Rights Movement] yoke on segregation in the South and to the [U.S.] Supreme Court--and so that's what Blackwell did. He went through all of those barriers and made it to the top and still he was a very humble mathematician. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28174 Speaker 1: He [African American mathematician, David Blackwell] was someone that you knew, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew him, in fact, the National Association of Mathematicians (NAM), we named a lecture series after him that still exists that happens at the summer joint meeting for all mathematicians now. We have a lecture series after J. Ernest Wilkins [African American nuclear scientist and mathematician] too and we have a Cox-Talbot address, after [Elbert Frank] Cox [first African American to earn a Ph.D. degree in mathematics] and we have a--we did a series for the ladies, [Evelyn Boyd] Granville, Euphemia Lofton Haynes and [Marjorie Lee] Brown [first African American women to earn Ph.D. degrees in mathematics]. These people fought against odds when people would not acknowledge talent or not let them through. They were out there and they persisted in spite of all, and at the same time they never stopped relating to the black community. Speaker 1: Now do you think now that we are in danger of--do you think we still have as talented a pool of black mathematicians out here that's just isn't being tapped or not getting the opportunity? Speaker 2: We still have the talented pool of mathematicians out here. Two things are happening now that did not happen during that time. Number one is we have a number of good mathematicians who are being siphoned off into computer science and engineering. You say well what you mean being siphoned off. They had the dual majors of math and computer science up to the master's [degree] level and then when they looked to see where the money went, you see, some people ask professors why did you do all that hard work and studies just to go work at a college or university getting a low salary. They pay engineers in the six figures, you know. They pay the top computer scientists in the six figures, especially those who work in the industry. And so you are getting a lot of people who are being siphoned off into those areas. Now you still have a lot of good people who--, for example, there is a fellow named William Massey [also a HistoryMaker] who got siphoned off into Bell Labs [New Jersey], and he worked with them about ten years, but he got tired of the industry because they kept wanting him to solve only their problem, they were trying to stifle his creativity. And he is now a full professor at Princeton University in mathematics, because he wanted to do elective mathematics as well. There was Richard Tapia, who is out there who is a Hispanic who works with blacks a lot. They wanted him to do all this, he said I'm not going to do all that, I want to stay where I can influence other people to grow in mathematics. There was Nathaniel Dean, there are a number--I could name at least a half a dozen or a dozen mathematicians who are around now. Many of them started out in industry and went back and now they are coming back to academia, but early on that was the only place they could go, was academia. Story_ID: 28175 Speaker 1: Sir we always ask this question, what would you consider to be your major contribution in the field of mathematics? My major contribution in the field of mathematics, I think would be to say that I demonstrated to the world in general and to African Americans in particular that you did not have to be a child prodigy or you did not have to be born with a silver spoon in your mouth to be able to do mathematics and compete on the world stage with some of the best mathematicians. I came from very humble beginnings. My parents and my siblings did not go to college and we had no resources but I was instilled a love for learning and when I chose math as my field, I chose to become the best in it. And I did it and I did it with confidence and then I went out and demonstrated that I could teach math, I could do math in industry, I could do math in government, I could write papers and present papers. And one of the--two of the proudest moments in my life was that when I was at the World Congress of Mathematicians in 2002, in Beijing, China, a conversation was struck up between me and John Nash [American mathematician whose works in game theory, differential geometry, and partial differential equations have provided insight into the forces that govern chance and events inside complex systems in daily life]. And you might not know John Nash but he was a renowned mathematician from Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]. A few years ago they made a movie about him called 'A Beautiful Mind'. He was this wild mathematician who did fantastic math. He is the only mathematician who has ever been awarded the Nobel Prize [Nash shared the 1994 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences with game theorists Reinhard Selten and John Harsanyi]. John Nash and I sat there and we talked together and we presented--I presented that afternoon, he presented that same day. And while I had an awesome amount of respect for John Nash, it did not diminish my confidence as a mathematician to one iota. He and I took a picture together and I brought it back here. There were people in Princeton who couldn't get to Nash to have a conversation with him, he was considered so awesome, so great, and so isolated. I brought it back they say why did you do this? I say something about being a mathematician and talking what I knew and I say you can do the same thing. You can't be another person but you could learn math so well that you will be respected and when the newspaper saw the picture of the two of us together, I was fascinated so that they used the title under there, 'Two Beautiful Minds'. Of course, I don't consider myself in the same category as John Nash, but I have presented mathematics on the world stage on four different continents, you know, and a dozen or fifteen different countries and made no apology for it. Tokyo [Japan], China, Australia, America, Switzerland, France (unclear) and I stood shoulder, head and shoulder with some of the best, with no apology and no excuse. And they saw that I knew my mathematics. And I wanted to show that to other persons, especially African Americans, to show that you can do what Blackwell [prominent statistician and mathematician; first African American inducted into the National Academy of Sciences, and the first black tenured faculty member at University of California, Berkeley] did. You don't have to get your mathematics [degree] and only teach in high school or hired to a junior college or be stuck over here; you can be on the world stage. Story_ID: 28176 Speaker 1: Now likewise when you look back at everything you have done at this point, is there anything you would go back and change or try to do over again if you could? You know that is a fascinating question and my answer to you is no. The reason I say that is I don't think I would be where I am today if I had planned it myself. I think what I did was I took advantage of opportunities, and as I took advantage of opportunities I kept going on a growth path to do that, to do this, to do this. And so I would tell anyone, follow opportunities, follow the path that puts itself before you and make the best of it. Elevate as high as you can and emerge as strong as you can. Okay. Story_ID: 28177 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: My hope and concern for the African American community today is that--to diminish the negative of the past. To look inward at their own God-given talents and to develop them to the highest and to become as self-reliant as they can. Because society, the government, welfare, nobody else is going to look out for you if you don't come together and make yourself as strong an individual as you can and then come together in groups and make yourself as strong of a village as you can, African Americans are not going to rise to strong of a village as you can. African Americans are not going to rise to the level of greatness that they are capable of doing as a group. You are going to have individuals who are going to always escape. Story_ID: 28178 Speaker 1: Now you were the director of an African Studies Program here at Elizabeth City State University [Elizabeth City, North Carolina], right? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Okay, now a mathematician as director of African studies is interesting, but what was the scope of African studies and what did you do? Speaker 2: Excuse me. The scope of it and what I did was this. I probably didn't mention to you but at Purdue University [West Lafayette, Indiana, where Houston earned his Ph.D. degree in mathematics], by default, I became the director of the Black Culture Center at Purdue University. And the reasoning was that they had asked a number of graduate students would they help them start--the undergraduate students had asked a number of graduate students and a few faulty, would they help them start a black cultural center at Purdue University. All we all said no you go find somebody who's interested in that. We, the graduate students, we were up there struggling trying to get graduate degrees and we knew how much time that was going to take. And so all of us said no. And when I heard that three white professors were going to get together and try to learn how to run a black cultural center, I said not on my watch. I said I know more when I'm asleep, I know more on my little fingers than you can ever learn for running a black cultural center for black folks. And I told them I would do it for one year until you had time to go out and find somebody outside of the university. I told the students that and I told the university that and others. But, it was again the kind of thing where I thought those of us that were fortunate and got to a certain level, we owed something back to community even though we were still trying to strive and go ourselves, we owed that. As far as the African studies here, I came to Elizabeth City State University and they had a very good, broad international program, but they were not doing very much with Africa. And I wanted to do something with Africa and then USAID start telling me about writing textbooks, and I said why not combine all of this and come up with an African Studies Program, where I can get people to focus on the challenges of Africa and also the potential of Africa and the richness of Africa. So we had African Introspection Week, we would bring some of the top scholars here, we would even bring former heads of states and top people here to the university so people can get a chance to--we even brought in scholars from Africa here so people could deal with it. And the aim was, I thought, an African American institution needed to have a reason to advance Africa, and get people to look at it in the true sense of the word of what it was, rather than all the stereotypes people had done. And so that was the purpose to broaden this international and globalization to put Africa in its proper perspective and show that Africa had great contributions, great resources, great scholars. We just had to help them. They were not at the level of industrialized countries at this time. They needed help for us to relate to them, but first to recognize what they had already done. Story_ID: 28179 Speaker 1: Now tell us something about your family. Now you have been married for a long time. Speaker 2: I have been married for forty-three years and I am very fortunate to have two daughters. I sometime am a little concerned about the fact that they put too much attention on me or I put too much expectation in them. I try to give them the same direction that my grandmother [Ruth Houston] (unclear) by getting the best education you can. Go to the highest heights, etcetera. Any my oldest daughter, whose name is Dr. Mave (unclear) [T.] Houston, she went ahead and went to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], she went to University of North Carolina [UNC] at Chapel Hill, she went to Auburn University Engineering School [Auburn, Alabama] and she got her Ph.D. in computer science. My younger daughter [Kaiulni M. Houston], she is now at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and she is a full-pledged doctoral candidate in chemistry, and she expects to get her degree next year. So--but I recognize a little later that I'm not so sure I should have pushed the women as hard as I was pushed. Because they're telling me now, look you got us to get all this education and stuff now, now we are finding men who are not as educated as we are and they don't want to talk to us. We pushed for education and do all of these things and kept going like you told us, and you got a lot of men who did not do this. And the men who are around, they a little shy about talking with us because they think we are over educated for them. But, they are wonderful daughters, I wouldn't exchange for nothing in the world. My wife [Virginia Lawrence]--(unclear) I say they are spoiled rotten but they are excellent children and they have landed on their feet. So much so that I hear them, I still talk with them but I don't worry about them. I like the way they have developed themselves, personally, academically, and character wise in their job setting and in school, I'm very pleased with what they are. Now my wife, she spent her life in public education. Incidentally, my younger daughter She went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]. You talked about [Paul] Gueye [also a HistoryMaker] there. She went to Hampton and studied chemistry and then she went to UNC, Chapel Hill. My wife, she has always loved children and nurturing children, and so she went to Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama] and got a degree in elementary education. And then she came out and she did some further study when I was at Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana] and she studied some at Georgia State [University, Atlanta, Georgia] and got a master's degree, eventually at Armstrong Savannah State College [Armstrong Atlantic State University, Savannah, Georgia], in education. And she was a classroom teacher and then she was selected to be an instructional specialist where she helped teachers to develop their teaching skills and maximize their productivity, and while she was a teacher she was elected teacher of the year locally and she was elected regionally and state-wide, and as a instructional specialist she was the person that principals liked to have around them because if she was there they knew they didn't have to worry about their teachers. Their teachers were going to be doing what they needed to do, if she was on their immediate team. So we have been a family of educators and we have done a lot of things together, and we've enjoyed one another. And two things that we have done together and I think is very fascinating and that is, we also talked about how you learn and grow from traveling. And we have traveled together as a family in over half of the states in the United States and they both have been to foreign countries, my daughters. But my wife and I have done more traveling, I have traveled in all fifty states in the United States and I have traveled in six different continents and over fifty different countries. I have done more traveling than any of them. But I got them involved in traveling to learn how you can grow and become gratified from still learning from cultures and what people do. And so we are very pleased with that and we are fortunate to have a small home in Georgia and a larger home here [Elizabeth City, North Carolina] so we relate to our relatives in Georgia every year. We go down and spend lots of time in Georgia and we relate to our colleagues up here that we came to know while we were here for the past twenty-six years--past thirty years now almost. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 28180 Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to the legacy question but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as being a genuine, down to earth example of an American who proved that education is the greatest, the greatest commodity that you can get that can change your life and help you change the world. I want it to be where you say, hey education worked for him. He didn't have any money at the beginning, he didn't have any name recognition, he was not from any great family but he took advantage of education. And he changed his world and changed the world of so many around him. And that's what I'd like my legacy to be. The power of education. And it starts with you as the individual and you using it to impact community and nurture others. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much, sir...