 Story_ID: 23921 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewing today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Patrice Coleman. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: The entire name. Mary, M-A-R-Y, Alberta, A-L-B-E-R-T-A, Styles, S-T-Y-L-E-S, Harris, H-A-R-R-I-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 26, 1949, Nashville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: My title is President and CEO of Biotechnical Communications. My occupation, I am a research scientist, and a business owner. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is today's date? Speaker 2: December 11, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay, in your offices, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 23922 Speaker 1: Okay now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask that only require a short answer. First one is what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Barbecue spareribs. Speaker 1: Okay, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Yellow. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes I do, fall. Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Hard to say, Paris [France]. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not that I can think of right now. Speaker 1: Okay, well if you think of something-- Speaker 2: Not right now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Not right now. I think I wrote it down last night when I looked at the questions, but I can't remember it right away. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So I'm going to ask about your family history now. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but your mother's side first so we can keep the two sides straight. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Thought of the favorite saying soon as you said that. Do you want it? Speaker 1: Yeah, well what is it? Speaker 2: Favorite saying; "All that glitters is not gold." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, that's my favorite saying. I say it a lot. Story_ID: 23923 Speaker 1: All right. Well can, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Sure. Margaret, M-A-R-G-A-R-E-T, Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Bays, B-A-Y-S, Styles, S-T-Y-L-E-S, Sharpe, S-H-A-R-P-E. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: April 11, 1918, Nashville, Tennessee. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace that side, can you trace them back to the Emancipation and beyond, and what were they doing in history? Speaker 2: I, I know that my mother's, my mother's grandmother had been a cook on a plantation and I believe in Mississippi. And she was married to a, a field hand who was whipped brutally for coming to the house to talk to her. I remember they would tell this story over and over because she was black and Cherokee Indian. So I, I do remember that and I remember that my mother's mother was the first African American to work in a printing house in Nashville, Tennessee. I guess in those days they set the type, I guess it's linotype. I don't quite remember what it was called, but she was the first African American to have that kind of job. I remember that my mother grew up in a very nice house in Nashville. I remember because I visited as a child. And my mother's father was a dentist. And her parents divorced when she was a little girl and I think her father moved to Chicago [Illinois]. And so she raised by my grandmother who was a single parent, working single parent at the time. My, my grandmother on my mother's side had a beautiful singing voice, but she also played the organ and she was quite an accomplished organist and she played the organ for the, for the church. My mother inherited that music capability, so much so that she played by ear and played quite well and went to college on a music scholarship. So I, I do remember that. And my mother loved Nashville, she loved everything about Nashville and often spoke of it quite fondly. She met my father in Nashville. He was a student at Meharry Medical College. Speaker 1: Okay, now did your--so your mother went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: No actually she didn't, she went to Tennessee State [University, Nashville]. Speaker 1: Tennessee State, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, she's a Tennessee State graduate. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay, now did, do you have your great grandmother or great grandfather's name? Speaker 2: I don't. I have my grandmother's name on my mother's side. Her name was Alberta Houston. And actually it would be Alberta Bays Houston because Houston was her second husband. And--but he died--I don't think they were married that long and he passed away. And my mother's father's name was Fred Bays. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were named after your grandmother? Speaker 2: Yes, both grandmothers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, grandmother on my mother's side and grandmother on my father's side. Story_ID: 23924 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now did, did your mother [Margaret Sharpe] have any stories about growing up that she shared with you, about what it was like in Nashville? Speaker 2: She did, she, she talked a lot about, about the African American community in Nashville and she felt it was fairly close-knit when she was growing up. She loved to say, "You didn't do anything wrong because if you did, Miss So-and-so down the street would get you and then she'd drag you home and tell your mother and then you'd get another," another--where it was this very close knit community that, that I recall. She did talk about the guy on the corner who owned the corner grocery store, very fair skinned gentleman who had gone to vote actually, exercised his right to vote. And as a result, they burned the store down. And she always used to say that it was important for African Americans to vote because she knew people who had been harmed for exercising their right to vote. And so she felt it was, she always felt it was very important that people when it was election day, that they get to the polls because people had lost their lives, they had lost their businesses and their homes just for the simple act of, of registering their vote. So she used to talk about that a lot too. Speaker 1: So Nashville is the kind of city like Memphis [Tennessee] where black people could vote, but there may be some risk involved, or-- Speaker 2: There was risk involved at the--there had to have been risk in order for this, this to have happened and it seemed to have frightened the whole community that this would have happened. But the store was rebuilt and you know all turned out well, but of course as we know, those things sometimes didn't, did not end well. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah but she, she loved Nashville and she talked about it being I think it was referred to as the Athens of the South because of all of the schools that were there. Speaker 1: That's right. Vanderbilt's there-- Speaker 2: Vanderbilt [University], yeah, Fisk [University], Tennessee State [University], Meharry [Medical College] is there. And so she felt it was a very cultured place. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where did she go to high school? Speaker 2: Pearl High School. Speaker 1: That's right. I've heard that, yeah Pearl High School. Speaker 2: I think everybody who was black went to Pearl High School. Speaker 1: Okay. And okay--and your mother, she majored in what at Tennessee State? Did you tell me already? Speaker 2: Yes, she actually went on a music scholarship. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But she actually, she actually wound up majoring in business. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did, did she start her own business? Speaker 2: No she didn't. She--once she graduated, she went to work. Actually she went to work at Meharry Medical School and in the anatomy department. And of course that's where she met my father and then she left Nashville for a while to work at Homer G. Phillips, which is the black hospital in St. Louis [Missouri] and-- Speaker 1: That's where your father did his residency? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And--but she went, she went back to Meharry and worked in the school of nursing for Hulda Lyttle for whom the school of nursing is named and they went on to be great friends until Hulda Lyttle died. She married a guy named Frazier, Dr. Frazier who was the first black physician to serve south Florida. And he used to see his patients with horse and buggy. But at any rate, she knew his wife from Nashville. She had given her her job there at the Hulda Lyttle School of Nursing. So, so she was not a business owner. She married my father and then went to Miami [Florida] to help him establish his practice in Miami. Story_ID: 23925 Speaker 1: Okay, so now let's go to your father's side now. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Logical time to do it. Can, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: George, G-E-O-R-G-E, Wilson, W-I-L-S-O-N, Styles. Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember it off the top of my head. I put it on the, on the form. They asked for it on the form. It's on the form. Speaker 1: Was he, was he much younger than your mother, or, or older. Speaker 2: Older. Speaker 1: Older than your mother. Speaker 2: Yeah, by about four years I think. He was born in 1914, maybe 1913, somewhere around in there. Speaker 1: Okay. And where was he born? Speaker 2: Miami, Florida. Speaker 1: Okay. All right now again, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and can you take them back to the 19th century too? What, what were they doing? Speaker 2: Well my, my, my father's side of the family is interesting in that they're Bahamian and in many, many Bahamian people came to the United States back in the early 1900s from the Bahamas. My grandfather who was George Matthew Styles, was a entrepreneur. He owned several successful businesses in Miami and he was married. My grandmother was Mary Elizabeth Styles. And between the two of them, they had five children. And my dad was the only, six children cause I have five aunts, so five girls and one boy. And my father was, was the one boy. They all grew up Miami, a fairly prominent family in Miami. Even to this day I have to laugh if I go home and I say my name is Styles, somebody will say you know your dad delivered me, or my grandfather was friendly with your grandfather. So a family very well known in Miami. Hard workers, everybody worked hard and that was kind of the expected that you would do that. And it was expected that everybody would succeed and that everybody would go to college. And so my grandmother was--she did not work outside the home. She raised these six children. Everybody went to college. And my father went on from there to go on to medical school. Speaker 1: Okay. Now where did he go to high school in Miami? Speaker 2: Booker Washington High School. Speaker 1: So many of those. Speaker 2: So many, yes, Booker Washington High School. From there to FAMU, Florida A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical] University [Tallahassee]. He came back to Miami and taught school for a while and then went to medical school because medical school was expensive and they didn't have the kinds of financial aid and support that we have now. So he worked and then he went back to medical school. Speaker 1: Okay, for medical school he went to? Speaker 2: Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Meharry and then from there to Homer G. Phillips [St. Louis, Missouri] and then you know we're back to Miami. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 23926 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: You know I, I don't know. I think--I don't know. I know they met while, while you know she [mother, Margaret Sharpe] was working there [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and he [father, George Styles] was a student. And I think she played the piano for a music group and he could sing really well. And I think that's how they met. And she was playing for the group and he was a member of the group, and that's how they got to know each other, yeah. Speaker 1: Was this a gospel group, or-- Speaker 2: It wasn't a gospel group. It was a popular music group. You know and they'd play for the dance or something like that, yeah. Speaker 1: That was the era of big band music in most parts. Speaker 2: Yes it was. Speaker 1: So this, was this a pretty good sized-- Speaker 2: It was a nice size group, yeah. And, and he could sing. And he sang and she played for the group, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now I forgot to ask you if your dad had any stories about growing up in Miami [Florida]. Speaker 2: You know I'm sure he must have told--my father died when I was eight, so I don't remember a ton of stories. I mean I just kind of remember being in that presence of, of a larger than life personality who was just quite gregarious and always pretty fun loving. But I don't remember any specific story, it's so long ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Any stories about him that, that people tell? Speaker 2: I know my mother said once they had traveled to, to Cuba, no they were in Mexico. They traveled a lot. They traveled quite a bit and she said they were in, in Mexico and they were sitting there having dinner and she said all of a sudden the lights began to sway and the, the room began to move. They had never experienced an earthquake so they didn't know what was happening. And she said my dad didn't know any Spanish. He knew a, a little bit. He jumped up and he says [speaks in Spanish; que pasa?] and everybody looked at him it was like whoa, whoa, whoa, why is he saying that? I think it means hey, what's going on or what's happening. And she said they got their stuff and ran out. But no, I, I--you know she just used to tell us, my mother used to just tell us funny things like that about him, about his, you know loving to be out, loving to travel, loving to be around people. Story_ID: 23927 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. All right now when you think about your parents' personalities and interests and hobbies and the way they walked and talked and looked, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: My dad, yeah. I have a sister who is a lot more like my mother. But and I guess we'll talk about her in a little bit. But I am definitely more like my father. Starting with my interest in science. I used to think when I was a kid that it was a good afternoon if I could sit there and go through his medical books. And I did that since I was a little, little kid. I learned how to read doing that. So I enjoyed, always enjoyed it and I always had a real knack for science and real love of it. And very much the entrepreneur. To take a slightly different path, just before my father died, he had, he had plans and I actually still have them, for a string of clinics. He had decided that general medicine was--it, it required too much. This was in the days of house calls. So you know we don't do that anymore, but in those days you did. This was back in the '50s [1950s] and he decided that there was, there was a real need to have clinics and centers that focus specifically on OB/GYN [Obstetrics/Gynecology] issues and delivering babies and women's health issues. And so he actually had plans to build and staff clinics starting from Fort Lauderdale [Florida] coming all the way back down to Miami [Florida]. So he was--he always thought out of the box. He was, he was really a, a, a visionary when it came to health care and the business of health care, as well as other business ventures in the city of Miami. So I think I do fall into that category and am not risk averse. In fact kind of embrace that and enjoy it, and it kind of gives me a real high to go--to, to move in that direction. So yeah I'm a lot like him. Story_ID: 23928 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now you have a, you have just one sister? Speaker 2: I have a sister and brother. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, well tell us where you, you fit in the lineup and-- Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I was the first. My sister is second and my sister is a Ph.D. in math education. And you know very accomplished in her own right. She is, she is very different. This is a, this is a person who used to--when we would go grocery shopping, get a kick out of adding up the grocery bill before the check, before the cashier. This was fun to her. She would do it in her head. And I'm not that great in math. I'm okay, but she was a whiz and she would do this and then she would say, she would burst out laughing and say, "I'll bet you're wondering how I did that, aren't you?" But she would always be right and she could do it faster than the lady at the checking account [check-out], so we knew she had a talent for math early, early on. She has taught at the college level and she lives in West Virginia. And so she's taught there. She currently--she used to be in charge of professional development for the state of West Virginia when the governor appointed her to that position. And now she runs an educational foundation in West Virginia. Speaker 1: Now, now what is her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Patricia Sandra Styles. Her last name is Kusimo, K-U-S-I-M-O. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, and she's a--we are, we're I guess what they call Irish twins. I think we're eighteen months apart in, in age, yeah. Speaker 1: That's what they call that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think they call it Irish twins. Speaker 1: I didn't know that. Speaker 2: Yeah we're, we're very--people, people think we're the same age but we're not, I'm a little bit older. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're very close in age and did your mother dress you all alike? Did you kind of look alike? Speaker 2: Yes, yes she dressed us alike. We were always together. And in fact when we were recently in Miami [Florida] for a funeral of a family friend, somebody said, "You know, I was really happy to see, see you and your sister together. In fact I was wondering if she was going to come down and I thought it would be so nice to see those two little girls together again." And I thought we're not little girls anymore. She said, "We used to always see you all together." And I said to her, I said, "You think we were together that much because in our minds we were not." We segregated ourselves--in those days if you were in, if you were in a grade and your brother or sister was in a grade, you really didn't want to have too much to do with them cause they were younger than you and they didn't have--so we thought we were pretty segregated. She says, "Well I guess we were together more than, more than we realized." 'Cause that's how people remember us, as always together. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And your brother now, now he's the youngest. Speaker 2: He is the baby. He's four years younger than I am, yeah. Speaker 1: What's his name, what's his-- Speaker 2: His name is George Wilson Styles, Junior. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he's a minister. Speaker 1: Now what denomination is your family, or is he the--or is he different from everybody? Speaker 2: He's different, he's different. We, we were raised Episcopalian. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And none of us are Episcopalians now, but we all grew up in an Episcopal church. Speaker 1: Okay, and he's now what kind of a reverend? Speaker 2: He--there's a, I guess it's a non-denominational church. I think it's called Jesus People Ministries in Miami. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right so he's--was, was he very, very much younger than the rest of you [unclear]? Speaker 2: He is, and he has a different talent. His, his talent, he inherited the musical talent from my parents. And in fact he was a music major in college. Speaker 1: Okay, okay so he majored in music. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a music major. My sister was a math major, and I was a biology major. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So we're all very different. Story_ID: 23929 Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I have many early childhood memories. Speaker 1: Well one earliest. Speaker 2: Let's talk about my best childhood memory. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I, I--you know when you say earliest childhood memory, I could tell you my earliest childhood memory is living in a section of Miami [Florida] called Overtown when my parents first moved to Miami. That's my earliest childhood memory. Speaker 1: Okay that's the earliest, okay. Speaker 2: That's the earliest memory, and those were--I didn't know if you're familiar with this, this area of town, but it's where most--it's where almost all black people lived in Miami at the time. It's an area right outside of downtown Miami. It's where almost everybody--blacks--where my grandparents settled when they came. And when my father came back to Miami from medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], my grandfather had a house there. And so we moved into that, that house. It wasn't my grandparents' house, they owned another house and so we moved into that house and I can remember living there and kind of what the, the neighborhood at the time was like. That was very, very small, very young. I mean maybe two years old. But I don't, you know, a very long time ago. That's my earliest memory. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Childhood memory. Speaker 1: Overtown, now that--I remember there was a--PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] did something recently about Muhammad Ali's fight with Sonny Liston, the first fight and him training in Miami in Overtown. And there was a-- Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think he trained. I--if they said that, I don't think that's correct. I think he trained in Allapattah which is on the way to Overtown. I remember Muhammad Ali living in Allapattah and would see him on my way home from school on the bus. A very handsome man, so all the young girls, you know would love to look at him. But yeah he was not--I don't know, maybe he trained at a gym in Overtown, I don't know. But this, this is an area that is near downtown Miami, but it's all black. The high school was there, St. Agnus Church was there, it's, it was all black. Speaker 1: Theaters? Speaker 2: Everything. It was the heart of black Miami, yeah. Story_ID: 23930 Speaker 1: Okay, we were just talking about the Overtown section of Miami [Florida]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That, that's where you lived when your parents [mother, Margaret Sharpe; father, George Styles] first moved back. Speaker 2: When we first--when they first came to Miami and then they didn't stay there long. We moved out to Brownsville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, and Brownsville, all black neighborhood out near--going towards the airport and I remember it's funny how as time changes and you, you grown and you learn. But the reason we moved out there was because my grandfather had built this lovely home for my grandmother and he took her out there and she said it's too far away from everything. It's too far away from Overtown. So she wouldn't move into the house. So my father said, "Okay I'll buy the house from you," and we moved into the house. And that's how we wound up out there. Story_ID: 23931 Speaker 1: We always ask this question: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Some of the smells, barbecue, clothes drying on the line, leaves burning in the fall, the smells. Those are the things that I remember, very pleasant memories for me. Those are the things that I remember smelling. The things that I remember seeing, people walking to church on Sunday morning because churches were in the neighborhood and you could walk to them at, at that time. And it was a time for people to walk and talk with their kids on the way to and from church. I remember of course walking to school and there was no fear of getting snatched or kidnapped or anything like that, or the grocery store or the drug store, the neighborhood. I remember black businesses in the neighborhood thriving. A community that was pretty much self contained and doing quite well, thank you. I--from everything from the hospital, the drug store, the grocery store, the dry cleaners, all of it right there. Everybody knew everybody. I remember being in the hairdresser way too many hours spent, spent there trying to get out of there. But I remember that. I remember the music. I remember the entertainers, I remember the Sir John Hotel in Overtown was recently featured in a series called 'Magic City' on TV. But I remember being there often with my father [George Styles], with my mother [Margaret Sharpe]. There was a hotel attached to it and so when black entertainers came, they couldn't stay on Miami beach [Florida], they stayed at the Sir John Hotel. It was quite nice. And I remember they had the best hamburgers and cheeseburgers in the whole world. If you went into the dining hall, the restaurant there, not the dining hall. And I remember, I remember going to the Ebony Fashion Fair and thinking, "Wow, aren't those girls beautiful, they're just beautiful." These are, these are--if you ask me what, what do I remember visually, and, and I remember one of the most fun things for, for our family was to go to the classic football game. And that's because one, a lot of times they would play Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee] so my parents would have lots of friends down from out of town. And of course my father would be rooting for FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallassee, Florida] and my mother would be rooting for Tennessee State. But as young children we never went to the football game, that was always at night. And so we were with babysitter, but what we did get to do was go to the parade that preceded that. And this was a very big deal in Miami, it was a huge deal. And of course Florida A & M [University] had this outstanding band. It was called 'Marching One Hundred' at the time with this precision marching. And this parade would just--people would come from everywhere to see the parade and I can remember going year after year and they had a, a section of the parade which I still enjoy when I go to the Bahamas on vacation, the Junkanoo Section. And I don't know if you're familiar with Junkanoo, but it is a carnival-like atmosphere and dancing and costuming that's very similar to Carnival in Brazil. And it is the most fun ever, it's the most fun ever. So yes, these are--I, I, you know I remember eating conch fritters as a kid and, and which is a Bahamian dish and pigeon peas and rice and fried fish and all those things that I guess the doctor says you should steer clear of now. But yeah those are the things that I remember about Miami [Florida] in those, in those early years. Story_ID: 23932 Speaker 1: Okay so where you lived out in, what's it's called? Speaker 2: Brown Sub [in Miami, Florida]. Speaker 1: Brown-- Speaker 2: Brownsville, it's actually called Brownsville. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it--the people who lived there called Brown Sub which was a slang for Brown Subdivision. And as I said, as you get older and you realize what's really happening, you realize that some of these names were not very--well it could have been named better. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so Brown Subdivision. Now what, what is the implica--I mean was the implication that, that it was a black neighborhood? Speaker 2: Absolutely yeah, absolutely, yes. And, well yeah there's no other thing to say about it. And, and, and I mean you know some of the, some of the things that, that people would, would complain about now for instance with regard to the zoning, the flight path was right over this black neighborhood. Now you know those planes could have gone any other way. They could have gone over Coral Gables [Florida], they could have gone over--but it was right over the black neighborhood and so I remember that as a matter of routine if you were talking to someone, or you were talking on the phone, it was just an automatic response that you stopped talking till the airplane finished flying over. And then you resumed your conversation. In, in, in this day and age, what would happen is that they would have an airport, there would be a neighborhood, the neighbors would complain, they would go to zoning and say you can't have a flight path pattern over the neighborhood. It disturbs, you know it disturbs the every day activities of the neighborhood. But in, back in the '50s [1950s], we had no voice for that kind of thing. That, that would not--I mean you know going to complain to somebody about that? No way. So yeah. Speaker 1: It sounds similar to Aurora, Colorado which is like a black community, or is becoming more Hispanic now I think but it was a black community in Denver [Colorado]. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is, yeah this is akin to things like putting toxic waste dumps in our community or near our communities, or in our community. It's the same kind of thing. Speaker 1: What was the Brown Subdivision developed by African American entrepreneurs or-- Speaker 2: I don't think so, I don't think so, no, no. And it's not like that. It's like, it's, it's more like you own some property, you put up a house. When we think of a community being developed, we think of a developer going in and developing. No. It was a long time before I remember that we had connected to the sewage line. So I mean this was an area that white people did not want to live in and black people had property there and they put homes there. So there's no consistency in design of the homes. I mean the homes are, are different because it wasn't developed by a developer. Speaker 1: Okay, cause you're saying your grandfather actually built the house, had this house built and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, so what, what did the house look like? What was the-- Speaker 2: Lovely house. Three bedrooms, two bathrooms, you know a garage, large family room. He was a doctor so he had, he had money and, and, and the house was--it was, it was quite nice. Nice yard, fence, flowers, hedges. And again--and it was a nice neighborhood. But you could have our house and then right next to it have a house that was much smaller, that was not quite as nice. Neat, clean, but not nearly as elaborate. Again, no consistency in design. And no consistency with respect to income because all black people lived in the same neighborhood. And, and in a way that was kind of a good thing. Speaker 1: Okay, in, in, what sense? Just a- Speaker 2: Why do I say it was a good thing? I say it was a good thing because you got to know many, many different types of people and they got to know you. And after all, my father [George Styles] made his living by treating patients in the black community. So it was great. Speaker 1: Okay, so all right. Speaker 2: For me it was great. Our family thought it was great. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They knew us, we knew them, yeah. Speaker 1: People all, you know almost always lament the end of those kind of communities, you know when they participated in the integration process. Speaker 2: Yes and, yes and my mother [Margaret Sharpe] if she were here she would say, "I don't know if this was such a good thing, this integration." I know a lot of people who feel that way, my age. They've heard their parents say it because these communities were so self sufficient and self contained. Story_ID: 23933 Speaker 1: Okay, so well tell us about what you liked to do growing, growing up. You said you were very interested in science-- Speaker 2: Very, from an early age. Speaker 1: --and [unclear] practice, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I liked to do the things that most kids liked to do, ride the bike, roller skate, play with our friends in the neighborhood. I remember there was a carnival that used to come every year, would setup in the neighborhood. And one year my mother would get us dressed, because she had three children, so she'd get me dressed, my sister [Patricia Styles], my brother [George Styles, Jr.]. And then she would get dressed. And so we were outside once and my sister said to me, "What do you think, what do you think if we get that water hose and turn on that water hose?" And I said, "Well that sounds like a good idea." We were really little. And so I got the hose, turned it on, and then she says, "Why don't you put it, put the hose down my back?" I said, "Okay." I wet her, and then my brother was standing there and he says, "Do me Mary, do me." I said, "Okay." I did him. And my mother comes to the door, she's ready to go and we're, we're all wet, we're really wet by this time. We--everybody got a spanking, everybody got a spanking, got sent to bed and I kept saying, "But the sun is still out, the sun is still out." 'Cause we were--and she says, "I don't care." And I said, "But we won't get to--." She says, "You can look at the carnival through the window." And that's how we spent the rest of the evening till it was too dark to see anything, looking at the carnival out the bedroom window. But-- Speaker 1: Did you ever get a chance to go to it? Speaker 2: No, we didn't go that year. But when she said--when you asked me what I liked to do, we were very typical children. I mean you know we did all, all the good stuff and some of the bad stuff and you know, trick or treating at Halloween. Christmas time was always fun. It was just--those are--just every day kinds of things. Now when I got a little bit older, I was always a really good student, I must say. Really good student, always--pretty much an A student and all through school. And enjoyed that. Story_ID: 23934 Speaker 1: I was in the second class of African Americans to go to Jackson High School [Miami, Florida]. Now the reason I say it like that is because back in that time, which was the '60s [1960s], schools were not integrated in Miami. And so Jackson High School when, I, I think there was some legislation passed or the school board was forced to adhere to integrating the schools in Miami. And so what they decided to do was that they would come over from the high school and they would interview--and this seems inconceivable now, but it was very much an accepted practice--they would interview students to see which black students could come to the white high school. Speaker 2: So they could choose which ones they wanted. Speaker 1: They, and they did, they did do that. That's exactly what happened. And I didn't really want to go. My mother kept saying you are not--you're going to go on over there and I thought, "Oh, no I wanted to go to the black high school." And she says, "Oh no, no, you have this opportunity and you're going to go." And so I think the first year they selected one, two, three, four students. And then the year that I went they took about twenty. So I was in that first group of black students really to go through Jackson High School in Miami. And I was, I was not happy about being there, I really wasn't. I wasn't happy about being there. Story_ID: 23935 Speaker 1: Now I want to pick this up a little later, but I want to take you back to grade school. We didn't talk about grade school. And what, what, what grade school did you go to? Speaker 2: I went to grade school [in Miami, Florida], I went to two. I went to Holy Redeemer for a short while and then transferred to Bethune Elementary, Bethune Elementary and it was all black. Speaker 1: And Bethune is named after of course Mary-- Speaker 2: Mary McCloud Bethune, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's a public school, Bethune Elementary. Speaker 2: It is, yes. Speaker 1: Did it serve the students right there in Brown Sub[division]? Speaker 2: It did, it was the area, it was the area public school, elementary school. Speaker 1: Now did you like--did they have any biology or science in grade school that you remember? Speaker 2: Yeah you know, and I didn't like it then. I didn't like it in school. It, it, it, it didn't adhere to what I had been reading at home, and it was pretty boring. I don't' think we had very good teachers who taught science for elementary school. Or at least it wasn't holding my interest at that point. Speaker 1: Okay, did you have much equipment, you know in terms of-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Microscopes and-- Speaker 2: No, it was all textbook learning. And science really is a hands-on discipline. So it's, it's very difficult for I think a young child to conceptualize science without some kind of hands-on demonstration. And so you're pretty much relegated to reading the book and kind of answering the questions at the end of the chapter, boring. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you, you suspect the stud--the teachers really didn't know much about it. Speaker 2: Yeah I, I think--and we know this now that you really do need to be trained in how to teach science and math to young people. It makes a huge difference. And I just don't think that expertise was there. Story_ID: 23936 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now was there any references in popular culture to science that you picked up on? Like on television or in the movies. Speaker 2: As a young child? No. No, no, no. I was--I started to think about 'Mr. Rogers', but I don't think so. Speaker 1: There was a 'Mr. Wizard'. Speaker 2: 'Mr. Wizard', that's what it was, yeah I think I watched 'Mr. Wizard', but that was it, yeah. Speaker 1: You know, even though he passed away, what last year, Don Herbert. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I would have thought he would have been gone long before now, but okay. Yeah, yeah. You know television basically, God, 'Kate Smith', 'Lassie', 'Rin Tin Tin', 'Flash Gordon'. These are some of the things that are coming to my mind from way back in the day. I mean yeah. And remember television used to go off with a test pattern, you know in the evening and wouldn't sign back on till morning time sometime, seven, eight o'clock in the morning, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah I think you're right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: With the Indian head, did you have an Indian head test pattern? Speaker 2: No, we had the circle with the, with the cross in the middle, that was it, yeah, yeah, yeah. Long time ago. That's way back when 'Art Linkletter's House Party' was still on the radio, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so did your family get a television early on, or-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, not a television, a television--almost everybody's bedroom had a television. Everybody's room had a television and then a major television in the, in the family room, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay you all televisionized early. Speaker 2: We televisionized early and in those days they were--the smaller ones were made out of metal and I got the bright idea, cause I'm the science person, that if you put crayon on top of it and let it sit there long enough, it would melt, which I decided to do. Of course I got a spanking for this. And it would even melt and go down through those little grids. Speaker 1: That's what I was afraid of [unclear] thinking that. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, oh well. Speaker 1: You didn't ruin a TV did you? Speaker 2: I did. Yes as I said I got a spanking for that, that was not an ingenious discovery. My mom didn't think that was too exciting. She, yeah she didn't--she wasn't happy about that. Story_ID: 23937 Speaker 1: Were you at all interested in fixing the television set or when it broke down or you know, testing tubes. I know in those days you could take the tubes out. Speaker 2: I got science kits as a kid for Christmas gifts and loved it, loved everything about it. You'd use those--I, I also have the talent that I can put things together. I don't really need a diagram to do it. It's kind of intuitive. So I've been doing that for a long time. So I used to do stuff like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay and what about nature? Now as someone who's interested in biology, did you, you know, spend much time exploring nature? Speaker 2: No, I didn't like outside. It's so hot in Miami [Florida], I didn't enjoy being outside, yeah. I was--and it would seem like a natural gravitation, but no because of the weather. It's hot there and it rains, it's hot and rainy and it, it really wasn't something that I took to enjoy to be outside with, no. Prefer to be inside. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah doing stuff, yeah. Story_ID: 23938 Speaker 1: Okay now what--now did you go to middle school? Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Okay and what was the name of your middle school? Speaker 2: Brownsville Junior High. Wonderful place, wonderful school. The principal was Ida Radcliffe, a no-nonsense woman, very smart and she had been principal of an, of another school. I think it was one of the high schools. And this school, this junior high school was built new and she was given the school to run and told that she could handpick the faculty, which she did. And she staffed it with almost all young teachers coming right out of their training, or had been teaching maybe five years or less. And they were an energetic, dynamic group of teachers who had a lot of enthusiasm, a lot of interest in the students, there were lots of clubs and after school activities and they worked very well with the kids. It was a wonderful, wonderful experience. That is where I really began to develop my science talent in seventh grade. So middle school for us was seventh, eighth and ninth grade. And I had a teacher, Robert Young, who was teaching so that he could earn money to go to medical school. So he had been a biology major in college with a minor in chemistry. And taught us as if he were teaching a college lecture class. He taught us how to take notes. He taught us the scientific method. He taught us how to do an experiment, how to think critically and this was very, very exciting to me. So that's when I figured out that I probably had this, this gift. Eight grade science teacher reinforced that. She was Ursula Wells. Very dynamic individual, very smart woman who just built on what Robert Young had started, they worked in teams so they knew what the other one had done. And then my ninth grade year, Earl Allen also working so that he could go to medical school. Just kind of rounded it up. I wound up winning the science award when I graduated. Four, four different awards I think, English, science, home economics and there was one other, I can't even remember what it was. But it was a wonderful, wonderful experience. I'll never forget it, it was great, it was great and I, and I think if we had teachers who taught like that now, and maybe we do, I just don't hear about it, our kids would be so much better. Nobody tolerated nonsense. It just, it just wasn't tolerated. It was--maybe it was unusual as a public school, but it wasn't tolerated. You were expected to show up, you were expected to do your best, whatever that was. And people recognized that students had individual talents and they nurtured those talents, and those kids went on--we all went on to do well, really well. Story_ID: 23939 Speaker 1: Now middle school there's a lot of activity nationwide when you were in middle school. One thing was the March on Washington [for Jobs and Freedom, Washington, District of Columbia] in '63 [1963]. Do you remember that? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Did anybody in your family go? Speaker 2: I remember the March on Washington and the reason I remember it is because I believe it was in August. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I was getting my hair done and they had it on in the beauty shop. And I was sitting there and I remember everybody saying how brave this minister [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] from Atlanta [Georgia] was. Of course it was kind of foreign, again he's a Baptist minister and most people, a lot of black people that I knew were Episcopalian. So he was kind of considered a troublemaker, but they felt that he was brave and they felt that someone needed to do it, and they were all amazed that all these folks had come to Washington to support him. So that's why it was on, on TV. That's why they had it on on the TV in the beauty shop because everybody was so fascinated that he could bring all these people together. So yeah I do remember it very well. I remember that, I remember of course when he was killed. Speaker 1: Your father being a, a doctor and your mother working at--she was working at FAMU [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] at that point. Did they, were they a member of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement for Colored People]? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And one--I grew up reading the 'Crisis' magazine, yeah. Well all the magazines, 'Jet', 'Ebony' and, and 'Crisis' came to the house. Speaker 1: Was there a local black paper in Miami [Florida]? Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah. 'Miami Times' is still in existence and of course like all black newspapers, it was, it, it covered what was going on in the black community in Miami. And our family was friends with the publisher of the, of that newspaper. Speaker 1: Now who, who was the publisher? Speaker 2: Garth Reeves. Speaker 1: Garth Reeves, I've heard that name. Yeah I've heard the name. Speaker 2: And in fact Garth was friendly, Garth's father was actually the publisher and he has since died. And then Garth took it over, who was my father's age. They were friends and so yeah but we knew their family. And their, their kids, his daughter was friendly with my sister. Again, we segregated ourselves by age, right. It's only like a year's difference but she's my sister's friend. And he had a son, but the son has passed away. Story_ID: 23940 Speaker 1: Okay, so the March on Washington [for Jobs and Freedom, Washington, District of Columbia, 1963] and did you see the speech, Dr. [Martin Luther] King's speech? Speaker 2: Yes, and, and, and as I said, I can--I spent way too many hours in the beauty salon, so that's how I got to see a lot of it 'cause I was there so long trying to get out, but yeah I did. And I remember thinking--, 'cause I like to write, I remember thinking, what pretty words. I was young so I didn't really grab the real significance but I remember thinking what pretty words and how somebody could put those particular set of words together and everybody seemed to be so impressed with the words. Of course now that I'm older, I was a teenager, you know, what thirteen, twelve, thirteen years old. Speaker 1: Yeah you were, you'd have been yeah thirteen. Speaker 2: Yeah, twelve or thirteen, yeah. So but-- Speaker 1: Yeah, you'd have been thirteen. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so -- Speaker 1: It was on the 26th of June. Speaker 2: I remember, I remember hearing it and thinking what pretty words, yeah. Speaker 1: Now I'm coming out of my head here with these, with the March [on Washington] and all that but I'm looking here at the outline. Your father [George Styles] passed in '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: No, '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: '58 [1958]. Speaker 2: '58 [1958]. Speaker 1: So you were eight years old, they have it wrong here. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was eight years old. Speaker 1: Okay, so let me change this. But okay, all right, so your father--yes you did say he passed when you were about eight. Yeah, that is-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, so you--it was just your--had your mother [Margaret Sharpe] remarried or anything by then, by '63 [1963]? Speaker 2: Yes, my mother remarried and they ran a business, they had a business, a service station which was quite interesting because, and at the time my brother and sister and I thought this was horrible. We had to work there. And so while everybody else was out kind of doing their thing, we were working. And that could be anything from cleaning the bathrooms at the service station, to sweeping the floors, to handling the cash register, to running to get--whatever needed to be done, we were it. But the interesting thing about that was again it gave me a lot of insight into people in the African American community because many people came to the station, one 'cause they knew my mother, to get their cars filled up every week. So we get to see everybody, including the funeral home director Athalie Range. Did, I don't know if you had her name, her name was Athalie Range and she went on-- Speaker 1: A-T-H-- Speaker 2: A-T-H-A-L-I-E, and she went on to become a Commissioner in Miami [Florida] and do all sorts of wonderful things before she died. And her son-- Speaker 1: Now her last name is R-A-- Speaker 2: R-A-N-G-E, Range. Very prominent family in Miami. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very prominent to this day. And so--but the service station was situated on the corner of 15th Avenue and 62nd Street, which is a major intersection in Liberty City [Miami]. So again, got to see a lot of people, talk to a lot of people. Story_ID: 23941 Speaker 1: Now tell us about Liberty City. Liberty City has figured prominently in almost--at one time it seemed like almost semi-annual riots there in Miami [Florida]. Speaker 2: Well it wasn't like that when we were there. What the, these neighborhoods have changed over time. Liberty City was much like Brown Sub[division; Brownsville], it was like going from--it was like going from southwest Atlanta to going to West End. It was just another black neighborhood. It was a large black neighborhood, but it was, it was another black neighborhood. They were--, they were contiguous in that unless you knew that you were in Liberty City, you wouldn't really know that you had left Brown Sub except you knew where Liberty City was. And I think it's in the city limits, maybe that's, that's why and Brown Sub is outside of the city limits. So again it really is like going from southwest Atlanta into the city of Atlanta [Georgia]. And they had a wonderful high school, which is the school I wanted to go to, Miami Northwestern. They have a wonderful football team now I understand. They had then as well. Lots of black businesses, my parents owned one of them. And again, another self-contained black community. Speaker 1: Interesting. Is there a story behind the name Liberty City? Speaker 2: Yeah, they always had the--Overtown, Brown Sub, Liberty City. I don't know it, I'm sorry, I wish I did. I don't know it, but-- Speaker 1: It just kind of seems in contrast to Brown, Brown Sub. Brown Sub reminds me of Inkster. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: An area perhaps named by white, white people for black people to settle, you know. And I don't know if that's true, but-- Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know. Speaker 1: But then Liberty City sounds like something that might be named by black folks because of, you know the aspirations of the community. Speaker 2: There were no, there were no riots. There was no gangs, didn't exist. Again, it's a different day and age. Older black people didn't tolerate certain behaviors from younger black, you just didn't do it. Speaker 1: Families were still intact and maybe a different, different-- Speaker 2: Many of them, yes. Yeah, you just-- Speaker 1: Different era all over the country. Speaker 2: Yeah, you just--for the whole country. I mean you--that, that was just--somebody having a gun. That's unheard of, that was unheard of, yeah. So, so while certainly there were problems and there were people who broke the law. You know we're talking about communities where numbers runners were respected people in the community. People who, I mean it's just what people did, but there was not violence associated with that, yeah. Speaker 1: The numbers guys come in the beauty parlor to get-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. And the 'Sonny Boy' magazine, you know with numbers and Pittsburgh used to run a comic strip, it was called 'Sonny Boy' or something and numbers would be in the thing, yeah. People sell dream books. So yeah all of that, yes I remember all of that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm old. Speaker 1: You're not old. Speaker 2: Yeah I remember all of that. I don't know if Patrice [Coleman, observing the interview] remembers it, but I remember it. Speaker 1: All right, there's a nod from Patrice, okay. Story_ID: 23942 Speaker 1: But so okay, so in, in 1960--we're talking about '63 [1963], '64 [1964] era. So the, the March on Washington happens and '64's [1964's] election where--do, do you remember how the community felt when President [John F.] Kennedy was assassinated in '60 [1960]. Speaker 2: I don't remember how the Miami [Florida] community--I was in college, well Kennedy--when I, no I wasn't in college when Kennedy was assassinated. I thought you were going to say [Dr. Martin Luther] King was assassinated. Very sad, very sad. Disbelief that this could happen and even more disbelief when Lee Harvey Oswald was shot at point blank range on national television. I mean one second--of course the nation was riveted to the TV and they announced of course they were going to transfer this suspect and then everybody's watching him be transferred and all of a sudden this man just steps out of the crowd and shoots him. Just disbelief and shock, but very sad that Kennedy was assassinated and thinking that because Kennedy had been seen as kind of the guy that was going to do the right thing by black people. And they were very sorry to see him go. I remember just what I associate with that is just overwhelming sadness and disbelief that it had happened. Yeah I do remember that. I don't think anybody who lived through it could forget it. Story_ID: 23943 Speaker 1: And, and what then was the disposition of, of--or the relationship between black people and white people in Miami [Florida] in terms of civil rights and when you were growing up? I know you lived in a--these black enclaves, Overton and Brown[sville] Sub[division] you know but what--and Liberty City, but what, you know what-- Speaker 2: There was not much of a relationship between black people. Black people basically worked for white people. If you didn't own a business, you worked for somebody who was white. Either directly or indirectly. So if you taught, even if you were at a black school, it was, it was part of the school board's school system. So, so the relationship was basically employee/employer relationship. And, and I could--and, and that had some interesting ramifications and I tell people that, and this is the truth, I--it wasn't until I went to graduate school that I realized that Jewish people were not white people. I thought they were the same thing. Because of this work relationship and the whole relationship of so many black people that I knew whose parents worked in those hotels on Miami beach. So which was and again I grew older, I realized what was going on, which were basically owned by Jewish people. And the story goes that, and you may have heard this, is that it was--they said they used to have a sign when the white people owned Miami beach saying no Jews and dogs allowed. And then the Jews bought it and they just left the sign that said no dogs allowed. So it was a very interesting time in terms of the relationship. When you talk about a relationship, I don't think there was a relationship beyond employee/employer, that's it that I can recall, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23944 Speaker 1: And I guess there was a prominent Jewish community in Miami [Florida] 'cause they, they did a lot of the development of early Miami from what I understand. Speaker 2: They probably did and probably my aunt would be, would know better about that. Speaker 1: I can tell you around this time that you're asking me about, this middle school time is when the Cubans began to, Cuban people began to come to Miami in significant numbers. And this was a very interesting time because the Cuban people, as far as I understand it, were the, the ones who left initially were the ones who had money, they were the educated class. And they came to Miami and were will--because they didn't have a lot after they--I mean they had to leave and they left quickly and they didn't bring a lot of money with them and they needed to work. And what had happened was that many of the jobs over on Miami beach that were--that African Americans used to hold, Cuban people took them. And there were, there was a lot of animosity between the black community and the Cuban community in Miami. And you know I didn't--people don't talk about that a lot but I can remember this very clearly. And by going to Jackson [High School], there were two high schools in Miami that had a lot of Cuban students. One was Miami High, which was--had been an all white school and many Cubans went there because Little Havana is in close proximity to Miami High, and Jackson High School was the other one. And so I got to know a lot of Cuban students and, and I knew them as my, as my friends, not in this hostile thing. And I began to learn a lot about, about what they had left behind, what their parents had left behind. I had a guy that I was friendly with, he used to always--he sat behind me in algebra. And as I said my sister was the science, the math whiz, I was the science whiz. Every day he touched me on the shoulder, "You got the homework?" Ray, his name was Ray Bacaria [ph.]. "No, I don't have the homework." "Guess who's got the homework?" "Who?" "I've got the homework." "Ray, you had the homework all the time." And he would say to me, "How can you not have the homework?" Well I wasn't smart enough to have the homework. But he said, and this was the truth, he said, "I go to school all day and when I leave here, I go to work and I work until midnight. I go home, I do the homework, I get a few hours sleep and I come back to school." So what had happened was this. He had gotten out, but his parents didn't get out. And he was actually taking care of himself. He had no--I mean there was nobody cooking or doing anything for him. He was taking care of himself. So the rub was how can you not have the homework when you know you got parents and a house and that. I got the homework and I--these people, these students worked extraordinarily hard. Really and their parents that came with them worked very, very hard. So the, the jobs that these--that the service industry, which is what they took, the waiters, the maids, they would take these jobs and they would make money. They would buy, get a small place and then some more would come and they would stay with them until they could get on their feet. And this kind of cycle and before anybody knew anything, they had basically owned that Little Havana area and they just kind of spread out from there. And I, I watched that, that pretty much happen in Miami. It was a lot of animosity about it. Speaker 2: Did, did the, did people that you know have any I--did they have any idea that Cuba had been like a Las Vegas before Fidel Castro? Speaker 1: My parents did, 'cause they had been there. And my mother had, had said to me that it was, it was a resort area. And-- Speaker 2: So the kind of work, that kind of work, the hotel service work and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but the people who came initially were not supporting that class. They were the doctors, the lawyers, the teachers. They were the middle class, the rich, the upper middle class. They were not working every day poor people. But they took those jobs because they needed to make money. And they emphasized two things, education for their children, and the support and re, reinforcement of Cuban businesses in the Cuban community. And as a result, they were able to thrive in Miami. Speaker 2: Now were these Cubans mostly Spanish Cubans or any--were there, cause there, there are lots of black people in Cuba, but were these the black people that had come over, or, or mostly--I would suspect it's more of the Spanish population. Speaker 1: Yes and, and, and when I was in junior high school, we had someone to come to our junior high school who was a black Cuban, if you will. And but yeah so I know that they were segregated based on color. And in fact it's ironic cause years later our daughter went to Cuba and spent a summer there. She's fluent in Spanish and she just kind of submerged herself and, and, and lived as a black Cuban. And she told me, she came back and she told me that it is very segregated based on race. She felt there was a big racial component to life down there. Speaker 2: It still [unclear] divide-- Speaker 1: Yes. Yeah, it wasn't that long ago that she went, yeah. Speaker 2: It's funny how-- Speaker 1: So, yeah it was interesting. So, so, so I don't, I don't think of Miami when I think back on this, I don't think of Miami so much as black and white. I think of it more of Bahamian, Bahamian American, Cuban, Cuban American. I think Jewish and then I think some whites. That's, that's what comes to my mind when I think about Miami. Story_ID: 23945 Speaker 1: Were there segregation rules in Miami [Florida] that were strictly enforced, like in some of the cities in the South like Birmingham [Alabama] where you--during the same time period where you had like signs 'Whites Only'. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and now I recall that more so when I was a little girl. I don't recall it much from junior high. I think by that time the Civil Rights Bill had passed and-- Speaker 1: And officials, official transition-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the transition had been made and I can remember white people coming over to Virginia Key Beach which is the black beach, and dancing and you know, celebrating when this Civil Rights Bill. Because now there was--before they had their beach, we had our beach. And it was no mixing. And then once the Civil Rights Bill came, there was mixing. Yeah, I remember that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Virginia Key Beach. Speaker 2: It was a long, long time ago. Some of these things I hadn't thought about in years. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm asking--we, we haven't interviewed as many people from Miami, so it's good to get the culture I guess and what was going on. So thank you. So high school. This is Jackson, is this Andrew Jackson High School? Speaker 2: Of course. The Jackson Generals. Speaker 1: Yeah, he, he conquered the, their Seminoles and the creeks in, in Florida back in 1840s. Speaker 2: I had nothing to do with naming the school. My mom just forced me to go there. Speaker 1: All right, so, all right. So you were like--were black students a very small minority there? Speaker 2: Very small initially. The school has gone through transition, it was all white. Then a few blacks, then Cubans and a few blacks, then about 50 percent Cuban and 50 percent black, then all black. Now I think it's, I, I think it may be Cuban again with some black students. And these things are neighborhood schools now, there's no going and picking which students you want to, to come. So it pretty much fluctuates with how the neighborhood changes around the school. Story_ID: 23946 Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I not ask you--before I get into high--I, I need to ask you about the Bahamian community, the Bahamian community. And on some level 'cause your father was from the Bahamas and-- Speaker 2: My father was, no his, his parents. Speaker 1: I mean a son, a second generation. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well first generation American from, from the Bahamas. But did, did your family have much connection to the--that community of people from the Bahamas? Speaker 2: Very much so because my grandfather, my grandfather owned a grocery store, the, the--a grocery store and a beer garden. And a beer garden is really a bar, but a very big bar. So again, very tied to the Bohemian community, Bohemian American community. And know a lot of people. And Bohemian people are--they say that Bahamian people are clannish and probably so, yeah. And because they have a common ancestry I think. And so yeah, I, I, I, I know it from the music and the food and the, the accent and the language because I grew up hearing it so much. Story_ID: 23947 Speaker 1: Now when you were coming along did they take a lot of pride in Sidney Poitier being a big time actor? Speaker 2: No, not really. As--well maybe later. Sidney Poitier was, I mean yeah I guess, the, the Poitier of course is Bahamian name. And I guess, yeah, yeah, yeah. It was a big deal, yeah he was a movie star, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So I know he won an Academy Award. Speaker 2: Was it 'Raisin in the Sun'? Speaker 1: No, it was for 'Lilies of the Field'. Speaker 2: 'Lilies of the Field', okay. Speaker 1: Yeah I think that was in '65 [1965] or '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: She's gone find out for us. But that's--but it was during that era, that later part, part of the '60s [1960s], it wasn't '60 [1960], quite '68 [1968] 'cause he won it before he did 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner'. Speaker 2: I remember 'Lilies of the Field'. I remember 'Guess Who's Coming to Dinner', but I think I was a post-doc by that time. I mean I think I was-- Speaker 1: But he was becoming increasingly popular, you know through the '60s [1960's], you know, yeah. So okay so '63 [1963] he won it, okay. So this is, yeah that's the same era, yeah so much was going on. Story_ID: 23948 Speaker 1: So at Jackson High School and you had a chance to really take some science courses. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The real, you know with microscopes and all those other things. Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know equipment, teachers, the whole bit. I remember taking an exam in a class, the teacher Mr. VanDam and I answered a question on the exam totally wrong. And I got an A on the exam anyway. So I said how is this possible? And he said, he read my answer to the whole class. And he said the reason, the reason Mary gets an A is listen to the logic behind the answer. And I thought the answer is wrong, and I got highly embarrassed. He says but listen to this logic. He says none of you are thinking like this. This is the kind of thinking that I want, but I thought but it's wrong. But anyway that was not my proudest moment. But yeah again, I, I knew, I knew then that my thought process was a little bit different. Speaker 1: Okay which was good. Speaker 2: Well yeah. Speaker 1: It was different. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So okay, so did you participate in--now in this situation where the blacks were the minority, did you have like a full participation in high school? Speaker 2: I did. Yeah we did. Interestingly enough, we did. And I think it's because of the concept of a few is okay, a whole lot of them is not okay. And so there were a few of us. And so we were fully integrated. We were in the, the social clubs, I was in Tri-Hi-W [ph.]. There was Optimist, I had friends who were in Optimist and things like that. Gradually as more black students came to Jackson, there was full integration, I mean you know they were in everything, the chorus, the band, the football team, the track team, everything. But yeah I had full participation. I was in the Honor Society, I was--I'm trying to think, in the Science Club. The usual stuff that kids do in high school. Speaker 1: Now did you--were you involved in music in any way? Speaker 2: Not after junior high, I was in the band in junior high school and then I, I wasn't in the band in high school. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have a favorite science teacher? Was it Mr. VanDam or-- Speaker 2: No it wasn't Mr. VanDam, he wasn't, he was like the nutty professor. I think it was probably as I look back on it, I had two. The physics teacher, Lenny Booth, and the--my chemistry teacher, Edward Epstein. And I say Edward Epstein like that because he struck fear in everybody's heart. So by this time science has become a problem solving course. There is no more memorization, we are taking general chemistry and it is sci--it is problem solving based. So you learn the structure, you learn how to balance a chemical equation, you learn how to solve chemical problems, and just as Ray Bacaria used to touch me in the back every day in algebra class and say do you have the homework? I would also--Epstein would say we had twelve problems assigned, be prepared to go to the board tomorrow. Those were the worst words in the world. You never wanted to hear that. The only thing worse than hearing that was hearing him call your name to go to the board. Because for sure you would be humiliated if you did not have the homework. So it is at that point that I really began to learn and understand analytical thinking, which is very different from anything that I had really done before. Really analytical thinking, which is if someone asks you--if someone were to ask you--they give you some facts. They tell you here's a shoe, here are some shoelaces and here is a, a pair of socks, I'm making this very simple. And then they say to you describe what a foot looks like that's fully dressed. So now what you do is you take the fact that you know that a shoe goes on a foot, you know that a sock goes, goes over the foot before the shoe goes on the foot. So you put the pieces together like a puzzle. There is no straight-out answer, there is no yes, no, there is no fill in the blank, there is no true or false. It's all analytical. I learned that, you know carbon is C-6, I learned that to balance the equation you must do this and that. I learned that these elements don't combine together because of a certain thing. So when I'm asked the question of how to get from these elements to the end, I need to know how to get there. And that must--that is where we lose a lot of our students in the sciences. They cannot make that transition. Story_ID: 23949 Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just discussing off camera the problem solving process once you get past the memorization stage. Speaker 2: Yeah, so you need a certain number, you need certain facts in order to--think of it as playing a game. You need certain facts in order to play the game. You need to know what to do with them, what does this piece do, what does that piece do, how does it work? But the game itself is the ability to put the pieces together correctly, quickly in the time that you had to do the exam. So you must understand how the pieces work well enough so that you can manipulate them in your mind in any number of ways. And I think that is what's so difficult, and that's why I say it's very difficult to teach science out of a book without some practical application because it's--at least for me, it's very difficult to understand the concept of how it works together without actually seeing it come together. So, so I first learned this kind of thinking in this chemistry class where I would rather die than be called to the board and be humiliated that I didn't have the answer. And sometimes I was called to the board and I didn't have the answer. But my preference was to try if at all possible to be able to solve those problems. So yeah, so, so Epstein is memorable, Epstein is no longer teacher, he went on to become an attorney, a very successful attorney in New York at a firm called Epstein, Epstein and Epstein, his father owned it. But, and then there was Booth who taught physics, same kind of thinking required in order to solve the physics problems. And I actually became quite good in physics, I got As in physics all along but again, the ability not only in physics to conceptualize and analyze it, but to actually apply it. I, I could really do the wiring and all that kind of stuff pretty well, yeah. So, so, so it was, it was a good, good training ground for me and one of the reasons I went on to major in biology and chemistry in, in college. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so now you were, you had named the clubs and activities you were involved in, but on the verge of graduation, this is 1967, were you, did you have a special role in graduation? Were you the-- Speaker 2: No, in fact it's funny. I looked at a charm bracelet today. I think I was No. 12 in the class, I wasn't the Vale--I was No. 12 out of a class of about 350. Speaker 1: Okay. That's pretty good. Graduated No. 12. So and this is a, considered a decent school in Miami [Florida], right? Decent. Speaker 2: Very decent school, yeah. Speaker 1: Was it, was it at the top academic schools? Speaker 2: It was one of the top schools in Miami. Speaker 1: Public school. Speaker 2: Public school, yeah. Story_ID: 23950 Speaker 1: Okay, all right so when you were thinking about--now what kind of counseling did you get about college? Speaker 2: Well again, we had this white faculty that didn't know a lot about black schools. So the, the counselor was trying to guide all of us to white schools. So what we knew about black schools was from our parents and we tried really hard to you know, I applied to both. There was an admissions fee, an application fee, not admission fee, an application fee. So you know that kind of limited how many you were going to apply to. But I applied to both and, and that was based on my, actually my mother [Margaret Sharpe] saying why not apply to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], Tennessee State [University, Nashville], all the usual suspects. Fisk, Tennessee State cause she's from Nashville, Howard University [Washington, District of Columbia], Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], Lincoln [University, Chester County] in Pennsylvania. Yeah I think that, that-Vanderbilt [University, Nashville], I applied to Vanderbilt, she insisted. And you know just made a decision to go to Lincoln. Speaker 1: Now I would suspect that she would have wanted you to go to someplace in Nashville, right? Speaker 2: She did. And I was determined not to do that. Speaker 1: That's what I suspected, but I-- Speaker 2: I was determined not to do that. I thought there's no way I'm gonna be up there and have her friends checking on me and stuff. No, no that's not going to happen. So I was looking for a way out, yeah. Speaker 1: These are the things that, that parents never think their children would think, you know. Speaker 2: Listen, the Vanderbilt people sent their person over to the house. My mother was so thrilled, she called all her friends. "Yeah they even sent the girl over here and she interviewed Mary and I, you know they really want her to come." And I thought to myself and I am not interested in going up there. So I, and I didn't go. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so Lincoln now, what, why did you choose Lincoln? Just because it was not in Nashville? Speaker 2: That's right. It was not in Nashville and I really didn't want to go to Hampton. I had a cousin that had gone to Hampton and I thought well I don't, that doesn't sound like it's too interesting. But Lincoln sounded interesting to me, so I picked Lincoln and away I went. Story_ID: 23951 Speaker 1: Okay, all right so well what, what was Lincoln [University, Chester County, Pennsylvania]--had, had you visited the campus before you went? Speaker 2: Mm-mm, which was a mistake. Speaker 1: That's often the case in those days. A lot of people I interviewed never, had never been on campus. Speaker 2: No, I didn't go. And in fact the only time, the only reason I went before school started was my mother [Margaret Sharpe] insisted that she had to at least see the place so if something happened, she could tell somebody how to get there. So we went up that summer, but no I hadn't seen it before then. Speaker 1: Okay. Well what did you think of, of Lincoln? Now Lincoln is in like a rural part of Pennsylvania, right? Speaker 2: It was not a good choice. It wasn't a good choice. I was coming from an urban environment and Lincoln is out, it's forty-five miles south of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And it was really nothing out there. I remember when the bus pulled out, I thought is this it? And to--it was a small liberal arts college that had been predominantly--it was all male. So here I am again, the third class of women. I think there were 100 women in my class. The school had about 1,200 students. So I'm in a class, in a situation in a rural environment, at a school where they don't want women. The guys did not want women there, no they didn't. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: There was Cheyney State [University of Pennsylvania, West Chester, Pennsylvania] was right up the street. They figured when and if they needed women around, they would hop in the car and go to Cheyney. They were not pleased that we were there. I was in a major that was certainly male dominated, biology, because everybody was going to medical school. And I remember very clearly going into the biology class the very first day, guy's name Professor Harrison who's chairman of the department. He said, "Now listen, before we get started I need to make an announcement. I want you to understand that I understand that you women are here to get husbands. There will be no perfume wearing, there will be no nail polish, there will be no flirting in this class. Do I make myself clear?" I thought, "Now who does he think he's talking to? I wasn't there to get a husband, I had a boyfriend already, he's at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]." So--but a lot of girls were insulted. It--you know it's interesting because the Valor of our class turned out to be a woman. Some of the smarter students were women. But yeah it was, it was a very intense experience for me. Speaker 1: Now who was the president of Lincoln when you were there? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Marvin Walkman I think, yeah. Story_ID: 23952 Speaker 1: Okay, okay and you know, well were there any teachers that really, you know were helpful to you and you know or that you look back on and say they really-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. I can tell you that I had a biology experience while I was there. There was no one that I embraced like I embraced my teachers from high school or junior high school. But there was--Lincoln would bring in speakers and the biology department brought in this guy, his name was James Burney. I don't know if you've had cause to remember him, Dr. James Burney. And he worked for a company called Smith, Kline and, and it was Smith, Kline and French at the time. And he gave a talk in my embryology class to say that the day of the private physician is over. So everybody in there was pre-med, all of us. I mean you know, he said the day of the private physician is over. So we said what's this guy talking about? So he went on to talk about the value and the utility of getting a Ph.D. I had never thought about it before that; never crossed my mind. And I was fascinated by this. I was fascinated by the work, I was fascinated by the way he described what went on. Speaker 1: Now just for the sake of those who are watching us in the future. I don't know how far a future it will be. But what, what was the nature of medicine at the time that you were growing up and the kind of doctor your father was? Speaker 2: Well you know it's changed significantly. When my father was a physician, people did house calls is one of the things that I think killed him at such an early age. Speaker 1: A doctor would actually go to your house if you were sick. Speaker 2: Absolutely. They did house calls and he did many of them. As medicine progressed, physicians stopped doing house calls, but they had fairly large practices and, and they would-- Speaker 1: In their own office. Speaker 2: They would have their own office, they would--you would pay if you could pay and if you had insurance, they'd bill the insurance company. Of course now we know that that is, it's changed dramatically now. We have HMOs [Health Management Organization], we have all kinds of different health care arrangements. But at the time that I was getting this lecture, physicians were still in their heyday as essentially entrepreneurs. They were people who had a skill. They offered that skill for a certain price. People came to them, they paid them money and they made a lot of money doing that. They made a lot of money doing that. So here was this man sitting here telling us that that was soon to end. We were astounded. We didn't understand what he was talking about. Was he smoking something? I mean what is this? And then he went on to explain that you know eventually medicine would become a business and that, that, that people who had no medical training at all would begin to tell doctors how to run their prac--and of course we've seen that, that's what HMOs do. That's, that's how that works, it's a business model. Speaker 1: Is that--I've often wondered how that all happened in terms of does a physician's relationship with an HMO make a better situation for the physician? Speaker 2: No, they would say no. Speaker 1: So why do they participate in it? Speaker 2: Well because HMOs go and they sign large groups of people. They go to the University of Georgia and they say--or they go the region system and they say let us provide health care. We have a group of doctors who can provide health care for all your people at a certain cost. And when those large groups sign on like that, now the HMO has power and authority. So, so what they're able to do is they're able to veto certain procedures because it's not cost effective for them to do, to, to treat that. You need prior authorizations in order to get certain things done. So they actually regulate the way the doctor practices medicine. Speaker 1: So, so what-- Speaker 2: It's a business model. Speaker 1: Yeah, so what happens then, I'm trying to think this through, that, that the HMO gets the commitment of the insurance to them and that's how they're able to, to get the physicians to participate? Speaker 2: There is no insurance. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: There's no insurance. This is an HMO which is a company. The money for the, the in--the premium, the insurance premium, as you will, is paid to the HMO. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I mean. Speaker 2: There's no insurance company. Speaker 1: So the, the--okay. Speaker 2: There's no insurance company. It's paid directly to the HMO. So the university system writes a check to Kaiser or whomever. The HMO says thank you for this--I'm gonna just use the hypothetic--thank you for this million dollars. For this million dollars, we're going to take care of all the people in your group. Now this means that if I walk in with a procedure that's fairly costly, I have to--and, and need a procedure, I have to get a prior authorization. That means that that request goes to a panel of doctors who work for the HMO on salary. And they look at the records and they say well you know, I don't think she needs this. So you--at that point you need a--you have a choice. You can either not have it done, or you can pay for it yourself. And that's how it works. They save money by that, that process of review and approval before you're able to go to the specialist is kind of how they save money. It's one of the ways they save money. And they do other things. They, they emphasize preventive care heavily. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that you won't get to the point where you need that. Speaker 1: So is it, is it then because large blocks of people are committed-- Speaker 2: Very large blocks. Speaker 1: Committed to the HMO. Speaker 2: Airlines, airlines, all the airline employees, all the school board employees, all the, yeah. Speaker 1: So the private physician can't make any money because-- Speaker 2: It's very difficult. Speaker 1: He, he would have to-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Try to match the, you know-- Speaker 2: Exactly. And, and, and the private physician if he's not a member of that HMO, and I work for the school board and the school board is using the HMO, then I can't go to you because if I go to you, I have to write my own check. But it's already paid, so I bypass you and I go to the HMO doctor. So that's how it works. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 23953 Speaker 1: So here's this man telling us that this is coming [the loss of private medical practices, at a lecture by Dr. James Burney]. We've not seen it before, it's, it's a concept. We've never heard it but he starts talking about the Ph.D. work and, and I like it and it fits with my interest, and I get interested in going to graduate school and becoming this research scientist. And so that's how that happens. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were kind of discouraged from becoming a doctor. Speaker 1: I, I never really wanted it that badly. I wasn't sure what I was going to do with this biology degree. But I had seen it literally kill my father and I was not that interested in walking down that same pathway. I wasn't interested in long hours and it didn't hold--I knew the reality of it. My classmates, many of them, had the fantasy of it. I had seen the reality of it and it wasn't that enticing to me. Speaker 2: So the idea of becoming a doctor in most poor communities be the, the Italian community, Jewish community, immigrant communities, that's, that's, that's always usually seen as the highest attainment. Speaker 1: It was and I knew that. I knew that. Look, not only was my dad a doctor, all the godparents were doctors. So--and I had the opportunity to go. I can remember my father's buddy saying to me all you have to do is tell me you want to go, and you're in. That's all you have to do. He talked to me for several hours to try to get me to say I wanted to go. He even put me on the phone with students he had gotten in. Tell her what it's like. And I can remember the guy telling me, he said this is hell. This is hard, it's long hours. And he was sitting there in front of me saying see, see I told you, you--it would be fun. But it never really, it never clicked, it never clicked. So anyway I went on--I, I took another path. Speaker 2: I heard something else in what you said that you, that you associated your father's demise with being a doctor on some level. What did he die of? Speaker 1: He had a heart attack. He had, he had four. Again, hindsight is 20/20. We look at this. So he had all the risk factors. He was overweight, he smoked, everybody smoked in the '50s [1950s], and you smoked cigarette, pipe, cigar. He smoked them all. He had long hours, no exercise, he had three heart attacks. The fourth heart attack killed him. So I, I attribute the lifestyle in general. Long hours, overweight, no exercise, no time to do anything. I just think not good. It was--it never really appealed to me. The lifestyle never appealed to me. Speaker 2: [unclear] exposure to a lot of sick people. Speaker 1: Well of course, course, yeah. Speaker 2: Even though you're a doctor. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So, so those were, you know those were the, those were the days. So, so anyway we get this lecture, he tells us this. And I say to myself, I'm going to graduate school. I really like this, it sounds good. The issue was how was I going to get there, and that's a whole another story. Story_ID: 23954 Speaker 1: So did you--how--what was your standing at Lincoln [University, West Chester, Pennsylvania] when you graduated? Speaker 2: I was near the top, but I wasn't at the time. I graduated early. I finished early and I went back to Miami to work for a semester because I was going to get married that summer. Speaker 1: This was 1971? Speaker 2: 1971, yeah. I was getting married that summer. Speaker 1: Now what did you--is this the same young man that was at [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]-- Speaker 2: Same husband, forty-something years now, yeah. So I was getting married. The trick was to get the money to go and I had spent two summers at Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia]. I met a wonderful, I met many wonderful people there. Luther Williams, who I don't know if you've had an opportunity to interview him, I'm one of his proteges. And Roy Hunter, Jr. And I don't know if you heard his name, but Roy had a program for students that were interested in going to graduate school. You could not be a pre-med major. And when I came down for that summer program, I took a course in biochemistry, molecular biology and embryology, no it was cell biology. And really got really bit quite heavily by the research bug. I mean there were all these wonderful scientists running around, they were black, they were smart, they would come in to lecture. They wouldn't have any notes. They, they knew it so well and I thought if I could just be like this, this is wonderful. I loved everything about it. And decided this is what I'm going to do. So James Burney comes gives the lecture [at Lincoln University, Chester County, Pennsylvania], the next summer I go to Atlanta University. The following summer I go back. I meet all these wonderful scientists who were African American and I say I can do this. They say to me you can do this. I'm, I'm buzzed. I got to get some money somehow. So I apply for a Ford Foundation fellowship. And go to New York for the interview and I get there and I meet a young lady who is also being interviewed. She goes to Barnard [College, New York]. And she says--we're staying at the same hotel. She says you want to walk over with me? Yes. On the way over to the interview, she tells me how smart she is. I'm really smart, you know I go to Barnard. I graduated at the top of my class, dah, dah, dah, dah. And I know I'm going to get this and I'm thinking she's done all this stuff, I haven't done all this stuff. And I think by the time we get from the hotel to where the interview is, I'm so depressed. And I think why am I even, why even come up to New York for this? I get in the room, I walk in the room. The first thing I see when I walk--I am so depressed, I'm looking down. I walk in the room, the first thing I see is some crutches on the floor. And I think you know, what's going on here? I look up, there is Roy Hunter, Jr. whose summer program I had been in, there was a woman sitting next to him, her name is Dr. Darden. She had taught my sister at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]. I didn't know it at the time. And then there's another guy in the room I had no relationship to at all. And when I walked in the room and I saw Dr. Hunter there, my face lit up. We had the best interview. The best interview I could have ever had. And this woman of course was timing it and she says to me but are you related to Pat Styles? That's my sister Patty [Patricia Styles]. And I said yeah that's my sister. She said she is one smart girl. Well I knew that, I had grown up with her, I knew she was smart. She said she's one smart girl. And she says you seem to be just as smart, but you have a different talent and the other guy didn't say very much. I thanked everybody and, and went on back to Miami [Florida]. And a week later I got the letter saying that I had the fellowship. And that paid for everything for me to get my Ph.D. The, the tuition, the fees, the living stipend, the whole bit, and that's how I got my Ph.D. training. Story_ID: 23955 Speaker 1: Okay so this is at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], right? Speaker 2: Cornell, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I heard also, I mean I have a note here also that, that some colleagues of your father had arranged for a place for you at the University of Miami Medical School [Miami, Florida]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was what I was telling you, that I could have gone there. I mean it was, it was a done deal and I know a lot of people would have jumped at that opportunity. I just didn't want it bad enough. I, I, I could go to graduate school. I--by that time, by the time we had that conversation, I had already been accepted to Cornell and already had the Ford Foundation Fellowship. I didn't, I didn't want it bad enough and I really felt that that spot could go to somebody who really, really wanted it, 'cause I didn't. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1970? Speaker 2: 1971. Speaker 1: '71 [1971], okay. So you, you're up in Ithaca, New York at Cornell University. Speaker 2: Yeah, coldest place on the face of the planet. Speaker 1: It's kind of scenic, though. But-- Speaker 2: You don't get to see much of it when you're working that hard. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're working on a, a Ph.D. in molecular genetics. Now why did you choose molecular genetics? Speaker 2: Well I had been in that summer program [at Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Luther Williams is a molecular, he's a molecular biologist. And I really liked genetics quite a bit. And I was good at it. It's a problem-solving discipline and I was really, really good at it. And I figured I like genetics and I like molecular biology, so let me just combine the two and roll with this, yeah. So that's how, that's how--that, that simple. Speaker 1: So Roy Hunter, Jr. one of your teachers there? Speaker 2: Roy was, Roy taught me at Atlanta University in the summer. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Cornell was a totally different experience. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was with the, he interviewed you for the-- Speaker 2: For the Ford Foundation Fellowship. Speaker 1: So, okay, so what--well who were some of your teachers at--or your, your advisor I guess for your Ph.D. Speaker 2: Gerald Fink. He went on to head up the Whitehead Institute of Molecular Biology in Boston [Massachusetts]. But Gerry was an interesting character. We were essentially slave labor. Now that's not unusual for graduate students, okay. But this was taken to the extreme and basically I think he was really a lot more focused on his career than, than us. When I say us, there were, there were many of us in that lab working as, as graduate students and post-docs. But he walked in the last year that I was there, I, I went in and I said to him the first day, I so did not like Ithaca. I said--he said come in, it's nice to meet you, have a seat. I sat down, I said how long is this going to take? I didn't ask him how he was, I didn't ask him what the problem--I said how long is this going to take? He said well if you're lucky, it will take four years. I said thank you. And I got up and left. And I thought I don't even know if I can stand it up here for four years. It's, this is, this is such a culture shock to be up here in Ithaca. So I got to work on it and worked really, really hard. I think by the time I graduated, I must have weighed about ninety-five pounds, I'm not exaggerating. I worked really, really hard. And I don't think I got the support that some students got. This was interesting, and there's been things written about this. There was a group of students who went to graduate programs on the Ford Foundation fellowship in the sciences. I think there was a survey done not long ago that said we have the same number of black Ph.D.s in the sciences now as we had before the Foundation thing happened. So what happened, what happened, what happened was we get there because we have money. It's external money, it's coming from the Ford Foundation. So we have a student who can do research and you don't have to pay for them. We get no support when we get there. A lot of these kids dropped out. You know they just couldn't finish the programs. So we lost a whole bunch of people. And it, it was very, very unfortunate and it in, in many instances it was not a pleasant experience. But anyway Gerry walks in and he says I'm leaving this year and I'm going on sabbatical. Now this is my last year. You don't leave your graduate students and your post-docs like that. You just don't. And I said well when are you coming back? He says well I'll be gone for the entire year. And I thought this is a disaster. Post-docs left, they were so angry. And I'm still there and I got to finish this. So I finished the research and I start writing. This is before word processors, this is before software, any of that. And I'm sending drafts of the dissertation to him which have to be typed at fifty cents a page, which you paid the, the department secretaries usually did it, fifty cents a page. And I'm going broke. You know he's marking it. Finally he calls down and he says--he wouldn't come to the phone, he wouldn't do anything. He, he was just totally gone. And he says you don't have to send them typed anymore, but you do have to send them, the drafts. And I must have rewritten that thing over and over and over. Finally it was to his satisfaction. I took my final you know, exam, defended my dissertation and, and was gone. And was glad to be gone. I mean I, I thought I don't know how on earth I ever survived this experience. It was, it was traumatic. Again like I said, I--when I left, I have some friends here who were at Cornell with me, we were all Ph.D. students at the time, not in the sciences. They were in economics and one in city planning. And they saw me and they said what happened? And I said you will not believe this, ninety-five pounds. I'm sure I weighed ninety-five pounds. It was horrible. I was glad to go. I was glad to get it finished. Speaker 1: This is 1975, right? Speaker 2: I was gone, 1975. Four years to the day, four years. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23956 Speaker 1: You were saying that Erik Estrada was at Cornell University? Speaker 2: Yeah he was on, he was a football star when I was there, yeah. But-- Speaker 1: Any other classmates of any note that we would-- Speaker 2: Any of what? Speaker 1: Classmates that we might know that were--you were just so focused on-- Speaker 2: No, I mean there were a lot of, there were a lot--in, in terms of African Americans, we were so scattered. We used to get together like once a month and have a, a graduate student get together just so we could know each other and socialize, but everybody, it's not just me, everybody was super duper busy. And there was very little free time. I remember I said to my husband at Christmas time the first year I said, "Well you know we're going home to Miami." And we did. When I came back, Gerry called me in the office and he said, "You know I was very surprised you went home." I said, "What do you mean?" He said, "Well you know normally when there's a break from classes, you know we like to see you in the lab." He said, "There's no, there's no going home." So that was it. I'm telling you it was an, it was an intense experience. Also I was coming from Lincoln [University, West Chester, Pennsylvania] that didn't have near the equipment and the, the level of sophistication with regard to instruction. I didn't do a master's and then a Ph.D. I did bachelor's degree at Lincoln, Ph.D. degree at Cornell. I didn't do a master's degree. I just went right, I went for the gold right away. But he, I mean it was a very interesting, interesting experience and please don't think that I was picked on. I mean everybody else was catching hell too. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23957 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your dissertation. Now what was your dissertation about and, and if you can kind of explain it to a layman. Speaker 2: Yeah in a nutshell when I was working yeast, and I was working with yeast because yeast has a DNA structure that's similar to higher organisms as opposed to bacteria which is considered a lower life form. And I was working with something called the 'killer factor', which means that these yeast made the substance that if you, if you isolated the substance and put it in a petridish, it would kill everything in the dish. So the deal was what was the molecular mechanism that was responsible for making this happen at the DNA level or the RNA level, what was going on that would make this happen. And so that's what I spent four years of my life working on. And I was able to characterize that and characterize the molecular pattern of what was responsible for this phenomenon to happen. And then I went on of course and did my, my post-doctoral work around something similar. I can't even remember really a whole lot because that was a whole another set of issues once I got to Rutgers Medical School [New Brunswick, New Jersey]. Story_ID: 23958 Speaker 1: Now you're, you're married at this time, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now was your husband in Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was he going to school or just-- Speaker 2: Engineering school. And he was in an area called operations research and he hit the jackpot because he was a Bell Laboratories fellow. And so we, we were able to live quite comfortably because between me having the Ford Foundation support and him having the, the fellowship from Bell Laboratories [Homedel, New Jersey], which was twice or three times what I was getting from Ford, and you know we didn't have a lot of clothes and all that 'cause we were students. But it was great, so it worked out nicely. Story_ID: 23959 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So now at Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], now did he, did you, you all moved to New Jersey-- Speaker 2: We moved to New Jersey because he had to go work for Bell Laboratories, which was in Homedel and I got a post-doc at Rutgers Medical School because I had a friend who had gone to Lincoln [University, West Chester, Pennsylvania] with me, who sat next to me at all my classes, we're friends to this day. And in the old days they took roll and they--his last name was Staley [ph.] and my last name was Styles. So we sat next to each other. And when he, he said I don't care what [James] Burney says, I'm going to medical school, which he did. And he was at Rutgers. And when I sent to see him and I said you know I'm having trouble finding a post-doc, he said let me take you to meet the dean. Lo and behold the dean was black, Harold Logan. And Harold Logan said we would love to have you here, I'll arrange the money. It happened just that quickly. And so I had a post-doc. And I went there and was very interested--I was assigned a project that was similar to something I had worked on as a graduate student. And there was a girl who had worked on this problem before me. So what happens is you, when you pick up a project, you go into the project and you replicate the experiments before you and then you move forward. And the replication shouldn't take you long because the work should have been validated, so you kind of replicate the work quickly so that you can make sure that the results are as they are, and then you move forward. Well when I tried to replicate the results, I couldn't get it to work and I was very arrogant. I had been through pure hell at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York]. I felt I'm really smart. I mean I know a lot. Why can't I get this to work? I did the experiments for three or four months, I couldn't get them to work. Finally somebody said you need to check--I was working with tissue culture. And they said what you need to do is you need to check and see if the cell lines are contaminated. And I did. And the phenomenon that this girl before me had done her dissertation, gotten her Ph.D. on, and they had millions of dollars in grant money riding at the National Institute of Health [NIH] on this. It was an artifact of contaminated cell culture. And before I got there nobody had ever checked. Now this was a problem. It's a problem for a number of reasons. One, I had spent almost now a year has gone by before I really figure out what's, what the problem is here. Two, so I wasted a year. Post-docs are two years. I've wasted a year. Three, I need to tell somebody because it's no good. None of this, none of the papers that got published before I got there are good. None of the research grants, writing and NIH [National Institute of Health] are any good. It's all crap. The department chairman calls me in. He knows I know. He's trying to figure out what I'm going to do. And he says to me look, I know you've wasted a whole year. I, I don't want you to tell anybody about this. What I want you to do is you spend another year, I will write you a recommendation for any job you want anywhere and I will give you a lab assistant. So I was a post-doc. It's like the low, lowest of the low, right. And so you do all that stuff yourself. He says I'll give you a lab assistant, somebody to help you. That way it will take you half the time to do the work that you need to do 'cause you're going to have some help. So I said okay, fine. He said but you know don't, don't tell anybody about this, don't do anything. I'll just do this. I go back, I'm really happy now. I don't care, I don't care, I just want the lab assistant so I can get my work done, get my papers published and go. Well as it turns out, he never had any intention of giving me a lab assistant, never. Several months go by, no lab assistant. I go back to him and I say what about the lab assistant? He says well you know I want to give you the lab assistant, but we don't have any money. I went right downstairs to the dean and I said, I told the dean everything that happened. He was so outraged, he got the money for the lab assistant. I go back upstairs, I see the department chair and I say guess what? You don't have to worry about the money anymore. The dean gave me the money. He was so angry, he told me he said I will not write any letters of recommendation. I couldn't figure out what had happened. I thought I had done a good thing by going and getting the money. He said no, he said I'm not going to write any letters of recommendation for you. This has so angered me. How dare you go over my head? Blah, blah, blah, blah. So I finished up the post-doc, was able to get a job without his letter of recommendation and I thought that's it, I'm through with bench work. It's too much politics involved in this. What I didn't have an appreciation for because I was so young in my career, was that I really did have the upper hand, I just didn't know it. I knew, I mean I could have essentially sat down and said okay, here's what I want. Because they had this stuff going to NIH requesting money for stuff that was really an artifact. It was contaminated with mycoplasma [type of bacteria], the mycoplasma was absorbing the nutrients and that's why they were seeing what they were seeing. It had nothing to do with the cell line whatsoever. But I didn't know, I was young and he knew I was young. And he knew I didn't know how all of that worked, so he essentially took advantage of me. So I--anyway through with lab work, through with bench work and on to my first job, which is in Atlanta [Georgia]. And that's how I wound up in Atlanta. Story_ID: 23960 Speaker 1: Okay, well how--well tell us now, now this is the job as a executive director of the Sickle Cell Foundation of Georgia, right? And how, how did this come your way? Speaker 2: Well I, I really wanted to get out of New Jersey and I, I liked Atlanta [Georgia] quite a bit and I knew that this organization was looking for an executive director and sickle cell was a genetically based disorder, so it was a perfect fit. And that, and that's how I got the job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It happened just that quick. Speaker 1: Now you're quite young at the time and-- Speaker 2: Very. Speaker 1: The sickle cell, though not a new disease was getting a renewed focus or something, or a new--maybe it was the first time it was every really focused on. Speaker 2: The National Institute of Health [NIH] had a--under Heart, Lung and Blood Institute had instituted the Sickle Cell Disease Program. And they had a lot of money and they were funding Sickle Cell clinics and centers around the country. And this job that I had was at a Sickle Cell Center. Sickle Cell, yeah, Center. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a disease that attacks primarily African Americans I think. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And some Italian and Jewish population [unclear]. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes because it follows the pattern of the malarial parasite in, in, in the Mediterranean areas and, and in Africa. And so if you have the sickle gene it confers resistance to malaria. The parasite can't live in that condition, in the red blood cells. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The parasite lives in the red blood cells. So if it's a sickle gene, the parasite cannot exist with that hemoglobin structure. Speaker 1: Okay, but the--in countries that don't have--I mean so there's so many individuals that are born with the sickle cell trait to keep them malaria free. Speaker 2: No, what happens is that if you look at the, the, the malarial map and then you look at the gene, so if you look at the map of where the gene is, you look at the map of where the malaria is, they overlap. Okay, those people come to the United States and they marry; slave trade in our, in our instance. And so you had people who have the father and the mother have the gene, so you have sickle cell disease children as a result of that union. So you need two genes. Or-- Speaker 1: Two genes for the trait creates-- Speaker 2: For two, two sickle genes create a diseased patient. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You have a 25% probability with each pregnancy. You have somebody with the gene with a child that does not have the gene, that's called sickle cell trait. These people are asymptomatic for the most part. There's a 50% probability with each pregnancy. Then you have people who--no gene, no gene from this parent, no gene from that parent and those people are perfectly normal. The people with the trait can pass the disease on if they incur another partner with the trait. And the people with the disease can pass the disease on. So I was all into this. I knew it cold. I had studied it in school, it's a classic model. It's the first model for a molecular based disorder. So you're taught this very early in your career as a genetics person. Speaker 1: Okay. So you're twenty-eight years old, really young, and you're the executive director of the Sickle Cell Foundation of Georgia. How, how many employees did you have and what were you-- Speaker 2: Probably about five, five or six, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And what were you, what were you all doing really? Speaker 2: We were doing community based screening and that was the state-of-the-art during the time, which was to get in a van, go out to the mall, test people for sickle cell and then provide counseling and, and treatment if they were patient, if they had the disease, and counseling if they had the trait. Eventually the model moved to newborn screening and I did a lot of work with newborn screening, which it's a more efficient way of identifying what we call an index case. So you have a mall full of people and you're randomly testing them, you hope you find people who have the trait and have the disease. If you go to newborn screening, which is you test every baby born, you are likely to pick up babies with the trait and babies with the disease. You use that as the index case and then you go identify those families. It's, it's far more efficient. You, you identify the babies at birth, you can get them into treatment. So I was really pushing the organization to get more involved in that, and then I left there. I went to work in television for a while and then I went to become director of genetic services for the state of Georgia, where I had a lot of influence with regard to using that strategy that I just discussed with you as well as developing genetic treatment centers around the state of Georgia. Story_ID: 23961 Speaker 1: Okay. Now 1979 the TV stint, how did that--the National Science Foundation [NSF] got you involved in that, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. The Science Foundation--I was tired of doing community work and I went and decided that I would apply for a National Science Foundation grant to work in television for a while and do some science programming. And I got the--I mean you know I got the award. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I, I spent that year, I think it was two years maybe, I'm not sure, I don't remember. It's been so long ago. But I spent that time working in television and learning how to do health and science reporting. Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to learn some television production skills and all that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So was that kind of exciting? Speaker 2: It was fun, I enjoyed it. I was pregnant during that time as well, so it was nice. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So the programs that were produced were 'Techniques and Impacts of Genetic Screening', 'Artificial Insemination of Humans', 'In vitro Fertilization', 'Embryo Transfer', and lastly was 'Genetic Engineering'. Now that really sounds scary, genetic engineering. Speaker 2: Well it was new, it was new at the time. It's not--I mean it's--we do it all the time now, but it was new then, yeah. Speaker 1: I remember the talk, people were like [unclear]. Speaker 2: I know, I remember it well, yeah. Speaker 1: Black people were really you know-- Speaker 2: Up in arms and worried about it, yeah. Speaker 1: So sickle cell was worrying us, genetic engineering was worrying us, birth control worried black people in those days. There were plays written about it and is--it was some kind of a genocidal plot and you know so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember it well. Story_ID: 23962 Speaker 1: Okay. Now you didn't tell us--I have to bounce back to something that hasn't been discussed, and that's James Bowman, you mentioned him--is he in the picture now? Speaker 2: James Bowman. Yes by this time I had met Jim Bowman and because of my work at the Sickle Cell Foundation of Georgia [Atlanta, Georgia], and then I went on to--well we just continued our friendship over the years and we were, we, he helped me a lot to think through some of the logistics as Director of Genetic Services for the state of Georgia. Speaker 1: Now, now tell us who Dr. James Bowman is and just for the sake of this--you know we've interviewed him, but just-- Speaker 2: Well he was a pathologist at the University of Chicago Medical School [Chicago, Illinois]. He was very prominent in genetics and the laws around genetics testing and screening. He was very vocal with regard to the misinformation regarding the difference between sickle cell trait, sickle cell disease and when people were attributing deaths to the trait, he was the one to speak up and said no, no, no. You've got this all wrong and so he was quite a force to be reckoned with. He was just the, the best kind of gentleman you could ever imagine. Smart as a whip; intellectually sharp and just a joy to be around if you were a young person trying to learn the ropes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I should have done my post-doc with him and not at Rutgers Medical School [New Brunswick, New Jersey]. But I didn't even know he existed, I didn't find out he existed till I was getting ready to leave Rutgers. Speaker 1: From what I understand he was one of the few MDs involved with genetics. Speaker 2: He was. Speaker 1: In those days. Speaker 2: He was. He was, he was a phenomenal person. I just, I had the utmost respect for him and was so tickled to see his daughter you know in the position that she is in now. But yeah, he was-- Speaker 1: His daughter is Valerie Jarrett [Senior Advisor to the President of the United States and Assistant to the President for Public Engagement and Intergovernmental Affairs in the Obama administration]. Speaker 2: Valerie Jarrett, yeah. Speaker 1: In the Cabinet of the President [Barack Obama]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yes. He, he was phenomenal. Speaker 1: Okay, also I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you about Dick Gregory [activist and comedian], who was-- Speaker 2: I don't know Dick Gregory or much about him. Speaker 1: Okay, he was prominent on the air discussing sickle cell anemia. Speaker 2: I don't know, yeah I'm not familiar with that. Speaker 1: Tony Brown and-- Speaker 2: I remember 'Tony Brown's Journal', but I don't remember Dick Gregory on it. I don't, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah I think he was part of the discussions, part of the, you know some of the fears expressed around sickle cell. Story_ID: 23963 Speaker 1: I guess at some juncture here between '79 [1979] and '84 [1984], Glamour Magazine rewarded you with the Outstanding Working Woman Award, right? Speaker 2: That was wonderful. That was great. I was working at the TV, on the television project and got that award from Glamour Magazine and we all--Outstanding Working Women of the Year and they had us all come to Washington [District of Columbia], Jimmy Carter was the president. And we had a lovely reception at the White House and I--we stayed at the Four Seasons in Georgetown. And I can remember going into the hotel room and I call my girlfriend and I said, "B, you should see this room. You wouldn't believe it." So she gets in her car and drives over. Because they had satin wallpaper on the walls, I mean it was just beautiful. And she said, "Wow." And we were both marveling at that, look at this. But it was a, it was a lovely, lovely affair and a, and a very nice honor. Story_ID: 23964 Speaker 1: Okay, now in '84 [1984], you were appointed Director of Genetic Services for the Georgia Department of Human Services, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Georgia Department of Human Resources, Director of Genetic Services came in, put into place the testing, the screening, the clinics, the centers. Built a lot of stakeholder relationships between entities that were not speaking to each other before I arrived there. Just jumped in with both feet, gave a lot of money to the Sickle Cell Center at Grady Hospital to get that up and running. Speaker 1: Grady Hospital is a historic black hospital [unclear]. Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say that. I think it's, I think it's more of a poor person's hospital historically and it is the city hospital, Fulton DeKalb Hospital here in Atlanta [Georgia], yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah. So there are a number of African Americans there. Speaker 1: Okay, and you got the CDC [Centers for Disease control] here in Atlanta. Do they figure into this at all? Speaker 2: No, I was only on their advisory board, yeah. Speaker 1: That's the Center for Disease Control, right, okay. So, so what were you able to accomplish during this--to, to link these groups, these different groups together? Speaker 2: Yeah, link all the groups together. Establish a network of treatment centers throughout the state. Implement the newborn screening strategy, and essentially make the genetics program prominent in the Department of Human Resources. So when I was brought in, it was a small program. And what I decided to do was write some grants to get outside federal money to come in and really blow it up big. And no one had been doing that in the Department of Public Health before I arrived. I mean this was unheard of. And I just kind of sat down and did it and began to bring in like millions of dollars to make this happen. And so when I left, it was a pretty substantial or integral part of the public health delivery system. Story_ID: 23965 Speaker 1: Okay. Now in 1992, now this is a--so throughout the '80s [1980s], throughout the Reagan Administration and George Bush the first and stuff you were doing, you were working for the state of Georgia. In '92 [1992] you were the founder of, of Biotechnical Communications, Incorporated. Now so just kind of tell us how-- Speaker 2: So in a nutshell, I moved to California with my husband because of his work. And the commute from where we're living into Los Angeles is hellacious. And I say I cannot do this every day. And I start doing technical writing for biotechnology companies. And they tell me while I'm doing this writing, I'm looking at what they're doing and I see this small business innovation research grant. And I think why am I writing this for them? I write this for myself. I go back home and I'm watching TV, I was actually telling Patrice [Coleman, who is observing the interview] this story earlier. And I'm watching a talk show personality talk about breast cancer in black women and she's doing an awful job, it's, it's simply awful. And I say to myself you know, I think I could do a better job. Get on the phone the next morning and I called National Institute of Health [NIH]. I say to the guy you know here's what I want to do. He says let me send you an application. Again, there was no downloading, let me mail you an application. And he kind of walked me through how to fill it out and how to write it. And it got funded on peer review. And I--so I went on to produce this television special 'To My Sisters, A Gift For Life'. It was the first documentary done on black women and breast cancer in this country. And it went on to win some awards. But the television experience so wore me out I thought I cannot go back to this. And then I began to develop my business by writing these grants to NIH, getting the money to do the research around--the research issues around it, but also to do the productions. And so I went from television, to radio, from radio to internet. And so I've just recently finished an animated program based on health around African Americans called 'Keeping Up With The Walkers'. So that's how my business developed. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So these--say the, the first one, the breast cancer video 'To My Sisters'. Now where was it broadcast and how-- Speaker 2: BET [Black Entertainment Television] broadcast that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it was interesting because by the time we got to the broadcast after producing the show, by the time we got to the broadcast, they actually did not have an appropriate timeslot. And so what they said was well we'll put it on, but we'll put it on on Sunday morning at eleven o'clock. I said that's when every black woman in America is in church. Why would you do this? But they did. And surprisingly by word of mouth, of course there's some people who were home will see, it was so popular that they had to rerun it. And then we took it after the rerun and we turned it into a video. And I think we wound up distributing about 8,000 of those things across the country because there had been nothing like it before. And it was just a--it was just wonderful to see it. Speaker 1: Now did you consult with doctors around? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did. Speaker 1: Who were some of the-- Speaker 2: Tony Disher; he's a radiation oncologist. We--I worked very closely with the American Cancer Society and with the National Cancer Institute. So Oscar Streeter [ph.], Tony Disher, Otis Brawley [ph.]. Those are some of the people that we worked with. Speaker 1: Okay, and there's several points bulleted here that the, that the video was to accomplish and can you maybe talk about what you intended to do with it? Speaker 2: Well the goal was to get black women engaged in this dialogue about breast cancer and to get it out of the closet and into the public dialogue. We wanted to--wanted them to understand that even though we have a lower incidence, we have a higher death rate from the disease. We wanted to emphasize that mammography was key and to demonstrate why and how it works and why it works. So, so people will say well I had a mammogram five years ago, why do I need another one? Well we were able to actually demonstrate why an annual mammogram is so important of course because you see early changes in the breast tissue, you see those changes early. So you, you can find the change here as opposed to waiting to five years later when it's a full grown lump. Because by the time you feel a lump, it's been growing for about seven years. So you really are--it, it's great to be able to visualize it way, way when it's microscopic as opposed to waiting until you can feel--although it's nothing wrong with finding a lump that you can feel. The other thing is that treatment is important. It's not only important to get the mammogram, but to get the treatment. And where we tend to fall down now because the CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia] has a very aggressive breast and cervical cancer screening program, is the treatment. So black women will say I don't want to, I don't want to do this because I can't afford the treatment. The treatment is going to make me sick, I need to work. I don't need to be home sick. I, I, I don't have anybody to keep my kids and I say to them who will keep your kids when you're dead? It's, it's a simple choice. Who will keep your kids when you're dead versus who will keep your kids now? So you need to see about doing this now. So the, so the problems that arise for black women are not so much money for mammograms, but money for treatment. That's where the biggest--I see the biggest challenge for black women. Story_ID: 23966 Speaker 1: All right now how long were you in California before you moved back to -- Speaker 2: Twelve years. Twelve years and moved back because of my husband's job. He became the first black dean of the business school at Georgia State University [Atlanta, Georgia]. And so I was excited to move back. My family was on the east coast and I was thrilled to be headed back to Atlanta. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I loved Atlanta. Speaker 1: But most of the television production--so, so, so you moved back in what, what year was, would it be? Speaker 2: I think '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: '98 [1998]. Speaker 2: '98 [1998], '99 [1999], somewhere around in there, '98 [1998], maybe '98 [1998]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, you said earlier that you moved basically from television production to producing, radio. Speaker 2: Radio, yes, yes. Speaker 1: And now, now why was that decision made? Did you think you would reach more black people on the radio? Speaker 2: Television was, was problematic. It involved a lot of things that I was not familiar with and things that at the level that I was working, you know having to deal with people's agents because the, the To My Sisters documentary was hosted by a celebrity and it featured celebrities throughout. So everybody was--I had to deal with everybody's agent, I had to deal with the union and the guild and this and I thought this is too much trouble. So I thought I'm going to move away from this, and let me move to radio, which I did. And, and that was great and I, I loved it. I absolutely loved it, and -- Speaker 1: On the surface it sounds like a reduced role for what you're doing, but black radio is pretty is -- Speaker 2: Black radio is very prominent and it has a large reach, it has a penetration of about 95 percent. So cable, BET [Black Entertainment Television] was at about 25 to 50 percent of homes. This was a reach of you know, 95 percent of the African American audience. And was thrilled to have the opportunity to work in radio, learned a lot about writing and developing present--a lot about interviewing people for, and how to translate science from science to something that consumers could readily understand, and I got to be pretty good at that and enjoyed it tremendously. I still do interviews from time to time for on--for various things that have to do with health and, and medicine and science. Speaker 1: So, so would you be featured on some of the major radio shows, like Tom Joyner or Doug Banks and that sort of thing, or-- Speaker 2: I could be. I--what, what I did was I had my own show. So I, you know I wasn't a part of their show. Now I did do a feature as part of--for TV One on Al Sharpton's show. We would do a segment, health segment I think on Mondays. It's, it's been a while but yeah, I'm, I really enjoyed it. I enjoy the questions that I get from the audience and I enjoy trying to help people understand how to take better care of their health. Speaker 1: Okay. Well tell us about 'Journey To Wellness'. Speaker 2: Well 'Journey To Wellness' is actually the media brand. Biotechnical Communications is a company that's structured in an, un--slightly unusual way. We have a research arm and then we have a production arm, and then we have a broadcast arm. And the broadcast arm is the 'Journey To Wellness'. And all of our media products, all our television productions, our radio shows, our website, all falls under 'Journey to Wellness'. The research part is Biotechnical Communications and that's the entity to whom all our grants and research money is, is, is channeled. So 'Journey To Wellness' is a--online it's a online health magazine for African Americans. 'Journey To Wellness' on the radio could take any format from a, a stand-alone talk show, 'Journey To Wellness', to a segment that sits inside someone else's show, 'Journey To Wellness', or a television production. Now I have recently decided to ease up a bit with the 'Journey To Wellness' and we created that series 'Keeping Up With The Walkers'. But again even the theme song is 'Join The Journey To Wellness With The Walkers'. So it's our broadcast arm. Speaker 1: [unclear] I'm sorry, so 'Keeping Up With The Walkers' is a-- Speaker 2: It's a soap opera. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's an animated soap opera that deals with health issues that are prevalent among African Americans. And it focuses around the Walker family, intact African American family and their grandmother, and the challenges and the trials and tribulations of everyday life through teenage son Jamal. It's a, it's a, it's a great little property. We're, we're very proud of it. Speaker 1: And when did you launch that? Speaker 2: We just finished that and we're looking, we're actually marketing that now to two different entities. One the, the more clinical version to health centers and physicians' offices. And then a more relaxed version for television. Speaker 1: Okay, so for instance if you go, you go to a health clinic or something you might-- Speaker 2: And you're sitting there waiting, yes this will play on the TV or on the monitor, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I've often wondered about who produces those-- Speaker 2: Well now you know. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so, so 'Journey To Wellness' is a--can be--is a, kind of a malleable type of a product [unclear]. Speaker 2: Exactly. I use that to brand all the products that we do. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So we did some special documentaries for public radio, and it was 'Journey To Wellness Presents' series. Story_ID: 23967 Speaker 1: You mentioned, you mentioned--I know we, we mentioned I coming in the three major health crises I guess in the black community that, that doctors that are saying are--hit us harder than any other group. And what, what are those again? Speaker 2: Well they're actually six. Now I have to--now that I've said that, let me see if I can remember them. High blood pressure, diabetes, cancer, cardiovascular disease, HIV/AIDS [Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome) and infant mortality, there's six. We have many other diseases, but those are the--for instance kidney disease is a problem for us as well. We don't think about that often. Glaucoma is a problem, it doesn't cause death but it causes blindness. So I look at disorders where we see a disparity in morbidity or mortality. I, I tend to focus on those areas. Speaker 1: Now what are, are genetic factors responsible for these diseases that's hitting us harder, or is it just lifestyle? Speaker 2: It's lifestyle, it's primarily lifestyle. There's nothing else to say, it's lifestyle and then once we develop it, we're slow to go to the doctor. So when we get to the doctor, we're sicker, so it's less easy for the doctor to cure us, so we have a higher mortality rate. Speaker 1: So in terms of pre--prevention, I know it was something on not too long ago criticizing soul food, or one of the magazines was criticizing the content of soul food as not really being very good for you. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But and yet-- Speaker 2: And I love soul food. I'm a big soul--I grew up eating it, as many of us did and I love it. But it's simply not good for you, it's not good for you. And fixed in the traditional ways, it's a death sentence. And-- Speaker 1: Salt and-- Speaker 2: High salt, high fat, high sugar. It's not good. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Black people, from what I understand, smoke more than any other group at this point. Speaker 2: We smoke mentholated cigarettes more than any other group. And I had worked with someone once who was explaining to me that the menthol was developed specifically for Kool cigarettes. And I don't even know if they make that anymore, but at any rate, she went on to tell me and I had, you know I didn't know how this still figures given that everyone is so conscious, but it was the mentholatum in the cigarette soothes the cilia in the throat, which allows you to--or soothes the throat, rather, which allows you to inhale more deeply. Therefore, we have a higher incidence of lung cancer. Speaker 1: So tar and nicotine gets further embedded in your lungs and bronchial tubes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 23968 Speaker 1: Okay, so okay, so, so your latest project is 'Keeping Up With The Walkers'. Speaker 2: We just finished 'Keeping Up With the Walkers', yes, yes. Speaker 1: And this is done as a television production? Speaker 2: We developed it for two outlets, one for television and one for clinical use. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you, so it's--there are actors involved and-- Speaker 2: It's animated, but yes there are actors. Speaker 1: It's animated, okay. Speaker 2: It's animated. There are actors involved to voice the animation, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. But it's easier than dealing with the live actors and-- Speaker 2: It's a lot easier. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: It's a lot easier. Speaker 1: Is the animation done here in this country, or-- Speaker 2: We did it here. I was fortunate enough to have the opportunity to work with a very talented African American animator, his name is Juy [ph.] Husband. He is the son of the first African American animator hired by Disney--and Disney Studios, their animation studios. And so he has inherited this incredible talent from his father, and he is an amazing, an amazing animator. Speaker 1: Is his father still around? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That sounds like someone we ought to interview. Speaker 2: Yeah he's--I'm sure he would have stories for you. He's out in San Dimas, California. Speaker 1: Is that near Los Angeles? Okay. Making a note of that. Speaker 2: But okay, so, so you've been back here in Atlanta [Georgia] since 1999 and did you have any projects on the, on the burner for--I mean-- Speaker 1: While I was here? Well during this time I did mostly radio work and developed the, the internet came into being and so we developed the journeytowellness.com website. We--I produced a lot of pieces that were distributed through CNN Radio Network. I worked in public radio quite a bit, developing documentaries. I had my own show where I interviewed people. I did any number of things, all under that 'Journey To Wellness' brand. And, and then I decided to develop 'Keeping Up With The Walkers' for radio. It was actually developed like an old-time soap opera for radio. And then I got the idea you know what? You should animate this and so that's how we came to that. So that took about four years, four or five years to do that. And I've just completed it and so now I'm, you know looking at what I'm going to do next, if not retire. Speaker 2: Now that was funded by the National Center for Minority Health. Speaker 1: --and Health Disparities. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 23969 Speaker 1: But so now did you have any idea, I guess I, I guess when you--well as a little girl growing up interested in science, you probably had no idea you'd end up doing this. Speaker 2: No. It's a complete departure from everything that I have trained for, except that I do draw very heavily on my analytical thinking skills, my understanding of science and health, and my ability to translate what I am reading or hearing to somebody who has no background at all. This has been interesting because on the one hand, I have been kind of--I don't want to say marginalized, but kind of shoved to the side by my science colleagues because I don't do bench work anymore and I don't, you know, work in a clinic or at a hospital. But I've also become the--younger people want to know how did you manage to do this, and can I do it, and will you teach me how to do it, and oh, this is so cool, this is so interesting, this is so fun. So it's six on one hand and half a dozen on the other, yeah. And it's been real interesting to watch that evolution because and they say oh, you're leaving the lab. You know after, after you leave the lab for a while you become obsolete. In order to go back, if I wanted to go back, I, I would--in order to do everybody justice, myself included, I would need to do a post-doc again so that I could get my skills up, I could become familiar with the equipment, which has changed so radically since I've been out of the lab. So I would need to retool again and then go back. So, so people will say do you miss it? No, I don't miss it. I love it, I still have an interest in it, I still enjoy someone explaining to me the latest way to insert genes from using a virus to insert gene into somebody's human genome. I get it, I probably would get it a lot faster than the average person just because I have an understanding of kind of how it works. Am I eager to get back in it? No. I also understand with that the politics of how you get grant money in this country. I also understand the politics of being on a faculty and trying to get tenure and needing to publish and meet with graduate students, I understand all of that. So no, I don't miss it. I don't miss it at all. And it's, it is a world that I have tremendous respect for because I know what it takes to be successful in that environment, but it is not one that I would say oh, you know I really wish I hadn't left; I really wish I could go back. I don't miss it. Story_ID: 23970 Speaker 1: So would it be fair to say that you're kind of a, a pioneer in this niche? Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely. In fact somebody was saying, said you're not taking the road less traveled, you're actually digging the road as you go. Yeah, yeah I am definitely a pioneer without question, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay now is--I guess there's one more que--question about how, you know we relate to the black community. Is it--is there a particular way to deliver this information to the black community, or I mean do you have a philosophy about how it works? Speaker 2: Yeah you know it's interesting, people ask me, they say is there any such thing as black cancer? There isn't. What is different--cancer is cancer. High blood pressure is high blood pressure, heart disease is heart disease. What is different is our experience with that disease; that I the difference. And the cultural context in which you deliver the information. So what am I talking about? I give you a quick story. Somebody called me once and they said we--it was the American Cancer Society. I was living in California. They said we need you to do an interview with a nun about breast cancer in black women. Said I'd be delighted to do it. (unclear) they gave me the information to do the interview. While I'm doing the interview, it becomes fairly apparent to me that I'm not talking to a nun. So finally I stopped the interview, I said are you a nun? She said what on earth made you think I'm a nun? So what happened was she called and she said I'm Sister So-and-So. And I need to have somebody--I write for this newspaper, I need somebody to talk to me about breast cancer in black women. The person at the American Cancer Society was white. He interpreted that to mean she was a nun. I was clear, it was pretty clear to me, you know once we got into this, this was no nun. And I mean that's the difference, that's, that's a small, but very prominent example of what I say is the experience that the patient brings to the disease, as well as the experience many times that the physician brings to treat the patient are different. And so you as a black patient and you know there have been--Institute of Medicine did a study. You go in and say I got chest pains, I got this, I got that. If you're white, they say well we need to work you up, you might need to have a stint put in or you might need to have bypass. You go in and you say that, you're not likely to get that, that recommendation. Well you know maybe you got gas, maybe you need to do this, do that. You're not likely to get the same treatment in the health care system that a person, a person of color gets a different level of treatment and we need to be aware of that when we go in. We also tend to just based on our culture, we will handle things and respond to things somewhat differently. So if you ask me if the disease is different, absolutely not. The disease is the disease. If you ask me if the experience with the disease is different, absolutely it's different. I have countless examples where it's different. And when I am talking to someone about something, about the need to get screened for colon cancer, I am always very cognizant of their cultural context and how I'm going to present that information. So if I'm going to talk to somebody, like I said when black women say to me, well who gonna keep my kids? I say well who gone keep them when you're dead? They get that quick, you know. I probab--and I understand the issue of child care. So the next thing is so here's what you can do to take care of those kids while you need to see about yourself. I might not have that same level of discussion-- probably wouldn't. It wouldn't be an issue for a white woman, usually. It, it, it, it is a different experience with the disease, if you understand. A black man going in to talk about prostate cancer surgery to a white surgeon knowing that he may emerge from that surgery impotent or incontinent; that's a big deal to a black man. It's a big deal to a man, period, but to a black man that's a real problem. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: There's a, a--I think it's a--well I didn't know even in this job I think we, we have black interviewers doing this job because black people respond differently to black people than they do to white people. Speaker 2: And when I do my focus group research, I use black interviewers for that very reason. So I mean so I hope that answers your question as to, as to what makes this work for me, and what has made it work over the years. And, and like I said I'm pretty good at it now and, and I understand that. And things that people say to me don't shock me. I have more of an empathy for, you know because I've heard it before and I, and I get it, I'm black, I get it, I get it. Story_ID: 23971 Speaker 1: Okay, now this is a question we always ask when you look back at your career to this point, would--is there anything you would do differently if you could go back and change something? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I'd go to business school. I would go to business school. Everybody who knows me knows I love being an entrepreneur, I love business, I love investing. I would have gone to business school. Speaker 1: Now is that advice, advice you would give young pe--people who find themselves-- Speaker 2: Not necessarily because many of them don't embrace the entrepreneurial side of this like I do. This is a business for me, it's not a hobby. I sit down and I figure out how I'm going to make money doing this. And that's what I tell young people. I said the, the reason you go to school is so that you can have options and, and options that will allow you to take care of yourself. You don't use your education to hem yourself in, you use your education to liberate you, okay. So, so I would not--when they come and say ooh, this is so wonderful, can I do it, can I do it? I say now let me tell you what the reality is of how this happens. So let me tell you that I have written this--a gazillion page grant twice because the first time they turned it down. How I spent my whole summer writing it twice and I was not out having a good time, I was at my desk trying to figure out what the hell was wrong with this--you know what it--what do I need to say, how do I need to say it in order to get the money. Let me tell you about the review process and how political it is to get a grant peer reviewed through the NIH [National Institute of Health] peer review system. I have had about eighteen of these grants. I have had about a 95 percent track record, I'm not bragging, it's just fact. That has been very difficult to achieve that. A certain amount of it is luck, a good amount of it is skill, the remainder is persistence. I a lot of times do not see that level of willingness to work that hard among young people. Some of them, but far too many of them think that I appear somewhere with some money that I got from NIH somehow and I do these projects and it's all very glamorous and then I go and I get an award and it's all great. I tell them usually my basic uniform is sweat pants and a t-shirt. That's what I look like most of the time, sweat pants, t-shirt. I get up, go to the gym, come back, sit down at my desk, get busy. I, I, you know I'm arguing with vendors, I have subcontractors that don't always do what they're supposed to do. I'm having to cleanup mess, I'm having to fire people. It is not glamorous work, it's hard work. So I try to tell them when people come to me, NIH constantly sends people to me asking me talk to them about the grants process. And the first thing they say is ooh, I want to do what you, I want to make some money. And I say to them look, you should take the money you have, go to Las Vegas, play the tables. You know how to play blackjack? Go play blackjack, go play 21, do whatever you do. You stand a better chance of winning in Vegas than you do for getting this money from NIH, and that is the God truth. It is a very rigorous, it's a tough process to get through. And it's not for the faint of heart, and you do all that work and I've had this speech with myself more than a number of times, you do all that work and you get a letter back in three months that says we didn't even read it, we didn't like it so much. We didn't even bother to read it and give it a score. And these kids call me, and I call them kids cause they're young, and they're devastated. And so I say this is the game that you have chosen. This is how it works. If you don't like how it works, get out. If you want to stay in, don't complain, let's figure out how to do it better next time. And that is not for everybody. That's not for everybody. So you asked me what advice I give them, that's how the advice gets weeded out. You say let's figure out how to do it better. I don't want to write this thing again; I'm tired. I remember once I was angry, I was redoing a grant and I said--there's a girl working with me and I said I am so sick of this. I said you know, I have to write this thing, it's five times better than everybody else that goes through review process. I cannot believe that other people put all this detail and they do all of this to get their grants funded. And she looked up at me and she said you're right. Now let's keep going. It is what it is. And once I get sick of it, then I need to get out. It's over at that point. So the system's not going to change for me. I have to decide whether or not I'm going to play or not. And if I'm going to play, then I, then I cannot complain. I just need to learn how to play it as best I can. And like I said, 95 percent is not bad. I wish it had been 100, but I've obviously learned from that five percent that didn't get funded. Speaker 1: Now when and if you stop doing this, at, at some point you probably will retire. Speaker 2: Absolutely. I hope so. Speaker 1: But will--is there a residual life for these productions? Speaker 2: Everything that I developed is mine. I own. So any royalties or anything like that come to me, yeah, yeah, it's all--everything I create belongs to me. Speaker 1: And so the body of work that you've produced already, is it still producing for you? Speaker 2: Yes revenue, yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay, all right so there's an accumulative aspect of this that, that-- Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. I just wanted to raise that. Story_ID: 23972 Speaker 1: Right, now once again now when you--if you retire or if you decide to stop doing this, do you have something else in mind that you want to do that, that-- Speaker 2: I'm thinking about it. I, I'm thinking about doing something that's totally unrelated, going off and being a person trainer or something like that in the gym. I, I am considering what my options will be at this point in time. You know life, what do they say, life is not necessarily long, but it's wide. And there are many ways to earn a living and there are many ways to spend your time. And I think leaving this will give me the freedom to look at all those other options out there. And if somebody said I'm going to make it difficult for you, you can choose anything you want. So I am, I'm really, really looking. I had thought about working with children who are transitioning from foster care into the world. That interests me a great deal. I had thought about just being a personal trainer just 'cause I love going to the gym and fitness and it kind of fits with what I've been focused on. Just haven't really decided. Hopefully I have another two, three years before I have to make a hard decision. Story_ID: 23973 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I want, I want for the community to not make excuses. I think we excuse too many things to our detriment. We tolerate things that we know are not to our advantage. We, we tolerate behaviors that we know are not to our advantage. And I would love for us not to do that. I am old school. I think we should demand of our children that they be respectful of each other and of their elders. I think we should demand hard work. That should be an expectation that we have for our children. I think we should demand that our young men respect our young women; I don't see a lot of that. I think we should demand that young women respect themselves; I don't see that enough. So these are things that I, I wish for us--a continued striving for economic independence where we chart our own course and we make our own way, and we are not dependent on handouts. I, I find it distressing that so many of us feel that we should be given something. You know I, I want to see black men and black women married again and the family structure replaced. I think that's a good thing. I was listening to a presentation by the now former president of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and he said after World War I, we had the highest number of married couples in the United States. Now we have the lowest number of married cou--I want to see those things brought back. So those are some of the things that I wish for, for our community. Story_ID: 23974 Speaker 1: Okay. Well speaking of family, tell us about your family. You--do you have children? Speaker 2: I do. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We have a daughter who is an attorney and she's married. And that's it. And she was raised with the understanding that she had to work hard. I remember she called me once and she said--she was at work and she said I'm, I really am sick of this. I mean who thought of this coming to work every day thing? Where'd that come from? And I said let me tell you something. She works at a law firm, she just made partner. I said people don't pay you a lot of money for nothing. When people start paying you a lot of money, you have to show up and you show up every day. And I said and when they pay them the kind of money that they pay you, not only are you expected to show up every day, but you're available after five o'clock, and you're available on weekends. I said okay, if you don't like this, get out. The system doesn't change because you don't like it. It's not going to happen. Go find something else to do. If you, if you don't want to do that, then understand that if you take a position where you leave at five o'clock every day, your salary is probably going to be greatly reduced. So just understand that hard work is expected, that that's a part of--that's why they pay you like this. So she went on and she stayed and she made partner. I, I don't bite my tongue about this hard work thing. I, I don't know any other way. I--you know I'm from immigrant grandparents you know on my father's side, hard work. Send six kids to school, college, that's hard work. You know my mother's mother worked hard. My mother's father, the dentist, worked hard. So I just--I don't know any other way, yeah. Story_ID: 23975 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question too. When you look back at everything you've done at this point, again what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I read something, I bought a book recently and one of the things in it, in it was she went out on a limb and when the limb broke, she discovered she could fly. And that would be me. That says it all. Went out on a limb, and the limb broke and that's when I really discovered that I could fly. And I have, I have--when you ask me about the science, so don't be afraid to go out on a limb. When you ask me do I miss the lab? No, I don't miss it because I really am flying, I'm doing my own thing and I just love it. It's just great. I wouldn't have had--I wouldn't have done it any other way. I wouldn't have had it any other way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 23976 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you that we need to mention or talk about. You have to tell me about it before I ask my last question. Speaker 2: Impressions along the way as I was growing up. A teacher Florence Strong, beautiful, smart, she was my algebra teacher. She had been Miss AKA or Miss Alpha Phi Alpha at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]. She was part of that junior high teacher crowd. How to combine beauty and brains, that was my first image of how that could be done. Luther Williams, scientist, Roy Hunter, scientist. Guy Dobbs, Guy Dobbs was the first black Vice President at Xerox. Had an opportunity to meet him when we moved to California, phenomenal person. Not only was he an engineering background, but he was an accomplished musician. The ability to have balance in your life, real fun as well as seriously hard work, seriously equally hard fun. I think my mother always emphasizing education. I'm trying to think. Those are the people who have kind of shaped the way. My father, entrepreneurial spirit. I think those are the people who have really, really influenced me as I've kind of come along. I'm sure I'll meet some other people, but those are the ones that always come to mind when I think about--when somebody says how did you get there, or who influenced you? Those are the people that come to mind almost immediately, yeah. That's about it. Story_ID: 23977 Speaker 1: Okay. Well the last question is similar to legacy. Some people think it's the same thing, but it's a little different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As a fun, loving person who worked hard and really, really tried to enjoy the ride. I really have tried to do that, yeah, yeah. I've traveled all over the world. Just came back from safari in Kenya, and then a week in Paris after that. But yeah, somebody who you know, really worked hard and really tried to enjoy the ride. It's been good so far...