 Story_ID: 639249 Speaker 1: Wanna find out a little bit about your family history (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: What are your parents' names and when were they born and where? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother's name was Anna Virginia Fowler [Anna Fowler Hightower], and she was born on the 20th of August, 1917 in Atlanta [Georgia] and moved to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] when she was five months old. And my dad was Marvin William Hightower [Marvin W. Hightower], and he was born June 30, 1916 in Atlanta and came to D.C., I think when he was about six years old. Have a, have a brother, Marvin Alvert--and I gave him his middle name, and I don't know where I got Alvert from, but that's (laughter) his name, Marvin Alvert Hightower [Marvin A. Hightower]. He was, his birthday was yesterday, the 30th, and he was born in 1947 here in Washington. And he's been in Harvard--he got out of Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1969 and went to work a couple of years with the Boston Redevelopment Authority, and then he's been back at Harvard. He's a senior writer and archivist for the university. Been there since--forever (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you have other siblings? Speaker 2: No, just the two of us. Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother's family. How far back can you go? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. Accurately, I can probably go back to her grandparents who, again, were from Woodstock, Georgia. That's where the Fowler part of the family, as far as we know--in fact, I've got a--my brother and I are gonna sort of--now that we have some time, we're gonna sort of trace back as far as we can get. But-- Speaker 1: What are her parents' names? Speaker 2: Oh, right, my grandfath- parents was, it was George Washington Fowler [George Fowler] and he was born in 1895, and my grandmother was Lillian Taylor [Lillian Taylor Fowler], and she was born in the area around Woodstock, around 1897. My grandfather had two sisters and a brother, all born and raised in the Woodstock area. His oldest, older sister, Beulah [Beulah Fowler Williams], went to Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], and then she went to Emory [Grady Memorial Hospital Municipal Training School for Colored Nurses, Atlanta, Georgia] and became one of the first registered nurses in the United States back around 1918, 1919. And then she went to Ecorse, Michigan. And for about fifty years, she founded and ran the well baby clinic at the hospital there in Ecorse. Speaker 1: Wait. So you mentioned Beulah became the first RN in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One of the first-- Speaker 1: --in what year? Speaker 2: Must have been about 19--she got out of Morris Brown in 1913. Then she worked, and then she went back and got the RN which is today Emory, but it was the old Grady Hospital in Atlanta. But they had some special program, and she was the only black in that program. Speaker 1: Okay, 19 (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was around, somewhere between 1919, 1921, somewhere in--I've got her diploma. I just haven't look at it recently. But the brother, Sylvester [Sylvester Fowler], became the, you know, effectively, the black mayor of Marietta [Georgia]. He owned, you know, the funeral home, the beauty parlor, the barbershop, the taxicab company, the grocery store, the, you know, whatever, real est- a lot of real estate. And, in fact, there's a street named for him in Marietta, which I saw about four years ago when I was down there visiting some friends. So I remember going down there as a kid, and he was the only black that they quote, allowed, unquote to have a Cadillac. This was back in the '30s [1930s] when he got, he got it, and then his--he had three daughters, all of whom had--one was a teacher and end up going to Detroit [Michigan] as a principal, over the years. And the other one ran all the businesses. And she stayed in Atlanta, in Marietta, and then the second--the daughter that was my mother's age, stayed in Atlanta as well. So, so, it's, it's kind of an interesting family. Story_ID: 639250 Speaker 1: What did George Washington Fowler [Hightower's maternal grandfather, George Fowler] do? Speaker 2: Well, he went to Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and then he came up to the, to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] around 1917 right after my mother [Anna Fowler Hightower] was born. And at that time, it was very difficult, you know, for blacks to do anything. So he actually ended up working for the government. He worked for the Quartermaster Corps [U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps] and he retired from the Quartermaster Corps in--must have been 1954. And he went to Terrell Law School [Robert H. Terrell Law School] which is the old Howard University law school [Washington, D.C.] when it was a night school, didn't graduate, but he was a, I think he went there for two years, and then, you know, he ended up having to raise his family. But he used to coach baseball in his spare time. And during the war [World War I, WWI], having an all-black team that won--I've got the trophy downstairs. I gotta clean it up, and so it was, he was, he was my, one of my, he was probably my main role model. I mean my grandfather and I--my [maternal] grandparents, we all lived in the same house here in D.C. And it was just the richness of having the two generations, three generations together. And he died when I was, at the end of my freshman year in high school [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.]. And that was probably the most severe loss that I've ever experienced other--until my mother, and, you know, dad [Marvin W. Hightower] passed away because I, I'd never seen, probably the one person that sort of helped mold my character. I did everything, I did probably more things with him than I probably (laughter) did with my parents because he, he was just a very special man. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What about Lillian Taylor Fowler? Speaker 2: She worked for the government also. She worked down at the general, I think it was the school of the GSA, General Services Administration, and she retired. Again, just found all of her things up in the attic. And I have to go through that and get, you know, more up to date on what, what she--but she retired. She was a supervisor down there, and I think she retired in the, maybe, maybe the late '50s [1950s] as well. And then, you know, she continued to live with my parents, yeah, after my grandfather died. Story_ID: 639251 Speaker 1: Do you know anything about your maternal great-grandparents? Speaker 2: Not really. I know mister, what I think--I'm trying to think of the name that they, they used his initials, Mr. J.D. He was a very strappy man. He was over, you know, six feet fall, very tall, and Miss Lucy [Lucy Dean Fowler]. There's a book written about the blacks in Marietta [Georgia], and they are very prominent, and they're written about in those--in that book. But I haven't actually gone back far enough. I've got pictures of it, photographs and things over the years. But that's in my so called retirement. That's what I'm gonna spend some time doing to see how far, how far back I can really get. Speaker 1: What about on your father's [Marvin W. Hightower] side? Speaker 2: On my dad's side, my great-grandfather and great-grandmother lived right outside of Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 1: What are their names? Speaker 2: Mervin Hightower [Warren Hightower] and Anna Churn Hightower [Anna Churn Hardin]. And everything we know about her suggests that she came from a French Huguenot family that came from At- from New Orleans [Louisiana] by way of Marseille [France]. And we're researching that now because my aunt [Beverly Hightower], my father's sister, has a daughter who was a French exchange student when she was at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and somehow came across someone who connected with her. And they found out that there might be a connection--there was a spelling change, which often happened when you left Europe to come to the U.S. And my aunt and I are now beginning to try to trace that back. But they lived--I'm trying to think now. It's--I don't recall exactly. I remember going there because when they died, my great-grandmother, Anna Churn, had several siblings, one of whom my aunt, my father's aunt [Marie Hightower Stedman], used to take me to Atlanta to visit when I was younger, up until about 1950. So I remember going to the property. I remember, you know, a large piece of property with all these animals, this huge house, this big dining area where everyone would come to eat. And that was Aunt Fannie, and now one of Aunt Fannie's children's children has contacted my aunt who now lives in Douglasville [Georgia]--she moved back from California back home about five, six years ago. Now, they're beginning to figure out--and my aunt's going down to the county seat which has moved from what it was back in the late 1800s, to begin to find--because they had property, there should be property records census and, and things of that nature. Speaker 1: Do you know when Mervin Hightower was born? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I know that he died when my dad, when my grandfather [Marvin A. Hightower] was about five years old, my father's father. Speaker 1: So he was likely born in the late 1800s? Speaker 2: He was likely born around the time of the Civil War probably. Anna must have died around 1921 or so because my dad remembers the last time he saw her, he was six years old. So he was born in, you know, 1916, so she probably lived through about 1920-ish, '21 [1921], '22 [1922]. Speaker 1: And you think she may have been born-- Speaker 2: Let me see, well, if we back up sixty-two years from that, that would, that would put her back in the 1870s, yeah. Speaker 1: And it's Anna Churn. Can you spell Churn? Speaker 2: Well, that's the, that's the, that's the great debate, whether it's C-H-U-R-N or C-H-E-R-N-E. And that's what we're researching now. And it's--and where the Hightower part comes from, we're still, it's still a mystery. Everyone I--it's such an unusual name that anyone who asks me about it or when I've come across people, the few people who have the last name, there's almost inevitably a West Texas connection. So we're trying to, trying to, you know, find that, find out how that works. Story_ID: 639252 Speaker 1: What about your paternal grandparents? Speaker 2: The, my grand- my grandfather, my father's father, had a very, I'll say an interesting life. He actually passed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What's his name? Speaker 2: --for a number of years. He looked like a little Italian. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: His name was Marvin [Marvin A. Hightower] also, but my father [Marvin W. Hightower] was not a junior. Speaker 1: Marvin? Speaker 2: Marvin, um-hm. Speaker 1: M-A-R-V-I-N (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) V-I-N. And it's Alvin, A-L-V-I-N [sic. Alton]. So maybe that's how I decided to call my brother Alvert [Marvin A. Hightower], I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: But my mother [Anna Fowler Hightower] gave me the privilege of naming, giving my brother his middle name (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you know when your grandfather was born, approximately? Speaker 2: It would, it would have to have been in the late 1890s because he and his sister [Marie Hightower Stedman] and my grandmother [Helen McFarland Hightower] were the same age. They were both born in 1897. She was born the 24th of December. I got to know her because she lived here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] After she left Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], she taught for many years-- Speaker 1: Your grandmother? Speaker 2: No, the, no, this is my aunt, my father's brother's [sic.] sister. And she taught for many years in North Carolina, and then came to D.C. in the, maybe late '40s [1940s] after the war [World War II, WWII]. So I got to really know her-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and so, but, yeah, she was born 24th of December 1897. Or I would suspect that my grandfather was born two to three years before that. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said he passed for white. Speaker 2: He did, for a number of years down in Florida. Speaker 1: What stories have you heard? Speaker 2: Oh, there are a lot of stories about him being a valet for some rather notorious figures (laughter) over the years, and then my--he married--when he married my father's mother who was, you know, a medium colored brown, sort of a cafe au lait complexion, he did not stay with her very long after my dad was born. And he and his, one of his buddies sort of went off. And he kind of disappeared for a number of years. And then all of a sudden, then he married my aunt's [Beverly Hightower]--see, my aunt is actually my father's half-sister. But they never--they have the same father, but different mother. So she, in fact, she's only six years younger than I am--six years older. She was born in 1935 and born in Atlanta [Georgia]. But, and her mother [Sallie Hightower], she was just a wonderful woman, and so there was a big gap. There's a nineteen year gap between my mother's--and my father's age and my aunt's [sic.] age. Speaker 1: What's the name of your grandmother? Speaker 2: That's a good question because she died when I was about a month old. I never, never knew her. I've only seen pictures of her. I knew her sister--this is funny. Her sister was Janie [Janie McFarland McHenry]. Her sister worked for the Scripps family of Scripps Howard [E.W. Scripps Company]. And we have these wonderful photographs and many pieces of china from China where she took care of their children when they took the world cruise, back around 19, oh, 1920, 1922. Then they were gone almost a year. But-- Speaker 1: When did--how did Marvin decide to pass? Were there stories told about that? Speaker 2: I don't know the stories there. It's just that, you know, he looked like a little Italian. And I guess there were better opportunities if, in that timeframe to do that, than not. There are other, other people I know whose parents did that, including my father--on my cousin's side of the family, one of, yeah. There're a number of stories like that. And then all of a sudden after, after I would say, the first time I remember seeing my grandfather was when I was in, finishing up elementary school [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. He came here to work at one of the seafood restaurants. And he stayed here for, maybe through the early part of my high school [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.]. And then he took off again, went to California which is where his daughter was at the time, and that's where he died. And that would have been about 1964 'cause I got to see him again in '63 [1963] when I went out to, to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] to see her and got to see him and spend a lot of time with him. But never--I didn't really question him a lot about his career. My aunt knows more, and that's, and that's what she and I are gonna sort of start pulling together. But, and there, there are these stories, yeah. Story_ID: 639253 Speaker 1: So, moving on to your childhood-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you were born in Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Born right here at Columbia--what was then Columbia women's hospital [Columbia Hospital for Women], which is now a condominium [The Columbia] on 23rd [sic.] and L Street [Washington, D.C.] (laughter). Speaker 1: What are your earliest childhood memories? Speaker 2: Oh, just a lot of great family. It's a small family, but it was a very closely knit family. My mother [Anna Fowler Hightower] only had one brother, one sibling, who was the second black to graduate from Military Academy in the 20th century. Well, he--well, here's the story. He-- Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: His name is James Daniel Fowler [James Fowler, Sr.]. And he was born in Atlanta [Georgia], in 19--1916, January 27th. And he went to, you know, the famous Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] here and went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], graduated magna cum laude, Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society], and at that point, he was headed to med school. He wanted to be a neurosurgeon. Congressman Dawson [William L. Dawson] from Illinois, who had replaced Congressman De Priest [Oscar Stanton De Priest] as the only black member of [U.S.] Congress then, felt that it was time to have another black--'cause B.O. Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] had been the first black in the 20th century after almost fifty years of not having a black in the Military Academy. B.O. went to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] in 1932, got out in 1936. So my uncle graduated from Howard in 1937, and Congressman Dawson nominated him to a Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland]. He passed the test for Naval Academy, and then they said he, when he was, time--when he could accept the appointment, he would have been too old. So then he took the test for West Point, passed it, passed the physical and then Dawson appointed him in 1937. So he was the only black cadet at West Point in 1937 for two years. They--no one spoke to him. They put him in a private room. He had more demerits than anyone had ever--who walked through the yard because it was a continual period of harassment for two years. They were trying to break him, and, you know, which happened to everybody who went there through about the mid-'40s [1940s]. But he was the only one there for the first two years. And then Clarence Davenport [Clarence M. Davenport, Jr.] came in. Clarence was from Detroit [Michigan], came in in 1939, and then Tresville [Robert B. Tresville] came in in 1940. So there were about three blacks at the academy at one time which had never happened before. Then he spent his entire career as a career military officer including a stint as the commandant of the Chinese military academy [Republic of China Military Academy]. He worked for Chiang Kai-shek from 1958 to 1960 in the academy and then came back here and then went out to Fort Leavenworth [Kansas] and was one of--was the first black field grade officer to head up a tactics division at the Command General Staff College [United States Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His two sons also went to West Point. One who just died last week, was a lawyer as well, and Jim [James Fowler, Jr.], middle cousin, got out in '67 [1967], and David [David Fowler], who just passed away, got out in '74 [1974]. Then Jim's daughter, Kim [Kim Fowler], went to the Naval Academy. So we have three generations of service academies in the family and there are, total six service academy graduates, three West Pointers and three Naval Academy. So, and that's, that's part of my story, the growing up in D.C. I started school early, skipped twice, got out of high school at sixteen. Story_ID: 639254 Speaker 1: So, even before we go there, where did you live as a young child (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lived in LeDroit Park [Washington, D.C.], right at 74 S Street NW, and it was-- Speaker 1: Take me around your neigh- your block. Speaker 2: Around my block, one block over, the treasurer of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] lived at the corner, the-- Speaker 1: Who was that? Speaker 2: That was Lowell Johnston's father [V.D. Johnston], Lowell--Anna Johnston Diggs [Anna Diggs Taylor] is the judge, district court judge in Michigan who ruled on the eavesdropping case [ACLU v. NSA, 2007]. Well, her brother and I, Lowell, were (gesture) just like that, and Anna and Jordan [June Jordan] went to prep school together in New England [Northfield School for Girls; Northfield Mount Hermon School, Gill, Massachusetts]. And then at the corner was Dr. E.Y. Williams who was the head of the department of psychiatry at Howard. At the other corner was Dr. Brazier [Joseph C. Brazier], a prominent dentist. Around the corner was my third grade teacher, Miss Shade [ph.]. That was, that was in (unclear). I mean it was, it was a solidly middle class, you know, professional neighborhood. We just have, you know, a tremendous experience there, just understanding what it meant to be excellent because this was segregated Washington [D.C.] at the time. All the schools were segregated, but we had the best teachers because they were all masters, doctorates who couldn't do anything else because there were no opportunities. So we got the advantage of having the creme de la creme of the black intelligentsia. Story_ID: 639255 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What elementary school did you attend? Speaker 2: I went to Mott [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]. Mott does not exist anymore. Mott is the parking lot for Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. It's right at the corner of 4th [Street] and W [Street], one block south of Howard's campus. And my mom [Anna Fowler Hightower] taught there after she--she came back into the D.C. school system around 1950 after running the [U.S.] Army's GED [General Educational Development] program at Fort Belvoir [Virginia] to give the soldiers who didn't have a chance to finish their high school diploma. She ran that program for about four years down at Fort Belvoir. Speaker 1: Now, was that rare, to have an African American woman-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --running that program? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Well, she got out of Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] in 1938, is that right? Yeah, 1938, and then she went to Huntly, Virginia which is at the end of Skyline Drive near the area we're in, that Little Washington [Washington, Virginia] is today. She taught in a one room schoolhouse. She taught first grade through sixth grade. And she did that for--until she got married to my dad [Marvin W. Hightower] in 1940 until I was born. And then she had a special assignment, special job in the war department [U.S. Department of War] during the war [World War II, WWII] in the censor, censoring area. And then when that was over now, they asked her to take over this program and start it actually at Fort Belvoir too, and run the GED program. So she did that until 1950. Story_ID: 639256 Speaker 1: So, tell me about your father [Marvin W. Hightower]. What was he doing professionally (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my, yeah, when he got out of high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], he went to work for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. And then about 1947, '48 [1948], he started an advertising and commercial printing business which he had until we sold it to several major publishers in Chicago [Illinois] and Cincinnati [Ohio] in 1971. So at fifty-five, he retired, yeah. My mom [Anna Fowler Hightower], you know, came back into the D.C. school system in 1950 and then retired from Mott Elementary School [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] in 1977 as the head teacher and the assistant principal there. And she had, she actually worked a lot with Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and Miner [Miner Teachers College] when Miner was still, you know, in existence before D.C. Teachers [District of Columbia Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --became the college for everybody to go to in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for teaching. Story_ID: 639257 Speaker 1: And you attended Mott Elementary [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I attend- I attended Mott. I started at Mott when I was four years old. And I skipped half of the first grade and half of the third grade. So went to Mott, got out of Mott in '52 [1952]. Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your teachers at Mott. Speaker 2: Oh, well, most of them were my mother's friends. So I had very, very little latitude (laughter). The biggest--as I looked at some of my report cards that I found when my mom [Anna Fowler Hightower] died, going through her hope chest, the comment was always, "Dennis [HistoryMaker Dennis Hightower] works very fast and then he becomes too social." I, yeah, and in today's parlance, I was considered a quick study. And then I would, you know, pull little girls' pigtails or, you know, go talk to my buddies. And then, so that was the consistent comment from the time I was in the third grade all the way through the sixth grade, Dennis is too social (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter). Speaker 2: He does good work, but he's too social. I had wonderful, a lot of my childhood friends that I got to know at Mott are still some of my closest friends. I mean they, some of the people we were talking about early, [HistoryMaker] Charlene Drew Jarvis, Fred Gregory [HistoryMaker Colonel Frederick Drew Gregory], Lowell Johnston, Paul Reason [J. Paul Reason], Wesley Williams [ph.], I mean we all started--we were all in the top section of our, it, our class. And we always had then the best teacher. We were all in the same classroom from kindergarten all the way through the sixth grade. It was incredible. We did the plays. We had--we did the-- Speaker 1: What plays? Speaker 2: Oh, well, you know, 'Nutcracker' ['The Nutcracker,' Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky], you have to do 'Nutcracker' every Christmas. And we had one teacher, Miss Johnson [ph.], who was quite a dramatist and she was the one who was responsible for putting on the Christmas pageant. So I was always in one of those pageants. We had oratory contests. I was always involved in that. We had safety patrol, involved in that. Anything--and that's where early, the early signs of leadership began to sort of develop and manifest themselves, where there were maybe a group of us, basically, that same group, you know, Lowell, myself, Paul, Wesley, where we were constantly drawn upon to do things and to get out in front and take leadership. Story_ID: 639258 Speaker 1: You mentioned [HistoryMaker] Charlene Drew Jarvis. Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: She's a relative of Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew]? Speaker 2: She's Charles Drew's second daughter. Charles Drew had four children, Bebe [Bebe Drew Price], who was a year ahead of us, Charlene who was in my class, Sylvia [Sylvia Drew Ivie] and Charles, Jr [Charles Drew, Jr.]. And they all went to Mott [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], and they all lived one block--because at that time, Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] provided housing for their professors. And today where the, one of the universities is on College Place [sic. College Street], that's where they lived. So we used to kind of--it's only one block from the, from the elementary school. So a lot of us would go over there and have lunch together and, you know, with our peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and, you know (laughter) and have lunch there with--and Mrs. Drew [Minnie Robbins Drew] was always there to, you know, to welcome us, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you know Dr. Drew? Speaker 2: Yes, and I had the pleasure of meeting him before he was tragically killed. In fact, I was sitting next to Charlene the afternoon that Maude K. Brown [ph.] who was the principal at Mott at the time, came into pull her out of the room to let her know that her father did not survive, you know, the car crash when he was coming back from that fishing trip in North Carolina. So that, you know, there's a lot of, lot of richness to that experience at Mott. Most of us then went on to Banneker [Benjamin Banneker Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School, Washington, D.C.] when it was a junior high school, and-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Well, let me ask this (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm. Speaker 1: --did Fred Gregory [HistoryMaker Colonel Frederick Drew Gregory], was he one of your class--? Speaker 2: Fred, Fred was in that--Fred was in that class as well. Fred lived in Anacostia [Washington, D.C.]. His father [Francis Gregory], at the time was principal of Armstrong High School [Samuel Chapman Armstrong Technical High School; Armstrong Manual Training School, Washington, D.C.]. But Fred, he made the trek, because Mott was the, considered the best elementary school in segregated D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: So he was the nephew of Charles Drew? Speaker 2: He was the nephew of Charles Drew. His mother [Nora Drew Gregory] and Charles Drew were siblings. Speaker 1: And he later became an astronaut? Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. He went to the Air Force Academy [United States Air Force Academy, Colorado]. He went to Amherst [Amherst College, Amherst, Massachusetts] for the first two years. And he graduated from Anacostia High School [Washington, D.C.] in '58 [1958], then went to Amherst for two years and then went to the Air Force Academy, got out in '64 [1964]. So he was in the second group of blacks who graduated. Charles Bush [Charles V. Bush] and the other two guys from D.C. were the first three in '63 [1963] who came out. Story_ID: 639259 Speaker 1: So, it sounds like the teachers and parents during that era really focused on making sure you guys were prepared for the future, that you were future leaders. And many of you went on to do some extraordinary things (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They--and this is, this is part of--when I, when I look back, yeah, I went to Banneker [Benjamin Banneker Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School, Washington, D.C.], and I just found my graduation program from Banneker. Speaker 1: This is Banneker Junior High? Speaker 2: That, when Banneker was the junior high school, right there at Georgia Avenue, right across from what was then Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], and then Howard University [Washington, D.C.] was on the other side of Miner. So we were all there. We used, we used to walk across the campus, you know, like we were, you know, gonna be in college one of these days. But at Banneker, Banneker was another opportunity to certainly (unclear). In fact, I looked, was looking at the program, and, you know, I got inducted into the, you know, the honors society at Banneker. And there were only five boys. It was me, Paul Reason [J. Paul Reason], Wesley Williams [ph.] and Carl Sloan [ph.] and one other fellow, I can't remember the name of right now. And it, and, but, and there were like eighteen girls (laughter). But there, again, we had the best teachers who really focused on excellence. Speaker 1: Who were some of these teachers? Speaker 2: Let's see, my English teacher and Latin teacher was Miss Brooks, and I could do nothing wrong in Miss Brooks' class because she and my mother [Anna Fowler Hightower] had known each other since elementary school, Char--Charlotte A. Brooks. In fact, she lived three blocks from us (laughter). You had Miss Houston [ph.] who was my history teacher and my homeroom teacher, loved the woman. And I think that's where I really sort of generated this love of history, of times past. She just brought history alive, wonderful woman, but would not take anything less than what your best was. And the theme was always about excellence. It was, you know, you've got a special set of talents, this group that we were talking about. Then we're gonna make sure we push you to make sure you're prepared. Story_ID: 639260 Speaker 1: And, of course, in my ninth grade--that's when the Brown decision [Brown V. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] was passed. So instead of going to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] like everybody else in my family and all of our other friends who would have gone to Dunbar, we tested for different schools. And most of us ended up testing, like Paul [J. Paul Reason], myself and Leona Fitzhugh [J. Idorenyin Jamar] whose father [H. Naylor Fitzhugh] was the second or third grad, black to graduate from Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] in 1933. All of us tested into McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.] which was more science and technology. So I tested into their pre-engineering program. And, again, we got to McKinley, and there it was very clear, early on, that the white teachers were not happy that we were there, and particularly, because we were bright. And the thing that we then felt and understood more clearly than we had ever before was how well prepared we really were. And there was a struggle, frankly, because many of the students, many of the teachers--there was a track system in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at the time. There were four tracks. Track one was the top track, which they called college prep, and then track two, I forgot, I forgot what it was called. But then track three and track four were basically training you to be a secretary or to be a, you know, a trades person, whatever. So they tried to keep most of us out of track one, but it didn't work because our work was track one work, so those of us who did well, we ended up after the first semester in all track one, which would be AP [advanced placement] today. And we showed what we can do. And then what we realized was that these white kids weren't all that smart (laughter). Speaker 2: What was the percentage of black students at McKinley? Speaker 1: It changed. It was very interesting over that three years from '55 [1955] to '58 [1958]. I would say we had about 350 in our class. Going in, let's say 15 percent, 20 percent at the max were, were black. By the time we graduated, 75 percent were black. That's when the white flight occurred. Everyone who didn't really believe that educat- that integration was the right thing, that's when people moved to Silver Spring [Maryland], to Bethesda [Maryland], to Chevy Chase [Maryland]. That's when the white flight occurred. Story_ID: 639261 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you aware of the racial divide in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in your childhood? Speaker 2: That's, that's an interesting question. Yes, and no. Yes, because it--we knew that there was segregation, but no, because it didn't inhibit us from doing what we wanted to do 'cause we had our own community. The black middle class community here in D.C. was quite strong, and-- Speaker 1: Okay, so what kinds of institutions did you have in the black community (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had--well, we had U Street. We had--that was, that was our--we had U Street, we had 14th Street in this part of the city. Speaker 1: So the cultural mecca. Speaker 2: The cultural mecca was there. You had the Lincoln [Lincoln Theatre, Washington, D.C.], the Republic [Republic Theatre, Washington, D.C.], and the Booker T. Theatres [Booker T. Theatre, Washington, D.C.]. You had the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], which was owned by, oh, gosh, the Murray family who grew up, grew up with my parents [Anna Fowler Hightower and Marvin W. Hightower], Mercedes [ph.] and her brother. Then you had the Howard Theatre around the corner. You had Howard University [Washington, D.C] right there anchoring that. Then you had 14th Street. I mean most of my dad's businesses, his clients, were all up and down 14th Street, all up and down U Street. So I knew that corridor because I worked, you know, in the family business as a salesperson and had all the college accounts when I was in, at Howard 'cause I'd do, you know, the advertising, promotional, whatever. So I really got a, got a sense of what the dynamic was. So, yes, there was integration--there was segregation here, but it didn't, we didn't--we never focused on it because we had options and alternatives. In the summer, from the time I was eight years old, I went to Massachusetts to summer camp. I went to Atwater [Camp Atwater, North Brookfield, Massachusetts]. So most of the summer, until I was swimming instructor until I was the head of water safety program at Atwater, I was gone from June until August. So I never felt what it was like to have to deal with that. My family traveled. I mean we traveled by car because then, you know, there were, there were no access to hotels. So you stayed with family or friends as you either drove south or as you drove north. I mean we had family in Detroit [Michigan]. My godfather was a surgeon in Detroit. So we'd go to Detroit, my mother's cousin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who was that? Speaker 2: Welford T. Hill. He had gone to Howard, and then he, he'd gone into this famous regiment in World War II [WWII] that my uncle [James Fowler, Sr.] and other godfather was in, retired as a general. They all served in the 366th Infantry Regiment. So he came out of that and went to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and then moved to, moved to Detroit. Then my mother's first cousin moved to, had moved to Detroit and was teaching, Aunt Beulah [Beulah Fowler Davis], who was named for her aunt [Beulah Fowler Williams]. And then my father had relatives in Chicago [Illinois], one of the most beautiful women I've ever seen in my life. She, in her thirties, had pure gray hair. It was long, flowing, gray hair. I used to love to just go to Chicago and see her. She was just the most beautiful woman I thought I'd ever seen in my life. Story_ID: 639262 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had access to opportunities. You were able to see other communities-- Speaker 2: And, and because of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you saw blacks in control of things. You saw blacks doing things. You saw the intellectual, you know-- Speaker 1: Which intellectuals do you remember from that era? Speaker 2: Well, of course, you know, Franklin, E. Franklin Frazier who lived three blocks from us (laughter). So you saw him socially, and you saw him in his role as the, you know, the spokesman for, you know, the black bourgeoisie (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was he like? Speaker 2: Fascinating man, arrogant, smart, just--but yet, when you got to see him outside of his sort of role, the most engaging, the most thoughtful, thought provoking, pretty much the devil's advocate. He'd throw stuff out and just see how you respond. There were other, other, other people-- Speaker 1: Was Ralph Bunche around? Speaker 2: No, Ralph Bunche was not there at the time. Not, no, he had, he had the left the university. Most of the key people, you know, Just [Ernest Everett Just] had already gone. Let's see, E. Franklin Frazier, Robert Martin in political science with his son--again, we all went to the elementary and junior high and high school together, Bob, Jr. [Robert E. Martin, Jr.], who's a dentist down in Columbia [Maryland] now. Speaker 1: Did you know [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt as a child? Speaker 2: Yeah, Sharon, oh, yes, Sharon's father [Carlisle Edward Pratt] was a judge. Her mother [Mildred Petticord Pratt] had died when her, you know, her--she and Bennie [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley] were early and, then got to know her much better 'cause they lived on the, in the Anacostia [Washington, D.C.] side. But she dated the, a brother of a very good friend of mine who was also, we're both classmates at McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], Arrington Dixon, was her first husband. And then Jim [James Dixon], his older brother was my classmate at Tech. Speaker 1: So is this a very small community (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very small, yeah, we had these Christmas parties that the parents would put together. There were various women's clubs, depending upon, you know, who-- Speaker 1: Which clubs? Links [The Links, Incorporated] or sororities? Speaker 2: Well, no, there--well, my mother [Anna Fowler Hightower] was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] for seventy-two years when she died. And she--and her, she was involved on the protocol committee for the hundredth anniversary. And she'd given a speech the week before she had her stroke. So she was active until she was almost--and she was ninety, almost ninety years old when she died last April. But, yeah, there were those kinds of groups. There were these different clubs, and they would make sure that we all go to know each other. Most of us knew each other anyway because you either went to Mott [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] or you went to Banneker [Benjamin Banneker Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School, Washington, D.C.], and before the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. And then after the Brown decision, of course, you'd already established some of these relationships. So the parties in the basements, you know, where we had a rec room. Almost everybody, you know, had a rec room at that time. Speaker 1: Was Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] alive and well in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] at this point? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Jack and Jill was alive in well, yeah. Jack and Jill was alive and well. Jack and Jill there were a lot of-- Speaker 1: Were you a member? Speaker 2: No, no, because--I don't know why my mom didn't do that because one, we had so many other outlets, but, no, but, yeah, but again, I partied with everybody (laughter) who was in Jack--and dated a lot of girls who were in Jack and Jill. Speaker 1: Were these, was this group defined by the parents' education or professional achievements or, you know, were there other (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A combination-- Speaker 1: --criteria? Speaker 2: --a combination of things. Many of the parents were native Washingtonians who had gone to Shaw Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] and Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] Miner [Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]. So in bringing their kids up, that's the circle. Many of them, many of the parents were, you know, doctors, lawyers, teachers, morticians-- Speaker 1: This is the professional class. Speaker 2: This is a professional class, so, yes, to that extent, one might say that there was a bit of isolation from other parts of the society here, in the other black society in D.C. But that's how it worked. I mean that's just how it worked. Speaker 1: Were there issues--you always hear about D.C., issues of color and hair texture and all that stuff? Speaker 2: Some of that is true. I mean some of that is true. I mean I never, it never--I never became either embroiled in it or a victim of it because, you know, if you saw Freddie Gregory [HistoryMaker Colonel Frederick Drew Gregory], you know, Freddie Gregory is very fair, you know, straight hair. Charlene [HistoryMaker Charlene Drew Jarvis], these were all my friends. I mean there was never an issue. But, yes, in some circles, that was an issue. There's certain families where if you didn't look right, then you weren't gonna date their daughter. And you knew that. I mean, that was just kind of how things worked. But for the most part, that was not an issue. Story_ID: 639263 Speaker 1: When the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] came down, at first there was the Briggs versus Elliot [Briggs v. Elliott, 1952] and the Brown decision, was this a talker? Was this a big deal in the black community? Speaker 2: Oh, it certainly was because they knew that things were gonna change as a result of that. That structure that we had created over the last three generations in some cases was gonna be different. We, I think our teachers understood that we were gonna be very vulnerable to the notion that mediocrity was okay, where there had been, they had been preaching excellence all along because they knew from their experience that everybody didn't, was not gonna be happy for us being smart and being leaders and you're doing things. And they really prepared us for, for going to McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.] or going to Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] or going to Coolidge [Calvin Coolidge Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] or going to Woodrow Wilson [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.] or the old Western High School, which is the, the art school [Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.] now in, you know, there on 35th Street in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.]. Yeah, it was, it changed. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: It really, really changed how we functioned and how we operated. But that early togetherness sort of prevailed and many of us still get together today as a result of those early experiences that go all the way back to Mott Elementary School [Lucretia Mott Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], yeah. Speaker 1: What are, what are your early memories of integrating McKinley High School? Speaker 2: A lot of fights, a lot--my, one of my closest friends, George Ray [ph.], who's a lawyer here now, lived around the corner on 1st Street, George, you know, had a, had a tough time. He's really, he's a great looking, good looking guy, played basketball and he, his parents had to send him away to school down in Florida, down in Louisiana because he just--he was not gonna make it. He was not gonna live through McKinley, yeah. Speaker 1: 'Cause he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He just-- Speaker 1: --fighting back? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And it was, it was funny because there were some of us who didn't have a problem at all. I mean I ended up being president of my class at McKinley. There were others who just, for some reason, they were the ones that got picked on. And, but George had to get outta there (laughter), yeah. Speaker 1: So in your classes, the white students were supportive and respectful? Speaker 2: Not initially, not initially until they realized that we had the intellectual horsepower. You know, they believed what they had heard at home. They had no prior experience other than maybe someone coming in to clean their homes, frankly. So when they realized that we could compete intellectually, we could compete athletically, we could compete in student council, we competed--you know, you name it, we were there. And there was this core group in my class, the class behind me, and my cousin's class, two classes behind me, where we just, we just said, look, we know what, we know what we can do. And it took time. So by the, I would say by our--by my junior year, there was much more of a rapport between many of the white students. There were still those who you knew were just absolutely upset that we were there. And it often, it often was the group whose parents could not afford to leave the city. So we were stuck with sort of that element. And they weren't all--then none of them were in track one either. They were normally in track three or track four. They couldn't understand why we could be in track one, which is college prep, and they had to be in the, you know, the manual trades track (laughter). Story_ID: 639264 Speaker 1: 'Cause McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.] was known for its technical training-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --as, in addition to other academic fields. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: But because you were in track one, did you completely skip over the vocational part of it or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, because that wasn't track one. Track one was, you know, in- it was intensive history. It was geometry, algebra, geometry, trigonometry, differential equations. It was chemistry, biology, physics. It was, it was all of those other things that (background noise)--let me just turn this off (laughter). It was all of the other things that they did not have any, any understanding of, and that's what we were doing. I mean every-- Speaker 1: Did you excel in all of those fields, in science and math? Speaker 2: Yes and no. As I said, I went to, went to McKinley when I was thirteen. Speaker 1: What year was that? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955] and I graduated when I was sixteen. I had a lot of growing up to do. I was smart. I could get stuff done, but my social streak never left me. I had an appointment to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], but I was too young to take it. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you-- Speaker 2: I was sixteen, and when I was eighteen and got the appointment back, I had discussions with the people up in, with the academy, and I was able to get the, I could have had the appointment back if I wanted it. And at the end of the interview, the general said, "Well, we will certainly expect that you will coming in as a plebe the summer of '61 [1961]." And, of course, I was a junior in college at that time, eighteen years old. And I said, "No, general, I don't think I'm gonna come." And he said, "No person that has the opportunity to go to West Point say no." I said, "Well, I am for two reasons. I have a car, and you don't have any women here," (laughter). So, this is misguided. Yeah, it's misguided youth. Speaker 1: The-- Speaker 2: You know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Who, was--did you have a sponsor in [U.S.] Congress? Speaker 1: Had presidential. Speaker 2: Who was your-- Speaker 1: 'Cause D.C. [Washington, D.C.] doesn't have a--you know, didn't have congress-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, so I, so I got (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was your sponsor? Speaker 1: Well, I got a presidential 'cause I tested, and then, and then it's called presidential. My cousin got a presidential to the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland]. My other two cousins got presidentials as well because in D.C., you know, we have no, we have no-- Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause I know Fred Gregory [HistoryMaker Colonel Frederick Drew Gregory] was talking about he--there was a congressman from another state who sponsored him. Speaker 1: From another state and they--which is what happened to my [maternal] uncle [James Foweler, Sr.]. But in the, in this case, they had gotten to the point where you didn't have to do that. But then I--and it was only about, let's see, fifteen years ago, just before I retired from Disney [Walt Disney Television and Telecommunications] in '96 [1996], and my family finally acknowledged that I did okay not having gone to West Point (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) That was a tough pill to swallow. Speaker 1: That was--it was, and as it turns out, you know, I graduated from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] at twenty, when I was twenty. And I was the top ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] graduate and the distinguished military graduate. So I got the same commission. I got a regular [U.S.] Army commission that I would have gotten had I gone to West Point. And then I actually stayed on active duty for eight years. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So it, you know, it kind of comes around in, in funny ways (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Story_ID: 639265 Speaker 1: Even before you graduated from McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], I wanted to ask you about Principal Charles Bish [Charles E. Bish]? Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter). He, well, he oversaw, I think, one of the most difficult transitions that any principal that I can imagine would have to undergo because he--I found him to be--and I was on the student council. I was parliamentarian of the, in the student council. I was, you know, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. I was on the rifle team, track team, baseball team, you know, I'm just doing all, doing everything, doing--and being social. So I got to see Dr. Bish a lot (laughter). But he had two assistant principals--it was interesting. Dr. Jewel [ph.] who was African American, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] trained, Harvard H--Harvard Ph.D. and Dr. Weinstein [ph.] who was Jewish. It was almost like Dr. Jewel kind of handled us and Dr. Weinstein handled them. And then Dr. Bish kind of sat over this. A lot of respect for that man because he stood up when a lot of people would have just kind of stepped back and kind of let things happen. He made sure that those, at least my recollections were that he made sure that we got the quality education that we, that we deserved, that the taxpayers' money was paying for. He took some stands that were very unpopular in terms of the various societies, the various organizations, what--you know, there'd never been any blacks on the Tech High staff. Paul became, Paul Reese [ph.] became a lead photographer. Somebody else became one of the writers. That hadn't happened in our first two years there. Speaker 1: There's a report of the principal turning, I guess, a protest, white students protesting the integration move, he turned that protest into a sort of pep rally. Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: Do you remember that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I do. He was very clever, that--and to tell you the level of respect that we had for him. It must have been in 19--let me see, we got out in '58 [1958]. So, it must have been 1978, yeah, 'cause I had just left McKinsey [McKinsey and Company] to join GE [General Electric] and it was our twentieth reunion. We invited Dr. Bish and he came, along with several of the other white teachers who had been--and see Hernest--Ernest Hemingway's cousin was our English teacher in track one. Speaker 1: Who was that? Speaker 2: Miss Hemingway. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: She had a little Volkswagen, and I remember a couple of guys from the football team, a couple of the white guys, would--and the way the campus was set up in the old days was that the faculty could park on the upper campus, upper quadrangle there which led right into the school. About six guys, I mean brawn--you know, brutes from the football team picked her Volkswagen up and moved it as a joke (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: I mean there were things like that. So things by the junior, by our junior year were getting to be calmer, you know, a little bit more, you know, what you would expect in a school where, you know, kids could come together and just have a good time, and learn. And by our senior year, I would say that we had laid the groundwork for the next two classes, where it was virtually a non-issue. But Dr. Bish played a very pivotal role. And I'll never, never forget, I would say the courage that he displayed because it was, it was a very difficult time in those first couple of years. Speaker 1: And you graduated from McKinley in what year? Speaker 2: In 1958. Story_ID: 639266 Speaker 1: When did you enter Howard University [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: September of 1958. Speaker 1: How did you decide to go to Howard? Speaker 2: Well, it was, again, you know, when, when I, you know, couldn't accept the Military Academy [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] appointment, I had applied to Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana], I think Springfield College [Springfield, Massachusetts] 'cause they had a great swimming team, and who else did I apply to? Of course, Howard and, I don't know whether it was Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]--Morehouse didn't have a swimming team. So I knew I wasn't going there, but I ended up going to Howard, one, because almost everybody in my family, that my family knew, had gone to Howard or Miners [Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]. You know, at that point, they were right there close together. All my friends were going to Howard, and plus I had access to one of the two cars in the family (laughter). Speaker 1: Oh, a car? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's right (laughter), it's very important at that time. At sixteen, that was very important. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So, got to Howard and got involved, made the swimming team my freshman year. In fact, there were only two freshmen who did, and he and I are still very tight, Mike Smith [ph.], who's a retired IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] executive and now back teaching at Howard business school [Howard University School of Business, Washington, D.C.]. So I swam for, you know, swam for Howard, and then, I was the first captain of the, first black crew team in the nation, you know, in rowing. And then I was co-captain of the rifle team, and gosh, I was president of the education honors society, Who's Who, student council, you name it. Speaker 1: So you were active. Speaker 2: I was really active. I mean really active, and at one point my parents [Anna Fowler Hightower and Marvin W. Hightower] thought that all I was doing was extracurricular activities, and they were probably right (laughter), between extracurricular activities and the girls (laughter) and the parties. But I guess, I still did my work. I still did my work. Story_ID: 639267 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, take me to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] in 1958. What was the scene? Speaker 2: Oh, see Howard at that time, yeah, was considered the black Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, with no disrespect to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: We took over a little bit later. That's okay (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A little bit, yeah. But what Howard was at that point, was the melting pot for a tremendous amount of great talent among young black, you know, kids. And what you, what you learned very quickly was, yeah, you thought you were smart, but there are a lot of other smart kids that look just like you from all over the country. And it was just wonderful because one of our faculty members, Carl Anderson [HistoryMaker Carl Edwin Anderson], who became head of student affairs at Howard, kept driving in--as did many of the other professors, kept driving the notion that if you can make it at Howard, you can make it anywhere because you've already been tested by being amongst the best there are, period. They just happen to look like you. But if you can deal in this environment, then you, you know, you're gonna be prepared to go out. And that's actually the case. It is, it was, at least then, it certainly was the case. And you had all these professors who had done all these wonderful things (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who were some of your professors at Howard? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, Banner [William Augustus Banner], in philosophy, trying to think of the dean who just died, one of the first Harvard black Ph.D.'s, taught classics [Frank M. Snowden, Jr.]. The names aren't coming back to me, but all the classes that I took, most of them--again, I didn't have any, I didn't get any slack because most of 'em knew my fam- knew my family (laughter), had gone to Shaw Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] with them and gone to Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] with--I mean just, I couldn't do anything other than try to be, you know, do it, do things right. Story_ID: 639268 Speaker 1: What was your major? Speaker 2: I had three majors, yeah. I was in and out of majors. I ended up, I had education, political science, I had physical education and what was the--at one point, I had another one. I'm trying to even think now, but I, so I ended up getting a B.S. degree in four years. I was--the program I was on was geared to be a five year program, but I just doubled up and just-- Speaker 1: In which field? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was a, it was a collection of 'em. They would have been--it would take me five years to do it, but then I took like, you know, thirty five hours a semester in most cases and still was swimming and still doing the--I mean I did all right. You know, I did--I just, I had fun at Howard University [Washington, D.C]. And that's why I keep telling people, Howard taught me how to live my life and Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] taught me how to earn my living. And then I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So the social scene, was that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Social scene was incredible. Speaker 1: Was it focused on the Greek system or-- Speaker 2: It was the Greek system, and it was the, you know, if you were an athlete at Howard. See I, see the thing at Howard, Howard didn't give athletic scholarships at that time. So if you were participating on a athletic team, it was because you--that's what you wanted to do. And then we, and, you know, I was on a championship swimming team for four years, and we never lost in a championship. And so we got to meet other people at Morgan [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], at Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee], at--well, those are the only two possible who had teams 'cause the rest of the teams was the white teams, Pennsylvania [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and LIU [Long Island University, Brooklyn, New York], West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], a lot of Pennsylvania schools. So went to the nationals out in Ball State [Ball State University, Muncie, Indiana], and just, I mean those were the kinds of things that, you know, when we, when we started the first crew team, we road in the Dad Vail [Dad Vail Regatta], an eastern regatta in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], used John Kelly's [John B. Kelly, Sr.] shell because we knew he didn't--we didn't wanna bring our shell up and he said, "Well, you can use my boathouse. And you can use the shell that, you know, that I used, you know, in the Olympics." So, I mean that was, that was, you know, wonderful experience. Same thing with the rifle team. You know, we traveled all over the country, and then we, you know, we normally won, I guess in the three years I was on the rifle team, we probably won 90 percent of everything, every match that we shot, you know. Speaker 1: Did you pledge? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], oh, yeah. Speaker 1: What year did you pledge? Speaker 2: I pledged in 1960, spring of 1960. And that was quite an experience. Speaker 1: How many people on your line? Speaker 2: We had, we had seventeen. We were the magnificent seventeen (laughter). And, you know, people like Colbert King [HistoryMaker Colbert I. King], Pulitzer Prize winner was on the line with me, Ed Batten [Edward Batten], my daughter's godfather was on line with me, let's see. I'm trying to think now. Bob Booker [ph.] who was my best man when I was married, is a physician out in San Francisco [California], was on line with me. I mean we just had, we just had a great group of people. Speaker 1: Stepping on the yard, and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, on Fridays with your, and all your stuff on and then singing. We had a tree, you know, the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] had their tree. And the office had the sundial, and so, you know, Fridays was it. Story_ID: 639269 Speaker 1: So, did any people from your prior cohort also attend Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt? Speaker 2: Yeah, Sharon, Sharon and Benny [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley], her sister, went to Howard. And, let's see, Paul Reason [J. Paul Reason], Paul left McKinley [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], went to Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] for his first year and then went to Lincoln, Pennsylvania [to Lincoln University] for his second year, came to Howard his third year 'cause his father was the librarian at Howard, Dr. Reason [Joseph Henry Reason], and then that's when he got his appointment to the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland] in '61 [1961], then he got out in '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Did you know Dr. Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert] when he was a student at Howard? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And the president, of course, of Howard. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, Pat was a--Pat and Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.] were roommates. Togo ended up being secretary of the army, secretary of veterans affairs, and Togo was on the swim team. Pat and Togo, I think, were part of a movement with [HistoryMaker] Larry Gibson who's a frat brother [in Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity]. I made him the next year, who is from Baltimore [Maryland], a lawyer in Baltimore now. They--see, the Greeks used to run everything on that campus. They started a movement to make the independents more powerful, and they used homecoming of 1961 as their, as their sort of mantra. My first, my then wife--my wife, my former wife, was a cand- was running for homecoming queen along with Wilma Monteith [Wilma Monteith Prince]. Speaker 1: And what was your former wife's name? Speaker 2: Denia, D-E-N-I-A, and she was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority]. Speaker 1: Denia Stukes [Denia Stukes Hightower]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, and then the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] put up somebody, the Zeta Phi Beta [Zeta Phi Beta Sorority] put up someone, and then Wilma was the independent. And Pat-- Speaker 1: Swygert. Speaker 2: --Swygert, Larry Gibson, Togo West and a few others were just absolutely convinced that they could change the direction of the, of the, of the Greek control on campus. And they did, they did. And Wilma won by the slimmest of margins and Denia was second. In fact, they had to--they had a recount because they couldn't believe it. And that's-- Speaker 1: The first time a non-Greek won (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first time a non-Greek had ever won, at least in any, in, in anybody's memory on that (laughter) campus. Story_ID: 639270 Speaker 1: What was the social hierarchy based on at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Was it, as you mentioned the Greek system, and whether you're an athlete or not or was there-- Speaker 2: It was, it was a combination of Greek, athlete and I would say participation in student affairs. That's where the leadership cadre came from. And the student council was this blend. When Carl Anderson [HistoryMaker Carl Edwin Anderson] took over as head of student activities, we really started formalizing the homecoming. We formalized Christmas, we formalized holidays and events where he would bring the student leaders together and say, "Okay, plan it, make it happen." And to this day, I mean (unclear), from Indiana, from Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], and ended up being the VP of academic--of student affairs under, oh, for many years until he retired about ten years ago. And he saw this potential and just brought the leadership out. The other thing, the other strong suit at that time was ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]. You know, Howard had an [U.S.] Army and an [U.S.] Air Force ROTC unit. I ended up being the commander of the Army unit my senior year and my daughter's godfather became the (unclear) commander of the Air Force unit his senior year. That was another part of the, sort of the political structure. Speaker 1: And the godfather's name again? Speaker 2: Ed Batten, B-A-T-T-E-N [Edward Batten], who--he's right down here in Springfield, Virginia, and he retired from AT&T [AT&T Inc.]. And so there were a lot of things moving on that campus, but the key was participating and being a leader in the various activities. Whatever you did well, you had the opportunity to really show what you could do at Howard. And you had a lot of faculty support because they knew that they were helping you get ready for the real world. Story_ID: 639271 Speaker 1: I'm gonna throw another name at you. Eddie Brown [Eddie C. Brown], the founder and CEO of Brown Capital [Brown Capital Management, Baltimore, Maryland] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, Brown--Eddie was a year ahead of me. And he was in engineering, very smart, came from Florida, very humble beginnings. And he'll tell you, he'll be the first one to tell you that. Eddie, you know, when he left, Eddie was a superb student, very smart, very, very smart. Eddie went off, and I think he worked for Grumman [Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corporation; Northrop Grumman Corporation], one of the few black engineers at that time, which would have been '61 [1961]. And then he went to, you know, Indiana University business school [Indiana University School of Business; Kelley School of Business, Bloomington, Indiana]. There were some programs back in the mid-'60s [1960s] to early '70s [1970s] that were focused on getting more blacks and minorities into the top M.B.A. programs. When I went to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], I got a fellowship under the COGME program, Council for Graduate Management Education [sic. Council for Opportunity in Graduate Management Education], which was the Ivy League colleges, Wharton [Wharton School of Finance and Commerce; Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Tuft--Tuck [Tuck School of Business, Hanover, New Hampshire], Harvard, Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], I think Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] was in that program as well. Eddie was under another program who a Howard graduate was also the executive director of. And I can't remember his name right now. But Eddie then went to Indiana University to, got his--and got his M.B.A. And then he went to work for the founder of Cummins Engine [Cummins, Columbus, Indiana] and then, you know, ran money there, then went to T. Rowe Price [T. Rowe Price Associates] and then, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --started his own firm twenty years-- Speaker 1: Okay, but could you see the beginnings of that at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: No, you would never have thought that he would have been a financial manager. Everybody thought Eddie was gonna be the best engineer in the world. But things were different. When we came out in that timeframe, there weren't that many opportunities for blacks in industry. And that's why--and one of the reasons I went in the [U.S.] military because you didn't, where you can actually demonstrate your leadership in, right from day one. So everyone thought that Eddie was gonna be probably be one of the best engineers around 'cause he's really smart. But by the time he made the transition to go to grad school--this was in the late '60s [1960s], things had changed because of the Civil Rights Movement. And then companies were looking for black men at that time, primarily, to come in to go into these various leadership roles, and that's how, and why I left the [U.S.] Army-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and I'll get that a little later. But Eddie then made that transition, majored in finance and then went to work for the Irwin, Irwin Jacobs' [Irwin M. Jacobs] family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who founded Cummins Engine Company. And that started his rise, and that attracted him to T. Rowe Price, and then, like I said, twenty four years ago, he set up Brown Capital Management, and it's still going strong. Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 639272 Speaker 1: During your years at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], you also continued work with your father [Marvin W. Hightower]? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I had all the college accounts. I mean, that was the greatest thing because that's when I really learned about business. My father and I--and I only even know this now, and he died five years ago, six years ago this May, at eighty-six, there's no way we could have ever worked together (laughter). And the reason is, and I have since discovered it, just as my son [Dennis Hightower, Jr.] has discovered that he and I could work together now, but we couldn't have earlier, we're too much alike (laughter), too much alike. He was detailed, he kept records of everything. He wanted everything done so precisely. And I was too, I was very cavalier. I mean I was, you know, I, I'd get stuff done, but I had my own way of doing things, and I was stubborn. I had my own ideas about what I was gonna do, and what I wasn't gonna do, spoiled probably because there's six years between my brother [Marvin A. Hightower] and me. So in many respects, I was like an only child, and I didn't like structure. So, but, yes, I did work for him. I handled all the university accounts, Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.], Howard. Speaker 1: This is in advertising. Speaker 2: Yeah, and on the college campuses, what that meant was that whenever there were these big events like homecoming, like the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] balls--D.C. [Washington, D.C.] was big in that time for a lot of ROTC stuff at G.W. [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.], at Georgetown and Howard, oh, yeah. And even though there wasn't that much activity between the groups, it, over the, over the four years I was there, that did change. I mean when I was in command of the, you know, the [U.S.] Army unit, we invited the people from Georgetown. They came over. They invited us from Howard to their things, the same thing with GW. So that changed. So I ended up then working to develop business in the universities to do all of the advertising, the commercial printing, the whole thing. And at the--also at that time, he had the account of Dart Drugs [Dart Drug, Washington, D.C.], which was the Feld family who owned Ringling Brothers Circus [Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey Circus] and Waxie Maxie music [Waxie Maxie Quality Music Company, Washington, D.C.] down on 7th Street. So we did all of that, all of their work. We did the big plumbing company here. I can't--Atlantic Plumbing [Atlantic Plumbing Supply Company, Washington, D.C.]. We had all of their accounts for business forms, you name it, every doctor, every lawyer, everybody who was anybody who got married, all the invitations, we did. Speaker 1: So you got a great deal of practical experience. Speaker 2: Absolutely. And that's where I really learned how to manage money, to account for things, to understand how business really worked. But I also knew that I could never work with him (laughter), at that time, at that time. Speaker 1: Were you aware of the level of success he had achieved? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't, I really wasn't. I honestly wasn't, even though in the community, there were other examples. And this is something that I've always said was, we--a problem after desegregation, we had black businesses, small, though they might have been, they were owned by us. When Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968], and we burned out our own 14th Street, our own U Street that was a tragedy because 80 percent, 90 percent of those businesses were our businesses. We owned them, the funeral homes, the liquor stores, the dry cleaners, the grocery stores, the haberdasheries, you name it. We owned it, and then all of a sudden, it just, it just disappeared. Story_ID: 639273 Speaker 1: Well, speaking of the Civil Rights Movement, I mean that was obviously a very tragic moment (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --but you were at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] during a time when the Civil Rights Movement was gaining momentum. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Was that something that affected your life as a college student at all? Were you aware of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, well the thing is Ralph Featherstone, who ended up getting killed down in the--and during one of the summers, you know, he grew up three blocks from me. And my mother [Anna Fowler Hightower] taught all five of the Feather- Featherstone, you know, boys. Ralph went to Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]. Ralph was a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity]. I mean, I knew Ralph. I knew, you know, Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin]. I knew, what's his name? He married Miriam Makeba, just died a couple of years ago. And I should know the name. He, we--he came to Howard in, two years after I did. The name is escaping me now, and I should know it, but, you know, all of, you know, those were the guys who, who started SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]-- Speaker 1: Right so you mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were right there at Howard. Speaker 1: Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was-- Speaker 2: Stokely-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that was who--yeah, Stokely, that's who I'm thinking about. Yeah, Stokely, I mean Stokely, Stokely was not quite the rabble rouser that history may make of him, but he was there. No, there's no question, and he spoke out. He was, you know, he was doing his thing. Oh, yeah, Stokely was right there on campus. When I was treasurer of the student council my senior year, Mike Winston [Michael R. Winston] was president. Mike ended up being VP of academic affairs at Howard when he came back. Conrad Harper [Conrad K. Harper] who went on to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 639274 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you know Jackie Brown [ph.]-- Speaker 2: Oh, sure (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) back then? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Oh absolutely, yeah, yeah. Well, see, that year we sponsored, student council said, let's figure out how--see, Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was always in a difficult position because it was funded by the, but it's one of--only one of two land grant colleges, Gallaudet College for the deaf [Gallaudet College; Gallaudet University, Washington, D.C.] is the other one. So Howard always had to walk a very, very tight line because 80 percent of the budget from Howard is voted on by [U.S.] Congress. So you had white congressmen, you had a D--a D.C. committee [U.S. Senate Committee on the District of Columbia; U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs] that basically oversaw D.C. [Washington, D.C.] in its segregated days and even after that when the money was at issue. So Howard had to be very careful, and Mordecai Johnson, Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] after that, and Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek], they all--and even Pat [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert] today, the--and I was, you know, I was a trustee at Howard for ten years. So I understand what the difficulty was. So the leadership of the student council, myself, Mike Glenson [ph.], Eddie Miles [Edward L. Miles], who's, teaches, professor of oceanography out of the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], and Conrad [Conrad K. Harper], we decided we would bring Malcolm X and Bayard Rustin for a debate. Well, that caused more uproar among the administration. Dean Arthur J. Blackburn [sic. Armour J. Blackburn] for whom Blackburn Center [Armour J. Blackburn University Center] is named was the dean of students. He called us into his office, and he said, "Do you all have any idea what you're doing to this university, you know, the jeopardy that you're putting--," and we said, "We are at Howard University, the capstone of Negro education. Why can't we bring competing views to understand what it is the issues are?" I mean it took a lot of time, a lot of gnashing of teeth and finally, we didn't, you know, we wouldn't, we wouldn't give up. We persisted and prevailed, and we brought Malcolm X and we brought Bayard Rustin into Cramton Auditorium [Washington, D.C.]. And they had a incredible debate. There was not one incident. Now, the campus was well protected and guarded because of, more because of Malcolm, than because of Bayard Rustin. But it was one of the highlights of the four years that Howard could break through and not forget about, but balance the competing tensions and bring two people of that caliber on campus who are--were totally opposed in terms of philosophy and point of view. Speaker 1: What was the most explosive issue that night? Speaker 2: Malcolm's famous statement, you know, "A nigger's, a nigger, a nigger," and that when they, when they start rounding up people, they're not gonna ask for, you know, Negroes who have Ph.D.'s, you know. You look like that, you gone get rounded up. That was the issue. Yeah, and-- Speaker 1: Did you meet Malcolm? Speaker 2: Sure did, yep, 'cause, you know, again, being one of the four, you know, leaders of the student council, you know, we--the four, we had to greet behind the stage and all that. I mean incredible person. I mean just-- Speaker 1: What do you remember about him? Speaker 2: I remember the, his eyes, piercing. I mean they just went right through you. And there was almost, there was, there was a fieriness, there was a, a determination. It was, it was--fanatical would be too strong a word, I think, but belief, he believed. He--what, whatever he was talking about, that's what he believed, and, and you saw it. And Denzel [Denzel Washington] captured that. Speaker 1: In the movie ['Malcolm X'] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the movie. He--I think he captured what I remember about him that one night that, you know, relatively short period of time that, you know, that was history in the making right there. Story_ID: 639275 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year did you graduate from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: In '62 [1962], June the 8th, 1962. And then I went on active duty on June the 15th. I was commissioned in the morning, graduated in the afternoon, and got engaged that night (laughter). Speaker 1: Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, yep. Speaker 1: And you proposed to Denia Stukes [Denia Stukes Hightower]? Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's right. Speaker 1: Now, she comes from a very politically active family as well. Yes, she was born in South Carolina. She was a signatory to the Briggs decision [Briggs v. Elliott, 1952]. In fact, when they had the fiftieth celebrations a couple of years ago, she did quite a bit of speaking and went up to New York and here in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tell me a little bit about her family's role in Briggs, Elliott. Speaker 1: Well, they were in, in Summerton, South Carolina. And her father was a mechanic. Her mother [Gardenia Martin Stukes Davis] was a homemaker, had five children--no, four children at that--no, five at that time 'cause, yeah, Gray [ph.], the youngest child was, was born in 1949, I believe, or 1950. And when they were petitioning for the right to have quality buses, books and school facilities, the white community basically said, anyone who signs this petition will lose their job. So her father signed the petition-- Speaker 2: And who was her father? Speaker 1: Will--Willie Stukes [Willie Stukes, Sr.], and when he lost his job, then he set up his own car repair shop in their, in their, in their yard. And in the course of repairing one car, one of the cars fell on him, and crushed him, killed him immediately. So, but Denia had signed--her brother, her older brother, Will [Willie Stukes, Jr.], had signed and her mother and father. So she's actually a signatory to the Briggs, Elliott decision. So when all of that came about in--two years ago, she went out to Arkansas. She went out--she came up to New York. She did some things here. I think there were a couple other places where she went and spoke (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --about the experience at Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall]-- Speaker 2: When did her parents move here, her family? Speaker 1: No, they moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Okay, her mom and siblings? Speaker 1: Yeah, mom and the five kids moved to Philadelphia and lived with her aunt who just died at ninety-eight about three years ago--about two years. Speaker 2: Okay, and you met at Howard? Speaker 1: Yeah, we met at Howard. We were friends until our senior year. We were all on committees together, and we knew each other because we were part of that leadership cadre. And we didn't start dating until after homecoming, our senior year. Speaker 2: And then you proposed? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Upon graduation? Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, got her mother's permission, yeah, the whole thing, yeah, did it right, yeah, in the old fashioned way (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right (laughter), gotta do it right. Speaker 1: That's right, yeah. Speaker 2: When did you get married? Speaker 1: The 2nd of February, 1963. I was already on active duty at the 101st Airborne Division down at Fort Campbell, and she was a social worker. She was a Spanish--she was a language major. She majored in French, Spanish, and Russian. Spanish was the, her main language. So she--that was also the time that the refugees were coming in from Cuba. So many of them were professionals who just couldn't work because they had to get outta Cuba. So she worked for the department of social services as a social--as a caseworker because of her Spanish skills. And then when we decided to get married in February, and then she still had to finish up that year because, you know, that was, that was the South, even though it was Fort Campbell, Kentucky. And I was in one of the two strategic [U.S.] Army units that would go anywhere in the world on a moment's notice, I couldn't get housing off post. So I had to wait until I got on the list as a junior lieutenant. When my name came up, then that came up maybe in April or May, so that June--and that's when she moved back, moved to Campbell. Story_ID: 639276 Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights of your time in the service? Speaker 2: That's an interesting question. I, you know, I was commissioned as a regular army officer who, which would have been the, you know, the career track as opposed to a reserve officer. And I had the--'cause I was the number one branch, but I had the choice of assignments. So I put in for the 101st Airborne Division, and I'd already been accepted to go to ranger school and the Airborne School [U.S. Army Airborne School, Fort Benning, Georgia]. So either I was gonna go to the 82nd [82nd Airborne Division] in Fort Bragg [North Carolina] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fort Bragg. Speaker 2: --or the 101st at Fort Campbell [Kentucky]. And I like the eagle better anyway, so-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --I got my first choice and went down-- Speaker 1: So you went to the 101st. Speaker 2: I went to the 101st the week after I graduated, got a platoon, and then got my orders to go to the Infantry School [U.S. Army Infantry School] at Fort Benning in August. So I went to-- Speaker 1: Outside of Columbus, Georgia. Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, yes (laughter), and--yeah, yeah, right on the border with Alabama (laughter). Speaker 1: I lived there. Speaker 2: Did you, really? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, there we go. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so I went to, went to Fort Campbell initially, got a platoon, and then got the orders to Fort Benning, went down for the infantry officer orientation, of course, finished that, and then went to ranger school, got out of ranger school in the week of Thanksgiving-- Speaker 2: So you went from Fort Benning to Fort Bragg? Speaker 1: No, no. The ranger school is at Fort Benning (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Fort Camp- oh, oh, I see. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was at Fort Benning. Yeah, it's at the Infantry Center [U.S. Army Infantry Center]. And then I finished, finished ranger school just before Thanksgiving and came back, started Airborne School, did the first three weeks until Christmas. And then we went off Christmas and then came back for the, for the mandatory jumps, the five jumps that qualify you as a para- a parachutist the first week of January of '63 [1963]. Then I went back to Campbell, took over my platoon, then got an early opportunity to be a company commander, and then went on the, on the, the staff as the operations officer for air operations and then became the intelligence officer. And then in that period of time, a couple of things happened. I got asked if I would be interested in going to law school and go into the judge advocate program. And I thought a lot about that. And I, at one point everyone thought I was gonna be a lawyer, like if you look at my high school little write up, everyone thought, number one, I was gonna go to West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], number two, I was gonna be a lawyer. So I thought about it long and hard, and then I decided I really wanted to be more operational because the leadership opportunities were just so vast. And at the same time, I had an overture to leave the infantry and go into intelligence. And that's what I did. Speaker 2: At the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 1: No, I was in some special programs, and went to special training in the spring of '65 [1965], yeah, from January through June of '65 [1965]. Story_ID: 639277 Speaker 1: And I mean, you're obviously serving-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a first lieutenant by then (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) going through school. So you--the March on Washington, was that a part of your consciousness at the time? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean we--well, for, for good reasons and for bad reasons. The good reasons were because, one, I was in Baltimore [Maryland] or Dundalk, Maryland where the intelligence training was being conducted those five months that I was involved there and also the [U.S.] Army, I think to its discredit, had a program, a cointel [counterintelligence] program with the, with the agency [Federal Bureau of Investigation], you know, on the, on basically observing all of those activities for any un-American activities. So, you know, this was the time of Hoover [J. Edgar Hoover] and all this other stuff. So you can understand it in the timeframe, but I was in school when that happened, and then I left in July to go to Asia for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you still in tune with the philosophies of the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Oh, sure, oh, yeah, yeah, because I did a lot of reading. Yeah, I knew people who were, you know, who were involved. So, yeah, I--it never--yeah, I understood that serving in the [U.S.] military sort of isolated me. So you had to really force yourself to be involved and to read, to understand, to talk about it. And that's what I did by and large. And then I went off to Asia for an operation, intelligence and an operational side as a, as an operator. Story_ID: 639278 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you get out before Vietnam [Vietnam War]? Speaker 2: No, 'cause I came back, went back to another specialized program for almost--let's see, from October of '66 [1966] until the spring of '67 [1967]. And then I got assigned to a special operations unit in the, kind of this area, civilian clothes kind of thing. And then I got orders to Vietnam in '68 [1968], so I went to Vietnam. Speaker 1: How, what was that experience like? Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was, it was a sobering experience. I told someone my--I have, I have different, I have very, very strange feelings about death. I mean I put too many young people in body bags and put 'em on helicopters, you know, who were never gonna fulfill anything at eighteen and nineteen, twenty years old. So it was very sobering in that sense. I--and I can talk a little bit about a little bit of it, but I had a kind of a dual mission. I was in a straight ahead unit, but I also did some other stuff in, you know. And, you know, I saw combat. You know, I was wounded and, you know, got, you know, (gesture) all those medals and all that stuff. But it-- Speaker 1: You were wounded. Was it a serious injury? Speaker 2: Not, not, not debilitating, no. But I left my pound of flesh over there, you know (laughter) literally. Story_ID: 639279 Speaker 1: It made me think and I got a, I got a, really a plum assignment when I came back in '69 [1969] at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.]. And at that point, I was involved a lot in Eastern Europe and Russia in that, in that interesting time. And I got selected, while I was in Vietnam, I got selected early to be promoted to major. And then when I got back, the fall of '69 [1969], I got an early selection to Command General Staff College [United States Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas] in my seventh year which normally happens in like your tenth year. And that's when things were really changing, and let's see, a man by the name of Richard Clarke who had a headhunting firm called Richard Clarke Associates [New York, New York], African American, still, still alive, who realized he had, apparently had a number of contracts from companies who were looking for black talent. And this is, again, at the tail end of the Civil Rights Movement. And he knew enough to know that the [U.S.] military provided leadership opportunities. So he put together a job fair--I think it was around November of '69 [1969]. I got back from Vietnam in July and signed in at the Pentagon in August. And the guy who was the coxswain on our crew team, worked for Dick. And he said, "Denny [HistoryMaker Dennis Hightower]," he said, "look, things are different now. I know you're on the, on the right track, and, you know, you'll be a general. Everybody knows you were gonna be a general when you left Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]." He said, "But things are little different. Why don't you take another look and see what's going on the outside?" So I said, "Oh, fine, okay." I said--long story short, after the job fair, I had five job offers to leave the military. But I'd just been--so I could, you know, for this prestigious school, that is the, you know, the training ground for the next, for generals, you know, in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. So I made a decision that I would leave the military because if I had gone to Leavenworth--and you're kind of, you know, you're kind of there, that's it. So I put my letter of resignation in when I knew I had the offer in hand from Xerox [Xerox Corporation]. And it was rejected. And I put it back in again. And it was rejected a second time. And they said, you know, there were a lot of reasons. They said, one, you know, you're below the zone of selection for major, you're below the zone of selection for CHES [ph.]. You've got a bright future ahead, plus, you're in a critical skill area in the intelligence field, and not a lot of people who do what you do. And you do it well, and blah, blah, blah. So I put it in a third time, and by that time, I had come to the attention of General Westmoreland [William Westmoreland], who was now the chief of staff of the [U.S.] Army, called me in his office. He said, "Major Hightower," he said, "I'm looking at your background, and I knew what you did in Vietnam, and I know what you did officially and I know what you did unofficially." He said, "I think you need to stay in the military. You've got a bright future." He said, "Look, you, your own selection is Leavenworth. You're gonna go there this summer, the summer of 1970, you know, you do a year," he said, "and we'll send you to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]. You can get an M.B.A. You can get your choice of assignments," and he said, "You're on a, you're on the general strike." He said, "I'll just tell you flat out." And I listened to that, and it's almost reminiscent of the West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] decision, discussion. I said, "General," I said, "I'm honored by your recognition upon my potential." I said, "But you know what, sir? You won't be around when all these things happen. And I think I'm gonna take my chances on what I know right now, and what I know right now is that I can transfer all the good things that I've learned in the military over these eight years into civilian life, and I think I'll do pretty well in whatever I decide I wanna do." He said, "I'll sign your papers." So on the 5th--22nd of June, I went over to Fort Myer [Virginia], turned in all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What year is this? Speaker 1: June of 1970. I turned in all of my stuff (laughter) and got in my little Volkswagen and drove up to Rochester, New York 'cause Xerox was the, one of the five companies. And that was the best opportunity. So I went to Xerox, and in the first two years there, I got three promotions. Really, I really just--I really clicked with, with, with Corporate America. Story_ID: 639280 Speaker 1: But what I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you have kids also during this time period? Speaker 1: At that point, yeah, my, my children were born in '65 [1965] and '68 [1968]. My son was born in, on July 7, '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: What's his name? Speaker 1: Denny [Dennis Hightower, Jr.]. He's a junior. And my daughter, Dawn [Dawn Hightower Lucas], was born February 21, 1968. And we were living in Reston, Virginia, which is where we lived in my first assignment to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] after--before I went to Vietnam. And then that's where we were after I came back from Vietnam. And the reason was, I could not rent a place in Virginia, even with my uniform on in-- Speaker 2: Because of racism? Speaker 1: Yep, in 1966. And friends of ours had moved out to Reston for several reasons, also in the [U.S.] military. And they said, well, why don't you come out here and take a look? Loved it. And, again, open community, you know, that's exactly how Robert--you know, Reston is Robert E. Simon [Robert E. Simon, Jr.]. That's the R-E-S, Robert E. Simon town, Reston. He was the concept developer, the--and the whole thing, like Rouse [James Rouse] was to Columbia [Maryland] 'cause Columbia actually was built six months after Reston. So we lived there maybe a year and a half after it opened and then came back because it was such an im- engaging community, and such an open community that when I came back from what, to be my final tour, we lived there. So then I moved the family up to, up to Rochester, New York to Pittsford [New York], a suburb. And that was in 1970, July of--August of 1970. And then I got, as I said, three promotions in the two years before I-- Speaker 2: What were your positions? Speaker 1: I was, I started out as administrative assistant to the vice president of research and engineering. And then I became manager of organizational planning. And they sent me to Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] for a two week seminar on planning. And that's where I met a professor who was very instrumental in convincing me that I needed to come back and get an M.B.A. because that will (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who was that? Speaker 1: This was Jay Lorsch [Jay W. Lorsch]. He's still there. He-- Speaker 2: Spell the name? Speaker 1: L-O-R-S-C-H. He's a professor who now handles all of the work regarding boards, board effectiveness. In fact, I've even used him on some of my boards like Gillette [The Gillette Company], when I was on the Gillette board, and then he was a professor there, and when I was on the faculty, he was still, you know, on the faculty. I mean I've seen him full--yeah, we've seen each other full circle from student to now colleague. And, you know, Jay said, "You know, you really ought a think seriously about applying." Well, the, the dilemma was I'd just been selected for this third promotion which would have taken the family from Pittsford, New York to Stamford, Connecticut to the new headquarters that Xerox [Xerox Corporation] was starting at that time. And, you know, we went there and looked at houses in Westport [Connecticut] and all the other nice places. And then I got the acceptance at Harvard, and the fellowship. So I said, (makes noise) and Xerox had selected me to go to the executive M.B.A. program at University of Rochester [Rochester, New York] which was, you know, every Friday for three years. And in my view, that wasn't really an M.B.A. And I only applied to Harvard, and I said, "If I can't get in Harvard, I'm not gonna go." So I got into Harvard, got a fellowship. So between the fellowship and my G- and my veteran--and my G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] benefits, then--and my wife [Denia Stukes Hightower] then got a job at Xerox. She was a sales rep for Xerox. So we were doing fine, got a little flat right in Cambridge [Massachusetts], off of Fresh Pond Parkway there on Grozier Road. The kids had their bedrooms. I had my little office area. Nobody ever saw me. I'd come in, you know, from class and three o'clock in the morning I'd crawl into bed after getting all these cases done and did that for two years, and came out in '74 [1974]. Story_ID: 639281 Speaker 1: When you were at Xerox [Xerox Corporation], did you know the president then, Charles McColough [Charles Peter McColough]? Speaker 2: No, it was C., C. Peter McColough. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Charles Peter McColough (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, you, yeah, yeah, Peter McColough. Yeah, no, I met him, you know, any number of times when he'd come out for briefings from downtown Rochester [New York] 'cause, you know, I was in Webster [Xerox Research Center Webster, Webster, New York], which was the research and engineering center which is about, maybe twenty minutes outside of the city. So McColough was always out there, and I was, you know, kind of on the high potential list so I'm, I always had access or had exposure to all the senior, senior people there which is part of how I ended up getting the opportunity to go to the Stamford [Connecticut]. But Harvard was still compelling, yeah, it was still compelling-- Speaker 1: That's interesting. We interviewed [HistoryMaker] Deborah Lathen who was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --formerly of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And she said Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] was her only real choice. Speaker 2: Yeah, I only, I only--I did not apply to any other school. I said, "If I can't get into the best school, then why do it?" Speaker 1: Where did, where did that notion come from for you? Speaker 2: Where it came from was that, as I moved around Xerox that first year in the various planning meetings, budget meetings, I noticed that everybody who was in a position of power and responsibility were Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] grads. And I said, "Okay, that's telling me something." So then I started doing my homework. I mean not that I didn't know Harvard, obviously. You know, my brother [Marvin A. Hightower] had gone to, there as an undergrad. But I didn't, I didn't really appreciate the importance of the right school. The--if you, if the--if you weren't a Harvard M.B.A. at that time, you were a Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California] M.B.A. or you were a Wharton [Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] M.B.A. or maybe Tuck [Tuck School of Business, Hanover, New Hampshire] but more often, there was Harvard, Wharton, Stanford. And I said, "Okay. If that's the deal, then I think I'm as good as anybody. I'm sitting here, you know, dealing with, so let me figure out how I'm, how I'm gonna move to the next level." And Jay [Jay W. Lorsch] was the one who--when I was at his course on organization planning, he said, "You really ought to think about, you know, applying and coming in for the full two year program." And that's what I did. Story_ID: 639282 Speaker 1: Who were some of your other influential professors at Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: That's the, that's the, the critical issue of Harvard in that timeframe. It was in that timeframe that the first large group of blacks that had ever come to Harvard Business School, the first graduating class that had more than one was in 1969. My class, we started with seventy-five, graduated forty. Class before, similar statistics. Sharon's sister, Benny [HistoryMaker Benaree P. Wiley], was Class of-- Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt's sister? Speaker 2: Yeah, Benny--Benaree was in class of '70 [1970]. Maybe there were fifteen, twenty in her class. I mean it was, it was, again, civil rights push. I mean there was no incentive--until that time, in the early '30s [1930s], there were three blacks. One fellow did not finish the program, but he was the first one who came in. Then there was Naylor Fitzhugh [H. Naylor Fitzhugh] from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]: Harvard undergrad [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]; Harvard law--business school graduated in '33 [1933], couldn't get a job. Nobody wanted to hire him. That's how he got to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], stayed and ran Howard's marketing program for years until he went Pepsi [Pepsi-Cola Company; PepsiCo] and then he became a legend there. Then Luther Foster [Luther H. Foster, Jr.] who ended up being president of Hampton [sic. Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], went to Harvard Business School. And he got out in '35 [1935], I believe. From '35 [1935] until '49 [1949], there were no blacks at Harvard Business School. Then, what's his name? His daughter, you know, his--he died, but he worked, he, for American Express [American Express Company], Bud Wilkinson got out in '49 [1949] or '50 [1950]. Then there was a, kind of a hiatus until the late '50s [1950s], and there was one or two. And then the big push came in '69 [1969], '70 [1970], '71 [1971], '72 [1972], '73 [1973], '74 [1974], and then it's back--trailed off again. So there just weren't that many examples, except what I saw of my white counterparts. And I said, "Then that's where I gotta go. That's--if that's what it takes to, you know, to move," and I said, "I think that I can learn the skills, but I think I bring something that many of them don't have--at least I didn't see it exhibited, and that is how to lead." So I said, "I think I've got a leg up on that, and I think I'm smart enough to figure out the other stuff." And that's what happened. Story_ID: 639283 Speaker 1: What classes did you take? Speaker 2: Oh, well, the first year, it's, it's, it's dictated. It's a set piece and you take finance, you take control, you take organization behavior, you take, what else? Strategy, gosh, what else in that first year? But it's a set (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 2: --it's a set piece. My second year--your second year is all elective. All of my electives were international, international marketing, international finance, international anything because I knew from my [U.S.] military experience and my other stuff that I did around the world, you know, when I was in intelligence that that's what I was good at, dealing with cultures, dealing with cross cultures, and-- Speaker 1: Had you mastered languages over the years? Speaker 2: I can't talk about that, but, yeah, generally, yeah, yeah, yeah. But so I knew that I had a particular, I would say propensity for non-U.S. And it proved to be the thing that defined my career. When I left, I left Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], I went to McKinsey [McKinsey and Company]. Story_ID: 639284 Speaker 1: Were there people, classmates at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], people we might know, people who went on to achieve great success? Speaker 2: Yeah, Stan O'Neal [Stanley O'Neal] (laughter). Stan got out in--let's see, I got out in '74 [1974]. I think Stan got out in '78 [1978]. On the African American side--and this is no, not to be immodest, I'm considered one of the, the top examples of, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Achievement. Speaker 2: --of achievement. Oh, yeah, I got the achievement award in 1992 from the university. I'm only the second--I was, at that time, the second black to have, who have gotten a professional achievement award from Harvard Business School. The first was Luther Foster [Luther H. Foster, Jr.]. I got it in '92 [1992]. Luther in his, almost eighties, got it when, in--three years before that. Since then, Ann Fudge [Ann M. Fudge]. Ann Fudge got it two years after I did. What's his name, Stewart from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], the pres-- Speaker 1: Donald Stewart. Speaker 2: Don got it because he went to the AMP program, the Advanced Management Program. And so Ann, myself, Lilian [ph.], what's Lilian's last name? Lilian is in Richmond [Virginia] now. She started a service, a cleaning service and some other things that hired mothers who, you know, had no other, no other opportunity to do anything. Story_ID: 639285 Speaker 1: Was Harvard particularly political at this time, Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]? I mean, there's a lot going on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All Republican, all Republican, all Republican. Speaker 1: --with the anti-war protests about Harvard. Speaker 2: Yeah, not only that though. Here, now, here's the story. In 1969, my brother [Marvin A. Hightower] graduated from Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I can't really tell you the whole story, but I was in Vietnam. And something very, very serious happened to me. The day he was protesting against the war, I'm--and you may have to cut this out, I was, I was shot down in a place where I wasn't supposed to be, in another country where we, where Kissinger [Henry Kissinger] was saying, there are no American troops there. Well, that wasn't so because we were in a bloc operation. And I was running it. So I know where I was (laughter). So that's the, that's the irony. And my brother who was, you know--Al Gore was in that class-- Speaker 1: With your brother? Speaker 2: With my brother. And they were all against the war [Vietnam War]. And yet, here, you know, his brother is in that war, you know, going through some pretty awful stuff that week (laughter). And, yeah, but on the business school side, Republican down to the wire. And that's what you had, that's why that school is important because it forced you to understand how other people think, who don't think like you (laughter) and who don't really also want you there. There were professors in that timeframe who ultimately became my colleagues when I joined the faculty in '96 [1996] who didn't think that we need--we belonged there. Why do blacks need to know anything about business? And certainly not from Harvard Business School. They're never gonna run anything. They're never gonna have any power. They're never gonna become, accountability. Why are we wasting our space on blacks when we could have, you know, some legacy people coming here? We could have some of the whites who are gonna go off-- Speaker 1: Did you hear people voice this? Speaker 2: Oh, you bet, oh, you bet, you bet. And that's why the African American Student Union started, to have a voice in terms of how are you treating us and other minorities? At that time, the other minorities were women, and there weren't that many women there either. Speaker 1: Were you a member of BALSA [Black American Law Students Association; National Black Law Students Association]? Speaker 2: No, I was a member of AASU -- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which was the African American Student Union. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And that, on the business side-- Speaker 1: Oh, right, right, right. Were you--'cause you mentioned that the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the business school were, were pretty divided because-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --Cambridge [Massachusetts] versus Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they were on the other side. Yeah, they were on the other side of the river [Charles River]. Story_ID: 639286 Speaker 1: Okay, so Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault] was at the law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time? Speaker 2: Ken was at the law school. Debbie Lee [HistoryMaker Debra Lee] was at the law school, and that's the joke. The joke now is that, in fact, when I was, we had the African American business school alumni conference here about four years ago. And I was the honorary chair. And Debbie, I asked Debbie to speak, Debbie lived right up the street from me in my old house in Rock Creek, in Rock Creek Park [Washington, D.C.] there. And I said, "Debbie, you know, I want you to speak for the breakfast." So she threw out this question. She said, "I feel a little funny being here because--and, of course, you know, I'm from the law school. But most of the, most of the law--most of, most of those of us who are running companies, really came from the law school, not the business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]." And she was right. Stan O'Neal [Stanley O'Neal] was the only one, 'cause, you know, Ken went to the law school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, Ken Chenault. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was running BET [Black Entertainment Television] and she went to the law school. Speaker 1: Right, [HistoryMaker] Deborah Lathen. Speaker 2: Deborah Lathen, that's right. Speaker 1: Executive director and founder of The HistoryMakers, Julieanna Richardson was at the law school. Speaker 2: That, that, that's right, that's right, exactly. So she was kind of right. But in the scheme of things, on the business school side, other than myself and Ann [Ann M. Fudge] and Stan, a lot of, a lot of our classmates, and I've given speeches about this over the years to the Black Caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] and others about the fact that we got to a level in most of the organizations where, if you didn't, if you weren't competent, you weren't gonna get hired in the first place. And we tended to spend our early years really focusing downward on the skill set that we were hired to do, you know, to execute. Then there came this period where you would get to the, what I call that level where the, more the insidious qualitative decisions and judgments were made about whether you got promoted or not, and whether you played golf, whether you played tennis. How did your spouse look? Did she have the good social graces? I mean-- Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. And a lot of our people sort of decided to fall out at that point, and that's--there was a big wave in the early '80s [1980s]. Let's go off and start this business. Let's go start that business. Some were successful, some weren't. But those of us who sort of stuck with it, you know, up until recently, there just weren't--I mean when I retired--and here's the, here's the, here's the irony of it. When I retired in 1996, I was one of the five top black executives in Corporate America. The other four, Ken Chenault, who was running the card division [of the American Express Company], he, I mean he, he still wasn't, he was not the chair--president or chairman then. Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] who had just become the president of Time Warner [Time Warner Inc.], after being on the board, Barry Rand [A. Barry Rand] who was in the office of the chairman who ran North American operations for Xerox [Xerox Corporation], myself, and the guy [HistoryMaker Berry Gordy] who ran Motown [Motown Records]. That was it, 'cause Frank Raines [Franklin Raines] was still heading the Office of Management and Budget. He hadn't come back to Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] at that point. That was another year. So, yeah, it--a lot has changed, but a lot still hasn't changed. And when Stan, you know, had his problems a few weeks ago, it was even more ironic that as the executive suite has expanded, I still only have about five CEOs, Symantec [John W. Thompson], Darden Restaurants [Clarence Otis, Jr.], Ken, Dick and I can't think of the other, but yeah, there's still five. Story_ID: 639287 Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-four [1974]. Speaker 1: And what'd you do next? Speaker 2: I went to McKinsey [McKinsey and Company] as a strategy consultant, went into their Cleveland [Ohio] office, and went in as an associate and then after the first year, was promoted to senior associate and engagement manager, which was, again, I'm on a fast track. So I was on a partner track there, but I knew that I really didn't wanna be a consultant there. I--the, the appeal for McKinsey was threefold. One, it, at that time, had the reputation of being the best strategy firm, two, the client base was incredible, and three, it was a great platform, one to learn what really happens in top management, how people think about decisions, how they make decisions, and also the opportunity then to go off and use that experience either with a client or with someone else. So I was there almost four and a half years and got recruited to GE [General Electric], and--which was a--those two jobs were pivotal because one, I didn't know exactly what I wanted to coming out of Harvard Business School, so I think McKinsey allowed me the opportunity to apply all of that sort of pure knowledge that I had gained over those two years and also allowed me to sort of begin to see where I could leverage that knowledge in a role where I could get back into a leadership capacity. When the GE opportunity came around, that was a natural because GE then had a reputation for two things. One was for strategy, implementation of strategy and two, it was the grooming place for general managers. You learned how to be a general manager at GE. Jack Welch hired me. He was the head of consumer products at the time, and I had the choice when I interviewed him, of working on his strategy staff in Connecticut or out in the field. And I was just with Jack. We were on a speaking engagement in Barbados about two months ago. And we had a great time because I'd kept in contact with him on a number of occasions over the years when he bought, when he sold RCA [RCA Corporation], I mean sold, yeah, the television business to the French company. I can't remember the name now. But when they bought NBC, he used to come to the French Open [Paris, France], and I knew he was there one year, and I went and, you know, gave him my card at the tent. He came up and he praised me. He said, "Well, look, any time I'm here, you give your number and you can come, and we'll have drinks, lunch when I'm--." So for five years, while I was--the last five years I was there, I saw Jack every year. And then I didn't see him again until (background noise). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So when Jack hired me, he gave me the choice of either working at corporate headquarters or in the field. Speaker 1: And this was what year? Speaker 2: This was '74 [1974]. Oh, I'm sorry. This was '78 [1978], I'm sorry, '78 [1978]. This was August of '78 [1978]. So when I elected to go to the field, which was the Lighting Business Group, the head, the head of operational planning for the lighting group, he said, "If you had taken the job in the staff, then I would have questioned whether you really wanted to lead any, anything." He said, "You'll get your chance." So within, less than a year, I had done some work down in Brazil on a couple of problems and I led a team down there and solved the problem, came back, and, you know, made the presentation. And then the next thing I knew, my boss, who ran the lighting business said, "Jack has asked me is your passport up to date." I said, "Well, why would he ask that?" He said, "Because you're now the new vice president and general manager to go down there and fix the problem that you told him existed in Mexico" (laughter). So went down and did the turnaround, and then on the way back got an offer that I just could not refuse, went up and talked to Jack about it. And he said, "No, you need--you take it. You're, you know, you're young. You're gonna move." He said, "GE has done a--it's gonna be like the government, you know, you're gonna have to go through this and then you gotta do that." He said, "This is an opportunity." This was Mattel [Mattel, Inc.], to go as a corporate officer (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you did you initially take the position-- Speaker 2: In Mexico. Speaker 1: --in Mexico? Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, yeah. And that's the, and that was the turnaround. Speaker 1: So--okay. How long were you-- Speaker 2: Two years. So when, when I came back, that's when I got recruited to go to Mattel. Story_ID: 639288 Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about Jack Welch. What kind of person is he? Speaker 2: Jack, he's, he was two different persons. When, in the early days, he was Neutron Jack. He was exploding everything. I mean he, when he came in after Greg Jones [sic. Reginald H. Jones] left, and he was, he won the horserace, he just really turned that, shook that business up. It needed it. It needed a new set of eyes and ears, a new direction. He just did it. And that's when you learn to be a general manager. And his whole theory was, all ships rise, all bows rise at high tide. I don't know how good you are until the tide goes out. That's when you show me how good a general manager you are. I learned absolutely how to manage people in a way toward excellence for meeting objectives, meeting budgets, product, market, customer, the whole thing. That's the best training ground, next to the [U.S.] military, that I've ever had. And everything I've done from that point on is the result of what I learned from Jack Welch. Speaker 1: You said there were two Jack-- Speaker 2: Now, it's Jack, the statesman, because he's done all this stuff. He has totally changed that company, and now Jeff Immelt [Jeffrey R. Immelt], you know, he's got five years in the saddle, different, different style, different personality, different set of demands, different business, different business model. Jack now, he married Suzy [Suzy Wetlaufer Welch], who was head of the Harvard Business Review, and I was on the faculty. In fact, I taught the GE [General Electric] case which is part of the general management course I taught. And Jack would come and be part of that program, and, you know, so I, I've had this, you know, relationship. So I hadn't seen Jack since maybe '99 [1999], I guess, until last November. We're down in Barbados, Caribbean leadership summit. And he was on the day before, but I knew he was coming so I told the people the history. So when I, when he came in with Suzy and I was there, I mean it was like old home week. We just embraced and we just spent like two hours, just catching up and talking and just--and he is, he is truly the statesman now. You know, forget all the stuff that happened with his second wife [Jane Beasley Welch] and all the-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --stuff that, you know, came out. He is still the best person I've ever worked for. The second best person I ever worked for was Frank Wells at Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] who died in this tragic ski accident, April of, well, no, Easter of '93 [1993]. But, no, I, I, I learned how to run a business from, from, from GE and from Jack. Story_ID: 639289 Speaker 1: Were you there when GE [General Electric] acquired NBC? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think now (pause). Speaker 1: Or any major acquisitions that-- Speaker 2: I'm trying to think. I mean I know Bob Wright. Bob Wright and I joined GE within the same week, and I've known Bob since 1978. And then, so, no, no, NBC was not part of the portfolio at that point. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: No, no what was part of the portfolio was the investment management company [Kidder, Peabody and Company] that they bought where they had the Charlie Jett [sic. Joseph Jett] problem who was also a business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] graduate and also African American. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: So, yeah, but NBC came after I left. Speaker 1: What were some of the highlights from your time as--you were VP and general manager? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Out in Mexico? Speaker 2: Um-hm, and that was, again, moving to a different culture. And that's why as I said, for us, I think that's where we have an opportunity because, one, I think coming out of an environment here in the U.S. where people tend to downplay, in many cases, our capability, when you go outside of your country, the presumption is one of competence because most countries send their best people outside of their home country to represent them in business or any other thing. So here, we still tend to see color before we see capability. And even when I came back later on in life as the president of Disney's largest division [Walt Disney Television and Telecommunications], I had ten presidents who worked for me. And we'd go in to talk to Bob Wright at NBC. We talked to people at CBS, you know, selling programs, you know, whatever. If I took three people with me, my, you know, my theme parks president or, you know, whomever, we were sitting in the anteroom waiting. And then whoever we were there to see would come in. The presumption was one of the other three white guys had to be Mr. Hightower [HistoryMaker Dennis Hightower]. Even today, even today. I mean I sit on some--I have sat on some of the most prestigious boards. I've sat on Gillette [The Gillette Company], Northwest Airlines, you know, I was on the restructuring committee to bring them out of bankruptcy last year. Still, still, you can't be Mr. Hightower. Somebody else has to be Mr. Hightower because in the--there's still the mindset in many places that despite knowing that there's a Ken Chenault [Kenneth Chenault], despite knowing that there's a Stan [Stanley O'Neal], oh, there's a Dick [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] or John Thompson [John W. Thompson] out at Symantec, most of 'em can't, they can't fathom. They still see that color first before they can acknowledge that, oh, yeah, of course, you could be Mr. Hightower. Why not? Speaker 1: How do you process, negotiate that? Speaker 2: Basically, I, I've always had the attitude that's not my problem. That's your problem. And if we're gonna do a deal, you're gonna do the deal with me (laughter). And most of the time, going in they wanted to do the deal with me. I was gonna decide whether I was gonna do the deal with them. And that's what, the power of Disney and the power of the mouse [Mickey Mouse] (laughter). Story_ID: 639290 Speaker 1: How long did you remain at GE [General Electric]? Speaker 2: Three years, and then that's when I got recruited out of there to go to Mattel [Mattel, Inc.]. Speaker 1: What year did you begin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In '81 [1981], the spring of '81 [1981], I went to Mattel as VP of corporate planning, strategic planning, and I was a corporate officer and got there just at the time when some fairly serious decisions had been made where the venerable toy manufacturer had basically decided to make the razor blades and not sell the--I mean make the razors and not sell the--just sell the razor blades. They got into the home electronics business which was in television, you know, the Ataris of the world, the Commodores. Wall Street loved it for the first year and a half, and then in June of 1983 decided that it really wasn't a business. So Atari tanked, Commodore kind of held its own because it had more outside business, outside U.S. business than U.S. Mattel, and our chairman at that time who's now deceased, made the decision-- Speaker 1: Who was the chairman? Speaker 2: Art Spear [Arthur S. Spear]. He had been a long time operations guy in Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] and came in when the Handler family was forced out because of a court order when they had some problems legally back in the late '70s [1970s]. And Art was a grower. He wanted to do it all. So he set up all these factories in Malaysia and, you know, Singapore, and all these places to manufacture these things that we had never done before. So when the industry turned zero, down, the company almost went bankrupt. So he asked a small group of us, including myself to stay with him to restructure the company. So my deal was to sell off all of the assets except the toy company, but to put together an IPO [initial public offering] with one of the big investment banks in New York [New York] to be prepared to sell 40 percent of Mattel toys to the public as a standalone if we had to do that. So I ended up selling Western Publishing Company [Western Publishing Company, Inc.] which was Little Golden Books, a venerable brand from the, you know, forever, Ringling Brothers Circus [Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey Circus] who my dad [Marvin W. Hightower] used to do the advertising for here. So I ended up selling the circus back to the Feld family who I had known since I was a teenager here which is really interesting. It was a big model kit company [Monogram] outside of the, Chicago [Illinois] near the airport, where you can buy model car--model kit cars, planes, and all that stuff. And there's some other, other fellows, little software factory that I'd actually set up as a joint venture, a new venture where we were gonna make all of the software for these products though in a securities company that, set up and had some other people run it. So we had to close all of that down. So the incentive for me and for some of the others who stayed on with him--there were about a handful of us, maybe four or five of us who stayed on, knowing that there would be no job at the end of the rainbow because everything was gonna get downsized to basically going back to being a toy company again. So the incentive was that everything I sold, my compensation would be based on some percentage of what I sold over book value. So February of '84 [1984] when all that was done, I had the option not to work anymore. And my wife [Denia Stukes Hightower] then basically said, "For better or for worse, but not for lunch." Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: "Go out and find a job" (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, she didn't want you hanging around the house. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: This was what year? Speaker 2: This was the spring--this was February, March of '84 [1984]. Story_ID: 639291 Speaker 1: Had you decided to go the business route because of the financial rewards? Is that your greatest motivation? Speaker 2: No, it was funny. It became, I've made, I've made a couple of family related decisions. That was a family related decision. Yeah, I've had two unaccompanied tours in the eight years I was in the [U.S.] military. I missed a lot. I missed seeing my kids do a lot of stuff that people who didn't do that, didn't miss. And I knew that given where I was headed and the kind of work that I was doing, there was gonna more of that than less of that. When this Mattel [Mattel, Inc.] thing came up, all of the opportunities for me that would have given me leadership were on the East Coast. My son [Dennis Hightower, Jr.] was a senior in high school. Speaker 1: And where were you living while working for Mattel? Speaker 2: In L.A. [Los Angeles, California], yeah. You know, my son was senior in high school. My daughter [Dawn Hightower Lucas] was a sophomore in high school. We had just come back from Mexico, three years before that. I said, you know, I can't take my, my kids out of school, especially my son. You know, your senior year in high school, I mean you can't do that. I mean I didn't feel I could do it. So I made a family decision. I said, Russell Reynolds [Russell Reynolds Associates, Inc.] was handling the search, and finally I said, "You know, I just can't leave. I'm not gonna--I'm not willing to leave the area." And they said, "Well, why don't you join us as a partner and you can do whatever you wanna do?" I said, "Well, there're only two things I really wanna do: one, high tech and the other's consumer products." They said, "Fine." So I joined them as a partner, did high tech, consumer products. And then the next year, they asked me to run the office. So I ran the office. I was the office manager as well. And Disney [Walt Disney Productions; The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] became one of my clients. And that's how I ended up going to Disney because after making several placements for the strategy group, the finance group under Gary Wilson [Gary L. Wilson] at that point, and that was the CFO. I did--I got this assignment to find someone to set up the European headquarters for the consumer businesses in, in anticipation of the park getting underway five years hence and also the European Union getting underway. Story_ID: 639292 Speaker 1: So, you were at Russell Reynolds [Russell Reynolds Associates, Inc.] for-- Speaker 2: Three years-- Speaker 1: --three years. Speaker 2: --yeah, um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: And you started at Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California]-- Speaker 2: June of 1987. Speaker 1: As VP of consumer products. Speaker 2: Um-hm, for Europe, East--for Europe 'cause there was no Middle East or Africa 'cause I ended up opening up those businesses and adding those onto the portfolio in the first four years. And then went--moved to Paris [France]. Speaker 1: How was Michael Eisner? Speaker 2: We don't wanna talk about that (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, no, the person that I absolutely loved working for was Frank Wells. Frank was the president. Frank was the next best person I've ever worked for after Jack Welch because Frank hired good people and he let you do what you got hired to do. He gave you the support when you needed it. I mean I got to the point with Frank, he sent me to Europe. He said, "Look, Dennis [HistoryMaker Dennis Hightower]," and there are three cases on the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] about this process. He said, "Dennis, I want you to go out and do something we haven't done before, come back in ninety days and tell me what you're gonna do." So I spent all the summer, you know, running over--you know, I had sixteen countries at that point, and running back and forth, meeting the people, getting to know the business, the manufacturers, the licensees, the promotional partners, everything; came back with this fresh, you know, this strategic plan of here's what we--what I think we ought a do. Here's what I think the outcomes could be. So I had this, you know, little deck, about thirty pages or so. I said, "You know, I'm probably gone be here all day 'cause they wanna go in detail and never had anybody pull all this together." The meeting lasted for two hours. And they said, "Well, you can go home." And I said, "Oh god, this is gonna be a short, short lived career here." And Frank pulled me, and he said, "Dennis," he said, "that is exactly what we wanted you to do. That's exactly the right plan. Do it. Tell me what you need, when you need it. It'll be there." I would call or Frank would call me. Frank would always have this--Frank didn't know what the time difference was. He knew but he didn't care. It's nine hours difference between Burbank [California] and Paris. I'd get calls two o'clock, three o'clock in the morning. "Let's talk about this." I said, "Frank, you know what time it is?" He said, "Yeah, but let--I still wanna talk about this." Yeah (laughter). That's the kind of guy he was. He said, what I said (unclear), when I determined after the first six months there, we needed to be in Eastern Europe and Russia, 'cause that was my old stomping grounds, I said, "I got, I gotta get there 'cause I hadn't--I was not allowed to go into those countries even though I, you know, did certain things involving those countries." So I said, "We need to be in there." He said--I said, "That's the next wave. There's another 310 million people that aren't even being addressed." So he said, "Okay, what do you need? What's the timetable? What's the return on investment?" I said, "Well, we're probably not gonna make any money for five years, but we can, we can make it diff- more difficult for anybody else to come in there if we go in right." And I said, "Here's the way we go in. We go into the minister of culture and the minister of education because the education systems are bankrupt. They have no money, and we can do--use publishing which is my biggest part of my business. We can create books and magazines in their local languages used in, in the schools and we get in that way. And we, it's a barrier to entry to anybody else." Story_ID: 639293 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Give me a sense of the products you were dealing with specifically (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These were books and magazines that are Disney books. The char- using the Disney characters to tell the, you know, the traditional stories. Speaker 1: Okay, so Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, the whole, the whole repertoire. But the difference was, we had local artists draw them and local publishers publish so that if you were in Sweden, and it was Aqua--Anka, Anka [Kalle Anka] who is Donald Duck. Donald Duck acted like he was, he was from the Nordic region. Topolino, the little mouse in Italy, Mickey Mouse. Most people in Italy thought Mickey Mouse was born and raised in Italy because he gesticulated. He was very Italian 'cause we had Italian people draw him and bring him to life. So that's what we did in all those countries. And then we brought the products in after that. So I had the full range of character, of merchant, licensed merchandise. We had children's music, children's records, film, home video, the full panoply of Disney product. Speaker 1: So this was Europe's first real introduction to Disney products? Speaker 2: No, Europe had been introduced to Disney [Walt Disney Productions; The Walt Disney Company] since 1932 when Walt Disney signed his first Italian publishing contract in Italy. And then, you know, the films went in before the war [World War II, WWII], and then the war just--there was a big hiatus. And then after the war, he hired people that ended up working for me forty years later. But that was only Western Europe. It was only, you know, basically, you know, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Egypt, all the Nordic countries, Austria and (unclear), you know, the--Central Europe, no Eastern Europe, no Russia, no Middle East. And, so that's what I did over the first five years was expand into those areas and build businesses and, and build capability in the Middle East and in Africa, in post-apartheid Africa when Africa--after apartheid was abolished. 'Cause I told Frank [Frank Wells], he said, "I want you to go down in South Africa." I said, "Frank, I can't do it." I said, "Until apartheid is over, I'm not going down there." I said, "If it, it's ever abolished, I'll be on the first plane." When it happened, he called me and said, "You got your plane ticket?" I said, "What do you mean?" He said, "You told me when apartheid was abolished, you'd be on the first plane." And this was the fall of 1994, and I was on the plane, set up in a business there in, in Johannesburg [South Africa], yep, still going. Story_ID: 639294 Speaker 1: Tell me what you saw in South Africa? Speaker 2: Loved it. I saw--well, first of all when I went down there, the person I had selected to run the business wanted to show me everything but Soweto [South Africa]. Well, I said, "You know what? You don't work for me. You don't have to show me everything." I said, "Because unless I understand how the worst of the people live, then I'm, I can't deal with how the best of the people live. So I want you to get a car. You do whatever you wanna do, and you're gonna take me and my team, and we're gonna go through Soweto." So, you know, we saw where, you know, Winnie Mandela lived. We saw where Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu] lived. We saw where everybody lived, the good, the bad, the ugly. And I said, "Now, I can put, I can, I can interpret what plans you send back to me because now I've seen the perspective" (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you see in Soweto, in 1994? Speaker 2: In 1994, I saw a lot of misery. I saw a lot of neglect. Speaker 1: What did misery and neglect look like? Speaker 2: Misery and neglect looked like, looked a lot like people in the worst shanty towns you could ever imagine, no running water, no facilities, no cooking, no nothing. I mean just a piece of tin, you know, 'cause a lot of people coming from the countryside also which is a big problem. But then, you go to the other side where, you know, Winnie Mandela lived, where Bishop Tutu lived, that could be any community up and down 16th Street here [Washington, D.C.]. So there was even a major divide within the areas where blacks were allowed to live. You know, there was the, you know, the haves and the have nots and there were more have nots, obviously, than the haves. Story_ID: 639295 Speaker 1: Did you meet Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu] and the Mandelas (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I had met him before. I had met him when I was still at Russell Reynolds [Russell Reynolds Associates, Inc.] when he came to get an award in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] back in, oh, '85 [1985], '86 [1986]. And I met Mrs. Mandela [Winnie Mandela] when I was at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] because one of her children went there. In fact, one was in my daughter's [Dawn Hightower Lucas] dorm. Speaker 1: Did you meet Nelson Mandela? Speaker 2: Yes, I did, yeah. In fact, I met him when I was at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] because when I was on the faculty there, we set up--I was one of the four professors that set up a program that he had requested through the World Bank. Speaker 1: Okay, so not--you didn't meet him in South Africa? Speaker 2: Not in South, not--in South Africa, but not when I was at Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I met him in '97 [1997] when we were setting up a program to train the two hundred future leaders of South Africa. Speaker 1: Tell me about your meeting with Nelson Mandela? Speaker 2: Just incredible. I mean the man is the--at that time, I had had a dinner. We had sponsored the chess championships, the Junior Chess Championships [European Junior Chess Championship] throughout Europe and Karpov [Anatoly Karpov] had to come in from Russia. So I had him at the apartment for dinner. And we, in the course of, you know, the guests we had invited, we started talking about leaders, world leaders. And so we went around the table and said, "In your mind today, who is a true leader and why?" Every single person, "Nelson Mandela, Nelson Mandela." So when I met him in '97 [1997] as part of the program that he had asked us to set up and train--and this was not just blacks. This was Afrikaners, black South Africans and coloureds. They had never come together prior to this, to learn to think about their country as a country. When I met that man, I mean there's just, there's an aura, there's an absolute aura about him. And it is so dignified. There's a level of humility that you would never, ever expect that he exerted that kind of power, influence over really the rest of the world and in terms of what change had occurred in that country, just incredible, absolutely incredible, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you remember anything he said? Speaker 2: Not anything in particular other than the general theme that he promoted, and that was that we have got to get this country to act in harmony and in consonance as one, and we're looking to you people from Harvard (laughter) to teach us how to do that, to make us think as one, make us think not alike, but as one where South Africa is what's important, and leave your ego out of it and concentrate on what's best for this country. Speaker 1: And what did you teach there? Speaker 2: I taught a leadership module on, you know, on the fundamentals, the principles of leadership. And we taught that course, we had three cohorts, in fact, four cohorts of fifty each, and I taught there from '97 [1997] to 2000. And this is, this year is the, the tenth anniversary. Speaker 1: What are some of the principles you taught (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, one, one--you know, there're a couple of, a couple of things. One set of principles has to do with the fact that as the leader, you are ultimately responsible for what your organization does or fails to do. You can't just take the credit when things are good. You've gotta also take the responsibility when things don't go the way that they're supposed to. You know, that you can't, you can't let a problem go. You're the leader. There's nobody else to kick it up to, that you've gotta stay with it, you've gotta work with it. You've gotta treat people with dignity. You've got to have intellect. You've gotta have good people skills. You've gotta have a superb business knowledge, whatever it is you're working on. And you've gotta have an infectious passion because people will follow you even if it's the wrong thing to do, if you're passionate. And I use the example of Jim Jones all the time, leading those people to Guyana and, you know, drinking that Kool-Aid. That's a form of leadership because you can't be a leader if you don't have anybody following you. Story_ID: 639296 Speaker 1: What role did you play in Euro Disney [Euro Disney Resort; Disneyland Paris, Marne-la-Vallee, France]? Speaker 2: I had no role to play in Euro Disney. I ran every business that Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] had except the park. So I had, (unclear) then I had publishing. I had character merchandise licensing, children's records and music, computer software, television promotion, film promotion, home video, just with everything but the park. Now, what I did with the park is that because my businesses had been in the country, we had all of the relationships. We did a lot of introduction of people from the parks to the different countries. You know, most of the royalty in Europe, we knew because they were sponsors of the annual Christmas movie which is the big animated film that comes out in Europe every year. And my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So tell me who you knew? Speaker 2: Well, you know, King Juan Carlos [Juan Carlos I], you know, his daughter were our sponsors when we launched one of the movies in Spain. Queen Margrethe [Margrethe II] in Denmark when we launched, 'The Little Mermaid,' you know, it made sense, yeah. So, and she would-- Speaker 1: How were--how were they? Speaker 2: Good people. You know, people who don't have to, who know who they are at those levels, are great people. You know, Chancellor Kohl [Helmut Kohl] from Germany. We had a big sports program. He was a, you know, a big soccer fan, big soccer player. So got to meet him on several occasions to work with the German people on a lot of things, Queen Frederica [sic.] from Belgium, the prince, you know, the--not the prince, from Luxembourg [Jean of Luxembourg], Mrs. Gorbachev [Raisa Gorbacheva]. She introduced us to the publisher in Russia. Speaker 1: How was she? Speaker 2: Fascinating, fascinating woman--never met him [Mikhail Gorbachev], but she is absolutely fascinating. Speaker 1: Fascinating in what sense? Speaker 2: Just her insights. You know, people, few people understand that despite the imposition of communism, entrepreneurial, entrepreneurialism was alive and well in Russia. Story_ID: 639297 Speaker 1: And I'll give you an example. Michael Eisner and I were in Moscow [Russia] the day that McDonald's [McDonald's Corporation] opened their first restaurant in, near Pushkin Square [Pushkinskaya Square], in Moscow. We were there because we were gonna see Yeltsin [Boris Yeltsin] and (unclear) about a Disney Store, in Russia, in Moscow. The problem was, they wanted us to put it right next to the KGB headquarters in Detskiy Mir which was a children's store in Russia. It's, you don't want me to get into that. But, yeah, we were at Pushkin Square. And Michael said, "Dennis [HistoryMaker Dennis Hightower], what's going on there?" I said, "That's the opening of the store," and, you know, McDonald's was our promotional partner, like they are in the U.S. for all the animated films. There were like thousands of people ringing this small store. I said, "Michael, I want you to look and I want you to observe what's happening." I said, "Here is entrepreneurialism in its purest form." What you will see is that they were letting people in. No restrictions on how many could go in at a time. People were coming out with their bags of whatever, hamburgers, French fries, whatever. And they were selling it to the people who were in line. I said, "That tells you that we can do business here. So despite the repression that people had gone through and lived under," I said, "there are a lot of rubles stuck literally in mattresses waiting to be used. There's pent up demand here, Michael." And sure enough, that's exactly what happened. So when we actually, you know, moved in there and got set up with publishing and some of the other things we did (makes sound), we just took off because the money was there. And the money was there because my deal with Frank was that I would not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Frank? Speaker 1: Frank Wells. I was not gonna put Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] at risk. So when my key publisher wanted to come in from Denmark 'cause they had done a lot of business there as well, they had to pay me in German, in Deutsche marks because that was the strongest currency at the time, that they took the currency risk when we brought Nestle [Nestle S.A.], Mattel [Mattel, Inc.] and other, our other major product partners in, they would pay us in the currency of choice that their contract was under, not in rubles. The advertisers, the same way. So even though my plan said we weren't gonna make money for five years, we made money in the first two years of getting it started up because we shipped at risk. And Disney's great for OPM, using other people's money (laughter) you know. But that's again the pound, the brand, you know. Speaker 2: Were you equally successful in countries like Spain? Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean those countries had been there. Those were the, those were sort of the core countries. What we did, we took it to another level, took it to another level in terms of product design, product quality, distribution, marketing, taking more control of the brand as Disney whereas before, the licensees basically took charge of the brand. And I said, "Now, we're, you know, that stops today." We started doing value analysis and saying where along the value chain can we stop and bring it back in house and, 'cause we were just leaving too much money on the table, and we were putting the brand at risk 'cause nobody was basically minding the store or minding the brand. So, you know, I ended up buying up almost all of my publishers, and I became the publisher. We set up factories that did clothing where we controlled the design, especially the high end stuff that was several thousand dollars of, you know, in price, and in price points, retail price points. And then we'd get, you know, like Hennes and Mauritz [H and M Hennes and Mauritz A.B.] or CNA [CNA Financial Corporation] or some of the other big retailers, El Corte Ingles [El Corte Ingles S.A.] in Spain to the, sort of the midlines which then complimented the other lines in their business and they also gave us space, two hundred to three hundred square meters of space within their stores so even though I didn't run the Disney stores, I had the special permission from Frank and Michael to set up shop within shops. They weren't stand alones like the Disney Store. They were three hundred square meters where we then controlled the merchandise mix. Story_ID: 639298 Speaker 1: Did you see this, any special leadership potential in Michael Eisner at that time? Speaker 2: No. Here's the--my view of that relation. When Frank [Frank Wells] was alive, it was the best team I'd ever seen. Michael, to his credit, is the most creative person I have ever seen. You can go into a meeting with him, not having a clue as to what you really wanna come out of there with but a blank sheet of paper. By the time you get out of that kind of a meeting with Michael, you got the deal. You've got the point (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you have an example of that? Speaker 2: Yeah, a good example of that is the animated movies. He has a knack, and he likes to always, you know, go at odds, you know, when it got to product because I, you know, I'm a classy marketer. I wanna test stuff. I wanna know before I make a major commitment of the company's resources, is this, you know, it's the old, you know, the old advertising, "Do the dogs like it," you know. You can always bring dog food on the shelf. If the dogs don't like it, then you're just wasting a lot of time, energy, effort and shareholder value. And Michael would say, "Okay, Dennis [HistoryMaker Dennis Hightower]. You go ahead and just spend the company's money and you--." Sure enough, Cheryl [Cheryl Butler], I'd come back with, you know, the most sophisticated stuff you ever wanna see, that you could execute. And it was only within a couple of points off of what he said it was gonna be to solve it. He has this innate sense of what consumers really want. Speaker 1: And so what's a specific example of that? Was there a particular product? Speaker 2: Anything, anything, you-- Speaker 1: Give me one. Speaker 2: --you name it. Okay, children's music. He understood that piece of the business, but he never wanted to invest in it himself. Speaker 1: So what did he do? What children's music specifically? Speaker 2: Well, he allowed, he allowed me to go off and create singers, teenage singers which had never been done in Europe before because he said, he knows that'll work because as long as they were under fifteen, and could still relate to the tweens age group, which they could. And we started in France 'cause the fellow who ran France for me ran CBS music for ten years. So he knew it cold. But Michael would give you that kind of latitude. Story_ID: 639299 Speaker 1: Where the issue was with Michael [Michael Eisner] was that Michael is the worst manager that I've ever worked for. He hires good people and then he wants to micromanage you. He wants to tell you when to do it, how to do it, what to do and then he wants to go all the way down in the organization--I mean not that any of us, you know, had anything to fear because we were all confident and although--yeah, I was one of the top five executives in his company. And, you know, you'd make a decision, and the next thing you know, he's talking to some product manager five levels below you. "Well, do you think this is really gonna work?" That's not appropriate. I mean that's just not, it's not smart. And the biggest issue was Frank [Frank Wells] was the consummate operator. Frank was a Rhodes scholar, was a lawyer, had been a vice chairman of Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc., Burbank, California], and he took off when they had the big, you know, you know, turnover there when Ross [Steven Ross] died. And he went off to climb six of the seven, you know, tallest mountains in the world and wrote his book down there, you know, the 'Seven Summits' [Dick Bass and Frank Wells with Rick Ridgeway]. And that's when, where Disney [Walt Disney Productions; The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] came to him and said, "We want you to, you know, resuscitate Disney in 1984." And he said, "I'm not the guy. I can be a good number two. You need to go get Michael Eisner. You want, you want, you want some creativity. I'm the operator." So that team came in '84 [1984]. They were like this. What Michael could, could do on creative, Frank could do on operations. Frank will drill deep. He's a quick study. He'd get right to the core of things, and the two of them really, really brought that company back. What happened was, when Frank got killed in that heliskiing accident in, on Easter Sunday of 1993 [sic. 1994], Michael thought he could do what Frank did. And from that point on, the brand and the company and the morale and everything else started taking a very slight decline and cumulatively over the ensuing, I would say four to five years, Disney lost a lot of headway because he would not succumb to Wall Street pressure to say--I think Wall Street understood that he was the creative genius. He was not the operator. He--and then the problem is, you know, that Michael, you know, Michael--with Michael, you're the man of the hour for this particular moment. He's very fickle, and he tells the same people--or different people the same story. You know, I was to come back and, you know, the hint was, you know, you do this, you do that, and, you know, maybe you're gonna get it. And Steve [Stephen F. Bollenbach] (makes sound), the chairman of Hilton [Hilton Hotels Corporation] now, you know, CFO, he came in from Marriott [Marriott Corporation]. Steve, you know, you do this, that, and you know, (unclear). And somebody else would (unclear) and then (unclear). Always was a disaster, absolute disaster. Story_ID: 639300 Speaker 1: Then Michael [Michael Eisner] and I had a couple of big run ins because I ran--his biggest division at that time was his TV and telecommunications [Walt Disney Television and Telecommunications]. Speaker 2: Right, and you took that on (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In, in March of '95 [1995]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And then I, we locked heads over 'Jerry Springer' ['The Jerry Springer Show']. Speaker 2: What was that debate about? Speaker 1: 'Cause he wanted to continue the syndication. I said, "That is a garbage program. That is not a--." He said, he said, "It's not called Disney. It's Buena Vista [Buena Vista Television; Disney/ABC Domestic Television Group]." I said, "Michael, people are not stupid. They know that Disney owns Buena Vista distribution. That is, as far as the consumer is concerned, families. That's Disney." The other one was 'Roseanne.' I refused to sign 'Roseanne,' and we had a big debate, a big argument about it. I said, "Not Disney. Send it over to NBC" (laughter). I said, "Not Disney." Speaker 2: Now, what was the problem with 'Roseanne'? Speaker 1: My personal opinion, has nothing to do with her sexual, sexual inclinations. I just thought that she was just a low class person, frankly, and was not gonna lift the, lift the image of the company, that she was no, she wasn't known at the brand. And Jerry Springer, he may have been the mayor of Cincinnati [Ohio], but that show is disgusting. It was a gutter show. And I said, "Why do we feel we need to compete on that basis?" And so he and I locked heads on a couple of things like that, and finally, I just said, I said, "You know, Michael, I told you when you hired me ten years ago, nine years ago at that point, that at fifty-five, I'm retiring 'cause I don't need the money. I'm independently wealthy, you know. You've made me, you've helped that with the Disney stock and all that stuff." I said, "I'm going off to do some other things that I really wanna do in life now that I've done what I set out to do, you know, when I left the [U.S.] military." And I said, "You know what? When we finish pulling the ABC piece together, I'm outta here." Speaker 2: So that was, that acquisition of ABC happened on your watch? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So I came back to basically, you know, make it mesh. Speaker 2: What were some of the other key shows that you either kept on the air or removed from the roster? Speaker 1: Oh, I removed a lot from the (laughter)--yeah, I used to have these run ins with my president of television, all the time, Dean Valentine, because I just thought it was not--the production quality, the production (unclear) just weren't there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What were some of the-- Speaker 1: I don't think I wanna, I don't wanna go through all the bloodshed again, but, you know, we had, you know, the best one was 'Home Improvement,' the first one to get a million dollars per segment for syndication. That, I mean Tim Allen is as funny when he's off the stage, off the screen as he is when he's on. That, I felt, was a great show. It was a wholesome show, it, you know, it fit, you know, within the Disney, you know, attributes and values from a brand standpoint. Some of that other stuff was just-- Speaker 2: You guys had Regis [Regis Philbin], right? Speaker 1: Yeah, now, that's not, yeah, 'Regis and Kathie Lee' ['Live with Regis and Kathie Lee'], who, in fact, that was the first show I saw. I went to New York [New York] during buying season which was a month after I took over. And that's the first set I went on to see kind of what we really do. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And that was fun. That was a fun show. But most of 'em were marginal. There was, what I call dumbing down America, primetime. Story_ID: 639301 Speaker 1: So, what was your mission? Speaker 2: My mission was to expand internationally. So my first, almost first nine, six months, I was gone a lot of the time. I was in London [England] setting up, we launched a Disney Channel in London. We launched a satellite bay station in Singapore to bring the Disney Channel into Singapore and to Taiwan and to Hong Kong. We structured wonderful deals with the Sevens down in Australia. That's what I--'cause again, we were, we were not well positioned or as well positioned as we should have been or could have been. So my focus was to expand, you know, we did the big deal with the Russians, you know, we had 93 million viewers, you know (makes sound), the minute that, that deal was signed. Speaker 1: What was that deal exactly? Speaker 2: This was a package with the, with the Disney, the Disney club [Club 33] and the Disney Channel. Every Sunday from five to seven [o'clock]. And so a lot of times, I would go into Russia for business meetings, and the people would tell me, "Well, we can't meet on Sunday 'cause we have to watch with our family, the Disney thing from--." I mean we had tremendous acceptance in Russia and Eastern Europe. So we took that into all of Eastern Europe. So that's, in that one year, three months that I actually had a job before I retired, that's what I ended up having the most impact on, was getting Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] launched internationally in a way that it's still sustained, yeah, and it was sustainable and still is, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you have an interest in diversifying the primetime lineup in terms of, I guess, race, gender? Speaker 2: Yeah, and, the, my point was always, be thoughtful about it and don't look like Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., Burbank, California]. I thought Warner Brothers had the worst line up ever, and I said, "If that's what you want, then you gotta, have to get somebody else." And where I had another issue with him, which I won, and I think I won too many. Maybe that's, and that was the problem, was on a song, 'Songs of the South.' It was up for rotation coming out of its seven year hiatus to go back in on video. So my business affairs lawyer and the guy, PR [public relations] guy, PR, EVP [earned value professional], I said, "Look, let's go to the screening room." I said, "Let's look at it." I looked at that thing. I said, "I can't, I can't deal with this. We're not gonna release that." So I wrote Michael [Michael Eisner]--no, that, no I went to see him. I said, "Michael, I know 'Songs of the South' is on the rotation list to come back out, you know, for its next generation." I said, "I don't think we ought to do it." He said, he said, "Dennis [HistoryMaker Dennis Hightower], you--." I said, "No, Michael." I said, "Maybe you need to go down and do what I just did. Maybe you don't remember how, you know, how defaming that movie is with Uncle Remus and all that other stuff." He did, and he agreed with me. So it was always that kind of a, of a battle. See, first of all, a lot of the--when I got, when I got the job, one of my, the guy who ran syndication, my president of syndication said, "Dennis," he said, "let me just tell you what's going on here." He said, "Michael has brought you into the tribe, but you are not of the tribe." I wasn't Jewish. So he said, "That's what you're gonna be fighting." He said, "Because, you know, we kind of run things around here." You know, here being Hollywood. I said, "I understand that." I said, "But you know what? I don't need to do this. The day that it becomes onerous and I don't have any fun anymore--. You may have to work. I don't." (Laughter) Yeah, so it was always that tension, and it was the job that I enjoyed the least because of that. Story_ID: 639302 Speaker 1: I couldn't focus on what I thought I could really accomplish there because you were always, yeah, here's what, here's another way of thinking about it, Cheryl [Cheryl Butler], that there's a lot of fanfare when I took the job. Oh, he doesn't have any television experience. Oh, yes, but he's run, you know, all these businesses, you know, he took a business in Europe from six, from $650 million to $4.5 billion and all that. And that was fine. But he doesn't know television. I said, "No, and that's maybe a good thing because I can bring a new set of eyes and ears and I don't, I don't bring the baggage." I said, "Secondly, there're other things that Disney [The Walt Disney Company, Burbank, California] can do through that medium." I said, "There's a whole thing called telephone companies who wanna bring stuff into the home." So we put this joint venture together with the four phone companies called Americast. And that was another thing that I had a lot of fun with, but most of it, I told the lawyer who was the chief operations officer, the chief operating officer, I said, "You know, Sandy [Sandy Wax]," I said, "this is the first job I've ever had where I don't really like my product." I loved the home videos. That's a true consumer product, and that was the biggest piece of business anyway out of the $6 billion of revenues I had, four of 'em were from home video. I said, "I don't really like my television product because it doesn't, it doesn't represent the best of what we can be." And when this whole issue about diversity came, I said, "If we gonna look like Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc., Burbank California], then I don't wanna have any part of that." I said, "We're, we gotta be better than that." I said, "You know, we, we've got Denzel [Denzel Washington] in a couple of great movies. Why can't we do the same thing and why can't we invest the same sort of creative talent?" But it was kind of the lowest, take the lowest, you know, common denominator and just kind of, we rolled it out. And I said, "If that's what you really want, then I can't do that." Speaker 2: Whatever was easy. Speaker 1: Yeah. I can't do that. I won't do it. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, I don't have to do it. Story_ID: 639303 Speaker 1: How long did you remain in that position? Speaker 2: Sixteen months, yeah. So I got there in March, and then retired in June of '66 [sic.]. Speaker 1: And what did you do next--of '96 [1996]. Speaker 2: Of '96 [1996], I'm sorry, yeah. And then, at that point, I was, I was on the visiting committee at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and the dean, and I told the dean I was gonna retire [from Walt Disney Television and Telecommunications]. And she said, "Well, look, what are you gonna do?" I said, "Well, you know," I said, "I've always wanted to teach, you know, I come out of a family of teachers," and I said, "I've always been interested, and I think any good leader is really a teacher anyway. So I'd like to see what I can do." She said, "Well, look, I'm putting this program together that I'm getting approval from the university on to bring experienced, successful leaders back to the classroom." And that was important because at that time, the demographic at, Harvard was that you normally had anywhere from three to six years of work experience before you came back to the business school. So it was a bit problematic to have a newly minted doctorate of business administration who had been, you know, the academic all his or her life talking to people who had been out there about leadership, about how to, how to put budgeting plans, marketing together when you hadn't done it. So he said, "I'm gonna, I'm gonna--I'm thinking about bringing about four people in, and I'd like to have you to be one, being kind of a guinea pig, come in as a senior lecturer the first year, and if it works, then we'll do three year contracts, three year rolling contracts. And I'm gonna try to get everybody--if you, those who make the first cut, a full professor of management, but not on the academic tracks so that you're not blocking a true academic." And I said, "That's important, Kim [Kim B. Clark], because we cannot be seen as being in competition with the, you know, the true academic faculty." So I got selected, let's see, and a fellow from Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] who was retiring, another--a lawyer who was a big labor guy and a lot of experience with labor and another fellow who had gone to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], had taught at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], had been with, been an investment banker with Brentwood Associates and had been a U.S. congressman. And so the four of us came in, and launched this sort of approach. And we all ended up doing extremely well, and then the next year, we all got three year contracts as professor of management. Story_ID: 639304 Speaker 1: How did that feel on the other side this time? Speaker 2: It felt good, and, and the reason it felt good is 'cause, is--one of the questions we didn't get, finish off on the, about my favorite professors. But I only had a couple because at that time, those who weren't against you being there, didn't have time for you even if they were there. So I, my point was that, when I accepted the job, I told Kim, I said, Kim Clark [Kim B. Clark], who was the dean then, I said, "Kim, all I wanna do is two things. I wanna be a good teacher, and I wanna be able to have, be accessible to students who wanna talk about their careers," I said, "because the one thing that I did not get out of Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], thirty years ago, was that, none of the best professors ever had any time for you. And they were off writing their books, on their boards, lecturing. They didn't have time for you. I wanna be able to have time for students who are coming here to make a career transition." So over the four years I was there, I probably saw three, four hundred students. And I always had an open door, whether you, or whether it was officially on the, you know, on my secretary's log or running across campus 'cause I actually lived on campus. I had an apartment right at, in the student dorm area, on the business school campus. So I was the happiest I'd been in a long time because, one, I was giving back some knowledge that I thought I had gleaned in the real world. And the ratings supported that which was a little bit problematic because of a couple of us got better ratings than the-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: --the academic professors. Speaker 1: Ah, of course (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Becau- yeah, because we, you know, we were talking about what do you do Monday morning, not about the theory of the case. Now, theory's fine, but then how do you execute on that theory? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: How do you get it done? How do you lead people to do things that they don't wanna do otherwise, and that's what's called leadership. It doesn't-- Speaker 1: What did you teach? Speaker 2: I taught two courses. I taught the first year required course called Leadership, Values and Decision Making, how ethical values have to be part of the decision making process, not after the fact, saying, "Oh, now, are we gonna have a problem ethically, morally or whatever because of a decision we made?" It's how you incorporate that. So we had, you know, cases like Johnson and Johnson [Johnson and Johnson Products; Johnson and Johnson Services, Inc.], Tylenol, like Nestle [Nestle S.A.] and the apple juice scam where they didn't have any apple juice in the apple juice, you know, this kind of stuff, trading on Wall Street, things that a lot of those students were gonna end up doing. Then on the second course I taught was the first year course in global leadership, general management, it's called general management course, where GE [General Electric] was a mainstay case, Johnson and Johnson, Nestle, you know, the big, big brands, Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company] where you'd look at how--what's the role of the general manager in a multinational business. So they were fun, they were fun courses. Every, every course and every case that I taught, I had done what I was teaching. So, it added--so I had all of these vignettes and all of these, you know, anecdotes that added, I think, added flavor to the, in the richness of the discussion which was rich enough anyway because you had people who had actually been out there themselves. Story_ID: 639305 Speaker 1: And you remained at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] for four years? Speaker 2: Yeah, through the spring semester of--the end of the spring semester of 2000. And that's when I got a call from someone who I'd--who was the benefactor for the Ron Brown Scholar Program [Charlottesville, Virginia], Tony Pilaro [Anthony Pilaro] who was one of the founders of duty free shopping. And he said, "Dennis [HistoryMaker Dennis Hightower]," he said, "I'm on the board--I'm not on the board," he said, "I'm investing in this business in Luxembourg. It's a satellite business that's gonna bring two megabytes streams of video into PCs [personal computer] at TV quality," and he said, "It sounds like something that's just right down your line." I said, "Tony," I said, "I'm retired. I'm having a ball here at Harvard." He said, "Well, you know, it's gonna be a big equity piece and, you know, what we need to do, we need to replace the founder, you know, she's fabulous. But she can't take it to the next level. You know, we need somebody like you," and he said, "You know, we're probably gonna, you know, spin this thing, you know, get a strategic investor within a couple of years." He said, "Why don't you just come on." He said, "You're gonna be in Paris [France] anyway, right?" I said, "Yeah," 'cause I had an apartment in Paris that my ex-wife [Denia Stukes Hightower] got in the divorce. And I said, "Oh, yeah, I'm gonna be in Paris at my apartment." So he said, "Why don't you just come on over to Luxembourg and let's talk and see." Well, long story short, went over for a week, took the job, told Harvard I was not gonna renew my contract, went over--and then I got cancer, had to leave that business. But I still advised him. We sold it. Everybody did fine. Then I retired, retired, and then I just did the boards, do the speeches, do the seminars, and that's just fine (laughter). Story_ID: 639306 Speaker 1: As you look back on your life, what would you say are the key moments, moments you're most proud of? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, that's, I think the, the two--no, the five happiest moments were when my two children [Dennis Hightower, Jr. and Dawn Hightower Lucas] were born, then when my three grandchildren were born. My grandchildren now are nine, about to be seven, and almost five. My youngest granddaughter is named for my mother, Anna [Anna Fowler Hightower], and she was born on her birthday, 20th of August, yeah. So those stand out as absolutely just burning memories of nothing but, pleasure, and yeah, seeing the kids grow and do their thing. Yeah, those, those are--the sense of family. Even though I'm divorced and there were reasons for that, doesn't change how I feel about my kids or how I feel about my grandkids. The other was the recognition of, that I received when I was in the [U.S.] military for doing what my [maternal] grandfather [George Fowler] had always said. He said, "If there's something worth doing, just do it right." And he said, "Always give your best because," he said, "even when you give your best, you may not always achieve what you, you want, but you can be guarantee you won't achieve it if you don't give your best." So the recognition by peers. In fact, I'm getting an award next month from the Afro American association [African American Alumni Association] at Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts]. It's called the Bert King Award for Service, and it's the whole notion of giving back. And my whole life, I think about those being another set of moments, collective set of moments of being unselfish in wanting the next generation to do better than I did. And to be open, available, willing to talk, to counsel, to do whatever it takes to make sure that you don't go through the same minefields. You're gonna have your own minefields to go through, but you don't have to go through the ones that my generation went through. And I think that's something I'm very, very proud of and very--feel very good about. And it's part of the family tradition of service, you know, aunt [Hightower's maternal great aunt, Beulah Fowler Williams] being a nurse in the well baby clinic, another aunt being a teacher, and, you know, at the turn of the century, the--my mother, you know, spending her forty years in teaching, my dad [Marvin W. Hightower] started the first black Air Explorer troop here in 1951 in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. I mean, it's that, that, that--those are good moments. Those are things that I really feel good about. Story_ID: 639307 Speaker 1: What message would you like to send the next generation, words of wisdom? Speaker 2: I think really, it's that there's no substitute for excellence, and there's no place for mediocracy, that the--that there're three things that I talk about a lot, and I call 'em the three Ps: prepare, perform and persevere. You know, the prep- the prepare is the education. You've got to have a base of knowledge, and you've gotta have a way to continue to increase that knowledge because knowledge has a very short half life in today's technology driven environment. The perform is that, assuming you've prepared properly, you're gonna have opportunities to show what you can do, but getting in the door is the easy part now, relatively. You've got to perform, you've gotta show why it was important for whatever organization, business, nonprofit, whatever it is you're studying about, why it was important for them to hire you to do what you are good at and be really good at it. And then the third is the persevere because even today, with the advantages that many of our youth will have over the previous generation, there's still these minefields out there. There're still people who are not gonna be happy for your success, who are not gonna be happy that you are where you are, have the capabilities that you have. So you've got to keep, you've gotta--and I've always said that we're all gonna, we all, in our careers, whatever those careers are, we all hit brick walls at some point. And the measure of who you are is what do you do when you hit the--when you get up? Do you back off? Do you go through it, around it, over it, under it? Do you continue to persevere? And then the fourth, my new P is politic. You can't do all of that in isolation. You've gotta have your antenna up, not as one who sees shadows, but one who understands that there's a certain dynamic that occurs any time more than two people get together. And it's what I call the syndrome of the strange bedfellows. Particularly, as young African Americans, as you begin to move up in whatever organization you're in, when you get to a certain level where you start getting selected for things that many of your white counterparts feel are their birthright, then you're gonna have people who would otherwise never come together on anything, who will band together to make sure you try--to make sure you fail. And you've gotta be just aware that there's a political element that often transcends your ability to bring your knowledge and experience there, and to continue to work at it until you achieve. But when you do, then you've gotta kind of watch out for what's going on on your flanks. You've gotta have somebody who's protecting your back, and you also have to have someone that you can talk to. Too often in my generation, we were made to feel as if we were competing with one another, even when we were in different career fields. It was almost a divide and conquer strategy. I encourage all young people to share their pain as well as their success because you never know who can help you, who can help think--help you think through something that you have encountered or see some, you know, some issues on the horizon that you might not see because you're, you know, you're too close to the problem and share, share, share. Talk to each other. Use us old folks who've been there, and to the old folks, I say, be willing and open to bring some knowledge back to this next generation because that's who's gonna be, who's gonna be running stuff, and more of us are gonna be doing it than they did in our generation. Story_ID: 639308 Speaker 1: And finally, what would you like your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I wanna be known as a good person, as a good businessman, who just happens to be African American. I'd like my tombstone to say, soldier, business leader, educator, because those are the things that I think my life has been all about. And I don't think I'll ever stop being an educator, even though formally, I may not be in the classroom, you know, five years from now...