 Story_ID: 8365 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir could you please state your name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: I'm Asa, A-S-A, G. Hilliard, H-I-L-L-I-A-R-D III [the third], Baffour, B-A-F-F-O-U-R, Amankwatia A-M-A-N-K-W-A-T-I-A the second [II]. So I have two names that are joined, a Ghanaian name, as well. Speaker 1: Well can you tell us more about your Ghanaian name and what does it mean. Speaker 2: Right. I was enstool in Mankranso in Ashanti in Ghana as--what they call 'Nkosohene' or a development chief. And that's gives me obligations in the city of Mankranso for assisting, in my case, with schools and with some economic development. And so there's a ceremony and some oaths and obligations that you have to deal with. And I've been doing that now for four years. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: I was born August the 22nd, 1933 in Galveston, Texas. Speaker 1: Okay. And can you tell us your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a professor at Georgia State University [Atlanta, Georgia] in psychology. That's educational psychology and educational policy studies. I'm in a department that has educational psychology and special education mixed. In fact, that's the name of one of my department. I'm also in the department of educational policy studies. And in the department of early childhood education. And I think I'm still listed as department of counseling and psychological Services. So I'm--because of background in counseling and educational psychology teaching and school leadership that when I came to Georgia State, they put me in four places. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: That's a good question. I think today is 6th of May, 2003. Speaker 1: Right, (unclear) birthday. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Yeah, that's true. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're now at Georgia State University in my office. In room 482 of the Education Building. Story_ID: 8366 Speaker 1: What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Barbeque. Any kind of barbeque. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: It seems that I gravitate to blue more than most of the colors except when I'm work symbolically. And when I'm--I have to have all three, the red, green and black. Speaker 1: Okay. And do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Georgia spring. Right now. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Destination for vacation? My favorite would be to go home, you know, to Texas, you know, as far as United States vacation. But beyond that to go to Ghana. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Actually it's an old Bible verse. The one that I probably repeat more than any others. So it's a product of my youth which says, "Study to show yourself approved unto God, a workman that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth." So, usually some part of that--"...rightly dividing the word of truth" or "Study to show yourself approved not to man but to God...." Story_ID: 8367 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history. How far back can you trace your family? Speaker 2: I can--on my father's [Asa Grant Hilliard, II] side I can go to grandmother Mary, who and her husband Bunker Hilliard who was Sterling before the end of slavery. And as soon as slavery ended, he renamed himself like so many Africans did. Called himself Bunker Hilliard after the Battle of Bunker Hill [Massachusetts]. His wife was Mary Tatum. So I can go back there. That's my great-grandparents. And they left Atlanta [Georgia] in 1870s or '80s [1880s] to Texas in a covered wagon with their fourteen children and one died on the way. And then, of course, my grandfather who was their son, Asa the first. And my--then it's to my father and me. Now on my mother's side, I can go back to--let's see my mother is Lowe--to the Shankle. Jim Shankle to--there's two more. I think its two more generations beyond my mother's grandfather. And they were from Mississippi. They were--and that goes back into the slavery period. And they were--the reason we know one, Jim Shankle ran away from a Mississippi plantation, because his wife was sold to a family in Texas. And he was able to swim across the Mississippi River and walk four hundred miles barefoot and find his wife with these people and reunited or else I wouldn't be here because my mother [Lois Otha Lowe] wouldn't have been here. So they now have a town in Texas named for him Shankleville. And so I can go back that far on that side. Speaker 1: Did he found the town himself or--? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, I supposed that he founded the town. But, let's see there was--well I better not say, because it's possible that they renamed a settlement that was already there. But he accumulated a lot of property after--immediately after slavery. And it's that property that was named Shankleville. So the best memory I have is that they were in kind of a rural area and there was a settlement of all these family members. And oddly enough, this is around the place where Rodney King and [James] Byrd [Jr.]-- the guy that was dragged--were. And Rodney King, my mother tells me was married to one of our cousins and--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Rodney King is from that part of the Texas? Speaker 2: Rodney King is, right. It's around Newton [Texas], Jasper [Texas]. Jasper was the place, I believe where Byrd was dragged. And he was also married to one of our cousins. In fact, you almost have to be either a cousin or married to them. Any of those little towns around that area. Shankleville, Newton, Jasper and a couple of other places that are close by. Story_ID: 8368 Speaker 1: Are there any stories from the 19th century that--I mean other than the--I know that other good story about your-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Was that your great-great-grandfather? Speaker 2: Great-great-grandfather from Mississippi in the early 1800s, right. Speaker 1: Jim Shankle. Speaker 2: Jim Shankle. Speaker 1: Any other stories about that period of time? Because you seem to have a good, you know--. Speaker 2: Yeah. We--I know that my grandfather who Asa [Hilliard] the first was the--we have some stories about him. He was the one that wanted to go to school. And in order for that to happen his--to public school. His mother who is pictured on the wall up there behind me, Mary Tatum went to the cotton fields and picked cotton in his place so that he could go to school. And he became an educator and his certificate is there on the wall from 1890, I believe it was. He got his teaching certificate. And on that certificate there are three board members who had to sign, who were white. One of the board members could not read or write. So my grandfather had to sign his name for him and then he marked his X. And then my grandfather, almost to be insulting, who had beautiful handwriting as you can see on the certificate signed his own name in his best calligraphy almost to draw attention to, I suppose. And he was the one that got into a fight with a Ku Klux Klansman in the place where they lived, in a place called Hackberry, Texas and knocked him out and had to leave because his life was in danger. And probably except for that fight, I would not be here because when he left he went to Bay City [Texas] which was the place that my mother [Lois Otha Lowe] then gravitated to, because her parents--her mother had died. So she followed--and her dad was dead so she followed her aunt who acted as grandparents to Bay City. And that's where my father [Asa Grant Hilliard, II] people had gone. And so that's where they met. But that's one of the-one of the stories that they tell. Story_ID: 8369 Speaker 1: My father [Asa Grant Hilliard, II] was a senior in Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical] University [Prairie View, Texas] when his dad [Asa Hilliard] died. Asa [Hilliard], II was a senior. And because Asa the first had done such a good job with high school that he was principal of, they got my dad in his senior year and brought him to the high school as principal. So he was the youngest one on the faculty. And we're doing a book on his life story that he wrote. And we're trying to get that out. And he was principal for seventeen years there. And they renamed that school after my grandfather in honor of the work that he did. A.G. Hilliard High School [now A.G. Hilliard Elementary School, Houston, Texas]. And later my dad left and went to Tyler [Texas]. And that school is now a community center. There's all kinds of funny stories that my dad used to tell about his childhood. And some--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Could you tell us one? Speaker 1: Yeah, about the time he was in the toilet and a guy came up and peed through a hole on his pants while he was using the toilet and he came out--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Peed through the keyhole? Speaker 1: It was a knothole in side of--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh it was an outhouse. Okay. Speaker 1: So the guy came in and just peed through the hole and wet my dad's pants and naturally that started a war. So dad got up and beat him within an inch of his life. My dad was very combative. We didn't know that after--his childhood was like that but we never saw any of that behavior when he was mature. But apparently they had--my granddad had to send him away to a place called something, FIST. FIST. [Farmers Improvement Society-Texas had a school called Farmers Improvement Society Agricultural College, founded in 1906 in Ladonia Texas.] It was some kind of industrial school. And dad tells stories about how on the way--when his dad sent him away for disciplinary reasons, in part and, because his friend was heading up the school. Professor [Robert Lloyd] Smith who was also, I believe in the eventually may have become a legislature in Texas. [sic, Smith had previously served in the Texas legislature in the 1890s, the last African American to serve until seventy years later.] But he ran this school. And so my dad thought it best to take his incorrigible son and send him off to this boarding school. And dad talks about how he wanted to make an impression on Professor Smith. So--But at the same time he had heard that there were some half-Indian girls in that neighborhood where he was going. And he was just daydreaming about these half-Indian girls all the way down there. And then the car had a flat. And he's standing outside the car daydreaming, "I just can't wait to get to FIST where I'll see all these half-Indian girls. I know they're beautiful." And he lost his chance to make an impression. Because he imitates Professor Smith's high-pitched voice, "Hey, young man. Make yourself useful." So he thought he had already lost his first chance to impress Professor Smith by being lazy, whatever. So he had many stories like that that he would tell. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Well tell us what--when your father was born about what year? Speaker 1: My dad would have been--I was '33 [1933]. Dad would have been, 1913, something like that. About twenty years older. Yeah. About twenty when I was born. Speaker 2: And his name was Asa Grant Hilliard, II? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Asa Grant Hilliard, II. Yeah, I got one more story I got to tell 'cause it's older than my father and it was about my grandfather. And it's something of the character that he had. My grandfather had a young woman that he was competing with. A young girl at the time. They were in school. And so they--my dad used to tell the story of how granddad and this young girl would compete with each other at night to see who could stay up the latest studying. And they could see each other's house. And so you could tell by the light--by the candlelight. They were studying by candlelight. And the two of them were two of the top students in the school. And so he would--my granddad would try to stay up until this young girl went to bed. And he wanted to see her light go out. And then he would turn his out. But I guess they'd have--sometimes she would win. Sometimes he would win. But that said something about how they felt about education. Story_ID: 8370 Speaker 1: Did you know your grandfather [Asa Hilliard] too? Speaker 2: No. My grandfather died two years before I was born. So I knew no grandparents. And I feel that was a great loss to me because we had really close family on both sides. And I would loved to have known, you know, even one of them. But I had--in the African way the sisters and brothers always took the children when the parents died. So my mother [Lois O. Williams] was raised by one of my grandmother's sisters who also died just a couple years or so before I was born. And her brother and two sisters were raised by another aunt. So they couldn't all--you know, no one could take all four. But some brother or sister took them and raised them. And so, I saw who--the woman that I know as grandmother, who is my grandmother's sister acted like a grandmother for me. And the same thing on the side of my father [Asa Grant Hilliard, II], you know, the--I saw my grandfathers brothers and sisters. Otherwise--see I don't have a picture of my grandfather. I've never been able to find a photograph and I've always wanted to know what he look like. But I do have photographs of his brothers and sisters, who I knew. You know, and they were little small people. They looked like pygmy people, almost that small. Very short and very deep voices. I remember the men who had that and very loving. Very kind. And so that was always a big treat for me to be able to go back home every summer and hang out with my grandfather's brothers and sisters. Story_ID: 8371 Speaker 1: Can you tell us more about your father? What, what was he like? He was a teacher--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. My father was a teacher and a principle. His whole life was education. Every waking moment he was thinking about those students either at A.G. Hilliard High School [Houston, Texas] or Emmett Scott High School in Tyler, Texas where he moved and was there for a couple decades. He--my dad would take us, you know, like my mother [Lois Otha Lowe Williams] and dad were divorced when I was two years old. So I spent all my summers with him. And, you know, the school year with my mother. But when I would go, one of the first things that I would have to do is pay my respect to every one of the elders and important people in town. That was just a regular tour my brother and I knew we had to take. And we didn't appreciate it, at the time, how important that would be to us. But he was trying to show us real live people doing real things. And he would give us the whole bios on everybody and we would do what he called pop calls, you know. And he loved to be with us. He liked to eat, you know. And we knew that if we went with him that he was gonna stop to eat before we even thought about it. And I was always hungry. So I liked going with dad for, you know, "I know you're ready for some ice cream." Whether you were or not. You know. Which meant he was ready for ice cream [laughs]. And the barbecue taste I got from his astute searching out of the best barbecue places. That would be one our favorite pastimes running around looking for barbecue shops. And the socialization that went with being able to talk to the owners and the people who'd drop by and all of that. Dad was a serious as a heart attack about his school. To hire a teacher, he would get in his car and load up with gas. And if he was interested in a teacher, he would drive to that teacher's hometown. If it's halfway across the state of Texas, he would go there. Spend two or three days talking to everybody who knew this person to try to satisfy himself about their character. Then he would observe them in their classroom to see that they really could teach. Then he might review their credentials and so forth. Only after that, would he offer them a position. So in both of his schools, one of the things he was known for was a crack faculty. They were just outstanding and the achievement of the students showed that. And I--most of the time when I talk to--when I would visit in the summer, most of our conversations were about the school. You know, either about the school or maybe about relatives. He loved his brothers and sisters. And so he'd tell us all the stories that they could tell about growing up and everything. He would farm out our visits so that the competing brothers and sisters who wanted us to stay with them for a little while. You know, he would fix it so that we could do that too. So it was a great time for us. And dad was an activist, a strategist. He loved to tell stories. I called them war stories about, for example one of them was how he was instrumental in getting Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] to have a black school board. Because, they were gonna have a white board of trustees and so he was the young whippersnapper who was in the meetings. I can't remember what the meetings were. But where they were making decisions in building of Texas Southern. And they were making decisions about things like that. And so he stood up and made his argument and was supported by some of the old people there, even though he was the youngest person in the room. And he said that down the road you're really gonna wanna have people from this community who would be in charge of that university. So in part, the fact that Texas Southern had a black board of trustees was one of the things that he did. And then it was that kind of thing that he--I mean he would just go on for hours with these stories. Speaker 1: Yeah. That's quite an accomplishment too-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --because Texas Southern is a state school. It was--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah, a state school. Yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear) A state university--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's right. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Texas. Speaker 2: Mm-hm, mm-hm. And he had since--My dad had gone to Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas]. Then he used that experience to take a position on that. One other example of--that revealed something of what Dad was about, you couldn't drop out of his school. They had a guy named Herman Wilson who came to him once--who dropped-out. Didn't come to him. And dad found out about it. Went to his house and said, "You get your behind back in school." And Herman said, "Well Professor Hilliard I can't, I can't do it. My grandmother raised me when my mother died. And so I can't, I just can't do it. I've gotta help her." And my dad said, "You get your butt back in school and we will find a way to help you with your grandmother." Which they did. And they got some business people and physicians and all and kinda helped financially. Herman Wilson graduated with honors from Emmett Scott. Went on to Lincoln University in [Lincoln University] Pennsylvania. Graduated at the top of his class there. And went on to Harvard University Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and graduated number one in his Harvard Law School class. And carried the mace. And then later practiced civil rights law in Mississippi. Because Dad wouldn't let him stop. But he loved all the kids. And if you meet any of his students, they'll all have similar stories to tell about his outreach to them. And sometimes, you know, they felt like they were his children as much as we were. And I think that was really true. Speaker 1: Is Herman Wilson still alive? Speaker 2: I don't know if Herman is still alive or not. He was--the last I had any special contact with him, or information about him. I hadn't had any contact with him since we were children. But--was about ten years ago. And I think he was still alive then. Story_ID: 8372 Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother? Can you give us her full name and spell it for us and her date of birth? Speaker 2: Yeah. My mother is exactly twenty years older than me. So she would've been--in September she will be ninety. Her name is Lois, wait a minute. Otha Lowe. That was her maiden name. She didn't like Otha, O-T-H-A, partly, because it was more of a male name to her. And so she changed her name to Lois O. Which would be Lois Otha. And then she married a Williams. Which was her second husband. So she goes by Lois O. Williams now. Dr. Lois O. Williams. And she--she was raised by my grandmother and grandfather, who is really her uncle and aunt. He was a Pentecostal minister. And became a bishop in the Church Of God In Christ. And so that's why he was moving around to different places. First to Bay City [Texas] from the whole Jasper [Texas] area. Then to Marlin [Texas] and finally to Denver [Colorado] where I was raised. My mother was raised in the church. She was just a--and still is a most extraordinary person. Independent, very confident in her ability to do anything. You know, she--my earliest memory is after we moved from Bay City, were in Houston [Texas] where she learned photography from this photography studio. We actually had a photography studio in our house. The front room. Went to Marlin. She reestablished the photography studio and also added hamburgers. So we had a little restaurant photography studio in the red-light district (laughs) of Marlin, Texas, you know. And so she's this very hyper religious person living in this red-light district with these little babies as a single mom. You know. And so we got to see her tested pretty well. And she always was upbeat about everything. And then later after we got to Denver, she--following our grandparents again because the itinerant grandfather. She went into real estate. You know. I've watched Mom do all of these different things with no background to do it. Except she just said I can do it. So she started selling houses. And so we--she sold a house fairly quickly. Began to accumulate a little money. And that began a round of house buying. About every three or four years, it seemed to me we'd be in a new house or a different house. Even though we were on welfare. You know, because we went there on welfare. I was on welfare until I got out of high school. And I worked all the time too. But--after I got old enough. And was contributing to the economic part of what was happening in the household. My mother became a minister herself and then became a trainer of ministers. And so she had something called the Praise Faith and Love Fellowship which she still has up until this time where she ordains ministers. And she ran a fellowship in Denver [Colorado]. They called them seminars. They used to rent hotel rooms and she had a congregation that she served. She had a newsletter that she published. And I think once in a while she still does even though she's almost ninety. And she moved here two years ago. She moved twice. She moved once and went back from Denver to Georgia. And now she knows that she needs us around a little bit more. So she lives with my sister--I mean my daughter. Yeah. Story_ID: 8373 Speaker 1: Were any of your relatives involved in organizations--? Speaker 2: Yeah. NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. My dad [Asa Grant Hilliard, II] was involved in that. My uncles were involved and I believe my aunts were as well. Plus they started organizations. My dad began the--he was one of the founders of the [Texas] State Teachers Association for black teachers. Now he also was one of the founders--the primary founder for the nation-for the statewide student council association. Because he thought that the young people oughta' began to get their feet wet. So that they would be prepared to move on into some of these other organizations. He did work with the Urban League in Texas. And then they did just a lot of work without organizations. Without formal organizations. As--like the whole thing I was telling you about the board of trustees for the university [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas]. But other things as well. My aunts were--they were sit--they were refusing to get up and move on bus long before Rosa Parks did that. My--one of my aunts had a threat to fight on the bus. Told the bus driver she wasn't moving anywhere, you know. And I found out a lot of women did that in other parts of the country. But yeah, they were--They were some organizations and some independent efforts that were proactive as far as civil rights kind of things. Speaker 1: Okay. You were saying off-camera that your father would be considered a race man. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You were explaining that. Can you explain--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That was a word they used when I was a child. A race man was one who gave a large part of their time to challenging white supremacy and segregation. I had one uncle who never went to school. Well, take it back he went to fourth grade and he became the richest one in the family. He was a millionaire, you know. And used to buy us clothes every time we went--when my dad became principal [of Emmett Scott High School] in Tyler [Texas] and had to move with no money. 'Cause he was always broke. It was that uncle that went and bought him a house and then bought him a car. So he could go in without being ashamed as the principal of the high school, wouldn't have to live in poverty. So that particular uncle was a strong civil rights person. And single-handedly became a lead politician in Houston [Texas]. The mayor's, the mayor's son, I guess it was, came to the funeral and said that his dad told him that, who was also mayor, that, if you intend to do anything politically in Houston, the first person you see is Sid Hilliard. And so he said, "I did." And he said, I got, you know, overwhelmingly elected, because he was able to mobilize that kind of support for him. He was a very strong political person. And he would be called--he called himself a race man. My Uncle Robie who taught at Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas] and also at Texas Southern [University] called himself a race man. Because they were keenly interested in injustice and, and fighters for justice. That's how they saw their function. Story_ID: 8374 Speaker 1: How did your mother [Lois O. Williams] and father [Asa Grant Hilliard, II] meet? Did they have a story about that or--? Speaker 2: Because it probably was just that my mother was an attractive young lady who was new to Bay City [Texas]. Because her--the ones her foster parents had raised her there and beyond that I don't know of anything else that was spectacular about how they got together. But they were married for two years. And I think my mom's headstrong ways probably had something to do with the divorce because she, you know, thought he was spending a lot of time at work. That's what I think happened. They never--Neither one of them ever really said why they divorced. And they were all, always very respectful of each other. Even of their spouses as they remarried. You know, my mother and my stepmother were very, you know, respectful of each other and enjoyed each other's company. Same thing with my father and the man that my mother married, you know. So--but I never really knew exactly how they met or exactly why they decided not to stay together. But my speculation based on bits and pieces is that my mom is independent and she's not gonna have--she's not gonna play second fiddle to (laughing) a profession (laughing). So I think that's what happened, you know. Story_ID: 8375 Speaker 1: Can you reflect back on growing up and give us a picture of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: For me, it was my consciousness of--from about three years olds. I think is when I have memories of things. And by that time I was in Houston [Texas] in kind of a inner-city area on Lyons Avenue in 5th Ward--. Speaker 1: 5th Ward--. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughs). So Fifth Ward was it. And it had all the--as a little kid I would go down Lyons Avenue. And I'd go to Wheatley [High School, Houston, Texas] and I'd imagine myself in that school. You know, I had heard about Yates [High School, Houston, Texas] over in the 3rd Ward, I think it was. And there were like lumber yards. And I remember a lot of kids on the streets. I remember being new and, therefore, vulnerable and--to the ones that were bullies and things like that. So we had to do a little fighting. And a couple guys fought for me. I don't even know who they were. But saw me about to get beat up one time and a guy came in cracked heads to keep people from hurting me, you know. But we had lots of fun time. You know, as poor as we were, we had plenty of things to do to occupy our time. You know, like taking the--I remember those little steel rims. And I don't know where they came from. But we would take coat hangers and bend them so that the top of the coat hanger would be against the little steel rim and then you could push that, you know, like a--you make the wheel roll with the coat hanger. And so we'd do a lot of that. Have races with that. We made--take skates and nail them to the bottom of a board and make a scooter. We'd dig holes in the back of the yard and make places to--like a model of a town and we'd have our cars. And we'd decorate them with bottle caps and all of that. We would--when it rained all the ditches flooded and, of course, the kids got in the ditches. I couldn't wait for the rain, so we would dig crawfishes, crawfish out the ditches. You know, we would fish for them with a little bacon on the end of a string. And they would grab the bacon and then we could pull'em out of their holes. And then we could eat the crawfish or play with them. It was a really happy time for me. And lots of friends. I went to school for the--to kindergarten in 5th Ward. That was my--I couldn't wait to get to kindergarten I remember all the toys that you got to play with. That was an attraction, you know. But the idea of being grown-up was also an attraction. You know, that other kids were going to school and I felt like I was supposed to be there. And it--it just looked like I wasn't old enough to go. So--And then shortly after that we left and went to Marlin [Texas]. But what I was--even then I was spending time between--the three months with my dad [Asa Grant Hilliard, II] and nine months with my mother [Lois O. Williams]--the school year with my mother. So I got a lot of country time, picking cotton. As I got older, hunting. I had a 22 [caliber] rifle and BB gun. So we'd go out hunting birds or squirrels, things like that. Working, one of my jobs used to be to slop the hogs. You know, helping with some of the farming, some of the gardening that would be done. And, of course, the biggest thing was going on a cattle drive. I think I was about eight years old. Where they'd have to take two or three hundred head of cows down the highway. You know we did the--you'd stop traffic. You know, and people would let--they would have to stop as we ride by with all these cows and everything to another pasture. That was a big time for me. Speaker 1: You actually did that on a horse and everything? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. I had horses. My uncle gave me a mare and she foal three times. So I had four horses at one time. And, I could see them in the summer. By then they'd have to be broken again because nobody would ride 'em until--And I had a real hard time ridding the one that he gave, because she would pay attention to grown-ups but not to kids, including me. So every time I'd try to get on her bareback she would reach around and bite me (laughs). And--or when I get out in the, you know, on the road after I get away from the house she was always trying to turn around. If I turned back just the least little bit, then she'd get headed for home and she'd would break out running and I couldn't stop her, you know. So I had a hard time with her. But I enjoyed being the owner of a horse. Yeah. Speaker 1: You had a stable--? Speaker 2: Yeah. We had cows. We had, you know, when they'd bring the cows into the--our house was real close to the highway and the coral was near the house. And so they'd bring in different types Hereford and Holstein and even the one that really excited me were the Brahma--the Brahma bulls and all that. They came and they were nothing to be played with, you know. And I'd have to pump the water to fill this huge kettle where they would come to drink and everything. Sometimes you'd get out and they'd let you ride the calves, but--I just had a great time when I was a kid. Broke and happy. Story_ID: 8376 Speaker 1: Where did you start school and what was the name of your school? Speaker 2: I started in--I don't know the name of the kindergarten, but I started at kindergarten in Houston [Texas]. And then my first grade started at Booker [T.] Washington Elementary School in Marlin, Texas. Where I attended for five years. Speaker 1: That's in Marlin, Texas right? Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. How did you like school? I would imagine you--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I loved school. Speaker 1: --with all the educators in the family. Speaker 2: I loved school. And I was always--I think it was just being curious. You know. I didn't want to miss anything. I wanted to know what was going on. So I was always in attendance. In Marlin the principal of that school, Mr. Hines was my father's [Asa Grant Hilliard, II] friend. So--because the principals knew each other. They would have meetings and so he kinda looked out for us in a special way once we got there. The teachers were great. I mean I just can't say enough for how I felt and how I thought other kids felt about how the teachers felt about them. And so I have very good memories. And I remember Miss Densen, Miss Washington were my favorites and a couple of others. And that was a very important part of my life because the Marlin years were foundational in terms of friendships. You know, I had a lot a friends. And I hated it when we got--when Mother [Lois O. Williams] followed her parents again to Denver [Colorado]. I thought my life was gonna end, you know. 'Cause I had friends that were very strong. One in particular Irving Richardson and I were--we were just like that. And I said I'll never have friends like these again, you know, so. But you do, of course. And I so I--I was there for five years--in elementary school. Speaker 1: So you were there until fourth--fifth grade? Speaker 2: Through fifth grade. And I picked up the sixth grade at Whittier Elementary School in Denver which was in the middle of a black community and it was almost all black. A mixed faculty, a black principal. And I had a good time at Whittier, as well, yeah. I was there one year in that elementary school. That was quite interesting. Because I'm new now and you're coming in at sixth grade. And so you gotta be tested. And so everybody was challenging me. So I realized right away that I had to do something or I was gonna be abused (laughs). So I went out and picked the biggest guy I could find and smacked him in the mouth. You know, I started a fight with him. And I didn't know much about fighting. But I figured that I just gonna give it all I had. So I went like a windmill. And I just as fast as I could throw blows. And so people said, "That man's crazy. That boy's crazy." So I got the reputation of being a crazy fighter. So nobody bothered me after that. I don't even know if I won the fight or not. Speaker 1: You looked crazy. Speaker 2: I looked crazy (laughs). Yeah, so that was a great school. Speaker 1: So you were at Whittier for one--you said one year? Speaker 2: I was at Whittier for one year and then went to--we had an arrangement where you go to junior high for seventh, eighth and nine. So I went to Cole Junior High School [Denver, Colorado]. And that's when I got a job, because we were on welfare as a janitor at that school. So I was going to school, I was a janitor at the school which meant I worked in the morning in--dusting and in the after-school period I would clean the school, sweeping. They called it sweeper boy. And my brother and--got the job--same job the next year. So both of us were able to earn money, sixteen (dollars), forty (cents) per week. That was our salary and we were very proud to be able to bring that home to Mom. And I was also a newspaper boy. So I would dust and I would sweep. And I had first a paper route that I would do before I dusted. So I got up real early in the morning and deliver the 'Rocky Mountain News' morning paper. And then the 'Denver Post' later. I'd deliver the Denver Post. At one point I had two paper routes. You know, the morning and the evening paper routes. Plus the sweeping job where we did on the morning, night and Saturdays and then in the summers. So I had a lot of work and a lot of enjoyment. I had real good experience at the junior high even though, again, we were broke. Speaker 1: Cole Junior High, was that primarily a black school too? Speaker 2: Cole was a school that was more mixed. We had a very good mixture of Asian. Because a lot of the Japanese had been moved to the concentration--from the concentration camp to Denver, resettling there. The--there were Chinese. There were a lot of Mexicans, a lot of Jewish kids, other white kids. So we had a fairly mixed population which got even more mixed as we went to the high school. So from a virtually all-black to a mixed and then to a more mixed is the way my school years went. Speaker 1: So this was like 1946, '47 [1947]? Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh. Story_ID: 8377 Speaker 1: Did you all live in the Five Points area of Denver [Colorado]? Speaker 2: We lived--yeah when we first went to Denver, we lived on Stout Street. 3030 Stout Street. And we lived in a house and then we lived in the housing projects for a short period of time. Right there on Stout Street next to Curtis Park in Denver. And then we moved to 26th Avenue [Denver]. And had a house there on 26th. Then I think after that to Gilpin [Street, Denver]. 2151 Gilpin. Then we moved right across the street from my junior high school [Cole Junior High, Denver]. 3304 Franklin [Street, Denver]. I walked out of the front door of my house and go in the back door of the school. That was really great and convenient. And then I guess-where'd we move? That was--I think that was--that was just before I went to college. We were in one of those locations when I went to college. Maybe Gilpin. I might have had the order wrong. Gilpin might have been the last. I think that's where I was when I was going to college [University of Denver]. Story_ID: 8378 Speaker 1: What were your favorite subject's in school? Or did you have a favorite subject? Speaker 2: I liked everything. I had a problem with arithmetic in [Cole] Junior High School [Denver, Colorado]. But I was just hungry for anything and everything. Including home economics. I took home economics mainly, because they had a pretty black teacher. In fact, all the boys signed up for home ec [economics] just because of Zelma Bell. She's still living, by the way, and a very close friend. But the only subject that I didn't do well in, until I got to [Manual Training] High School [Denver, Colorado], was math. Which I later--and later became a math teacher. Mainly because they had good math teacher's in high school. But I had a real problem with the math. Although I wanted to know math. And I remember this--I'll never forget this teacher. I still see his face and the scorn that he had for me. And he just didn't think I had it. And he gave me a D grade and said he oughta had fail me. And did everything he could to crush my spirit, you know. And I think that that may be the only time in my life where I began to wonder whether there was something that was missing in terms of my ability. But I just--I was always very confident about my ability in school. And--but the next year, Miss Grimsley, that was Mr. Miller--Miss Grimsley, a little lady about seventy pounds, you know. But a stern disciplinarian and very organized teacher. And she took the position that there would be no prisoners. You would learn geometry. And so I learned the methodology from her. And did a really good job in geometry. And after that I had no problem with mathematics. Mathematics I guess would be my favorite. Speaker 1: Okay. So it end up becoming your favorite subject unclear)? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It was before I met Mr. Miller, you know. But, he was teaching me algebra and I couldn't for some reason it just wasn't coming, you know. And--but later on I was able to do quite well with it. Story_ID: 8379 Speaker 1: What about high school? Speaker 2: In high school as far as favorite subject? Or--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) (unclear). Speaker 2: What is the high-in general? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: High school, there were--at the time that I went to high school there were five high schools in Denver [Colorado]. They were divided North, East, South, West and Manual Training High School [Denver, Colorado]. Guess what school I sent to. All the black kids, for the most part went to Manual Training High School. Because it was situated in the middle of the ghetto and that was their statement of expectation for us. That we would work with our hands and not with our heads. However, we had faculty at that school that were really--some of them, just superb. You know. I had an English teacher, Miss Lenderman, who was determined that, you know, "You're going to college. You're gonna do well. But you gotta learn how to communicate." Miss Grimsley was my math teacher. Same thing. Mr. Cruder was my first, let's see was he--first black high school teacher. I believe he was--Miss Bell was my first black teacher in [Cole] Junior High [Denver, Colorado]. All white faculty and then Miss Bell came, the home ec [economics] teacher. Mr. Cruder was the track coach but he was also doubling as the social studies teacher. And he was my swimming coach. He couldn't swim. But Mr. Cruder was, I guess you would say a great socializer because there were--I--he was an Olympic performer. You know, high jump, and tall. He must have been 6 [feet], 5 [inches] or something like that. He was a giant to us. But he had a love for the kids that was just extraordinary. And from that time until his later years, you know, we were--you know, we were Mr. Cruder's boys. So I just could never remember feeling more proud than when he walked into that school. He was the biggest thing in the school and he had the kind of personality and love for the kids that mattered a lot. So I didn't have a bad experience with my other teachers, but I had a great experience when he came. Speaker 1: This is at Manual Training High School? Speaker 2: Manual Training High School. I took wood shop. I took plastics. I took medal shop. I took--trying to think what else. Didn't take auto shop. But they had all these shops. So it was kind of the Booker T. [Washington], you know, industrial education philosophy. And so we had college prep but that was only--supposedly for a few kids. But I know very few kids that took those shops and went into anything, any kind of work that resemble, what they were being trained to do. And that same high school, you had [George] 'Ed' Riddick with me, who later became a speechwriter for Jesse Jackson. You had Glen Harris who became a psychiatrist. You had--you would have had Ed--no Ed Riddick didn't go there. He went to East [High School, Denver, Colorado]. He went to my junior high. But if you go back and find out what happened to the people that went to that high school, they were head people not hand people, you know. So obviously the city made a huge mistake in how they assessed us. And happily the faculty, so of them, you know, they were in our corner and they pushed us to do what we had to do. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me what kinds of activity were you involved in, in high school? Any clubs or--? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was in the band and I ran track for a short while. And I was on the swimming team. And I had to follow that pattern, because for athletics, at least, I was a sweeper boy. So I couldn't--I wanted to play football but I couldn't, because of when I had to work. And I wanted to play basketball. I was no good at basketball. But I think I could've done well at football. So I never got to do that. I was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and we had a drill team that was--won honors and national performances. We went to [Washington] D.C., New York and drilled in the Pentagon. We did all kinds of things. Because of the ROTC, we had a sergeant who got us in the [U.S.] National Guard. So we got free flights to be able to go and do these things in different places. I'm trying to think. I did--There were some other things that I--oh I was the head boy--you know, I was in student politics on student council. And we had a head boy and a head girl as co-student body presidents. Story_ID: 8380 Speaker 1: When you on the verge of graduation from [Manual Training] High School [Denver, Colorado], did you--what were your plans? Were you going to--you knew where you were gonna go to college? Speaker 2: No. I guess my whole life has been serendipity. I'm not--I wish I could say that I saw it all in a vision. I wanted to--when people would ask me what I wanted to do, I'd say, architecture. I didn't know what architecture was. But it just seem like it would be an answer and then people stop asking you questions. But I had entertained that partly. I thought medicine, you know. I was--think I was gettin' some family encouragement to do that. And so when I finally did graduate and went to the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado], that was, because that was the only school that I really had a realistic chance to go to. I didn't look at thousands of schools and decided I'll pick that one. You know. But it was a matter of money, you know. That--I had one lady who saw I had pretty good grades so she made it her project to try to get me a scholarship. I got me a Methodist scholarship for a small amount. But for a private school it wouldn't do. So she finally went to the Joe E. Miller Foundation and she said, "You've never given a black kid a scholarship and this is a young man who is capable of doing quite well." So she persuaded them to give me a scholarship, four year scholarship. Story_ID: 8381 Speaker 1: Well tell me about the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado]? Speaker 2: I got--finally got this four year scholarship from the [Joe E.] Miller Foundation which made it possible for me to go. And the first year I lived at home. And the University of Denver was called 'Tramway Tech' at the time because most of the students took the tramway to get there. The rail--you know, the city railroad. Speaker 1: It's tramway. Speaker 2: Yeah. So that worked out. And I was about seven miles so that in emergencies I actually walked it, you know, from my house to the university on the other side of town. And so I enrolled in '51 [1951] and decided finally to major in psychology rather than architecture or medicine. Speaker 1: Now why did you choose psychology? Speaker 2: I wanted to do service and I wanted to do healing. But for some reason my image of medicine it just--You know, I didn't wanna be cuttin' on people and doing things like that which is kinda foolish because--as I look back, you know. Speaker 1: [Tape interruption] Speaker 2: ...you through college, I guess. Speaker 1: Yeah. Right. Okay. Speaker 2: We'll have to try to schedule again and--. Speaker 1: Okay, whatever, right. Speaker 2: Alright. Now we were talking about Tramway Tech. Speaker 1: Yeah. Tramway Tech. And I picked psychology, because I thought it was something that would allow me to get into some kind of healing and service which I knew in general I wanted to do but I still didn't know for sure what I wanted to do. But I knew I didn't wanna teach. That was the one thing I knew I didn't wanna do because my image of teaching was a lot of it was inside. I like to be outside. A lot of it ties you down and I liked to be free and a whole bunch of other stuff like that. But eventually I decided to minor in education, just in case. And so I did get a credential as a minor in education. A major in psychology and a minor in mathematics. So that I would have something to teach. And a in minor in history. Story_ID: 8382 Speaker 1: I was very active in school. I worked. I was a member of the band. I--. Speaker 2: What did you play in the band? Speaker 1: I had played trombone. And I--I had played trombone since Marlin [Texas] and I learned how to play it in church and so I played all the way through the--junior high and senior high. And so I got in the band. Played trombone and I also played percussions in symphony orchestra. 'Cause we play--we had a marching band during the fall and then the rest of the year would be the symphony and I played timpani and some other percussion, although I didn't know anything about how to play it, but (laughing) my friend convinced me, "Hell man you can do anything." You know, he said, "Don't let anybody tell you, you can't do this, that and other." So I tried it and--I don't think the band director ever knew that I had never had any percussion training at all. Couldn't read percussion music (laughing). Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah (laughing). Oh I would fake it, you know. We had the symbols and you'd do the drum roll and all that. It was a lot of fun. I was active in student government. I was in a lot of clubs, you know. Minimally for a small part-time in Students for Democratic Society. I was in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association]. I was--there were several other things. I can't remember half of them now. They had a slogan saying, "He's the--." In the yearbook I think. "He's the--you name it, he's in it," But there were so many fun things to do. I was not in a fraternity during the undergraduate years although I did pledge. But I found that I didn't wanna go through that process. I had been through the high school letter club, pledging process. They had a Letterman's Club. And it was so brutal and I endured it, but I was ashamed of myself for enduring it. Because I should have stood up and said, "This is--You know, this is the worst thing on earth." I mean I can't tell you how bad people were really hurt badly and broken bones, all kinds of things that happen on that thing. And then, of course, at the end you're suppose to stand up and say, I passed it. So I decided I would not go through that in any kind of initiation again and if it appeared, then I would get out, which I did. I got out of the fraternity that I had pledged. Because it looked like it was going that way. And then later I joined a fraternity after college. So I was very active. Story_ID: 8383 Speaker 1: Had pretty good grades in undergraduate school [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. Not great. But, I had professors that I bonded with that became important to me later in graduate school [University of Denver]. Speaker 2: Now who are-were some of them and did they (unclear)? Speaker 1: The--one of the key people for me was a guy named Phil Purdue. Who was a teacher educator. And he just had a personal liking for me. And I didn't remember him as being a great teacher but I guess he was for--not so much for what was taught in class, but the other things. He was the one who taught me how important it was to be in professional organizations. He said that, "You will never function effectively in education unless you participate deeply in professional organizations." So he and his wife became very close friends. His son became one of my first students when I taught both in student teaching and when I taught for my first year as a teacher in high school--South High School in Denver. His--so he was very important to me. Bernard Spilka, who was a psychologist was important in kind of a role model way. He took his class--our class to his house one time. And all I saw was books for days. And he knew what was in everyone of them. And I used to sit in his class and just wait for him to drop book titles and then I would immediately go over to the university and get those titles. You know, so I became very informed in certain areas of psychology in particular. Largely, because of his model and his teaching, you know. And I still regard him as one of the really great inspirations for me. And then the third was Frances Brush who probably more than any other did everything he could to facilitate my growth and also was a model for me. He was a philosophy professor. And later in graduate school, because of the work that I'd done in trying to understand what he was doing in philosophy, he remembered me and invited me to be one of the teachers in the honors program in philosophy for the university. And it was three years of pure heaven. You know, as far as working with him and understanding his philosophy and working with these high performing students and the challenges of having to do the reading and do the thinking and all of that, that went with that made it--made him one of the really important people. So that would be Spilka, Purdue and Frances Brush that were probably the central people in my academic career through graduate school. Story_ID: 8384 Speaker 1: In terms of just your political thinking and your--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. Speaker 1: philosophy, who were the--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I would say that's my family more than any professor. There was one professor named Charles Merifield, who had some--who was a philosopher and kinda political scientist. And I got some ideas from him. But my sense of justice, my sense of strategy, all of that is largely my father's [Asa Grant Hilliard, II] family. My mother [Lois O. Williams] wasn't really politically involved and still isn't. She's very spiritually involved, but not political at all. But my dad and my uncles and especially the one that didn't go to school, I would rank them in that order. You know. Sid first and then my father and then my other uncle Robie. They were always trying to figure out how to change the structure in the system and they were quite successful in a lot of the things that they did. And I still use the thinking that they provided. Story_ID: 8385 Speaker 1: Now did you go right from undergraduate school to graduate school, or did you, did you serve--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No. I went to teach for three months in Denver [Colorado] at Baker Junior High School. I went to the [U.S.] Army, because I'd been in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] so I was commissioned. And then I came down here to Fort Benning [Georgia] and trained. And then I went to Fort Knox [Kentucky] and gyroed over to Germany for eighteen months. So I had an eighteen months stint. I got out six months early because it enabled me to start the school year without having to come in, in the middle of the year. and so I came back to my job in Denver and earned tenure by teaching the remainder of the three years necessary. And it's at that point that I went back to graduate school. Speaker 1: Now you went back to graduate school at the University of Denver? Speaker 2: At the University of Denver. Philip Purdue, the same professor. He called me one day and he said, "Asa, you know, we have a National Defense Education Act Fellowship." "What's that?" And he said, "What they do is to find people who will make good teacher educators. So since you're a good teacher, we believe that you would be ideal, because of your pragmatic knowledge to come in and get the theoretical and blah, blah, blah." And I said, "Well I don't wanna do that." You know, I loved high school. I was in hog heaven in high school as a teacher. I couldn't wait to get to school in the mornings. And I loved my students and everything. And I said, "I don't wanna do that. I wanna do the high schools 'cause I love it." And he said, "Well that's the kind of people we need in teacher education." So finally he twisted my arm and convinced me to apply and I earned the fellowship. I got it. And that changed my life because it took me out of one thing that I loved and showed me that I could like something else and I've never regretted, you know, that decision. But then I did get the--I got the fellowship to come back to school. Went through with a cohort of seven guys. Seven--and one woman, six guys and one woman. And I taught in the honors program for those for same three years that I was working on my degree. I was the resident hall counselor. So I worked and got my room and board for free while I got a stipend and was also paid to teach these classes. And plus I was still working as a bartender and a waiter (laughs). And at one point, I was teaching three classes in my last year of graduate work and taking three classes and writing my thesis, all at the same time. And getting ready to move to California. Speaker 1: And working (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. That was the worst--I know I can do anything after that year. Yeah. Story_ID: 8386 Speaker 1: You moved to California--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In 1963. Yeah. There was a--I guess I should have mentioned Dan Fetter, who was the dean of students [at University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] while I was in student activities. He took a liking to me. And he told me when he left, he said, "Asa I don't want you to get stuck in some, you know, off-beat, you know, place that really doesn't give you a challenge." He said, "So I'm currently president of the American Personnel and Guidance Association. And I'm getting ready to go to San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California]. Keep in touch with me and I'll help you get placed when you get out if you need any help." So he did. You know, I called him. You know, I remembered that when I graduated [University of Denver]. I had gotten one interview to go to Alcorn College [sic, Alcorn State University] in [Lorman] Mississippi. And they offered me the job at a very attractive salary. But that was also the ceiling. I went to Bradley University in Peoria, Illinois for an interview. I went to Iowa State [University, Ames, Iowa] for an interview. Those three schools offered me an interview and my wife [Patsy Jo Hilliard] didn't wanna go to either one of them. So I turned all three down and made everybody angry because I was the only one of the seven who had even been offered interviews at the time. You know, and I'd been offered several and offered jobs as well as the interview. So I called Fetter. I said, "Look I--you know, they're really mad at me at the university. They won't help me get jobs anymore, 'cause I keep turning them down." I said, "But where I really wanna go to work is San Francisco State." He said, "You do?" He said, "Yeah." He said, "Well I'm at San Francisco State." He was dean there. And so what he did was arrange for me to interview by phone 'cause I had no money to go out there and I was the only faculty member that they'd ever hired without a physical on-site interview. So I was hired at San Francisco State without ever having seen anybody on the strength of his recommendation. So he was a very key person in my life. Story_ID: 8387 Speaker 1: During the late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s] the Civil Rights Movements is--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --picking up and things like that? Your cousin was even involved in a case around a law school in--, Speaker 2: Mm-hm. Speaker 1: --the University of Texas, I think. Or was it--? Speaker 2: I'm not--Which one? Speaker 1: Jake (unclear). Speaker 2: Oh Jake? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Right, right, right, right. I can't remember which one it was. But I don't remember all the issues in that particular incident. But yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Board of Education. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, right. A whole lot of desegregation activity. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Right. Yeah. Speaker 1: So how-was anything going on in Denver around desegregation (unclear)? Speaker 2: Denver [Colorado] was very mild and people were afraid. They didn't do much, you know. When [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] came to Denver when people didn't--you know, people sitting on their porches talking, "You know don't bring all that mess around here. We got it good. You know, you tryin' to bring those Southern problems up North." You know, and all. Anyway we had it worse than they did in Atlanta [Georgia]. You know. But they didn't--I mean that was one of their prejudices--that they didn't have a problem. And so it was very hard for him to get an audience in Denver. But the problems were there. You know, like when my wife [Patsy Jo Hilliard] and I got married, we stopped at about four motels trying to get in on the way up in the mountains. And they all rejected us, because we were black. We--there were swimming pools that were still segregated. We couldn't swim at the amusement parks, for example. Elitch [Gardens] and Lakeside [Amusement Park]. You couldn't swim there. You could watch through the--that was the same as in Texas. There were restaurants, lots of restaurants where you couldn't eat in Denver. But it was invisible segregation. You know, it wasn't very open and blatant. Housing, you know, I remember the--neighborhood by neighborhood that opened up in housing. And they were leap-frogging. You know, look they broke York Street. Now Colorado Boulevard. You know, so it was like the world series or something in housing. So it was a problem. But I don't think Denver people responded very effectively to it. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you involved in any of that activity? Speaker 2: Yeah. I was involved mainly as a student. And we were trying to desegregate everything there was to desegregate. We ran for political offices, and won. Had coalitions to do that. I attacked the fraternity discrimination system. You know, and we had mainly editorials going back and forth in the student newspaper on that. We didn't have sit-ins or anything like that. But anything that was equity oriented around the university, I was involved in it. Yeah, it wasn't as dramatic as the lunch counters. But it was interesting. Yeah. Story_ID: 8388 Speaker 1: Now in '63 [1963] you were at San Francisco State [College, later San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]? Speaker 2: I went to San Francisco State. I graduated in '63 and I joined the faculty there in the department of secondary education. And I served in that department for one year before leaving for Africa. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how did that come about? Well how did you like San Francisco? You know--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I loved San Francisco. Yeah. It was great and my brother came out, you know. So we were very close. The--San Francisco State was--I was, you know, it was getting ready for that upheaval. You could feel it. You know, and that was, I think the year that [President John F.] Kennedy was assassinated. And so that kinda jump-started some things. And there was little community organizations. And always a linkage between the students--especially black students and the black community. And so when I left for Liberia for six years, I would come back every year and I could see this bubbling coming to a head. And we had the student political organizations--the Black Student Union. Danny Glover was there then. He claims he's--that I'm his mentor. And I accept that although we never--I never really have had Danny in class but I did know him on campus. And he was just as awesome then as he is now, you know. So that whole thing was going. So I missed the peaking of it. Because I was oversees. That's the only reason, probably that I became a department chairman. Because when I got back, [Dr. Samuel Ichiye] Hayakawa [Acting President of SFSU] had pulled the plug on [Dr.] Nathan Hare [Acting Chair of the Black Studies department] trying to make a speech arguing for black studies and everything like that. So they were just dying down. So I was the only member of the faculty and the department that hadn't been there physically during the point where people had to take sides. So I wasn't labeled yet. And so they--everybody kinda rallied around and made me the chairman and then later the dean for the same reason. You know, I was chairman a year and a half and then I became dean. And I was dean for eight years. But I think in both cases had to do with the fact that I hadn't been there when the faculty got polarized. Story_ID: 8389 Speaker 1: Now you went to the Peace Corps in '64 [1964]? Speaker 2: Right. We had fifty--we had four hundred about people who were training at San Francisco State [University, San Francisco, California] for Peace Corps. And so they needed to send two faculty members to do teacher education of the--'cause that was a teaching project in Liberia. So I was one of the two faculty members that went over to do in-service training for two years with the Peace Corps. Speaker 1: Okay. Liberia then--the president was--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The president was [William] Tubman. Speaker 1: Tubman. Speaker 2: And later followed by [William] Tolbert [Jr.]. It was probably the smartest diplomacy core--diplomatic core on the continent. It was--I guess Liberia and Ethiopia had been the two that stood out as the semi-independent states at the time. It had a lot of West Indians who had gone back. People refer to as American-Liberian, because they were--some Americans had gone back. But there were more West Indians than Americas. And a lot of them had intermarried with the local population. So they were rejoining that population. And you had a big class system--which got interpreted as a indigenous versus hemispheric Africans. But it really was more wealth versus poverty. And so I was there during those years. Which were also the years following Ghana's independence. Nigeria's independence. So that sweep of a sense of coming out and being independent that caught up everybody on the continent, including Liberia. Those were the high life years, I like to call them. And it was high life, literally. Parties and everything and not enough development. Yeah. Speaker 1: Are there any stories in Liberia that stand out that you wanna--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh my God. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. I was there for six years. See I did the first two years as a Peace Corps consultant. My job was to go around to these four hundred teachers that they had in the country and help them with whatever. Well, that's impossible. They're in eighty towns. Some of them you have to go in four-wheel drive and some you can't even get in by vehicle, by auto. You have to be flown in and dropped by plane. But it gave me a chance to really size up was going on in Liberia. So I enjoyed that. When I changed, I changed to the AID [United States Agency for International Development] job of building a school system in the capital city [Monrovia, Liberia]. So that was a different type of job. And I became a school psychologist and later the superintendent of schools and head of the advisory team. So that got me into all kinds--I mean you would have image all the different kinds of experiences that came out. Travel, consulting to the national government on education matters, the--creating a curriculum--creating an African curriculum. They didn't have a African curriculum in an African country. But we had--we got the money from a friend of mine who is now head of the Association of Colleges for Teacher Education. He was in the AID Program. So I went to him one time and said, "I need twenty grand." And he said, "For what?" And I said, "To get a bus and take these teachers around the country. So they can collect data for students' curriculum." And he liked the idea. And he said, "Well okay you give me a proposal by Monday." He gave me a decision on Friday. I got the money. He said, "You give me a proposal by Monday." So I got the proposal in after I got the grant. And we took a bus and went to eighty towns videotaping, audio taping, collecting stories, artifacts, child rearing practices, medical practices and we put all of that into a document that became the basis for culturally relevant curriculum for the high schools which then spilled over into the university 'cause they took our stuff and began to u-teach it in the university [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]. (Pause) Yeah. I--we saw heads of state from everywhere. There were parties all the time. There were opportunities to understand almost any layer of Liberian society. You know. We were in the--what I think of as the enviable position. You know, one night I might be at the president of Ethiopia or somebody's then and so they'd send invitation out to your house by limo and you're up in tuxedos and all of that. The next night I'm in a bar somewhere out in bush with some guys who were, you know, hunters, you know. So it was easy for us as Americans to have a cross-section of social class. Easier than for some Liberians who are fixed in their social status. Yeah. So I learned a lot from Liberia. Speaker 1: In those days, Liberia was considered the most stable of the countries--, Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right. Speaker 1: --in a lot of ways. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, it was. Speaker 1: You could imagine the upheaval that was happening? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's--Liberia had its problems, because of the class structure. And there were, you know, especially people from the rural areas had a hard time rising in hierarchy. But aside from that, it was literally the glory days for Liberia. And it--once the coups came, then what happened was Liberia became literally more foreign run than it had been before. You had these corporations. The oil palm and the oil companies and rubber plantation owners and they had a heavy hand in Liberian politics. But after the coup, they had it all. And so now what you got is all these foreign powers manipulating the people in Liberia. It's ugly. It's really ugly. Story_ID: 672673 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today wi- for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: I'm Asa Hilliard [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III]. Asa, A-S-A, G, initial, H-I-L-L-I-A-R-D. Also, Baffour, B-A-F-F-O-U-R, Amankwatia, A-M-A--M-A-N-K-W-A-T-I-A, II. Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story behind the second part of your name? Speaker 2: I have an identification with Mankranso, which is a city near Kumasi in Ghana. And I have responsibilities as the development chief there, to assist in both education and some parts of the economic infrastructure there. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: That's a good question (laughter). The 20th, okay. Today is the 20th of June, nine- 2005. Speaker 1: Okay. And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're located near the King Center [Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change] in Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: Okay. And this is a continuation of an interview we started I believe--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --two years ago, I believe. Speaker 2: It's a while back. Speaker 1: Two thousand three [2003], I think. Speaker 2: Could be, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 672674 Speaker 1: I believe we left off with you in high school. If not, we're going to start there anyway (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: And what, what was the high school that you attended? Speaker 2: I went to a school called Manual Training High School. Today it's called Manual High School, in Denver, Colorado. Speaker 1: Okay, it's in Denver high s- in Denver, Colorado? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Might add that there, at the time there were five high schools: North [North High School, Denver, Colorado], South [South High School, Denver, Colorado], East [East High School, Denver, Colorado], West [West High School, Denver, Colorado], and Manual. So, the black community, that's where Manual Training High School was located. So, you could tell what was expected of the children by the name of the school. Speaker 1: Right. That seem- that seems to be a tradition in a lot of the United States, it sends black people to industrial schools and training schools, manual schools, and that sort of thing. The intent was not to make you an academician, right (unclear)? Speaker 2: Right. That whole industrial education--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Hold on one second. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Yeah, the whole industrial education effort came out of think tanks in Lake Mohonk in New York, and also in Capon Springs in West Virginia. And the planters and industrialists got together to try to figure out what kind of schooling, if any, or education if any, that the Africans would get. And they decided that the most suitable form that would make them useful, but not a threat, was some form of vocational educational, but no liberal arts education. Speaker 2: Okay. Now as an educator yourself, and as a historian of education, tell us more about the Mohonk conferences [Lake Mohonk Conference on International Arbitration]. Mohonk, right? M-O--M-O-H-O-N-K--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, M-O-H-O-N-K, right. That's a retreat in--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: In New York. Speaker 1: --near a lake called Lake Mohonk. And so, the Mohonk conferences were held, and I guess it seemed as if there were probably about a couple hundred people that were invited, and most of them attended. And they were politicians--high level politicians, including presidents, ex-presidents, business executives, and owners of plantations and things like that, missionaries, and, a fairly good representation of the elite. And there were two sets of them. Brief--I think there were two years, or two or three years at Lake Mohonk, and then they moved to Capon Springs in West Virginia for another ten or twelve years. So that there was, you know, a fairly substantial num- amount of time invested in the design. I call it the design of miseducation. Speaker 2: Now, this is in the 1890s, turn of the century? Speaker 1: Eighteen nineties [1890s] up to the early 1900s, right. Speaker 2: Okay. And I know one of the presidents convened it, I mean-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --one of the conferences--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right. Right. Speaker 2: --I've seen some of the--there was a conference on the Negro question [Lake Mohonk Conferences on the Negro Question]. Speaker 1: Right, right, um-hm. Speaker 2: Yeah, what to do with the Negro. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Okay. So, the idea was to give us industrial education? Speaker 1: Right, right. And so out of that, you know, at the higher education level you got Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal School and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], which was the offshoot of Hampton [Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia]. Hampton was the first in the model with Samuel Chapman Armstrong, who was an ex-general who was the president. And Booker Washington [Booker T. Washington] was his student, and then went to Hamp- to Tuskegee to have copy of Hampton in Tuskegee. And so, the, the high schools with the industrial focus then are an offshoot of what was to be feeder schools into some of these industrial colleges. Speaker 2: Okay. So when you were in high school--I mean, when you were getting ready to start school, was there a dialogue about this in your family? Or did you have any awareness of this at that time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, yes, yeah, no, we knew (laughter). Remember, now I, I was--until sixth grade [Whittier Elementary School; Whittier ECE-8 School, Denver, Colorado], I was educated in Texas. And my father [Asa Hilliard, II] was a high school principal, and we had a long tradition of educators in our family. So da- you know, my dad would know what that meant, made the observations. And, but that was an issue of economic necessity, and so even though we were aware of it, there wasn't a lot that we could do about it at that time. Story_ID: 672675 Speaker 1: Dr. Cook was just here about an hour ago, you know, Dr. Samuel DuBois Cook [HistoryMaker Samuel DuBois Cook]. And he was talking about attempts in the black community where he was raised to form some private schools and tutoring to try to get, you know, black students up to speed on math and-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --other subjects that wouldn't be covered in an industrial or manual school--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Were there any attempts like that in Denver [Colorado]? Speaker 2: Not really that I was aware of at the time I was going through school. Fortunately what we had though was, at Manual High School [Manual Training High School; Manual High School, Denver, Colorado], we had teachers who didn't agree with the direction of the school. And I happened to have two very good ones that I remember very well to this day--one in English, and one in mathematics. And they said, "Well, we know what the normal curriculum is, but we're going to, you know, we see you going on to higher education." So, my English teacher insisted on college preparatory English, and she was bulldog determined that we would do good work there. And the mathematics teacher--my English teacher was named Mrs. Linderman [ph.]. And my math teacher was Mrs. Grimsley [ph.], and she had the same idea that, you know, you were going to not only know, but love geometry by the time she finished with you. So, so they, they just ignored the intent of the school, and kept going. Story_ID: 672676 Speaker 1: What was Denver [Colorado] like for you as a teenager, I mean, having been raised in Texas, was--? Speaker 2: It was very different than Texas, of course. The color line was drawn in the sand; it was quite clear and fast. And Denver, in its own mind, the Africans in the Denver population thought that they were in heaven compared to Texas. So, they would make fun of us, you know, coming from the Big Foot country. And they'd say, "Down there in the South where they treat you badly," and all of that. But in fact, Denver was segregated too, just less visible. And there were selected numbers of places. For example, the hotels were a problem, and some restaurants. And the amusement park [Lakeside Amusement Park, Denver, Colorado], we could only go to the amusement park on certain, at certain times; and then we couldn't swim in the swimming pool at the amusement park. We could ride on the rides, but couldn't swim in the pool. So at one level, it appeared to be integrated. For example, I went to school with all kinds of kids. We had Japanese kids, Mexican children, white children, and black children, all in the same school. But they tended to be--if they were white, poor white children--the Japanese who were there were the ones that were sent from the concentration camps, they were--to escape from California coast, they moved some of them out into Colorado. Speaker 1: Now, what year was it that you started high school [Manual Training High School; Manual High School, Denver, Colorado]? Speaker 2: I went to high school and graduated in 1951. So started--(simultaneous-- Speaker 1: Okay. So you were--this was nineteen forty--nineteen forty--not '7 [1947]-- Speaker 2: Forty-nine [1949], '50 [1950], '51 [1951]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Forty-nine [1949]--okay. Speaker 2: Forty-eight [1948] actually, in the fall--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 1948, okay. So, yeah, so you had Japanese from the concentration camps actually going to school (unclear)? Speaker 2: Well, they were the ones that--some went to the concentration camps, others were relocated. And so, they were part of the same family. Some of them had family members that were actually in the concentration camps, told us that they were, you know. And then we had Chinese, you know. So, it was quite a mixture. The largest number in my high school were African, and some middle income people. You know, 'cause the African community itself was all packed in. So, you'd have children of doctors, children of janitors all going to the same school. But there was a second choice for some of us that went to East High School [Denver, Colorado], which was an upper, upper middle class high school. So, there were a few that went there, but not too many. Speaker 1: Okay. And most of the blacks lived in Five Point [sic.]? Is that true? Speaker 2: They lived in that area. It was just, you know, fifteen, twenty blocks around Five Points [Denver, Colorado], going out toward the airport [Stapleton Airport; Stapleton International Airport, Denver, Colorado]. And that's where the largest segment of the black population was. Story_ID: 672677 Speaker 1: Now, how would you describe yourself as a high school student? What were you interested in, and what kind of student were you? Speaker 2: I was a good student. Behaviorally and academically, I did well. I was active, very active in student activities and student government, and I was a student body president by the time I was in the senior--they called it the head boy and head girl, they had one of each. We were very active in things like the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America]. We had YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], and so there was a strong community sense in Denver [Colorado] at that time. But didn't have much to do workwise, but--because at that time, once my family was divorced, and that was why my mother [Lois Lowe Williams] had followed my grandparents to Denver. And then, we were initially on welfare. And in fact, for most of my time in Denver up through high school [Manual Training High School; Manual High School, Denver, Colorado], we were on welfare. And because of that, we had first priority on certain types of jobs, like with the school. I was a school janitor in junior high [Whittier Elementary School; Whittier ECE-8 School, Denver, Colorado] and senior high, all--for those six years. I think we had, yeah, three years of junior high and three years of senior high. So I was the school janitor all the, all that time. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is the era of WPA [Work Projects Administration] jobs and that sort of thing with (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They had those. We knew all the alphabet soup, you know, we were at the tail end of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, the YPA, too, I think the Youth Progress [Youth Progress Administration] (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah. Story_ID: 672678 Speaker 1: When you were in school, was there, did you have any black history in school at all, in school? Speaker 2: No, (laughter) none, you know. We had, as I recall, we had 'Up from Slavery' [Booker T. Washington], that was in the library. And we appeared in the curriculum at the time that they talked about slavery, but not before, and not after, for that matter. You know, so there was literally no, no black history at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But was your family aware of-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --of black history? Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah. Remember, now Texas, black history was a big thing. If not in the schools, they'd do it outside the school. Churches would do it, and all of that. But again, Denver [Colorado], the general community tended not to be concerned about that a lot. And there were some that did. For example, I had a teacher who was the dance teacher, and she taught African dance. So, I was a member of an African dance ensemble. Now, if you can imagine that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now this is, yeah, this is--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --in the '40s [1940s] to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --in the '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: They wouldn't even call themselves black in the '40s [1940s]; they called themselves Negro, or colored, or something. So, to call yourself African at that time, that was, that was a real stretch. And, but our teacher, she was a ballerina, she had danced for the queen of England [Elizabeth II] and so forth. But she'd also studied African dance. Speaker 1: Now, what was her name? Speaker 2: Ms. Smith, Ernestine Smith. And her son and I were drummers. And my sister [Ruth Hilliard Blevins] was one of the dancers, African dancers. And my current partner, my wife [HistoryMaker Patsy Jo Hilliard], is the, was one of the dancers at that time. But she was too young for me to pay attention to her. She was four years younger, so I don't want to (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's a big difference when you're-- Speaker 2: I was a big baby at that time. So we had, and we performed all over the city, and it was a big, big thing. We were just as proud as we could be. And we did our version the best that we understood of what an African dance was. So when I think back now, it wasn't as great as we thought it was. But we, we'd bring the house down. We were the most popular act at the, what was called the Show Wagon in the summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, was there any particular style? I mean were you doing Ghanaian dance, or Yoruba, or--? Speaker 2: Well, we didn't know at the time. And we had drumbeats that we thought were African and everything. And I think that Ms. Smith probably knew, but we didn't get that part discussed. So, and I happened, I can recall some of the beats, and I--they're fairly common in West Africa, but. Speaker 1: Well, that is something. You know, you don't run across that that much, you know that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --African dance in the '40s [1940s], that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I couldn't wait to go to Africa. I couldn't wait to--anything about Africa I had a real hunger for at that time. And there wasn't much, and so you'd have to pick, pick out little bits and pieces from 'Tarzan' movies. And I remember when the 'King Solomon's Mine' [sic. 'King Solomon's Mines'] first came out. It was either in high school [Manual Training High School; Manual High School, Denver, Colorado] or college [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. And that was a fascinating film for me, because outside of all of the racist stuff that was in it, they had authentic dancing in 'King Solomon's Mine.' And they had the Tutsis and others, and that was my first-- Speaker 1: Now, is that the one--I know there was a version with Paul Robeson from the '30s [1930s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a different one. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He wasn't in, in the mine, yeah. Speaker 1: I don't think there was that, a lot of cultural--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There were some dances in there. There were some--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --looked like some Zulus, or some people from--you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, I have a copy of that film in my own library, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. And then the one with Stewart, Stewart Granger. Is that who it is, Stewart Granger? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And there were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And they had the Watusis in it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: I think that one was even called 'Watusi,' I think, even though it was-- Speaker 2: It might have been-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --I don't recall the title of it. Speaker 1: But it was the same, you know, movie basically. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: But the Watusis did a beautiful dance in that, I remember--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Well, I'll never forget the dances that were in 'King Solomon's Mine,' even now. And so I waited 'til I got the opportunity to go to Africa and see many, of course, many other forms of dance. Story_ID: 672679 Speaker 1: Okay. So in high school [Manual Training High School; Manual High School, Denver, Colorado] you got excited about Africa? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Yeah, even in junior high [Whittier Elementary School; Whittier ECE-8 School, Denver, Colorado], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, well this is unusual, 'cause (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --nobody's excited about Africa in those days--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: People are watching 'Tarzan'--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Embarrassed by it. Speaker 1: Embarrassed by it, don't want to be associated with it. If you call somebody black in school, you get mad--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you want to fight, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, definitely--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And the blacker you are, the more they want to fight. Speaker 2: Right. You definitely wouldn't call anybody African, unless you wanted to fight, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So that was a--that was kind of--so in some ways you were kind of--though you were, became the student body president, you were kind of an oddball in some ways, I guess? Speaker 2: Um-hm, in a number of ways. Because I had a whole set of values that were really Texas values, or southern values, and southern African values really. Because we had very, very, strong and close family relationship, very strong, what you would now call a civil rights orientation. My father [Asa Hilliard, II] and uncles would be called race men and race women, and my aunts the same thing. So they were, they talked about social justice all the time. And they were scheming and conniving, and doing whatever they could do to break the system down, and challenging it in all kinds of ways. Speaker 1: So when you were in high school, did you get involved in any of the efforts to--social justice efforts in Denver [Colorado]? Speaker 2: We did. We were trying to get curriculum in high school; that was one. I had a friend who later worked for Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], actually wrote speeches for Jesse Jackson--Ed Riddick, Reverend Ed Riddick [George "Ed" Riddick]. And Ed Riddick was the real radical who scared us all. Because at the time, he was leaning more in the Marxist direction, and was on the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] list. But he would, he was a brilliant, you know, genius of a guy. And he knew the background of virtually all the, the, what he called the Freedom Fighters at that time. And, you know, Mao Tse-tung, you know (unclear). He would know middle names of everybody--Dwight David Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower]. You know, big, barrel chested guy. And he was very articulate and very thoughtful. Speaker 1: Yeah, but he became the sec- he became the second man at Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] for a while. Speaker 2: Ed Riddick? Speaker 1: Yeah. He would--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, you knew him. Yeah, yeah, okay. Well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --he would be there in Chicago [Illinois]. He would--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was, he was-- Speaker 1: He was on the radio show ['Saturday Morning Forum']. He would introduce Jesse Jackson--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right, okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Reverend Riddick. Speaker 2: All right, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. He was-- Speaker 1: I think he's in Evanston [Illinois] now I think or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --he was in Evanston. Speaker 2: He was the first person I met when I went to school in Denver. We were both in sixth grade together, and from that point on we were partners all the way up. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what was social life like in high school? I mean, the black community kind of stayed-- Speaker 2: Very close, very close. Lots of, lots of good times; you know, house parties a lot, and school parties. There were lots of social life around the school--dances. And we used the school for dances, but also the Y [Young Men's Christian Association; YMCA], churches. There were plenty of things to do. Story_ID: 672680 Speaker 1: Now, when you were a senior and thinking about going to college, I mean what did, what were your, your options, you know? Speaker 2: Well, I knew I wanted to go to college. Again, we didn't have money. And so, there was a little lady in my church. I was in a Methodist church at the time, Scott Methodist Church [Scott United Methodist Church, Denver, Colorado]. And a little lady named Miss Wolfott [ph.] who watched over the kids, and she always thought that I ought to go to college and do some things. And of course, my family was pushing from the, both the Colorado and the Texas side. So, it wasn't a big job to convince me I needed to go, but I didn't know how I was going to go. So, she went around personally and solicited a scholarship for me. And the only scholarship I had when I graduated was a partial tuition scholarship from the Methodist church. And there weren't many options. You know, if I went to a four year institution, basically that meant Denver University [sic.], which was a private university. Because the University of Colorado [Boulder, Colorado] was way up the road, and the Colorado School of Mines [Golden, Colorado] was way up the road. So, it was the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado] that I was thinking about, but I still didn't have money. So, Mrs. Wolfott went to the, one of the people who gave scholarships. And I was able to get one of those scholarships and--that had never been given to anybody other than the Jewish kids. And so, she went and made that point. She said, "You've never given money to anyone except to white children. And so, here's a capable young man who ought to have it." That was the Joe E. Miller Foundation scholarship, that's what I got. And so, they gave me a four year full scholarship to the University of Denver, that's how I got through the University of Denver. And I worked part time, of course. Worked as a waiter at the hotel; bartender, janitor on the weekend; waiter on the trains in the summer, anything that I could do to make the rest of the money. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is like 1951 through '55 [1955]? Speaker 2: Through '55 [1955], right. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did you major in at the University of Denver? Speaker 2: Majored in psychology at the University of Denver. Minored in history, minored in mathematics. And I was also enrolled in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] which turned out to be very useful, beneficial to me, because you got your commission at the end. So, I went in the [U.S.] Army as a commissioned officer at the end. Story_ID: 672681 Speaker 1: Well, any stories from the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado]? Speaker 2: Oh, lots, yeah (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell us some good ones. I mean that, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, whoa, here's a good one. There--I moved, after the first year I lived at home. But after the, on the second year, I went to the university to the campus and moved into the dormitories. And we had all the issues around where you're going to stay, and who your roommates are going to be. I had all white roommates. And there were other Africans in the dormitory, and so we had a lot of social life together on both sides. And I had pretty good roommates and all of that. But we had a problem getting haircuts, you know, 'cause I lived--our community was seven miles away, and that meant walking over there. I didn't have carfare to get over to--and we would sometimes hike over and get our hair cut. But here was this, in the student union, a barbershop. And so there's a friend of mine who lives here now, who is a big time businessman that you probably would know, Nate Goldston [HistoryMaker Nathaniel R. Goldston, III]. And he runs a catering service [Gourmet Services, Inc.] here in Atlanta [Georgia]. And Nate was on campus, and we were good friends. And so, we were trying to figure out how we were going to get our hair cut. So we did, both decided we'd integrate the barbershop, and so we talked about it a lot. We said, "Well, you know, we, he's probably going to give us a lot of trouble, but we think if he's on this campus, he ought to cut everybody's hair." So we went in, and the guy was very nice. You know, we walked in and he said, "I never cut anybody's hair who's black before. But you want your hair cut, I'll cut your hair." So, then Nate and I thought about it. Because I'm thinking, what kind of haircut am I going to get, you know (laughter). So, I said, "You never cut black people's hair before?" He said, "No." I said, "Well, cut his first." Nate had real soft, wavy hair. I figured if I liked what he did to Nate, then I might let him try mine. So, he did a good job on Nate and a fair job on mine. But, so, for most of the time, for the rest of the three years I got my hair cut in the student union. Speaker 1: So, that wasn't as big a struggle as it looked like it was going to be (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Sometimes it was. Some struggles were hard. You know, we had, on the campus we had a struggle over student organizations, you know. And so, I'd write letters in the student newspaper [University of Denver Clarion] and everything. I ran for student office and everything. Put a coalition together and we wanted to challenge some of the racist practices of the university. For example, there were, there were honor societies that you couldn't get in. You know, and eventually we broke down a lot of barriers in those areas--the Phi Delta Kappa [Phi Delta Kappa International], which was an honor society. And I can't remember the names of the others. There were places where you couldn't go, you know. And I knew--for example, if I would go out with white friends who were going to the mountains for a party--that was always something that was going to be fraught with problems. It was all right as long as you were in the car with your friends, and it might be after you got out and got into the lobby of the place where you were. But there was going to be some kind of incident that was going to happen that was going to cause a problem. It could be with the students that you were with, you know. For example, I knew that anytime I got with a white group that it wouldn't be long, especially if anybody was drinking, it wouldn't be long before they're going to sing 'Old Black Joe.' (Laughter) You know, and-- Speaker 1: That song? Speaker 2: And, "Niggers all work on the Mississippi. Niggers all work while--," so, there were songs that they would normally sing when they were by themselves, you know, for not just as a regular rule. But if it came up, everybody would sing, "In the evening by the moonlight, you could hear those darkies singing." So, it would go something like this. (Singing) "In the evening--," and they'd start singing, and everybody'd get into it. And they hadn't--but I knew that they were going to come to that, that line. And so, but they hadn't thought about it, you know, because it's just a song for them. And then all of a sudden it would go like this: (Singing) "In the evening by the moonlight," and they would be into it, "you could hear those--," and then by the time they got to the word darkie, you know, they'd go, "(mumbles) singing," (laughter) you know, because they knew that they had already trespassed, you know, so. And everybody felt bad, and then, then you had to go through all the apologies, you know. So, it would always be, you know, kind of a semi-tense situation, you know. That wasn't, you know, most of it wasn't, wasn't too bad. But we had a lot of experiences like that. Story_ID: 672682 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Any professors at the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado] that you remember that were--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --helpful to you? I mean that you really learned something from? Speaker 2: I had two or three really awesome professors who made a huge difference in my life. Now, they didn't have--I think only one or two black professors that were there. One was at the Iliff School of Theology [Denver, Colorado], and I'm not thinking of his name right now. If I did, you would remember it. But the one who was really important to me was the one that got my graduate fellowship, Phillip Perdue. And I'd been, you know, active as a student in the university, and--in student activities, as well as academically, doing quite well. So, he came to me while I was teaching in high school. Story_ID: 672683 Speaker 1: All right. Now, we were talking about some of the professors. Speaker 2: Right. The, one of the ones that really be- we became very fast friends. My--he was in teacher education, Dr. Phillip Perdue. And so, he was the one that asked me to come back and apply for a fellowship, and I told him I didn't want to come back to school; I loved teaching at that point. And so he had said, "Well, come on back anyway. And then you don't have to, you don't have to quit teaching. You can go back with your doctorate and just work in the high school," knowing, I guess, that if I got the doctorate I'd probably see other possibilities. So he was the one that made sure that that came through. And I had taught his son, and his son had been one of the real radicals. And he had gone to Africa with, I think Crossroads Africa [Operation Crossroads Africa]. And came back and wrote a paper for me saying that Africa was dark only because of American ignorance--that was the name of his paper. And so, his son was like his dad. His dad was much more low key, the son was just out and out radical, you know. And he, in fact, he married a Kenyan, young woman from Kenya, I believe it was. Speaker 1: About what year is this? Now, this is-- Speaker 2: This would have been in, that's in '55 [1955]. That's after I had graduated from the college that the son had, ha, gone into--let's see, no, let's see, yeah, '55 [1955], it would have been in '55 [1955] that I had him as a student. Speaker 1: That's pretty-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's pretty progressive--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --for those days. Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, he was very progressive, (unclear) young boy, and I guess he still is. And I think his dad is still living. He was important to me. There's a psychology professor who's very important to me, Bernard Spilka. And mainly as a role model and a great scholar, and very rigorous, very demanding. And then of course the most important of all was a philosophy professor, Francis Brush, who is I think still living; be in his nineties. And, but he had asked me to come and teach with him. I had taken a course in philosophy from him. And I was in a graduate program, and he said he wanted me to teach with him. I said, "Well, I can't, I didn't major in philosophy." And I said, "I can't do that." It was in the honor's program, too, on top of it. They had a Centennial Scholars Honors Program. And he says, "Of course you can." (Laughter) I said, "Well, I guess I've got to do a lot of reading," which I did. And I taught in that philosophy core of the honor's program. It was a colloquium for the three years that I was in the graduate program there [at the University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. And the, I just can't describe the level of support for me and also for a couple of other people that he provided in a very--you know, as if there were no issues of any kind, you know. He--that's something that he wanted to do. And you'd have to know something about the type of quality of his own teaching; you know, he's a pioneer. But one thing, he had been in a concentration camp in Japan during the war [World War II, WWII], and his parents were missionaries. So, he had suffered in that concentration camp, and I'd like to think that might had had something to do with his sense of humanity and what have you. But he was extremely important, also for helping me with the philosophy part. Later on, having that background was very beneficial to me in my own academic coursework and other subjects. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, those were the three key people. And there were--oh, no, Merrifield, too. Francis Merrifield [ph.], who was also in philosophy and was-- Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name? Speaker 2: M-E-R-R-I-F-I-E-L-D. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had taken a course from him and I'd gotten an A out of it. And, but I, he was just one of the greatest speakers and one of the greatest thinkers that I had known. And so, when I was student body president, I managed to get him to be a keynote speaker at one of our leadership retreats, and he did a presentation called current controversies in the theory of leadership. And it was exactly what I wanted. Because that's what he talked about in class, was all these different theoretical and philosophical positions, and he had really neat ways of illustrating those. And so I showed up in the second class, and he says, "What are you doing here?" He said, I said, "Well, I liked the first class, and I want, I want more." And he says, he says, "I think you ought to go get something else." And I said, "Why?" He says, "You know I only teach one class." He said, "I teach Merrifield I, Merrifield II, and Merrifield III." He said, "The names on these courses don't mean anything." (Laughter) He said, "You got what I had to give." (Laughter) He says, "So don't waste your time. Go find something out from somebody else," which I always thought was interesting, because he was correct, you know. Most people fundamentally teach the same thing in most of their courses. Story_ID: 672684 Speaker 1: So, so you were, you were a top student. I mean you're president of student body and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. Speaker 1: --you have, you know, these relationships with these professors where they, they respect you for your brain. I mean this is-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well-- Speaker 1: That's--oh, was [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding associated with Iliff--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Vincent Harding, that's who I was trying to think of, that's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Is it (pronunciation) Iliff, or Iliff? How do they pronounce that? Speaker 2: Beg your pardon--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: School of theology--is it Iliff school--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Pronunciation) Iliff School of Theology [Denver, Colorado]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Iliff, okay. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah. Speaker 1: I-L-I-F-F, right? Speaker 2: Right, yeah. While I was doing my doctorate work, he was over there as faculty member at Iliff, and. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And he went on to become head of the Institute of the Black World in Atlanta [Georgia]--here in Atlanta (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, we had a lot of respect for him. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Okay. We tried to interview him in Denver [Colorado], but he was-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --he was sick at the time, and couldn't do it. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, there was actually another person at the university [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado] who was responsible for me getting my first job at San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]. And--because I was very active in student body, the dean of students moved to San Francisco State and became the dean of faculty. I think it was the dean of arts and sciences. And he had told me before he left, he said, "Asa [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III]," he said, "if I can ever help you," and he was also I think president of the American Personnel and Guidance Association [American Counseling Association] at the time. He said, "If I can ever help you," he said, "let me know." He says, "I'll do whatever. I'll--I don't want you to get stuck in a bad place. I'd like to have you get in a good institution. And so, I'll lobby and whatever, and so forth." So when I graduated with my doctorate, I called him. I said, "Well, you know, you said you'd give me a hand." And he was, "Yeah, I know a lot of people around the country. Where do you want to work?" I said, "I want to work at San Francisco State." So, so he's, "Oh." So, so the short story is that he managed for me--because I had no money to go for interviews. So, that was the first time that they had hired anyone without seeing them, on his word. He went to the college admin [administration] and said, "Look, I've got somebody that you really ought to consider." And so, they looked at my paperwork, and they took me without an interview. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, who is he? That's-- Speaker 2: Daniel Feder [Daniel D. Feder]. Speaker 1: Daniel Feder--okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: F-E-D-E-R. Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: And when did you get your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Doctor of education, I got it in 1963. Speaker 1: All right, Ed.D. they call it, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, doctor of ed. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-three [1963]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 672685 Speaker 1: You know, the--I had, you know, those are s- you know, just outstanding, and I had a few other real good faculty helpers, you know. And, but I also had some who were pretty bad, you know (laughter). I had one who considered himself my friend, and a very good supporter. Dr., Dr. Reed [ph.] was his name. And he used to teach the genetic inferiority of black people in the, in the educational psychology class. I'm sitting right there in the class, you know, he says, "Oh, yeah," he says, "IQ tests show that black people are genetically inferior to white." And yeah, that was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So what kind of a friend--you know, there's an African proverb, bad friends are worse than enemies, or something. Speaker 1: Well, yeah, but there are people that would tell you during slavery, you know, that, "Our slaves loved us, and we loved our slaves." (Unclear) (laughter). Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Any other bad experiences at University of Denver [Denver, Colorado]? I mean-- Speaker 1: Not a lot of--I didn't have--a lot of my friends had pretty bad experiences. But I had a, for the most part, pretty positive experiences. Speaker 2: Let me ask you this. I know a lot of students wrestle with this when they go to school, especially when they're a minority in a all-white school, about what to say and when to say it when something like that is raised in a classroom--genetic inferiority of blacks or-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --or somebody says, well they, all the--they should (unclear) white--everybody (unclear) white--or you know those kind of things and-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Or, all the slaves were happy. And-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you know, you're looking at this, and-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, for me it happened so often that I would be in an argument every five minutes. You know, that there were some things that people would say that would just be off tangent or what have you. If it was egregious, I would address it immediately, you know, and just say--like with Reed, I'd just say, "I disagree," you know. And, "Well, you--you know, I'm the one that's got the evidence." And so, we have a little argument about it and things like that, and if necessary I would walk out or whatever. I didn't have to do that, but I would have. But there were a lot of things I let go, because they were so minimal and so frequent that it's, you know, you have to decide are you going to spend all your time, you know, trying to address little small slights, or are you going to get your education and do it the other way? And I decided I needed to get out of school, where I would have leverage to do what I wanted to do, which I did. Story_ID: 672686 Speaker 1: Is there anything, you know--something I wonder if there's, if there's--not something to learn in some of these negative, you know, situations. You know, when you actually talk to the person about what they're talking about, you get some clues as to what, you know, what, what they think their evidence is, and what yours might be, you know. Speaker 2: Well, I already know, for example, that in psychology, at this moment--this moment being I think about ten years ago when the survey was done, a sample of a thousand psychologists, elite psychologists--and over half of them believe in the genetic inferiority of black people, right now, relatively right now. So, you know, again, that hasn't--I don't think that's changed that much. And that's, that's the common view of many people. And there are other even worse ideas. You know, right now the, 'The Bell Curve' ['The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life'] you know, Murray [Charles Murray] and Herrnstein [Richard Herrnstein]; the book 'Culture Matters' ['Culture Matters: How Values Shape Human Progress,' Lawrence E. Harrison and Samuel P. Huntington]. And these are two people who are arguing for school reform, and they're, they're lead thinkers on what changes ought to be made for schools that have black people--schools in general, but black people in particular. And the book is called 'No Excuses' ['No Excuses: Closing the Racial Gap in Learning,' Abigail Thernstrom and Stephan Thernstrom] that's the Thernstroms, husband and wife team. They also have a book--I'm trying to think, let's see. Huntington [Samuel P. Huntington]--also at that school, these two, they two have the book, 'No Excuses.' They argue that the reason that we don't do well is not because our minds aren't good, but because our culture is bad, and so if they could just fix our culture, then we would learn more and better (laughter)--if they could be in charge of our schools, that we would be better off than if, you know, our own people were. That's basically what their argument is. Then Huntington has the argument also internationally that's true, that the culture is bad. He has the book called 'Culture Matters.' And so, here are two Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] professors today who have written books like that. And it's under the radar, because most people don't notice what they've said, even after they've read the book. That's, you, you see that--he says that the re- Huntington says that the reason African nations can't succeed is not because of racism and colonization but the re- and slavery, the reason they can't succeed is that they have bad culture. And so, until someone goes in and changes the culture, they will never be able to succeed. Speaker 1: What (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's the guy who advises President Bush [President George Walker Bush] right now. After 9/11 [September 11, 2001], that's who Bush called, you know. So, so, that was, I mean there's never been a time in my life where there hasn't been a substantial amount of that among part of the population. Speaker 1: Okay. But in '63 [1963], I mean black history was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: There was a lot of it in '63 [1963] (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, but--but there's a resurgence in black history and culture. People were trying to-- Speaker 2: In '63 [1963]? Speaker 1: Yeah, sort of. I mean-- Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --it became more--I mean old books of J.A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers] were re-read. Speaker 2: Right, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: You know, people were starting to write--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It had--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and publish more of what they're calling black history--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. But it had had no effect at the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado] at all, you know. They weren't--professors weren't talking about it, and most students weren't talking about it, you know. That, that was about the time I began to encounter some of the good material-- you know, Dr. Clarke's [John Henrik Clarke] work and Dr. Ben-Jochannan's [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan] work and so forth. But that hadn't penetrated the University of Denver. Speaker 1: Yeah, who did you first encounter in that regard, I mean, that being your field and stuff? And what did--who were the first-- Speaker 2: George James' [George G. M. James] book, I got a copy of that. I can't remember exactly when it was, but that was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Was it before you got your Ph.D.? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that was one, that was one of the eye-openers for me. And I couldn't wait--that was part of my problem. I--you know, I had a fellowship that, as I indicated, that Dr. Perdue [Phillip Perdue] had helped me get. And so I had, you know, really, you know, moved myself into my studies. And I was teaching three classes, by the time I finished my third year I was the residence hall counselor, you know, which meant that my family had moved on campus and we got free food and free residence. So--by doing that, and teaching three classes, and so I just didn't have time to pursue the, the African studies that I wanted to pursue until I graduated. So once I got out, then I went--you know, virtually all spare moments trying to follow the leads that were suggested by 'Stolen Legacy' [George G. M. James] and then a few books that I had picked up by--I'd picked up a couple of Ben-Jochannan's books. And Dr. Clarke's, I knew about him, I'd heard him talk. Speaker 1: Now, let me go back to just--so you got married while you were in-- Speaker 2: I got married [to HistoryMaker Patsy Jo Hilliard] in 1957. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: When I came back from the ar- there was a period of two years when I was out for the [U.S.] Army before I came--two years after I began my teaching. I took out two years and went to the Army. And after that, I--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Did you leave the country, or did you stay here? Speaker 2: Went to Germany. Speaker 1: Germany, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 672687 Speaker 1: So, well tell us. Now, 'Stolen Legacy' [George G. M. James] where did you encounter a copy of 'Stolen Legacy'? Where did you find it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Someone had it and let me borrow it, you know. And it was someone not at the university [University of Denver, Denver, Colorado]. It was in Denver [Colorado], I can't remember who it was right now. But it was fascinating to me, and I couldn't wait--you couldn't get a copy for yourself, you know. When I first got my first copy of 'Stolen Legacy' I got it in Harlem [New York, New York] at, I think it was Liberation Bookstore [New York, New York]. They had it under the counter in a brown paper wrapping. And the publication information was torn out, you know. There was no, no page that--which--who the publisher was or anything. Speaker 1: Was that the Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan] version, I mean, publication--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, it was, it was an actual copy of what had b- it wasn't the mimeographed one. I've seen those. This was the actual book with the title page torn out. I don't know why that would be, but it was, it was available that way. Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and this was in, this is later on in the? Speaker 2: That was actually--when I got my own copy of it, it was in the '60s [1960s], you know, around '64 [1964] or '65 [1965]. Speaker 1: Okay. But the borrowed copy you got, it w- it had just been published and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I had seen--yeah, that was in '57 [1957], '58 [1958], or something like that. Speaker 1: 'Cause I think it was only--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was published I think in '56 [1956] or-- Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954]. Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954], yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: It came out in '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954], yeah. Speaker 1: But, so it was only about three or four years old when you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --saw it. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. I really never talked to anybody that saw it when it--close to when it first came out, you know, it's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah. Well, we had a couple people there who, you know, seemed to have their own reading program. And you know, that--I suspected that Ed might have been talking to some of these older guys, you know, barbershop types that read things, and-- Speaker 1: Ed Riddick [George "Ed" Riddick]? Speaker 2: Ed Riddick, yeah. Speaker 1: Ed Riddick, okay. Speaker 2: He was always reading all kinds of things that we didn't know how to find, but he seemed to know how to find. Yeah, he was the scholar, yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, 'Stolen Legacy,' tell us a little bit about it. Just set-- Speaker 2: About 'Stolen Legacy'? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah for those who don't know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, George James was actually a specialist in Greek. He spoke Greek and, and taught philosophy, and he had studied mainly what the Greeks said about the Africans. You know, he didn't have the benefit of the Africans' own version. For example, couldn't read the Metu Neter, and--but he did have a very good classical education. And so he wrote the book, 'Stolen Legacy,' which documents the Greek belief that they, you know, were influenced by Africans, which they were. And he drew the conclusions, and of course that was quite challenging to status quo at that time. So that when we found the book, you know, when we finally found a copy to do the re-print, that was Julian Richardson that was doing it in San Francisco [California]. We were looking for a copy, because it was so hard to find. And one of my students went to the University of California, Santa Cruz [Santa Cruz, California] and found a copy in the library, and stole 'Stolen Legacy' (laughter). She stole it out of the library and brought it to Julian Richardson who then, because of that title page, found out that it was the Philosophical Library in L.A. [sic. New York, New York] that held the copyright on it. And then he pursued it, and rented the copyright for, I think it was five years or something like that, which was the arrangement that he had. And by the time he got the copyright rented, the people began to wonder, well, what was he going to do with it? So they tried to get it back, you know, because I guess they hadn't really realized what the implications were. And then we finally got it ready for printing. So the printer was Greek (laughter) and he began to read it. And asked, "Was this true," you know, and everything. And so, he wasn't very happy, so we had problems with the printer. And he finally did go ahead and print it, but eventually through the good luck of having that young lady, we were able to get the legal way to print it, so that it didn't have to be sold under the counter and everything. And Julian invested in it, and otherwise there would have been a long time I suppose, if ever, before it had been published and shared. Speaker 1: Now Julian Richardson, he was the head of Marcus Books-- Speaker 2: Head of Marcus Books--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --in San Francisco--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --and Julian Richardson publishing [Julian Richardson Associates, Publishers, San Francisco, California], which was in the same place. Story_ID: 672688 Speaker 1: So, let's go back to, to sixty- the early '60s [1960s]. And so, you get ahold of 'Stolen Legacy' [George G. M. James]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And when did you first--did you hear of the people you mentioned? When did you first hear of John Henrik Clarke? Speaker 2: Oh, I had heard of John Henrik Clarke in the late '50s [1950s]. And I can't remember when I first met him, you know. I remember when I first got a chance to talk to him, though, and that was in--that wasn't until 1970. Seventy [1970], seventy- it would be either '70 [1970] or '71 [1971]. And that was at Black Child Development Institute [National Black Child Development Institute], we were both there. And so, we spent a lot of time together at that meeting, he was as generous as he always was. And so from that moment on, I, I was hooked on Clarke, you know, and he was very helpful to me. Speaker 1: Now what about Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan]? Speaker 2: Dr. Ben, I had read his works, you know, around the same time. But when I--I got some money when I was back after coming home from San Francisco [California], from Africa. I lived in Africa for six years. I came home from Africa back to San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University]. And so around '74 [1974], '75 [1975], I had gotten a grant from the State of California to do a study on intelligence testing, actually. And I insisted on having a historical part to it. So I was able to use that grant to pursue some of my historical interests, you know, and to hire consultants, you know, to interview people. And so, I was able to bring Dr. Clarke to the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. And I believe that might have been one of the first times that he'd been out there. And between I and a young man named Luma Kanda, had Luma Kanda's bookstore there, the two of us hosted him in San Francisco. And I was at that time trying to produce some of my visual presentations on ancient Egypt, and that was one of the reasons I wanted to be able to talk to him. So I showed him what I had, and I wanted to get his advice on what it was that I needed to do. Speaker 1: This is Dr. Ben, right, you're talking about--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he came, he was very generous, and gave me references and things like that. But that would have around '74 [1974], the first time that I actually got to sit down with him and spend time. Speaker 1: Now during the, I've read that during the--around '63 [1963], '64 [1964]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know, when SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was in Mississippi and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --they started, one of the things they do is teach black history to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the people out in the community. And that was, and there was--you know, people were starting to do that in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in some of the major cities. And was it the, oh 'Black America: Lost, Stolen, and Strayed' [sic. 'Black History: Lost, Stolen, or Strayed']-- Speaker 2: Right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --the TV show they did with Bill Cosby--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: With Bill Cosby. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: And he was, he had a segment featuring the John Churchville school [Freedom Library Day School] out in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They were teaching black pride, and that sort of thing. I mean-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --his stuff was starting to take off-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I mean on some level, and that--it never gets as big as it ought to get, but it gets-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's starting to take off. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. That was, that was really an important time. Well, you know, the people like Dr. Clarke and Dr. Ben, joined by others, had been doing the work of incubation there for quite a while. And so, they had lots of students around that were ready to make this happen. And so I think we just hit a critical mass at that point. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you got to San Francisco in what year? In? Speaker 2: I got to San Francisco in '63 [1963]. Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, so many people that come out of--San Francisco must have really been an exciting place to be. Speaker 2: Oh, it was a hotbed, yeah. It was a great, great, great, great place. See, in '63 [1963] when I went to San Francisco, it was, it was beginning to boil. That year was the year--that school year was the year I went to Africa. So, before the next fall, before one year was completed, I was in Liberia. And--'64 [1964] is when I went to Liberia. And that was also the period during which the upheavals were beginning to bubble up on campus. And so, I would come back every year for a campus visit, and, to--because that was part of my work. They needed to know what I was doing, and I needed to come in and get refreshed, and all of that. So, I'd get a month in San Francisco once a year. Story_ID: 672689 Speaker 1: So you were assigned to--now, how did you get, how did you get a chance to go to Liberia; and what were you doing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was sitting in a department meeting, and they had a project training Peace Corps volunteers for Liberia. And they announced that they needed somebody to go do staff development for the Peace Corps who were teachers. We had about four hundred teachers in Liberia, and San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] had the responsibility for training them. And I could hardly wait until that meeting was over. I was sitting on pins and needles, because I was afraid somebody was going to get that job. And that was my first opportunity to go to Africa, and I would have done anything to get it. So I broke out across the campus, and I ran from the building to the office of Peace Corps. And I told the guy, I said, "I want that job that I heard advertised." And he said, "Don't you want to hear what it pays?" I said, "I don't care what it pays," I said, "I want that job." He said, "Well, just slow down a minute, you know, let me tell you." So he did, and I got the job. So, that's how I got to Liberia. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was Liberia like when you got there? I mean who was the president, and what was the country like--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Tubman was the president when I got there. And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: V.S. Tubman [William Tubman]. Speaker 2: --it was a dream come true for me. There were all kinds of problems in Liberia, you know, the rich/poor dichotomy. Some people said it was native and foreigner--you know, the Africans from the diaspora were oppressing the ones who were left. It was a little more complicated than that, but it--there were, there were problems. And, but there were also, you know, some fabulous things going on. Liberia had at that time probably the highest level of diplomat anywhere in the African continent. These guys were sharp. They had a reputation all over for their brilliance, you know. They didn't have the wealth in the country, but they had, for whatever reasons, a lot of brilliant diplomats. So, there was always a lot of diplomatic activity--foreign heads of states coming and going. And that was open to us, you know, it was open to all the Africans who were there from the diaspora. They would always include us in everything. You know, if Haile Selassie came, we'd get tickets to the reception and the dinners and everything. And there was nothing--and someone has a big party on the farm, you'd go up to the farm and all. So, it was a great time for us, and I--and a great time for learning. Because I could go anywhere I wanted whenever I wanted, all over the country, and I did. You know, we had volunteers in eighty towns, so I got to go to all these towns. And-- Speaker 1: Oh, that is quite an experience. Speaker 2: Oh, it was awesome, it was awesome, yeah. My kids [Asa Hilliard IV, Robi Hilliard Herron, Patricia Hilliard Nunn and M. Hakim Hilliard] were there. I had one born there in Cooper Clinic [Cooper Clinic for Diagnosis and Special Surgery; Cooper Adventist Hospital, Monrovia, Liberia]. And we, we--and because we were Americans, we could socialize with anybody. You know, we knew poor Liberians and millionaire Liberians, and all in between. And you know, everything was open to us. Story_ID: 672690 Speaker 1: You were talking about the profound access that you had to-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. Speaker 1: --almost any strata of society in Liberia. Speaker 2: Any, any strata--we--I'd sleep in houses if I'd go into the interior. Many times I'd go into a village where if I wanted to sleep in the village I had to stay in one of the regular houses. And you know, that was always open. People were always warm and facilitating. And it was a kind of a rule that if you--let's say I was walking, and nightfall catches me in a town. The rule, the courtesy rule, is they've got to offer you a place to stay, and some food and stuff like that, and they did. They were, I--many a night I walked, trying to get from one place to the next; car might have broken down, or anything. And I might walk five or ten miles in the middle of the night, you know, to get to the next place. Never had any fears or anything. So, people were very good. And then the next day, I might be sitting with the president and the vice president [William R. Rolber, Jr.] in some meeting, or the secretary of state or something, you know, that would involve ceremonies or whatever. So, yeah, we had, we had access to everything. Plus, let's say I wanted to fly, you know, I just go out to the airfield. And I'd see one of the guys who was a pilot, and he'd take me up. He--"You want to fly the plane?" He'd let me hold the controls and all that. I mean the safety regulations, they wouldn't even let you close to a plane here, I'm sure especially after 9/11 [September 11, 2001]. But everything was quite open. Speaker 1: Now, was there ever a situation where things were too open, and you got involved too deep in something you didn't want to get involved in? Speaker 2: I was very careful to stay away from politics, you know (laughter). I didn't--things I didn't want to know, because I knew that there were potential dangers, you know, once you start meddling in business that wasn't your business, then--. I--so, I tried to stay away from anything that was political. And you couldn't always avoid it, you know. Like where I was acting as superintendent of the schools for a while, and then there's an issue on whether or not you're going to have local autonomy in the school system like you apparently do in the United States, have a school board and they get to set the salary, they get to hire the superintendent. In Liberia, you could have, they, the Americans are advised to set up that kind of system. But the federal--the national government had to keep its hand on collecting taxes. So they were not about to allow sub units to go off on their own tax collection schemes, and what have you. And so here's the tension then between the superintendent who's coming behind me--and I'm holding the job for him--and the secretary of education at the national level, and there's a struggle over this budget thing. You know, here I am in between the two of them, and there's serious problems about it from the top. They're worried about not the school district, but the principle of having to let go of central control to other types of units. It could be the hospital, it could be anything. So, that wasn't my job to get in the middle of those kinds of arguments. My job was to facilitate whatever their agenda was. That's the way I saw it, anyway. But you could be pulled in quite easily if you weren't careful. Speaker 1: Was, did you find--of course in Liberia, they've had a revolution since then. Did you find the society like highly stratified? You said it was more complicated than just--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It is. Speaker 1: --American Liberians versus-- Speaker 2: It is. The--here's why. The--(laughter) we were riding in a taxi one time, talking. And we were saying things about the local government and things like that, we being Americans working for the government and so forth. And it turns out that the guy who's driving the taxi is the son of the president. Okay. (Laughter) Well, how is it possible that we would know that this taxi driver was President Tubman's [William Tubman] son? Well, because he had many sons. They--I don't know how many, you know, maybe a hundred, two hundred, whatever. (Unclear) had a bunch of them, you know (unclear), because that was fairly common. People might have a number of kids that were, we would say was out of wedlock. But they kept a close relationship in most cases with those children, so they were family. So, here you have a person that's--president, here's somebody who's a taxi driver, and that's a father/son relationship. So, now that's what I say--that's complicated, you know. And you have someone who's tribal, and you have someone who is quote Americo. So, what are the children? Yeah. Okay, that's complicated. So, yeah, it's not quite as, you know, clear cut. You know, there was a clear cut economic thing--power or no power--people who had money and people who didn't have money, and that made a big difference. But I didn't meet many people that didn't have relatives, for example, who might be tribal, might be poor, even if they had wealth, and they were Americo or they were Liberian, you know. Story_ID: 672691 Speaker 1: We mentioned during the break the Dawsons, too, Horace Dawson [HistoryMaker Horace G. Dawson] and Lula Dawson [HistoryMaker Lula Cole Dawson]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: They were representing the U.S.? Speaker 2: They were head of the information agency, USIA [United States Information Agency], I think that's what they call it, USIA? Yeah. They were the ones who kept the information flowing, I guess, and maybe they also collected information. I don't know all the details of what they did, but they were--he was a well-connected person in terms of access, unlike some of the other people who had held that job before, I think partly because he was familiar with black culture and black ways, you know. Speaker 1: And he was the first, was he the first black in that position? Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah, yeah. They were quite popular. Speaker 1: Lula Dawson talked about the, she said there was a crisis amongst the women who were related to a lot of the African dignitaries-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --their wives not having access to the social events that--where a lot of policy was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, you mean the American? Speaker 1: Well, no, the wives of the African diplomats not having access to a lot of the social events where, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that, I didn't know about that, yeah. Speaker 1: I don't know. Well maybe it's a different--you know (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it could be; you know, it could be. That piece I hadn't known. Because-- Speaker 1: I think actually in Kenya or someplace, she organized the wives into a group to-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --try to sh- you know, because there were things like they said where--they were telling their wives, "You can't come to this event, because you don't know table manners." Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh. Speaker 1: British table manners or something--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so they would be left out of that scene and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --caused a lot of strife, you know. Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah. I, it could be, you know. That part I didn't get a chance to see much of. Yeah. Most of the people that I saw, the diplomats came with their wives. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: They came with African wives. Speaker 2: And they lived--you know, like we had a lot--like the Nigerians--my son [M. Hakim Hilliard] is named for the son of one of the Nigerian ambassadors, you know, Hakim [ph.], you know. And he and his wife went to all of the things together. And so--and they lived near us, you know. Many of the diplomats did live near us in Oldest Congo Town [Monrovia, Liberia]. So, that part I didn't see. But I wouldn't say--because I'm sure that they may have even had more than one wife or something maybe. Speaker 1: Now that I think about it, I think she was referring more to East Africa, and some of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: She was saying that a lot of these, the African politicians would have a European wife for those events. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And they'd also have-- Speaker 2: A traditional wife, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, a traditional wife. Speaker 2: African wife, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah, it could be. Speaker 1: But the European wives would go to all the events, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't see much of that either. Speaker 1: Okay. That may not be true in Liberia. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 672692 Speaker 1: So, is there any one thing--or what's the most, what are the most important things you learned in Liberia when you were there, that you didn't know before you went? Speaker 2: (Laughter) How political everything is. You know, that the Liberians are very wise. And one of the sayings that my counterpart had, Emmanuel Johnson, who is, now is still a very close friend, and his kids are my godchildren, in fact--but I would say to him when we'd get into some of these struggles between his office and the superiors, I'd say, "Emmanuel, why don't you just go in the office and lay your case down on the table and do so and so and so?" He'd said, "Asa [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III], you pull a rope, rope pull a bush." (Laughter) Which mean, you don't know what's on the other end of that action; you don't know who people are, and all. And it was, it was--when I say it's complicated, it's very complicated. You don't know who's related to whom, who holds the power. Things are very, very opaque, you know, they--. For example, I had a guy who wrote the book, 'The Zinzin Road.' I can't remember the author's name right now, Keeble [sic. Fletcher Knebel] or, or something like that. And he came and spent a couple of weeks and went and wrote this novel, and it's supposed to be a novel that's semi-true. Well, he wasn't there long enough to know what was true, and what people were telling him, you know, even when he thought he had good informant. "You know, when--in Liberia, President Tubman [William Tubman] is a dictator. He gets to do that and the other." Well, it may look like that, you know, but you've got to be around a little bit. Here's an example. What I saw was that one of the groups that was more powerful than any other was the Masonic order. They had a guy there named Mac, Big Mac, Mac DeShield, you know. And there was a big argument one time between the president and Mac DeShield, who was kind of head of the party. And president was the president--you know if he was really all so powerful, then this argument couldn't have taken place. And so, you know, he came to Mac DeShield, the rumor was, to ask him, you know, "You step down." And said Mac's answer, "Oh, no, if anybody steps down, Mr. President, you step down." (Laughter) So, for that to be able to be said by both men indicates something different than a dictatorship, you know. And so, so, the--there were a couple of social organizations--the Masonic order, which a lot of Liberians were a part of, and then oddly the rotary club [Rotary Club of Monrovia], which held some of the influence wielders, you know. And then there another club, the Poro society, which was the secret society and the Sande society. And so-- Speaker 1: So, the rotary club and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, the rotary was-- Speaker 1: And the Poro society. Okay. Speaker 2: The Poro, that's only Africans in the Poro society. But the rotary, that had an international group, but it included the people of means and wealth, you know. So, it was a place where networking could be done--both international networking, but also Liberian local networking. So, it's, it was hard to tell, I think. And anyone who thought that they could tell what was going to happen in Liberia, they were always fooled. But I would never have made predictions on--based on what I knew, I knew what I didn't know, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. That was the early '60s [1960s], and a lot of the African nations were becoming independent, I think--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, that was a grand time. Speaker 1: --Kenya in '64 [sic. 1963]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and quite a few others in '64 [1964] when you were over--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Grand time, yeah, grand time, high life, you know. That was the dance, and it was well done all over--the high life and the quadrille for Liberia. Story_ID: 672693 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a chance to go to Senegal when they had the first African arts festival [First World Festival of Black Arts, Dakar, Senegal] in '66 [1966]? Speaker 2: I didn't go there then. Yeah. Went to Nigeria, to Ghana, and not for festivals, but for--just to take my family and go spend time there. And also I went to Nigeria for some work with Peace Corps, you know, to tell them about our teacher project and so forth, and what they could do. Speaker 1: What did you think about the Peace Corps project when you were there? I mean it was brand new when you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--I thought there were some positive parts to it when I was there, mainly because nobody knew what to do. Case in point, I didn't know what to do. You know, they'd say, "Okay, go over there and do staff development." Well, I'm used to doing staff development in San Francisco [California], that meant I might have four teachers in one school; five teachers over here. And I could--half an hour, I could be in either place and I could spend a reasonable amount of time. Well, when I got to Liberia there were almost four hundred teachers, and they were in seventy-two towns. And some of these towns, you know, it's like a day and a half just to get there. And they were way back in the bushes, and most remote. So, I would see a volunteer maybe once, maybe twice a year for a part of a day. What kind of staff development are you going to do, you know? So quite frankly, I was of very little value to Peace Corps volunteers. But it was a great experience for me, because I got to go all over the country, meet all kinds of people including Peace Corps volunteers, but also lots of Liberians, saw a lot of settings and everything. So, I was well-educated because of my--and benefitted because I was there. But I don't think that I did really anything really positive for the Peace Corps. Now, what did Peace Corps do for Liberia? Well, because they were basically left alone--you know, they didn't have anybody supervising them. So they had to make up the stuff as they went along, because nobody knew what a Peace Corps volunteer was supposed to do, really. And if you're out in the woods by yourself in a town, then it's you and the town, not you and the central. So, I would say that I saw, for some of the Peace Corps volunteers, better teaching when they had to figure out what to do, than I see in Atlanta [Georgia] right now, where you've got companies coming in telling teachers what to do, you know. And so, the freedom--and all of them had to have liberal arts training. So they were fairly--content wise, they knew something, and that gives you some confidence right there. And so the rest of what they had to do was figure out a way to communicate. And so, I was impressed with most of the Peace Corps volunteers in terms of their ability to do that. Now, some were arrogant, some were in people's business that they shouldn't have been in. A few were appalled by the circumstances, you know, weren't culturally sophisticated and so forth. But most of those that became culturally sophisticated, it would be more likely among Peace Corps than it would among almost all the other Americans working there. Because if you were with the USAID [United States Agency for International Development], you were working in a city in an office, and you didn't really--in most cases, you had to make an effort to get to know people well enough so that you could have a good experience. Peace Corps volunteers, if they were adventurous, could do quite well. Speaker 1: Okay. So, so you spent six years, right, in the Peace Corps? Speaker 2: Right, two years I was with the Peace Corps as the advisor. Then in the last four years, I was an educational psychologist for the school system. And also, the last two years I was the superintendent--acting superintendent of the schools, holding that spot for my counterpart. I had to wait until they picked him, then give him time to get situated. So, I left the last few months kind of as his advisor. So that was my extent of service there. Story_ID: 672694 Speaker 1: So what did you do, well, you came back to San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]? Speaker 2: Came back as a department chairman. Because while I was gone, (laughter) they, they'd had the big strike, you know, and everybody's mad at everybody. And in my department, secondary education [Department of Secondary Education], I was the only one that had not been in the strike, because I was overseas. So, that's how come I became chair, because I was kind of the--perceived at that point as the one who could talk to both sides. And the same thing probably happened as to why I was dean. Because at the end of the year, I became dean, you know. I was offered that position, which I took and held for eight years--neither of which I think would have happened had I not gone to Liberia and had I not been absent during the time of all the campus upheaval. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you were in Liberia, were you--you were aware, I suppose, of what was going on here? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I was, remember, I was coming back to campus at least once a year, sometimes twice a year, and spending enough time. I was there, for example, when [HistoryMaker] Nathan Hare came, and when they won the thirty some positions for the School of Ethnic Studies [College of Ethnic Studies, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]. That was part of what the strike was about, establish ethnic studies, black studies. And I remember Nathan and I were talking, and he said, "I got all these positions, Asa [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III]. Now, what are, what is black studies?" (Laughter) Well, he knew what black studies was, but the point he was making was that we really hadn't prepared to put the courses in place in a brief period of time. So, it was an exhilarating time, you know, that they had gotten what they needed. He, in particular had fought very hard, and risked a lot. You know, he had a big fight with the president, a public fight and all that. But he won, you know. Speaker 1: S.I. Hayakawa. Speaker 2: Hayakawa, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: He's in the news quite a bit in those days. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, at San Francisco State, was Oba T'Shaka there at the time? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: See, I met Oba T'Shaka, because as the dean, at the time when they were trying to establish a department of black studies, they hired everybody. But they couldn't get tenured, in part, because the university had the rule that tenured people hire and say who can be tenured. So, they didn't have tenured people in the department. So, what they did was make up a tenured group from outside the department. And I was the chair of the hiring committee for the Department of Black Studies. And I remember initially, T'Sh- Oba T'Shaka was pretty upset about that, you know, as he should have been, because here are people outside the department that have power over people inside the department. Plus, some of them didn't have doctorates at the time, so that was a double problem. Because if you hired them, and how are you going to give them tenure with no doctorate? And some were arguing, "Well, I couldn't get a doctorate when I was trying to get a doctorate. But I know more about the field than the people who give doctorates," which was true of, like Julian Richardson's wife [Raye Richardson]. So, what we did was to get a doctoral equivalency. You know, said, we'll review your work, and out of all the work she had done, it was clear that she was the superior person in African literature, you know. There was nobody else on campus that could even measure up to her. So, I was able--that's one of my achievements, I consider, to negotiate you know, all that you know suspicion of an outsider with the department and all that. But I was able to work in that capacity long enough to get three people. Because once we got three people, then we could turn it over to the department, then they could hire their own people. So, we got the third person tenured, and then from that point they ran their own show. So that get- and now, it's one of the best--well, I don't know what it is now, but they were one of the best-- Speaker 1: That's right (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --black studies programs in the country. And they still have some of the strongest people in the country--Wade Noble [sic. Wade Nobles], Theophile Obenga, you know, Oba T'Shaka, so, yeah. Speaker 1: That's true. Story_ID: 672695 Speaker 1: In those days, I mean the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] was producing a lot of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --deep thinking, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah. And see, we had, in those days we had the, about fifty black psychologists, the largest number of black psychologists, I believe, in any city at the time. And-- Speaker 1: How--now, why is this true--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Because--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I mean I know you got Cobbs [HistoryMaker Dr. Price Cobbs] and Grier [William H. Grier] there, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: They were psychiatrists. Speaker 1: Psy- okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Oh, they were psychiatrists, so they don't even count (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The reason was is that they had this program (laughter)--there's this, I can't re- a book called, an article called Cooling Out the Mark or Chilling Out the Mark ['On Cooling the Mark Out: Some Aspects of Adaptation to Failure,' Erving Goffman], or something like that, where they were, the author was saying that what they did was set up community mental health centers as a consequence of the riots. And so they put these community--by defining the problem as mental health, then you could put these psychologists in these communities where there were either riots or potential riots, to chill out the community. That was supposed to be their function, but--and San Francisco [California] was one of those places. Los Angeles [California] had one, Boston [Massachusetts] had one, and so forth. And so, we got about fifty at Westside Community Mental Health Center [San Francisco, California]. You know, my brother worked there. And, but what that did was create a critical mass of black psychologists in one place, okay. So, they were not only in the town, they were really in the same facility, you know. And so, by working together out of that same facility, then of course they would compare notes in their spare time and work time. And that's why the Association of Black Psychologists was founded in San Francisco at the APA [American Psychological Association] meeting. And then we had one of the strongest programs in the country, you know. I was part of the war on IQ tests. You know, I was the expert witness in the Larry P. court case [Larry P. v. Riles, 1979] that outlawed IQ in California, it's still outlawed in California. Speaker 1: Yeah I remember the pamphlet, IPE [Institute of Positive Education, Chicago, Illinois] published 'Voodoo or IQ?' ['Voodoo or IQ : An Introduction to African Psychology,' Cedric X, et al]. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, you got a lot of good work there. And then Wade [Wade Nobles]--second generation came along, Wade, Na'im [HistoryMaker Na'im Akbar], and all those coming out of Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] were feeding the same group that was already there. So, it was, those were the glory times. Then they broke it up, you know. They had--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So what happened? How did that happen? Speaker 2: They sent somebody in to dismantle the Westside Community Mental Health Center, and--because I think powers that be saw what was coming, which was there was going to be a lot of power among black psychologists. And so they broke it down, and I think they broke all the others down, too. So that there were mini- there, some of them--the center stayed, but with a smaller staff. Story_ID: 672696 Speaker 1: Well, what else about you know San Francisco State [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]? Now, you--how long were you there, from? Speaker 2: Eighteen years, counting the six years in Liberia. Speaker 1: Okay. So you were there until 19-- Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980]. Speaker 1: --eighty [1980], okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That's quite a stretch, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: A lot going on. So, I mean, well, what would you consider your, your most important accomplishment there at San Francisco State? Speaker 2: I think the--I'm not sure that I had super accomplishments at San Francisco State. I did a good job as dean. We didn't have any resources, it would have been a great accomplishment as a dean, I would think, if I could have influenced the quality of employment of faculty for example; if they'd had enough turnover so that I could have put in place the criteria that would have made sure that they had--then that's the kind of school impact a dean could have. But I never got to hire people, really--only a handful of people in the eight years I was dean, because they were always cutting, cutting budget. I think that probably my work outside the College of Education [Graduate College of Education] was more important, like in the Association of Black Psychologists. It was also the years for the development of the National Black Child Development Institute [NBCDI]. And I think I made some contributions there, to that association its growth that time; getting prepared to do work in mental measurement and the challenge to the validity of mental measurement, which resulted in my work with the, in forensic psychology in San Francisco through Larry P. [Larry P. v. Riles, 1979] and some of the other court cases nationally--that was a contribution. And that was also when I was beginning to use resources to build my history capacity. And that was--for me, that was my main growth period, you know during--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Now, why was that so important, to build your capacity in history? Speaker 2: Well, because it was one of the specializations I wanted. And, and prior to that time, you know, there was, I'd always wanted to do that. But prior to that time, I was trying to fulfill requirements for graduate degrees and work-related--and I'm the, and especially when I became the dean I was really taken off path even more. Because the dean, it's hard to find time to read and to write and so forth, which was the reason that I took the job here in Atlanta [Georgia] at Georgia State [Georgia State University], because I could go back to the professorial research--reading, writing, and that kind of thing. So, it was, it was--but it, but I was able to eke out, you know, what I needed to eke out, in terms of reading and getting prepared to do some of the more important writing that I did during that--that was the incubation period for me. Story_ID: 672697 Speaker 1: All right, so, 1980. Now, now, how did you come across this offer to come out here to Georgia? And why did you come to Georgia--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Ye- well, of course, I, I've always loved Georgia. And it--when I went in the Arm- when I joined the [U.S.] Army in '55 [1955], I came to Fort Benning [Georgia] for my officer's training. So that meant I got to Atlanta [Georgia], and then that whetted my appetite even more. So, I vowed that at whatever point I could, I was going to stay in Georgia. And as it turned out, my grandfather [sic. Hilliard's paternal great-grandfather, Bunker Hilliard] was from Georgia, and I knew that. But since I've been here, I've learned even more about how important that is. Because they, I know where the plantation is, and a little bit more about the family detail and all of that. So-- Speaker 1: So, you're kind of coming back to your roots, on some level--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It turned out that way. I didn't know that--I knew that they were here, but I didn't know how deeply embedded they were here, you know. It's just even been this year that I've learned more detail on that, you know, the exact location of the plantation where my grandfather and grandmother [sic. Hilliard's paternal great-grandmother, Mary Tatum] were in, out in LaGrange [Georgia], and. Speaker 1: So, did Georgia State [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] recruit you? How--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. What happened, I got hooked up on the National Day Care Study. There was, I was with BCDI. BCDI has been very important to me. And the Black Child Development Institute [National Black Child Development Institute] challenged some of these studies on Head Start and daycare. And so a taskforce was formed at one point, where the people who were doing studies and controlling the Head Start daycare were getting ready to create a licensing exam. They were going to have a hundred-item, multiple choice test to determine whether a person could take care of babies or not. And of course, I'm a psychologist now, so I chaired a taskforce to look into that, out of BCDI. That taskforce had about twelve people on it from around the country. And one of those people was Dr. James Young, who worked at Georgia State. And so, we became very close on that taskforce. And so he was the one, along with Clifford Carter [ph.], who I knew from the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. And he was one of those psychologists in that strong group out there, and he had already come to Georgia State. And so, they had money--Georgia State got money to, from Fuller Callaway, Jr. [Fuller E. Callaway, Jr.], who had a foundation [Callaway Foundation, Inc., LaGrange, Georgia]. And he gave money to all the major universities in Georgia to have an endowed chair. He had endowed one chair at each one of those. And so, they had a national search. Well, Jim Young and Cliff Carter knew me. And then later, Russell Irvine, because of them, knew me. So, those three were instrumental in getting an invitation for me to come to do an interview, and they had about seventy people they brought in to interview for this chair [Fuller E. Callaway Professor of Urban Education]. And then they wound it down to four, and then four of us came to visit the campus, and then I was chosen out of, out of that group. And of course at that time, I didn't even know what an endowed chair was (laughter). Story_ID: 672698 Speaker 1: And part of the story that would be interesting to you is that I was doing some genealogical research on, just recently in our family, where we found out that we were located in Troup County [Georgia], four miles out from LaGrange, Georgia. And so, I was going through the history of Troup County. Speaker 2: That's Troup? Cap- Troup--okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Troup, T-R-O-U-P, near the Alabama border. And ran across this name, Fuller Callaway. Well, that's my chair, you know, Fuller Callaway [Fuller E. Callaway Professor of Urban Education]. But it was Fuller Callaway, Sr. [Fuller E. Callaway, Sr.]. It turns out that Fuller Callaway was from Troup County, and that they were using the cotton, you know, which I guess our people were picking. And he was into textiles. They were milling cotton and producing textiles. So that's how he made his fortune, Callaway, Sr. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then there was Callaway, Jr. [Fuller E. Callaway, Jr.], who donated money for my chair (laughter). Okay, so we were finding these connections, and it was amazing, you know. Speaker 2: That is amazing. That is-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that's really-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, what a connection--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: And my daughter is actually, she's found, she's followed up from one of the owners, I think. They were Sterlings and Tatums. My grandfather [sic. paternal great-grandfather] was named Sterling [Bunker Hilliard], and my grandmother [sic. paternal great-grandmother] was named Tatum [Mary Tatum]. So, she located the Sterling-Tatum Plantation [ph.]. That's the one that's near LaGrange, Georgia. Speaker 2: It's almost like the work of your ancestors is now paying for the position you're in now. Speaker 1: That's true. Speaker 2: It just came all around--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's exactly true. Yeah, isn't that wild (laughter). Speaker 2: That is something, that's something. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, so, so you came in 1980, and you (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I came in 1980, and the attraction to me was that it's the nature of most endowed chairs, the ones that are run well, is that the chair holder gets to make their own job description. That's what, that's what was attractive to me. So I teach one class, and--get to choose that, which--and I got to choose the departments that I would be associated with. And I was invited to, and I actually accepted to be in three departments: early childhood, counseling, and educational psychology. It was actually the educational foundation in the ed psych section. And so, I had joint appointments in those areas at the beginning. They've reconfigured the university [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] now, so I'm in two. But what that's done is given me now twenty-five years of support to pursue my research interests, and writing interests, and consulting interests and so forth. Yeah. So, it's been, you know, ancestral blessing (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, you can't beat that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's pretty--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: No, you can't. Speaker 2: That's powerful. So, well when you come to Atlanta [Georgia] in 1980-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --you got, Atlanta's got--I mean, I think Hoyt Fuller [Hoyt W. Fuller] is here now? I think he--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yes, the Institute of the Black World [Atlanta, Georgia]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(unclear) Chicago [Illinois]. The Institute of the Black World is here-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Atlanta is the center for-- Speaker 1: Right, Dodson was here. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Howard Dodson, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh, yeah it was, actually, by the time I got here they were decaying at the Institute of The Black World, but they were still there. Speaker 2: But--yeah, the remnants were still--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean, Institute of the Black World made a tremendous impact--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --on black thinking (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Extraordinary, extraordinary, yeah. Speaker 2: Walter Rodney was still here. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Bill Strickland [William Strickland]. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Quite a few--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, oh yeah, yeah. It still has a lot of power-- Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --over at that AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], yeah. Speaker 2: And Vincent Harding, from-- Speaker 1: A lot of power, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. So, and Hoyt Fuller had just come from Chicago-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, right, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --after the demise of Black World to here as well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Speaker 2: So, yeah, this place was, this place was jumping in some ways--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Right, yeah. Story_ID: 672699 Speaker 1: So, so in the eight- so did you have--now one thing that you did I--there may be other things we can talk about, too. But one thing you participated in the, in the--you were on the ground floor of the development of ASCAC-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Tell us--now that was '84 [1984]. Speaker 2: Right. We had a study group here called the Banu Study Group [ph.]. And that was Charles Finch and myself, Obadeli Williams [Larry Obadeli Williams], [HistoryMaker] Askia Toure, Robert Belcher, and a couple more that I'm not remembering right now. But it was about seven, eight people in the study group. And within a short period of time, we sponsored the Nile Valley civilizations conference [Nile Valley Conference] at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. You know, there was a long story about how we were able to do that. And at the same time, L.A. [Los Angeles, California], Baba Jetti [sic. Leonard Jeffries] and Maulana [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga], were putting together the first annual Ancient African Studies Conference [sic. Ancient Egyptian Studies Conference] at the college in--city college [Southwest College, Los Angeles, California], or whatever it was in L.A., which--and that's what became ASCAC. The one here, there was a lot of contention about it, because white scholars were invited. And the--I mean we were boycotted here. And the New York [New York] group in particular were just livid about it, and so they sent out the word, "Don't come." And part of Chicago [Illinois] did too. You know, they were not happy about it, and I suppose L.A. But we went ahead. And the, the problem, I felt, that we had to do it. Because there was a window of opportunity to do something that could have, and did have, as it turned out, lasting effect. Because what we did by having that conference on the Morehouse campus, you know, faculty brought--at one point we had two thousand people in attendance at that conference. And faculty, many of them for the first time, were reading in these areas. And one of the tangible outcomes of that conference was John Jackson's [John G. Jackson] book, 'Man, God, and Civilization' was required reading at Morehouse for the next, at least ten years, and may still be, I don't know. Speaker 1: I didn't know that. Speaker 2: And some other institutions also did it. So there were a lot of things. The, you can go over to the chapel [Martin Luther King Jr. International Chapel, Atlanta, Georgia] now, they have onyx on the pulpit in the chapel. You have obliques on the grounds. The guy who's the head, the chaplain at the university, [HistoryMaker] Lawrence Carter, he went to Egypt with me and was baptized in the Nile. And came back and he began to teach some of these things. So, we literally changed the curriculum of AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], and I think caused something to happen. But the very thing that the boycotters feared, actually happened here. Because they invited Bruce Williams from The Oriental Institute [University of Chicago Oriental Institute, Chicago, Illinois]. I can't think of the guy who's-- Speaker 1: Was Bernal invited? Speaker 2: Bernal invited himself. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we didn't invite Bernal. Speaker 1: So, Martin Bernal. Speaker 2: He showed up. Martin Bernal showed up with his manuscript for 'Black Athena' ['Black Athena: The Afroasiatic Roots of Classical Civilization, Martin Bernal'], and invited himself, and wanted to have an exchange, and wanted us to give him a plenary. And we wouldn't do that. But they, what they did was let him speak on a Sunday after the conference was over at the chapel. But, and he was arguing that, you know, he would have more influence than we would if, and he needed to be out front, and blah, blah, blah. Said, no, no, no. And then they tried to start an ASCAC at that meeting, but they were going to invite Bruce Williams and all these people into--Bea Lumpkin [Beatrice Lumpkin] and everything. And they were actually in the organizing the meeting for it, which was the thing that was feared in the first place. And we had a knockdown, drag-out battle inside the organizing committee, you know. And Ivan was--Van Sertima [Ivan Van Sertima] was on it; he wasn't in the study group, but he was on the committee, and he was kind of mediating some of this. And there was a literal, almost a war. Story_ID: 672700 Speaker 1: Now, just to backtrack a little bit, now--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Dr. Ivan Van Sertima-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --I guess in 1980--'78 [1978], '79 [1979], started something called the Journal of African Civilizations (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: It was an attempt to bring people discussing-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Ancient African civilization together in a journal format. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But the journal didn't have an organization, really to--It was sort of--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was the journal. He typed the journal on his own typewriter. I have Volume 1, Number 1, which I finally gave back to him because he gave them--he didn't have his own Volume 1, Number 1. So his wife [Jacqueline L. Patten-Van Sertima] told me that, and I gave her my copy. And so I'm short one volume now, because of that. But he, in those days--and in fact he showed me the first issue. He came to my house in San Francisco [California], we invited him over. And he showed what he--he said, "This is the pilot issue." And he said, "Asa [HistoryMaker Asa G. Hilliard, III], I don't have money for this. I've got to type it myself." And so, for the first few years, he literally typed the journal. And then finally, he got to the point where it could be published. It was a major contribution, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's the author of 'They Came Before Columbus' ['They Came Before Columbus: The African Presence in Ancient America,' Ivan Van Sertima] (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes, he had that. At that time, he had done that, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: In '76 [1976]. That kind of gave him like a-- Speaker 2: Right. Yeah. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And, then the, but I was the one that--you know, I went to--Maulana [HistoryMaker Maulana Karenga] and Jake [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] asked me to come to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], which I did gladly. And I'm glad that that's where the meeting came to fruition about the organization. Because that needed to be family, and it was family. And so, you know the story of what's happened as a result of that. But that was the Ancient African Studies Conference [sic. Ancient Egyptian Studies Conference], I think that's what we called it then. And then it became ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations] after that. We came to Chicago [Illinois], and that's when they decided to name it ASCAC. Story_ID: 672701 Speaker 1: Now, backtrack just a minute again. Why is Egypt so important? People, when they hear African Americans talking about Egypt-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --they say, "Aren't you all missing a point? Shouldn't you be doing something else rather than talking about--Egypt's so far away and so long ago? What are you talking about?" Speaker 2: Well, there are several reasons why Egypt is important. One is the structure of the white supremacy ideology is based on a story, you know, which is a false story about the priority of Western civilization over everybody else; and that the whole world was uncivilized until the West got started. That's false. And it's not only false by a little bit, it's false by a magnitude of almost half of human history. So that, Africa is clearly, you know, at the front end of the development of high technology--all that stuff, and had been done in Egypt before Greece even gets going on anything that's really high-tech. Speaker 1: In terms of dates, just give us an example. Speaker 2: Well, the date for pyramids would be 2700 Before Christ. Speaker 1: That's a conservative (unclear). Speaker 2: That's conservative. And the date for the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus would be 2000 before the birth of Christ, and that's mathematics up to pre-calculus. And the date for 'The Iliad' [Homer] and 'The Odyssey' [Homer] in the oral tradition is somewhere around 1200. The date for the written part of that is around 800. So, if you, if you give credit for even before the writing was really going back to the time of the beginning of Greek writing--Linear B or whatever they were doing around 1200, so forth--it's not about anything compared to the level of sophistication of Egypt. And so for that reason, it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That's about a 1500 year gap, at least, right? Speaker 2: A huge gap, yeah, minimal. And so for that reason, people who want to argue for white supremacy have to have Egypt--you have to take care of Egypt in some way; it can't be African. Preferably it would be the beginning of European, if it was going to be something. Or, it has to be pagan and it has to be minimized. So, they've got to, they've got to say, "Well, what you thought was happening there, it looked like astronomy, but it wasn't. It looked mathematics, but it wasn't." They've got to do something like that. So, that's one reason. It's part politics. You know, there's a political reason why the false story has to be challenged, and--and the true story has to be town--shown. But even if there were no colonial domination, no racism, no white supremacy, and only African, you would still have to have Egypt, because you have to have the beginning of your story. You've got to have a story, because that story is connected to the rest of the African continent's story. You can't understand West Africa if you don't know Egypt. If you have migrants that come from that Nile Valley region into the West, which you do, and you want to understand what they're doing, you've got to understand their antecedents, and, or vice versa. If you want to understand Egypt now, some of the things that are written in the Metu Neter can't be understood unless you take the living cultures that are practicing the things that they were writing about, then they become--they're illuminated. Because as they say, Dogon culture illuminates Kemetic culture, because there's a cultural kinship. So it's just--and then the third reason is that once you get the story correct, then you have the story correct, but it's important for anybody--again, we're back to the political now. You can't have unity unless you have cultural unity. You'll never have political unity. And so, all three of those reasons are reasons for the study of Kemet [Egypt]. Speaker 1: There's a scene in I think 'King Solomon's Mines' or one--the version with Stewart Granger, where he-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --his girlfriend [Elizabeth Curtis], I forget who she is; she's a European woman. But she looks at him and says, as she looks at the Watusi brother that's a guide-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --who's guiding them down to where the mines are. She turns to Stewart Granger and says, you know, "I've seen that profile before-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --on the walls in Egypt," she says--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Do you remember hearing that when you were there? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Yeah, but then they shut the door. It's like Richard Pryor series ['The Richard Pryor Show']--did you see that, where he's in the tomb? (Laughter) He said, "Wait a minute, these are all black people in here." (Laughter) They closed the door, and he says, "Well, there's nothing important in here," you know (laughter). And they sealed him up, you know, yeah, yeah. So, that's basically what's happened. Story_ID: 672702 Speaker 1: So, now in terms of white scholars-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --it's not just black scholars that are saying this, right. I mean the principle--I mean it's, if--there have always been white scholars saying something similar to this, or saying this--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --but, they have to get out of the academic world, or they have to be, you know--Bruce Williams, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Bruce Williams tried to tell the truth. Gerald Massey tried to tell the truth. Godfrey Higgins tried to tell the truth, you know. So that, yeah, there's lots of--in fact, the Greeks themselves tried to tell the truth. You know, they said, you know, this is where we got this stuff from. And, but even today if you have a political direction that's going this way, and you have a scholarly direction going that way, nine times out of ten, the poli- politics are going to trump the scholarship. You know, where you--scholars are always vulnerable to politicians who have an agenda. And that was true in the ancient world, that's true today. And so at, you know, at the present time, right now, here we have the Tutankhamun exhibit. And you had one of the most interesting and semi-sophisticated attempts to go back and claim Egypt again as a white civilization. And what they did was to combine a trip by the directive antiquities, so that you make the exhibit that's coming here legitimate. Zahi Hawass, you bring him here. And so, he comes with the exhibit. He didn't come with it the last time, I don't think; went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Then you get National Geographic to do a special feature on the exhibit at the same time the exhibit comes. If the exhibit is coming, you get Zahi Hawass coming, you get National Geographic coming. Then you have the findings of the forensics reconstruction of the mummy, you know, and that becomes the most important part of the initial advertising of the King Tutankhamun exhibit. Now, the forensics is supposed to be trumping the eyewitness accounts, you know, of the Golden Mask, for example, and all the paintings and things--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, all the-- Speaker 2: So, they say that because of this CAT scan [computerized axial tomography]--that that's going to be a more accurate rendering of what he really looked like. But they tricked themselves, because the very argument they were trying to make, you know, undermined the argument that they were trying to make. Because they had three renderings of Tutankhamun, all from the CAT scan, okay. Two knew that it was him, and one group didn't. The Americans didn't know; the French knew, and the Egyptians knew. But what trumped--what, where it argued against itself was that if the CAT scan is more accurate, then all three have to come up with the same thing. You got three different images, you know (laughter). When you get much as variation among the three images that were produced by forensic reconstruction from a CAT scan as you do among the images that you see in Egypt, you know. So, now if you don't get an identical rendering from the three different groups working independently, then where is the scientific validity of the CAT scan? Speaker 1: Yeah, I think they claimed that for instance his nasal index--you can't get that from a CAT scan, so you have to make it up or something like that--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Whatever--regardless--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So, they made him some very narrow nostrils in the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Regardless, when they finished there are three--I got them in my bag over here. I got the pictures, and when you put them side by side, they don't look the same, you know, whatever the reason for it, you know. And they have to look the same if you're going to claim greater accuracy for that over the Golden Mask, let's say, you know. So--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And the, like maybe hundreds of other images--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, hundreds of other images--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --of Tutankhamun that look exactly alike--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --that's showing looking--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Plus, plus, you have, you reduce the argument to one mummy. And what about all the other mummies and all the other images of all the other family? Why not a family portrait? If you put all the family pictures down, all the other mummies down, then this one little rendering of the CAT scan won't take (unclear) anyway--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, there's an argument to that, in terms of the skin color they used, like this is the average shade of the Fellaheen of Egypt. I mean, what, how does that--? Speaker 2: Well, what they never--I've never seen anybody deal with the fact that the current population of Egypt is not the original population of Egypt. And that's what they're trying to--the Fellaheen, they're trying to talk about the Arab population. That population--because how did the Arabs begin to speak Arabic? Because of Muhammad [Muhammad Ali of Egypt], right? That's be- but that's because of a migrant population that comes in with the culture. It's not just the language, it's the culture itself. They bring a whole different culture into Egypt. So, the current majority population is a new population. And the old population was the one that was pushed out and to the West. So, so, now you want to argue that, you know, what these people looked back--is some kind of norm to help you interpret what happened in the past. You know, it makes no sense at all. It's not--that would be like taking Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] and Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], and saying that's what the old Indians [Native American] used to look like. Because they look more like more Americans look now, but not the like the minority Indian population looked then. Story_ID: 672703 Speaker 1: So, ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations] is formed in '84 [1984]? And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984], right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah. And since that time, I know you've led many groups to Egypt. What was your first trip to Egypt? Speaker 2: My first trip was '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's when I took a group for the first time. And so, we've--you know, twenty-five years now. The one that's coming up will be my last organized tour that I will take. Speaker 1: Now, did you--were you the one that led the tour that [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height was involved in back in the-- Speaker 2: I went-- Speaker 1: Later--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I didn't lead it, but I was there. And I lectured on it, you know, at the National Council of Negro Women. Yeah, yeah, they asked me to do lectures there. Speaker 1: Because you know what people write, those who write, who critique the Afro centers and they say that groups like the Kemetic Institute [Kemetic Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] are crazy, you know ASCAC is crazy. But National Council of Negro Women, they're supposed to be a responsible-- Speaker 2: Right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --group of women that, you know. But yet, and they went to Egypt for their conference--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: And they went on tour, and. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, you know, anyone who makes the critique by name calling is not very smart. (Laughter) You know, if you make a critique, then you critique--you compare documents. You know, that's the problem with Zahi Hawass. I've got one little interview that he did, and he does a bunch of name calling. But if he wants to argue that Tut [King Tutankhamun] is a white person, then he needs to present his documentation. He needs to write something about that, and then submit it to peer review. And he hasn't done that, so he--he stands up and makes pronouncements. And Diop [Cheikh Anta Diop] did, you know, Diop had eleven arguments from empirical data that he presented to peers in Cairo [Egypt] in '74 [1974], and won the debate. Speaker 1: It's interesting that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the rendering of King Tut is actually lighter than Zahi Hawass himself. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Who's of Arab descent, you know. Speaker 2: Right, right, right, yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, I don't know. You know, you get--the whole color thing is an interesting thing, because you'll find a variety of color on the continent. And on the Asian continent, you'll find--you'll get the Indians that are very dark, you know. And-- Speaker 1: Yeah. (Unclear) Vijay Singh is darker than, than Tiger [Tiger Woods]. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. But if you know the origin of Indians, that's not surprising, 'cause the first Indians were Africans. Story_ID: 672704 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about--now, one of the, one of the activities that you were involved in was a history making trip to Kemet [Egypt]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --by a thousand African Americans in 1987--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --under the auspices of ASCAC [Association for the Study of Classical African Civilizations] when you were like first vice president I think of ASCAC at that point. Speaker 2: I was the second vice then. Speaker 1: Second, oh yeah, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Karenga was the first vice president. Speaker 1: That's right, [HistoryMaker] Maulana Karenga was the first vice president. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the president was Dr. Jacob Carruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.], from Chicago [Illinois]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, um-hm. Speaker 1: And so, well, tell us about that trip--how it was conceived and the trip itself, and the-- Speaker 2: Well, it's like so many others. That particular trip, I think, was determined by the ancestors. Because we were just young and foolish, and that was about the fourth year, third or fourth year, that we, we decided--well, we'd had a couple of conferences, now it's time to go to the continent. And I knew that if we decided to go to the continent, we were going to have a bunch of people. I think most people felt that if we got a couple of hundred people, that that would be--but I knew that if it were made possible, that they'd be there. And although no one knew how many at the time, well, when we got there and counted the folk, you know, we had about a thousand. And what was remarkable about that trip was that all of these are people who're going on their own money. There's no grants, you know, and a lot of people can't go unless they have a grant. And then when you realize that it was a cross-section of the community--we had people on welfare, and we had people who were millionaires on that trip, you know. And the energy was absolutely awesome. That--and in some ways, that's the most--the spiritual part of it is the most important part of it. Because in terms of efficiency, we, everything was horrible. You know, the logistics were impossible, you know, getting people in and out of hotels; getting people fed. One day, the first day we were on tour, nineteen buses show up at one temple, you know. I think it was at Kom Ombo [Egypt], I believe we went there first. And we had nineteen buses, and everybody unloading. Well, logistically, you can't put nineteen groups of people, ni- fifty times nineteen, through (laughter) a temple in-- Speaker 1: In an hour and a half or two hours--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah--no, no. So, we should have sent, gone to different--but we wanted everybody to be together. So, working the logistics out. And when we get to Aswan [Egypt], you know, where are you going to put a thousand people, you know, in terms of a meeting spot? Even in Cairo [Egypt], we're in the tent. If you remember, there--in a tent outside for the whole group. So it was a logistical nightmare. And also, in terms of spreading the expertise. So, one of our thoughts was we'd have lectures on the buses while we were going back and forth, in order to save time. Well, immediately you got a problem, because you have nineteen people who are people who are capable of being a--Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan], and then says, no, there ain't but one Dr. Ben and one Dr. Clarke [John Henrik Clarke]. And all the rest of us are lesser lights, and we come on down. So, that was a problem. So, the efficiency of it was a problem, which meant that for all the time that we were there, which was a relatively short time, it was hard for people to get the same kind of thing that you get with a tour of forty, fifty people, where you can be more efficient. And yet, there was no spirit like that, you know. In the whole--I mean with what all the people enduring--you know, some grumbling and everything, but really I think people--it was almost like the Million Man March in that regard--that everybody was just, you know, extremely pleased and happy to be there. And (laughter) one of the logistical, funny things--I don't know if you remember. The--(laughter) we're in this hotel in Luxor [Egypt], and we're spread out between three or four hotels. And we didn't like the food in our hotel, so people started going over to the ETAP [ETAP Resort, Egypt]; (laughter) we're at the Winter Palace [Hotel Sofitel Winter Palace Luxor, Luxor, Egypt], you know (unclear) ETAP. (Laughter) And so the ETAP had all the people living there, plus all the people from Winter Palace over there. And they couldn't figure out why all their food was (laughter) disappearing. And then the Winter Palace couldn't figure out why they, you know, they still had all that bad food still sitting on the table, you know. So, that was one of the funny things that took place--(simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 672705 Speaker 1: A thousand people at one time. That's--I think other than the hajj, I don't know-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --what kind of tour-- Speaker 2: I don't think they've ever had a tour like that in Egypt, you know. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: (Unclear) we had, remember the, the arrangements with the Nubians themselves--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --'cause the, the--it was a four day conference-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in Aswan [Egypt]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I think one of the, one of the benefits that the conference provided for the locals was the renovation of the-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --of the Nubian Cultural Center [Luxor, Egypt]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's true. Speaker 1: --which had laid dormant. Speaker 2: That's true, that's true. Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Now you--what? Speaker 2: Well, when--the Nubians had been pushed back from the mouth of the river [River Nile], all the way up to the dam. And when the Aswan Dam [Aswan High Dam] was built, the water covered forty-two cities. And they're underwater now, which meant forty-two cemeteries, which meant the place where some of your best artifacts are. And only a few of those temples were rescued and excavated. So that, much of the cultural wealth is still underwater, now under mud, in addition to being underwater and probably deteriorating because of that. And large numbers of Nubians went further south to Khartoum [Sudan], and close to Khartoum. And then you have the one just below the dam in Daboud [Egypt], and other cities around there. And of course the ones that were on the elephant team didn't have to move. But now, you have Nubians that are really largely packed toward Aswan, beginning around Luxor [Egypt] and scattered in-between, all the way up to the density in Aswan. So, what--the benefit, of course, to Egypt is your hydroelectric power and irrigation could be controlled. And so, a segment of the Egyptian population benefitted greatly, and the Nubians literally disintegrated. And so, they had very little in terms of economic wealth, and also the cultural wealth was being taken away. So the museum then, under those circumstances, becomes extremely important. But if you're--if it's not maintained, and not being replenished and restored, and not being used in a formal way, then that can easily disappear at the same time. So, by our being there and calling attention to the need for the museum, they had to do some extra work to at least bring it partially up to snuff, you know. And since that time, they've now built what they call the African University in Aswan, and that--the idea being that people from the interior of Africa would come and be educated in Aswan. And I'm not quite sure what all the reasons were for that. But some of us have questioned, you know, how high the priority is in terms of making that a first-rate university, and what they will do about preserving the artifacts, and how much cultural sensitivity there will be in the curriculum, and so forth. Yeah. Speaker 1: Well that's--so, there's the conference and then a tour of-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --I think at least six, seven temples were toured-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --by the group-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --as they worked their way from--going all--starting at Cairo [Egypt] and going all the way down to Aswan? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Down to Daboud, and then coming all the way back to Cairo again--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Speaker 1: And in the course of about-- Speaker 2: Ten days--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --ten days. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Are there any stories that really come-- Speaker 2: Lots of stories, yeah (laughter). We had, one of them was that we thought that we had people that were provocateurs trying to create trouble so that there would be incidents. One being the, when we were at the hotel in Cairo. That in--we were sitting out there in the tent, you know, this, nine hundred people, a hun- thou- however many of us went in the tent at that time, getting ready to go. And in comes this white couple, and they say, "We're a guest in this hotel, and we have a right to anything that happens at the hotel. So, we want to be in here." (Laughter) So, it was clearly--you know, they weren't interested in--they didn't even know who we were or what we had--or maybe they did know. Whatever it was, it was--we interpreted it as an intentionally a provocative gesture. So, Hosie [Hosea Williams] you know, le--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: From Baltimore [Maryland], Reverend Ho- the late Reverend Hosie--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: He was, he just gave it (whistles) a whistle, and about four or five of them young men went over and picked them up physically and took them out of the, out of the place where the tent was, because they clearly were just trying to cause trouble and make somebody angry. And I guess they would liked if somebody had hit them or something like that. And then you would have a big news story and they would have made the tour, you know, really, really bad. But we had a few incidents like that, that made us think that there were people who really just assumed that we should not be there. But by and large, I thought things went pretty well. Story_ID: 672706 Speaker 1: Any other stories about that conference that come to mind? That, I mean, is there-- Speaker 2: Well, you know, probably the most challenging thing about it was that we had internal problems. You know, that there were--struggle between--I won't go into the names of who was involved, but they our seniors who were battling each other. And there were groups of people lined up in hotels, and we were trying to keep that tension and friction down the whole time. And that--really, it's due to Nzinga [Nzinga Ratibisha Heru] and Joye Hardiman [W. Joye Hardiman], who put the mother influence to work (laughter) on the conference, I think, and ac- and actually exercised their moderating influence on those internal problems. And I don't even know all the reasons why we had them, but it was, it was--that was a potential flare-up, you know, that actually never, never came to fruition, thank god, you know. Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, just, just for the record, tell us what did the, what did people see when they went over to Luxor [Egypt] and Aswan [Egypt], in terms of the population there? You know because when we think of Egyptians, we think of-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the darkest ones we think of is Zahi Hawass, you know, himself. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: But who, but who did they see? Speaker 2: Well, by the time you get to Luxor, you see a real cross section, in terms of phenotype. You know, you get people very dark in Luxor, and much darker on average than they would be in Cairo [Egypt]. But then there are people who are very light in Luxor who could easily be the same as the population in Cairo. So it's just that there's this gradual darkening as you move from Cairo all the way back up the river [River Nile] to the dam [Aswan Dam; Aswan High Dam]. And then of course, once you get to Aswan, then it's you know, overwhelming a black population. Speaker 1: Yeah, so much so that people themselves were, were pointing to the group and-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --and saying, American Nubians. Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 672707 Speaker 1: Now that--you talk about an event. When we went to Doc Ben's [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan] village-- Speaker 2: That's Daboud [Egypt]? Speaker 1: Daboud. Nineteen busloads of people, and we were coming down this road. And by the time we got to Daboud, here were all these men in white galabeyas on either side of the road, waving (gesture) these white cloths like that, to welcome the nineteen busloads. They go through this line of men that stretched for a long time. It looked to me like about a mile or more. And come on down that line, and into this huge tent. And there were only, there was only room for the group in the tent. And then the town, actually, by that time there were about three towns that had come together to join Daboud and welcome the group. And then the mayor of Daboud, who was a friend of Dr. Ben, because that's his adopted village, made this speech. You know, 'cause that's electrifying to--just the visual impact of all those men standing there doing that. And then he gave voice to what that symbol suggested when he stood at the mic [microphone] and said, he said, "You know," he says, "well, you know, I'm here, and--to welcome you." He says, "And I'm supposed to welcome you back." He said, "But I can't." He says, "Because for us, you have never left. You have always been here in our heart." And then he broke down and cried (laughter), and so did everybody else at that point. It was, it was a stunning moment, a stunning moment. And that, as you say, you know, that, what they experience--of course the whole time was--people would come up, and they had various ways of trying to show their identity with the group, you know. And they'd call you, "Nubian, Nubian--Nubie, Nubie, Nubie. Hey, Nubie, Nubie, Nubie, and our American Nubian, American Nubian." And so there was that, you know, that relationship instantly, you know. And it had been there before, because of the work of Dr. Ben and lots of others. And it's still there, you know, you still get that. People will tell you when they go there, that they get that warm reception (unclear). Speaker 2: It's interesting, it was an interesting experience. And you know, and most of us I guess are directly descended from West Africans. But this is more a larger African relationship we're talking about. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: One that probably was, I mean, I think the Nubians themselves were-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --surprised that anybody that lived in America could look like them. Speaker 1: Well, that's true. And see, it's true that many of us are from West Africa. But in the statistics of the slave trade, it was West Africa, Angola, cen- Congo Angola, which is central West Africa. And then all the way around on the other side, Mozambique. So you had, you had those primary locations for those who came. However, as Cheikh Anta Diop shows in pre-colonial black Africa, that there's a map in there that shows the migration of East Africans to West Africa. So, all of your, all your West Africans are East Africans anyway, from the Nile Valley going all the way from Cairo [Egypt] all the way to, you know, Tanzania and Ethiopia, and places like that. And so, and the linguistic markers from East Africa that show up in West Africa and that's part of Obenga [Theophile Obenga] and Diop's work, is the cultural unity of black Africa is reflected in the linguistic affinities and genetic kinship with the languages. And then of course, between, especially with Mali and Senegal, you know, you get, I mean not just cultural, but you get phenotypical kinship. You know, in this book, 'Timbuctoo the Mysterious' that Felix DuBois wrote, he said that when they got to the Dogon, it was like living hieroglyphs. That when they observed the people, it was like the comments you made earlier, that the images that people remembered were the images they'd seen in Egypt. But here were these living people, that living culture of Dogon. And I saw the same thing three years ago when I went to Dogon for the first time. And the people used the Kanaga mask, and they were doing these dances and everything. And I said, "My, God, you know, this is--if hieroglyphs moved, this is what it would be like, you know." And so, that cultural kinship was, was quite there. Story_ID: 672708 Speaker 1: I wanted to turn to something else that we--that you were very much involved in. And that was an attempt to--now this is, you're part of the history of a--a long history of an attempt of African Americans to change curriculum in the school system, going all the way back to probably beyond-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Willis Huggins' [Willis Nathaniel Huggins] attempts in the 1930s to try to change it. And, he did get some kind of African curriculum-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in New York public schools [New York City Department of Education] for a while, but it didn't stay. And--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --he had something called the Portland Model [Portland Model Baseline Essays]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --that you were very much involved in. And tell us about that, and why--? Speaker 2: Well, that is one of the high points of my professional life, and also my service life. Because what was happening was, NBUF, the National Black United Front, had developed a presence in Portland [Oregon], a very powerful presence. And so, their struggle had gotten to the point where they were confronting the board of education with the need to do something about a lot of things in the service to students, of which curriculum was one. But not only curriculum--staffing, and policies of discipline, there were a lot of things which they lumped under the heading of desegregation. So, the board yielded, you know, finally, and said, "Okay, we'll bring somebody in to help us address some of these issues." And Ron Herndon was the one who was leading that effort. And so as it turned out, I was invited by NBUF to, at, you know, because they gave them the authority to make the choice, you know. So, I was then designated the dese- chief desegregation consultant for Portland, which meant conceptualizing what kind of assistance they needed. And so, there were a whole lot of things. To make a long story short, though, that are were a lot of things that we dealt with. I dealt with, you know, how to address the discipline issue; how to address the personnel issue and all of that. But the curriculum is the thing that we were most--I got the most attention for. And the African curriculum is the thing that we got the greatest attention for in curriculum. But we had more than that, it wasn't just African curriculum. And so the way it was conceptualized was, was this: that, that every ethnic family has a story; they didn't just pop up out of nowhere. And their stories, all, all ethnic families have stories that begin way back in the past. And that in the case of Africans, that had never been recognized. And, but it also had not been recognized with your, what we call Latino now. We called them Hispanic at that point. It had been recognized, but nothing had been done about it with the Native American population. And the Asian population recognized it, but nothing was done about it. So we said okay, we're going to conceptualize a way to look at the curriculum and find out what's missing from the curriculum and make it whole. Given the existence of what we call five jewel cultural groups--you know, the Hispanic, the European, the African, the Asian, and Native American--you know those are the--we knew that wasn't, you know, really clean, but that was as rough a cluster as we could do. And then we said what we want to do with all of these groups is that we want to tell a longitudinal story, where they started and how they got to here. And in each of those groups, each of those stories, we want five streams, I think it's five. We want the story of their history; we want the story of their mathematics; we want the story of their science; we want the story of their language arts; and we want the story of their arts, so that collectively those strands will constitute the whole story of a me- of an evolution of a people that will explain how they got where they are here. And then if we have all of these geo-cultural stories, then we'll have a more true rendering of the American story. That's the conception that we went with, which got lost, by the way, as the newspapers later on began to attack. In the beginning, there was no attack. We went for ten years with nobody attacking us, you know. We had a little trouble trying to get everything explained and understood in Portland, it took us four years to get something out that we could use. But we eventually got the African Baseline Essays [African-American Baseline Essays] out when Matt Prophet [Matthew Prophet, Jr.] became the superintendent. And shortly after that, we got the Hispanic Baseline Essays [Hispanic-American Baseline Essays], which are very good. And we got the Asian Baseline Essays [Asian-American Baseline Essays] that was also done, and the Native American Baseline Essays [American Indian Baseline Essays]. And we're going to do the European Baseline Essay [ph.] as well, because there are European groups like Irish in particular that have stories that are not told, which means European history is incomplete, you know. So, so that was what we were trying to do. Story_ID: 672709 Speaker 1: That effort--the- Portland, Oregon paid for that itself. They taxed themselves and didn't get federal money. They got, the school board [Portland Public Schools Board of Education] gave the money for this, and they gave enough money to release teachers. They said, well, you got to train teachers, you can't just put this out there, you know. And we brought in consultants. We brought in Dr. Clarke [John Henrik Clarke], and we brought in all these top level consultants. And we said, "You got to have resources here." So we had a library project, a multi-ethnic library project, and--to have the resources. And all of this got put in place, and then the staff development was set. So, they funded the release of teachers so that they could become proficient in all of the baseline essays to a degree, and then specialize in the one that's closest to their own teaching load. That's what the idea was. That worked quite well for Portland, it went on for a while. Then the curriculum of inclusion got started with Len Jeffries [Leonard Jeffries] in New York [New York], and that's when the right-wing forces got scared. And I think that's why they attacked Len for what he said up in--something about the anti-Semitic stuff, which I'm sure had nothing to do with what they were really trying--what they wanted to do was to derail an effort like Portland. Speaker 2: Yeah I think he said, he said the Jews at one time controlled Hollywood; or do control Hollywood--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Something like that, yeah. Speaker 2: Which, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. And he had, you know, Jewish scholars that agreed with him, you know, all of that. But that's beside the point--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a book by Neal Gabler-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Neal Gabler said the same thing--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --'An Empire of Their Own' ['An Empire of Their Own: How the Jews Invented Hollywood'], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Or, 'Of Our Own'--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but I never thought that that was the issue, you know. I thought the issue was that here are all these groups, you know, and they got Schlesinger [Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr.] and they got Ravitch [Diane Ravitch]. And I was sitting in the room, Ravitch was sitting right here. And I said, "I don't understand what the issue is in New York. Why you can't do it? We've been doing this in Portland for ten years, you know." Okay, then Ravitch's eyes got big, and the next I know there's a new magazine called Educational Excellence Newsletter [ph.], or something, attacking the Portland baseline essays [Portland Model Baseline Essays], you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: A new magazine? Speaker 1: Yeah, it had never been done before. That was Volume 1. Go get Volume 1, Number 1, and you--(laughter). And that was after this meeting, you know, that I happen to attend there in New York. So, so that's when, you know, the big curriculum culture wars began, you know, at--in earnest. It had always been there, but that's when it began in earnest. But by that time, we'd already demonstrated what could be done. Materials are all over the world. They even have the Portland baseline essays in Japan. You know, they got them in the Caribbean; they've got them in all kinds of places. And now you can download them I understand off the Internet, I think. And if so, then they're in lots of different places. And they tried to attack Dr. Clarke, they came after him. They had the guy at-- Speaker 2: They had Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] attack him from the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, yeah, they--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --Op Ed page of The New York Times--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Pitiful, pitiful, yeah, piti- a full page ad. But before that they had the guy in Chicago [Illinois] at the museum [Field Museum] who attacked him. Speaker 2: Frank Yurco [Frank J. Yurco]. Speaker 1: Yurco. Yurco--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The late Frank Yurco. Speaker 1: And then they had the guy who was in Michigan, in Detroit, who was attacking Hunter. And they actually, they went after Clarke--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Hunter Adams [Hunter Havelin Adams III], you're talking about. Speaker 1: Yeah, but that didn't hold. They couldn't, you couldn't really--I mean when anybody paid attention to what Clarke said, they couldn't--and then they went after Matt [Matthew Prophet, Jr.], but they didn't know that Beatrice Lumpkin was white, you see. So then they dropped that, once they found out she was white and Jewish, you know (laughter). So then they said, okay, well, so that, that won't--so they dropped that. And then they came around to Hunter and they decided--well, that was, he was attacked for two reasons. One was that they didn't want science to be the one that came out as a model, you know. And they were able to do it, because at that time Hunter didn't have a doctorate, so they could make a big issue of that, although Hunter knows more than anybody with a doctorate about this topic, you know. And--but we knew that, you know. We knew, I knew that if Hunter's name was there and he didn't have the Ph.D., no matter high quality the material was, that there would be always an opportunity to fuzz up stuff. So, what we did, and Hunter did it, he got [HistoryMaker] Carl Spight, who does have a Ph.D. in physics. So on the essay it says, "Hunter Adam and Carl Spight." That's--they're literally co-authors, or at least Spight was the reader of Hunter's work. And nowhere in the attack did they ever say anything about the fact that Carl Spight--you don't hear his name, because it's a better story if it's Hunter with no degree. Then they started really taking Hunter apart. I mean I'm surprised that Hunter is still standing. I have great admiration and love for that guy right now because he didn't cave in. But you know, he worked at Argonne National Laboratory [Lemont, Illinois], but he was a janitor. You know, well, you read what Hunter write I mean if you get on his distribution list--I don't know a list that's more informative than the variety and depth of things that Hunter circulated. And the essays themselves, you know, they tried to get in and make this lie about the hang gliders. That Hunter says the Egyptians were flying around the pyramids in hang gliders. He didn't say that. He said that there was a model of a bird that they thought was a bird, and it turned out it had a dihedral fin, and airplanes don't have that. And so they thought maybe--and these were engineers, not Hunter. That--and he's reporting on something that appeared in another document, which was all fuzzed up and everything. But it, you know it, and they did, you know, workshops at the American Association for the Advancement of Science on, trying to destroy this essay. It's still a good essay, you know, it's a great essay. Story_ID: 672710 Speaker 1: We were talking the baseline essays [Portland Model Baseline Essays], the Portland essays, and the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: --and the attack from, different cor- I mean you had an attack from--I think the teacher's union [United Federation of Teachers] even attacked in New York [New York] I believe--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, they're all the same people, though--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's Shanker [Albert Shanker] and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Shanker. Speaker 2: --Ravitch. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Ravitch [Diane Ravitch]. Speaker 2: I think they're tied together as friends, if I'm not mistaken. Speaker 1: And then you had, yeah, Lefkowitz [Mary Lefkowitz] attack from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And you had Schlessinger [Arthur M. Schlessinger, Jr.], and then you had Bill Bennett [William Bennett] out of Heritage Foundation [The Heritage Foundation, Washington, D.C.]. Most of them are right-wing, you know. You had Lefkowitz, and you had-- Speaker 1: And she mainly was in a boxing match with Bernal [Martin Bernal] about (unclear) history--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, yeah, trying to--but none of them were people that were prepared to discuss what they were criticizing, you know. Lefkowitz as--Obenga said he couldn't tell whether she knew Greek or not. See, Obenga is fluent in Greek, and-- Speaker 1: Now this Theophile Obenga who-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --was a confidante of Cheikh Anta Diop (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yes, Cheikh Anta Diop, friend, mentor, student--friend and student. Obenga had a new book out--well, it's not a new book; it's a ten year old book in French. But it's a new English translation, 'African Philosophy of the Pharaonic Period' ['African Philosophy: The Pharaonic Period: 2780 - 330 BC,' Theophile Obenga] from the text, you know, his own translation of various texts in Greek and also in the hieroglyphics. You know, so, and plus he's got sufficient training in science and mathematics, for example, to be able to interpret astronomical text and so forth. So this--you know, Lefkowitz can't come close on anything like that, plus she doesn't know the Kemetic at all. He knows the Greek, but she doesn't know the Kemetic. So they sent, you know, a Shetland pony to run in the Kentucky Derby (laughter) you know; she's the wrong person for that. And most of the people who were doing it, the big guns laid back; they didn't come out. You know, Bill Bennett doesn't know anything about the topic, either. You know, he was lecturing people about things he doesn't know about. Yurco [Frank J. Yurco] didn't know anything. People told me at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] that he was not going to get his doctorate, you know, even though he was a student over there at the Oriental Institute [University of Chicago Oriental Institute, Chicago, Illinois]. And-- Speaker 1: He's one of the major critics? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Well, he did the, you know, the grunt work on the thing. And it was, you know, not at the level of Cheikh Anta Diop and Obenga's presentations in Cairo [Egypt]. Speaker 1: He's a, yeah, now those presentations--this is an-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --argument that goes all the way back to--well, in '74 [1974], there was a showdown in Cairo--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: --between-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the Egyptologists of the world versus Dr. Obenga--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right, thirty years ago. Speaker 1: --and Dr. Diop. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the--I think there was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: There's never been--well, there's been one other meeting like that--not as high level, but almost. And that was Molefi Asante's [HistoryMaker Molefi Kete Asante] meeting at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. There was another debate that was held there, you know, the Temple symposium on the same topic, with fundamentally the same results. We had New York Times at that meeting, and a brother reporting from The New York Times. And we told him, we said, "You're not going to be able to report on what you saw here, because it's not going to come out the way you think it's going to come out." And it didn't, you know. It came out supporting the Diop, Diop and Obenga position and so forth. And when he got back, he said, "Well, there'll be blood on the floor if I can't get this through." And I said, "Well, guess what? You're not going to get it through." Not one word was made. They, he was out there for the whole week, and not one word was printed in New York Times about the meeting that he covered. Speaker 1: That's reminiscent of Bruce Williams' article on the incense burner, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: On the lost pharaohs ['The Lost Pharaohs of Nubia,' Bruce Williams], yes, yes. Speaker 1: --when he-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes-- Speaker 1: --he--when that appeared in The New York Times, it was a part one of two. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And part two never came out. Speaker 2: Never came out, yeah. Speaker 1: After part one he had--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. And nobody to my knowledge has ever been able to question Bruce Williams' scholarship on any of it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, no, but he lost his job. Speaker 1: He, he became quiet-- Speaker 2: He dated students, or something. Speaker 1: --for a long time, and now he's director of admissions I think--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying-- Speaker 1: --at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: --not working in Egyptology-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he said it was too hard, there was so much to--fighting. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah well he told us that he was being beat up pretty badly, yeah. Story_ID: 672711 Speaker 1: There's something else I was going to mention, but I can't think of what it is now. But, but the- oh, Stephen Howe, yeah, from--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right, in England. Yeah. Speaker 1: --who actually, he made a very pointed attack on Afrocentrists, he called them--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --Afro-centrists and (unclear) and glorifying something or other--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, well, at least he read some of them. You know, most of them don't even do that. But all he did was read enough to, to cat- to categorize people, but he didn't engage the scholarship, you know. So, it's, you know, it looked to me--his work looks better than all the critics, you know, in term- from an academic angle, but it's not adequate. Speaker 1: And there's a tape where he apologizes to Robin Walker, a brother from London [England]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: --at a bookstore--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: Have you seen that? Speaker 2: No, I haven't seen that. Speaker 1: Yeah, he debates Robin Walker, and he's, he apologizes. At the end he says, "Well, I didn't know enough, and I'm really sorry." He said, "I'm really on your side." And (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Really? Speaker 1: And people kind of, you know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was speaking to the audience. Well, he's, I read it, and it's not a competent critique. You know, for example, if, if Diop [Cheikh Anta Diop] says, "I created a melanin dosage test to determine the level of pigment in the mummies, and this is what I found," then the answer to that is to, not to call Diop a name. The answer to that is to critique the test itself, or to do your own test. Or do something, come up with something. But what he comes up with is--is you know, just invective, and you know, name calling and all of that, it's not--or, he just plain dismisses it and says, "It's clearly inadequate, you know," and that's not a, that's not a critique of anything. Speaker 1: At one point he said, in this tape from England, he said that Diop was not respected in Senegal even. Speaker 2: What, but what kind of statement is that? Speaker 1: And yet the University of Senegal is now Cheikh Anta Diop University [Dakar, Senegal]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, named for him, yeah (laughter) named for him yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, he's doing what all the others do, you know. Story_ID: 672712 Speaker 1: So, well, you're the author of several books. Now what are your books? Speaker 2: I've done 'The Maroon Within Us' ['The Maroon Within Us: Selected Essays on African American Community Socialization,' Asa G. Hilliard, III], which is on the socialization of African children; 'The Reawakening of the African Mind' ['SBA: The Reawakening of the African Mind,' Asa G. Hilliard, III]. I have three books on socialization: 'Reawakening of the African Mind-SBA'--'African Power' ['African Power: Affirming African Indigenous Socialization in the Face of the Culture Wars,' Asa G. Hilliard, III]; I did one on psychological testing, which was an edited volume that pulled together arguments against, against the empirical arguments against standardization and cult- and the absence of cultural salience. We have an edited volume, re-editing of 'The Teachings of Ptahhotep' ['The Teachings of Ptahhotep: The Oldest Book in the World,' ed. Asa G. Hilliard, III, Larry Williams and Nia Damali], which was the oldest book in the world, from the Kemetic. We have, what is it, something on the black family and stuff, and quite a few articles and things like that. Pro- oh, the most recent one was 'Young, Gifted, and Black' ['Young, Gifted, and Black: Promoting High Achievement Among African American Students,' Theresa Perry, Claude Steele, and Asa G. Hilliard, III] which is on powerful teaching. Story_ID: 672713 Speaker 1: Every time you speak-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --well, you speak to a lot of schoolteachers. You seem to be one of the most popular--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --speakers to schoolteachers all over the country. I mean, they flock to wherever you're speaking. I mean, and you--I mean I think one church in Chicago [Illinois], one organization was charging like thirty, forty dollars to hear you speak, you know. And that's the prices people pay to hear jazz musicians, you know a lot of the time. And they were coming, it was packed; the place was packed. Do you think after all of the battles of the '90s [1990s] that we're still--I mean what do you, what's your assessment of the struggle to change curriculum and culture, and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Well, it's not going to be easy to change curriculum; that's one of the things I learned. You know, we've had some great people do great things. Most recently Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] has required, there's a required course now, in order to graduate you've got to pass a course in African history in Philadelphia. I know that's Molefi [HistoryMaker Molefi Kete Asante] and probably Greg, and especially Greg Kimathi Carr's [Greg Carr] work--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Kimathi Carr. Speaker 2: So, you have things like that. At one point we had, for two years we had a million dollars from Atlanta [Georgia] to do staff development and infuse African content in school curriculum. Portland [Oregon] had ten years and so forth; Florida mandated African curriculum, and so forth. But unless you have a structure for sustainability, then those things kind of come and go with the leadership, and so forth. Because I think we have a bigger problem than what happens in the schools, and I think it's what happens in the community. And that if a community has a good grip on its own history, and has it preserved and has the infrastructure to maintain it and to enrich it and keep it going, then it becomes a factor that has to be taken into account in schools, you know. But right now, most communities can't argue for African studies, because the parents don't have it; (laughter) you know, the preachers don't have it; you know, the leadership doesn't have it. And so, the little teacher who's partially informed knows more than the community themselves. So, we're backwards. You know, like, I had a friend, a Jewish kid in, at University of Denver, [Denver, Colorado], Dick Kieffer [Richard Kieffer]. He, when he goes to the synagogue, he doesn't have--if the school never teaches a word about Hebrew history, they've got it in the synagogue every Friday, you know. And every summer he, they get six weeks of it in summer camp, you know. And so they say, "Okay, we'll do our own, you know. And here's our books, and so forth. This is the legitimacy, these are the materials." But the parallel--you know is b- well, we know why it is, because we had it when we got on the ships to come here. But our infrastructure got destroyed, and it's only in a handful of places we've put that back together again--Schomburg museum and library [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York], Moorland-Spingard Collection [Moorland-Spingard Research Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and things like that, you know, and the Auburn Avenue Library [Auburn Avenue Research Library on African American Culture and History, Atlanta, Georgia]. But even here, you know, the Auburn Avenue Library is not even really that well used. For a million people, that's supposed to be lines around the block, you know (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean the cultural reposi- the people-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the place that people come to get to culture--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --is the church--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. Speaker 1: And not the library. Speaker 2: Exactly. And each church, one of the churches I went to in Baltimore [Maryland] had a library. And the pastor--when you walk into the vestibule of this African Methodist [African Methodist Episcopal, A.M.E.] church, the vestibule is a library, I mean there's books all over the vestibule. You've got to walk through the books to get into the, into the sanctuary. Speaker 1: And they're not Bibles, I take it? Speaker 2: No, they're books. They're Diop's [Cheikh Anta Diop] books and Obenga's [Theophile Obenga] books; all of that's in there, and Dr. Ben's [HistoryMaker Yosef ben-Jochannan] books. And then they have study groups, you know. So that, right along with the theological material and so forth, they also get their historical and cultural material. And that, that's how it has to be, first and foremost. Because nobody's going to teach your history if you don't care about it, you know. And then I think we would have advocates, you know, people would be, you could have some--like we feared at San Francisco State [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] that the African studies program could go out of existence and the community would not be outraged. (Laughter) You know, the people who're teaching there would care, and the students who took it would care. But is there a critical mass that would say, "Hey, this is something vital that just happened to us." And in most places, the answer is no. And that's because the mission of socialization is not accepted, you know, as an obligation or responsibility in most places. Story_ID: 672714 Speaker 1: Now, what, what would you--I know when you hear terms like Afrocentrists, Pan Africanists, and black nationalists, what would you consider yourself philosophically--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I'm a Pan African nationalist, I guess is what you would call it. The Afrocentrism, I think is a difficult term. You know, it's a very--in the first place, Molefi [HistoryMaker Molefi Kete Asante] and I had this discussion about the, what appears to me to be an abbreviation of a proper name, Afro. And it's not the right abbreviation. I don't think--I think it should be Afri if you want to abbreviate it--and I don't think you ought to abbreviate your name, you know, and so forth. But I can understand that he started it off, and he's done some magnificent things with what he did and everything. But there's some other, there's another problem with it, which is that it appears to be a different way of identifying oneself ethnically than other people have. You know, usually a person is, just says, "I'm a member of the German--I'm a German person," that presumes that you're German centered (laughter). If you say, "I'm a Frenchman," that presumes that you're a Frenchman. "I'm an Ebo," that presumes that you're centered as an Ebo. But you don't say, "I'm Ebo centered," you know. And so, so I think there's something--it's nothing wrong with the name, but there's something wrong with the context of meaning that will be given to the name, based on how other people treat identity terms, you know. So, that's--that's the problem I had with it. And so right now, for example, most people think that Afrocentrism is course content. For me, what people, what Molefi and others mean by Afrocentrism, what it means is I got a family. You know, the issue is do you have a group for whom you have a family feeling, that you belong to someone other than yourself? Now, the thinking about it, you know, the theory of it and all that, that's important. But it's important after we agree that we're brothers. You know, in my family, there's no question about the fact that if you say Hilliard, what that means to us is that, you know, we have a biological, cultural, historical connection to each other; there's a bond. That's what it means first. Now, then somebody says, "Well, what do the Hilliards think being Hillard means?" Now, you may be getting into some kind of theoretical, philosophical discussion. That's an add-on for me, you know (laughter). The first question is that we know that we belong to each other. That's what's at issue, is our bond. And that's what--in order to destroy Africans, the bond had to be destroyed. Once you destroy the bond, then academic conversations about content and all of that are purely that; there're just academic. Now, it contributes to the bond, you know. The--you can't have a bond without information and without understanding, and all of that. But I think the, that what people have to remember is that I can have a lot of information about African people, and feel no bond. You know, and I see people that do it, especially now you get all these people that are being trained to be Negroes, you know, who are backing an academic institution. They have a lot of information about African people, and they feel negatively toward us. You know, you know certain--Clarence Thomas hates black people, as far as I can see. And lots of other scholars, the new conservatives, you know, I think they basically don't like black people, you know, and they have some information about them. So, so the centeredness--I'm--I think even centered--you know, I'd like to assume centered. That is, if you say, if I say, "That person is Chinese," what that means to me, from my experience, is that person'll go to battle for his family. If you mess with them (laughter), he's going to fight back. He's going to protect and defend, and all of that; I just assume that. He doesn't say, "I'm Chinese centered." I know he's Chinese-centered, because I know if I mess with him, I'm going to be in trouble. And, but that's not necessarily the case with us. You know, they can mess with us all over the place. Messed with us in Haiti; they just did. They just went in--U.S. just went in and deposed an elected president [Jean-Bertrand Aristide], a democratically elected president. Took him out of power, and moved him out and (laughter) had a regime change. And we didn't have any outrage, really. Some people did, but most people, "Oh, them, those Haitians." I mean, they're not, there's no bond, you know. And some of the Haitians, you know, how do they feel when they come in? Do they feel that they're just Haitians alone, even in Miami [Florida], you know? Those are African families being re-joined, you know, so to--the bond is the issue for me. So, I had a little way of expressing it: to be African, or not to be? Story_ID: 672715 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That--that brings me to the title of-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --one of your most popular books, one I like the most, is 'The Maroon Within Us' ['The Maroon Within Us: Selected Essays on African American Community Socialization,' Asa G. Hilliard, III]. What do you mean by that? What is a Maroon, and what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, that, it really pleases me, because a lot of people seem to like that one best. And I've probably forgotten more about that book than most of the others. But I, I remember what I even felt like while I was doing it, and so forth. I know what I was trying to do, and have no idea about whether it was achieved or not, except that I get, you know, that kind of feedback. But what I was trying--because there's really only one chapter in there where I deal specifically with the Maroons, and only a part of that chapter, which is a part of a lecture that I'd done. And what I was trying to show is the Maroon functions, you know, more than the history of the Maroons--that the Maroon is the decision to be family, to pull away from whatever it is that's trying to hold you back, and to act like a family. That's what a Maroon is. They got off the plantation, went off in the woods so people would let them alone, and so they could renew their resources, renew their energies, reaffirm their bond to each other, to strategize for their own self determination. That's what marronage is: to affirm their cultural values and so on, that's what marronage is. So, 'The Maroon Within Us,' what I was trying to say is that even though we may have forgotten all of that, it's still there. You know, the seed is still there, and all it has to do is be tapped. And then the rest of the book is trying to talk about all the aspects of tapping into that seed, so that we re-exist, that we do what our ancestors in Florida did. They ran away from the plantation in Georgia, and went down to Florida and said, "Well, look, quit messing with us." They started messing with them, well we ran all the way to Mexico and said, "We'll do whatever we have to do to be a family. We just don't--just leave us alone, we're not messing with you. Just let us be." And so, that's what that was, that's what that was about, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And in all my books, what I also try to do is to deal with a more sophisticated understanding of the nature of the opposition. In other words, it's not so much that somebody hurt me, but how did they do it? You know, what was their strategy? What tools did they use, and so forth? Because in being a Maroon, you have to understand that enemy and what that enemy is doing to you--what weapons they use and so forth. So that way you can then really protect yourself. Story_ID: 672716 Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question. And that is, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Oh (unclear) I've got a lot. Of course the one is that we become conscious, you know, because I think we're in a matrix, and we haven't taken the red pill. And that when pills are offered, we pick the blue ones more than we pick the red one. And so, I want us to be awake, you know. That's why 'The Reawakening of the African Mind' ['SBA: The Reawakening of the African Mind,' Asa G. Hilliard, III] was an important book. And in addition to that, I want us to know what the weather is like. You know, if you're awake, which means you know who you are, then you also ought to know what everybody else is, you know, what the weather--. And right now, there's some, there are some tsunamis that are--we're in the middle of some, and others are coming. There's an economic tsunami. Globalization is an economic tsunami that's already in place, and nothing is going to stop it. The book called 'Flat Earth' [sic. 'The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-first Century,' Thomas L. Friedman] tells us what's going to happen. And that's going to happen to people who are established and solid (laughter). And for those of us who are fragmented, when that tsunami hits fragmented people, what's going to happen? When--when everything, all the wealth in America has come down in order for it to go up a little bit in India and China and other places in the world, what are the consequences for Africans in a world that's going through those shapes. And our people aren't talking about it; you know, what are the consequences of--what are the consequences of Walmart-ization of the world? You know, Walmart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] is the biggest grocery store now. And what's it doing to the environment in Brazil, you see? So, that's another aspect of globalization. What are the consequences of the free reign of people to play with genetic material? You can experiment on anything--put human genes in pigs, and pig gene in flowers, and you can do--there's no limits on what can happen. You just move from one country to the other, and what's prohibited in one place is permitted in another. And so, and then all of a sudden stuff gets out, you know, ala 'Andromeda Strain' ['The Andromeda Strain,' Michael Crichton]--that's not just fiction. You know, it may have already happened in something like SARS [severe acute respiratory syndrome]. You know, we know people are playing around with chemical, biological, radiological efforts. And CBR, the chemicals and the biological get out of hand, you know. We already have--nuclear got out of hand in Russia, Chernobyl [Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant, Ukraine], it could happen again. So there's lots of little tsunami things that are non-economic also; you know, the media tsunami, you know, where we don't have a way to talk to our communities anymore. Because all the media are pre-empted, you know, even our griots as they call them, jele. Those young people have the most powerful form of communication on the planet, so much so that all your corporations have to talk through the language of hip-hop. But the hip hop artists can't send liberation messages, or they won't have the mic [microphone]. You know, so that's a tsunami. You know, how long can a family sustain itself when it can't talk to each other, except through--you know, when I was in Liberia, the metaphor is that, to make a phone call to the Ivory Coast, and I'm sitting here on the border, and I want to make a phone call to the next town in the Ivory Coast. My phone call has to go to Paris [France], and then come back to Ivory Coast, the way the phone lines were. All the communications in Africa went to Europe first, and then comes back to Africa, you know, in long distance. So, that's the metaphor for what's happening now. You know, for me to talk to somebody in Los Angeles [California], I've got to go through what? Through the Los Angeles Times, through CBS, NBC, through--. And so the ability to communicate clear messages to a family, that's a tsunami to me. You know, and you can't have that going for years and years and years and have any kind of solidarity. So that's a serious, serious problem. So I wish, you know, my hope is just, if we just knew what I just said; if we just knew what the tsunamis were. And if we knew who we were--if we knew those two things, then I got total faith that we know exactly what we have to do to enhance and, and protect ourselves. Story_ID: 672717 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently now? Speaker 2: Hm, there probably are, you know. And the only reason I hesitate to say that is because I can't think of anything, even the things I wouldn't have chosen, where I haven't learned something that's been very beneficial to me. For example, one of the things I started to say was I would not have taken time out to be a department chairman and a dean [at Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], because that took me out of the time that I needed to dedicate to the priority that I have on research and study and communication, and all of that. And I would have taken that chunk out. On the other hand, there were things that I learned because I did that, that helped me, for example, when I dealt with Portland [Oregon]. Or when I deal with the school districts; I understand administration, I understand structures, I understand--. So, on the one hand I would say yes, there are some things that I would do different, in terms of being more focused and more sustained in that focus. But I'm reluctant to give up the experience that I had, (laughter) even the bad ones, you know, the ones that were incomplete, because I'm more informed. I feel I'm more informed, and able and equipped to do things that, that I need to do, you know, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Story_ID: 672718 Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look at your life as it's progressed to this point, what would you see at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: That part, I really don't know. You know, I, I've learned that--and I don't mean to be, you know, hesitant, you know. But, I'm shocked. A lot--you just said something to me. You said, you know, that the book that you like is the 'Maroon' ['The Maroon Within Us: Selected Essays on African American Community Socialization,' Asa G. Hilliard, III]. And I get people who will tell me that. But almost everything that I know about the effect of what I do, comes in that way. Or, it's out there and it doesn't come at all. You know, people may have that, an experience like that, but never get to tell me that. So I've learned basically on, based on what people have said, that I really don't, don't know. You know, and sometimes it'll be ten or fifteen years, and somebody will come up to me and say, "Well, Asa [HistoryMaker Asa Hilliard, III], you know, you were--," one guy did. He told me, he said, "Man, I was at Stanford," this was when I did my first major slide presentation, you know. And there are about two hundred students in the auditorium on Stanford University campus [Stanford, California]. And as I remember, it was a pretty raggedy presentation. It had a lot of stuff in it, but it just wasn't coherent, as I think back about it now. But this student came up to me and he said, "I've never forgotten that." He said, "And it made me do," you know, XYZ, you know, "start looking here and start raising these questions. And I've been doing that all life," you know. Well, you know, it's a lot of things like that. If I hadn't seen him, I would not even had known that there was one student who felt that way. So I just, I just find that what I try to concentrate on, more than any evaluation of effects, is trying to get it right. You know, I try to clean up my act and go back and fix whatever it is that I didn't do well or right, and that's where I put my time. You know, I just don't know. Story_ID: 672719 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family. We haven't talked a lot about your family. Speaker 2: Well, I--my wife [HistoryMaker Patsy Jo Hilliard] and I started right away in 1957 when we got married. And shortly after that we, you know, about a year later we had our first child, Asa IV [Asa Hilliard IV]. And we had three more, Robi Nzinga [Robi Hilliard Herron], and another daughter, Nefertari Patricia [Patricia Hilliard Nunn], and my last son Hakim [M. Hakim Hilliard], who was born in Liberia. So, we have four children, and now we have seven grandchildren. The two girls, one has five children and the other has two. And then we have a grand-dog, you know, so that's, that's our core family. But we're loaded with cousins, you know, and we're establishing a colony here in Atlanta [Georgia] with twenty or thirty others who are kind of related to us one way or another, and some that we pull in, whether they are or not. And so our centers are in Atlanta, Houston [Texas] area for the big critical mass, Los Angeles [California]; and then lots of other places with smaller groups. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, Dr. Jacob Carruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] was your first cousin? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And I know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Not my first cousin, but he's my cousin, yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, okay, a cousin, all right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Carruthers, we're related to the Carruthers family in South Texas, just south of Houston [Texas] there. My grandmother, my father's [Asa Hilliard, II] mother, was a Carruthers, Pearl Carruthers [ph.]. So that's our--her, her parents are related to Jake's family. And so it comes down that way--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: So, you're second cousins? Is that what it is, or--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Beg your pardon? Speaker 1: Second cousins, I guess? Or, for-- Speaker 2: Well, I have to calculate; I, I don't know (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he's like a brother. Because if I show--I've got pictures of the, some of the Carruthers that were--and they all look like Jake more than me. You know, so I call him, I would call my first cousin, even though he's probably a second or third, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 672720 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Asa Hilliard, II] and mother [Lois Lowe Williams] get a chance to see you really get involved in your career before they--? Speaker 2: My dad did. He died when he was seventy-five, I think it was. And he went to Egypt with us, I mean to Liberia with us, he--so he knew about that African part. He was very supportive of it, very interested in it. And, and then of course my mother went to Egypt with me. And so she--and she's still living, and she's ninety-two now. And so she's very much aware of the things that I'm involved with, and, and also very supportive. You know, she's Pentecostal, so her primary interest and motivation move more in a theological direction than a historical and cultural. But I'd say the odd thing is that out of everybody in the family, she's probably the least aware of it, but is most African. Because the Pentecostal part, in terms of the whole--not only the values, but the behaviors--you know, spiritual possession and everything like that--she, it's amazing. If I look at her, and I go to Ghana next week, I'll see the same behavior that my mother exhibits. Story_ID: 672721 Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Now, is there anything you want to say that we haven't asked you? Is there something that I haven't touched upon that you think that you should address? Speaker 1: Well, trying to think. There's so much stuff. The--(pause) one of the, one of the things that almost never gets mentioned in interviews and stuff, but that I think has some meaning, is the variety of things that I've had an opportunity to do that aren't in the mainstream of what I do. You know, that I you know have, on several occasions been a janitor. I've been a cleaner of refrigerated cars on the railroad, where we have to go in and steam them out with steam hose and clean them down that way. We used to roll those wheels around. I worked as a maintenance worker in the railroad yard. I also worked as a dishwasher on the railroad dining car, a waiter on a dining car, and a bartender in the lounge car, and a chair car attendant, you know, all of that on that train. Worked in hotels--bartender, waiter. In the National Guard I learned how to operate heavy equipment--you know, bulldozer, road-grader, chainsaw. I did camp counselor training. I had paper routes, at one time two at a time. A janitor at the school and through the Rocky Mountain News and The Denver Post, you know, at the same time. I mention that because I think I'm shaped as much by the different types of contacts that I've had with people, in terms of nurturing my own humanity, you know. Story_ID: 672722 Speaker 1: So, I don't get as caught up in what, what like credentials mean. You know, I don't mind credentials, but I truly don't have much regard for them. You know, I have much more regard for a clear message. You know, when Jake [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] says, "Good speech," you know, that's what turns me on. And that can come f- like Ptahhotep says, from anywhere. You know, that kind of clarity I really like. And so I--I really, in my own thinking about what I do and who I am, the last thing I think about is some of the characterization that you get in resumes. (Laughter) You know, that the--both the experiences and the events as a part of those experiences are usually much more important to me, you know. You know, I saw--for example in Denver [Colorado], you know, when I lived in a neighborhood where, pretty rough. And I came home one night, and a friend of mine and I was walking past the house. And a woman comes out and her throat had been cut by her husband, and she died at my feet. You know, she just fell over. And she had on something like I have on here now that was white. And almost in a flash, it was all red, just like she had a red garment on. And then she sat there just like a chicken quivers. You know, I'd worked on a farm and all of that and saw that. Looked out, and that's--you know, a way to let you know that life is not forever, you know, and it could come--. I saw--when my mother [Lois Lowe Williams] had divorced my dad [Asa Hilliard, II], we lived in Marlin, Texas. And I remember when the men were going overseas, they used to fight right up the street just before--if they got ready to get on those boats. It would be like going to Iraq. They would tear the town up, because they wouldn't think they're coming back, in World War II [WWII]. And I remember one night where some of them were out in front of my house, which was right near the red light district, we lived--prostitution all up and down this street. And my mother is Pentecostal, you know, hole in the--and she has a little--here with these three kids in the house. And she's got a little thing where you take pictures, ten--three for a dime. And she sells hamburgers a nickel apiece--for a hamburger. And so, everybody, all the soldiers who would come to town, they would know here's this lady who's sitting here with these three little kids. So they would tear up, break every window out in every store, but never touch our house. And then I looked out one night and saw a gunfight right outside my, my house. Two men firing at each other, one down behind the billboard and all of that. And, and then I'd been shot at, you know, by the police, you know, who--in Bay City [Michigan] where we would go swim naked in a creek. And train came by and we're all naked, so we just waved. (Laughter) And people looked out the window, here are all these naked boys in the creek under the trestle. So somebody apparently reported it, and then this policeman came out and cussed us out, and shot in the water. I don't know whether if he intended to shoot at us or not, I'm hoping that he didn't. But he scared the life out of us by doing that. So, I'm just saying that I've had many, many experiences like that that--those are some fairly extreme kinds of experiences. But others that are of a different type that helped shaped my worldview, you know, just as much as an article on philosophy will help shape a worldview. And that one of my regrets is I don't have a way to summarize those so that they can be communicated at least in terms of what I think they mean in, in the long haul, you know. And everybody has that, you know. But I think we--in the matrix, we get in the habit of accepting certain topics as the main ones that can be talked about, and others may be just as important. Speaker 2: I agree with you. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 672723 Speaker 1: The last question we normally ask is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a hard one, too. You know, I've been asked that a lot of times, and, and I guess it's--what I've decided is that I don't really have much control over what that is, that people will have an honest memory of what their experiences have been. And that be- again, the best part I can do is try to monitor the input, you know, to try to do right. And I know that I tried to be a fair and truthful person. You know, that's my standard that I don't always reach, but I try as hard as I can to do that, you know. And that I'm family, you know; that I care about that, both nuclear and ethnic you know, family. And then of course I care about humanity as well. And so, I know that those, those things are true. And but I--in the long run, I think that I don't matter as much as what I may have been able to do, even for people don't know anything about it. So, they won't remember me, because they won't know what I did, you know. And so, and, but it won't--but what I did won't matter, you know, it will matter to them. So, so, I'm--my, my guess is that most of what I've done, knowing what I've done, with the possible exception of maybe one or two of my kids and my wife [HistoryMaker Patsy Jo Hilliard], most people around won't, won't have a good grasp of the variety of things and whatever depth there is that I've gotten involved with. If my brother had, had lived--Tom [ph.], who's you know, an incredible twin. You know, we were involved in some of the same things. He was probably close enough to know almost everything, you know, and he would have remembered. But what he would have remembered, I don't know. But he was in a space, and we were that close that he would have known. But most people I know probably can't get enough information to, about what, all the things I try to do and ways I'm--. For example, I was in San Francisco [California], and it was actually protection for me when I was dean [at San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California]. Most people didn't know, didn't have an inkling of what I did until I left, if they knew then. You know, for example, I'd have--half the people thought I was a historian, half thought I was a psychologist, (laughter) half thought I was in counseling. You know, they had all kinds of--because that part of it that they were exposed to, they thought was the whole thing. And so when--I remember one guy, he began, he said, "Wait a minute. I didn't know about this history part." And then he began to pursue--he was one of the guys in one of the departments where I went. And it's almost like he got scared, you know. "I mean, you're--how do these all fit together for you?" I said, "Well, this is what I'm getting ready to do." And so there's that kind of thing in everybody's life, I guess, where there's dimensions that can only be integrated inside the person. And so, I don't think that there's a lot of chance that much of the things that I do--and a lot of it is not public knowledge. Like, I avoided--I was able to not be in the newspaper even once. My photo never appeared in a newspaper once in San Francisco. I was there eighteen years, not once. And I was--on purpose, you know, I avoided that. And the same thing here. I don't think I've been photographed in any paper in Atlanta [Georgia]. Or been published--maybe somebody has photographed, I don't know. But I don't crave that kind of recognition. It's the burden for me to, you know, to have a lot of recognition of that type. So, I don't seek it, and so I don't think a lot about, you know--I just, again, if I could do right, you know, then I try to make my peace with the one upstairs. And ancestral expectations; if the ancestors are happy, then I'll be happy. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Thank you, sir. Thank you very much--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: All right. Thank you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Thank you...