 Story_ID: 531304 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state your full name, and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Okay. My name is Phyllis, P-H-Y-L-L-I-S, Jean, J-E-A-N, Mosley, M-O-S-L-E-Y, Hicks, H-I-C-K-S [HistoryMaker Phyllis Hicks]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: March the 3rd--no, that's not right. I was gonna say third month; it's March 7th, 1943 (laughter). Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: Omaha, Nebraska. Speaker 1: Okay. And ma'am, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, officially, I'm retired (laughter), but part-time I'm working at the Omaha Star newspaper, Nebraska's only black weekly paper, in marketing. I'm doing marketing and some column writing. Speaker 1: Okay. And the name of your column is-- Speaker 2: It's Just My Opinion [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is October the 4th, I believe, or the 5th, I haven't looked yet (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. This is--I think it's the 5th, and the year is-- Speaker 2: Two thousand seven [October 5, 2007]. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Omaha, Nebraska at the Omaha Star. Story_ID: 531305 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that they make me ask everyone, and they only require a short answer; they're kind of a warm-up. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, the first question is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Well, you can see I have a lot of favorite foods (laughter), spaghetti. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: My--black. Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: Well, now because my grandchildren are there, Las Vegas [Nevada] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I like spring and fall. Speaker 1: Okay. The last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Not particularly, no. Story_ID: 531306 Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Mosley, Jr.] side-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: Okay. Her name is Juanita, J-U-A-N-I-T-A, her maiden name--she has no middle name, her maiden name is Agee, A-G-E-E, and her married name at this time is Morrow, M-O-R-R-O-W [Juanita Agee Morrow]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Omaha, Nebraska, April 16th, 1924. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? I mean how far back can you trace them? You know where they came from originally, or were they from--always from around here? Speaker 2: No. My mother was born in Omaha, her mother, my grandmother [Emma Agee Sullivan], was born in Magnolia, Alabama, and her mother, my great-grandmother [Mariah Agee Morgan], was also born in Magnolia, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, is there a story in your family about how they--I mean when they migrated (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's a huge story. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, yeah, let's go back (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: --'cause it may--is there a story about the end of slavery or about what they-- Speaker 2: As far back as we had a family reunion and we have a book that traces back, and my great-grandmother's mother, her name was Emma Dumas, and her father--well, my great-great-grandmother's name was Emma Dumas [Emma Dumas Agee], I don't know who her father was. Speaker 1: D-U-M-A-S? Speaker 2: D-U-M-A-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she--as far as I know, she was not a slave. She was an Agee, she married an Agee, and from the little town in Magnolia when we went there for a reunion, the whole facility, at one time, were Agees. They had their own private school to train all of the children in the family, they had the only grocery store in the area, they had most of the land in that particular area, and it's not too far from Mobile [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, now these are the black Agees that are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --they had their own store, land and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay--near Mobile. So, are these the same Agees that are--you know, a former Mets [New York Mets] player, Tommie Agee-- Speaker 2: He's a cousin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He was a cousin. Speaker 1: Okay. And then there's an Agee [Arthur Agee, Jr.] in Chicago [Illinois] that was made famous by a movie called 'Hoop Dreams,' a young man named Agee that played basketball at Dunbar [sic. John Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know about him, but part of that family is Ardythe Sayers [Ardythe Bullard Sayers], married to Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers]; she--her name is Ardythe Agee, that's her maiden name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her father and my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's Gale Sayers' wife. Speaker 2: --wife--that's another story. Anyway, her father and my grandmother's father were brothers-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and that's how my grandmother--my great-grandmother and my grandmother came to Omaha is they came when Uncle Walter [Walter Agee] came. Speaker 1: And when was that? Now when did they come to Omaha? Speaker 2: My grandmother was twelve years old, that's all I know. Speaker 1: All right, so your grandmother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was born in 1907-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --and she was twelve. Speaker 1: Okay. It's about 1919, so. Speaker 2: Nineteen nineteen [1919], or 1920, something like that. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. So that's a--all right. Story_ID: 531307 Speaker 1: So she came here just right up on the heels of the riot, she was just before the riot, or just at the time of the riot of 1919 (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably, yeah. She never talked about it--no. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The one thing she told me, that one time at Thanksgiving, we were talking about Malcolm X, and she just--I mean out of the blue, said that--well, she was a member of his father's church when they came to burn the church down (laughter), and she said that, you know, how they hid in the basement and they went out the back door, and she hid Malcolm X's mother [Louise Norton Little] at her house, and then shortly after that, they left Omaha [Nebraska]. Speaker 1: Okay, so, yeah, Malcolm X's father was a reverend, Earl Little, right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And so he, he had a church here, and your great-grandmother (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, my grandmother [Emma Agee Sullivan] was a member. Speaker 1: Your grandmother, your grandmother was a member. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's your grandmother who came here in 1919, correct? Speaker 2: Um-hm-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: --with her mother [Mariah Agee Morgan], who brought her here. Speaker 1: Did she remember the name of the church, or do you remember the name of it? Speaker 2: I don't know. It was Holiness. Speaker 1: Okay. That's something. Now, that was--yeah, 'cause Malcolm X was born here in 1925, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was born in '24 [sic. 1925]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --okay. So, did she have any other stories about them, or about-- Speaker 2: That just came out and we were like, "Wow! You never said nothing." She said, "Nobody ever asked me," (laughter) so--but that was--basically that's all she said, that they were members, and she was friends--good friends with his wife, and that--how they hid her. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they hid her from the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The--whoever they were. I think it was KKK [Ku Klux Klan]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause she said they came up on horses and they were gonna light the--burn up the church; I don't know what stopped 'em, they didn't do it. But anyway, they had all escaped 'cause they were there, I think that she said it was a prayer meeting or something, and they all escaped out the back door, and then--and it was in South Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], I know that, too. I don't know where. Speaker 1: Okay. About twelve years ago--there's a book ['Malcolm: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America'] written by a guy named Bruce somebody [Bruce Perry], about Malcolm X, where he tried to debunk a lot of things that Malcolm X says in 'The Autobiography of Malcolm X' [Malcolm X and Alex Haley], and he alleged in that book that Malcolm X's father was really not, you know, harassed by the Klan. Speaker 2: Yes he was-- Speaker 1: He was--okay. Speaker 2: --I mean according to my grandmother. She said they ran him out of town. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's why they left Omaha. Speaker 1: So you have no doubt that that's what the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, if my grandmother said it, it's true (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was, she was a special lady, too. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, it's good to get that story from people who were here, and know, rather than to, you know, read it someplace else. So--okay, so--yeah, he went on to Lansing [Michigan] and was, was run over by a streetcar, and the story is there that they may have actually pushed him under the car (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pushed him, yeah, 'cause this--from--my grandmother's side, she said that he was a--you know, he was taking on issues and taking on, you know, the wrongdoings and things, and he'd speak out, and so they were always trying to quiet him down. Speaker 1: Okay. Now--oh, he was I know an organizer for the Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League. Speaker 2: Yes, sir. Speaker 1: Did--is there--are there any--were any members of your family members of the UNIA, Marcus Garvey's (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no--unless, you know--like I said, unless my grandmother--if they were doing that at her church, but I don't know. We didn't--you know, I just didn't think to ask her a whole lot about it 'cause she took everybody by shock when she said it, 'cause I mean all the years that it never--it had never come out. Story_ID: 531308 Speaker 1: Okay, so any other stories from your grandmother you--? Speaker 2: Well, my [maternal] grandmother was significant that--I told you what her name was, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, what is it? Speaker 2: Her name was Emma Lee-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: --Agee-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --Sullivan [Emma Agee Sullivan]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was--started the first usher board at Bethel Baptist Church in South Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska]. She started the city union usher board which is still formed in Omaha [Nebraska]. Now, that's a group of all the usher boards with the various churches and denominations that form a group, and they do fundraising and give scholarships, and she was the founder and the first president, and she was the--formed the usher board at Salem Baptist Church [Omaha, Nebraska] in 1938--'37 [1937], so she was--everybody knew her for that. She also was the first licensed black daycare provider in Nebraska. Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: And three blocks over is Binney Street, and that street is named after her. Speaker 1: Okay. So she set an example early on--set a pace, I guess--a tone-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --for, you know, what you should be doing. Speaker 2: Being involved, yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was very active in the National Baptist Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.], Dr. Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson] and her. He was her pastor at one time, and they were very close friends. Speaker 1: And I saw that in the book out there. There's a book out in the lobby, I was reading, before we started this interview, about the history of black folks in Omaha (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, that--Bertha Calloway. Speaker 1: It's all--yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, she did. Speaker 1: Bertha Calloway is the director of the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she's in a nursing home now, she was the black museum. Speaker 1: Okay. She was the director of the black museum in Omaha. Speaker 2: And she did that book. And we're selling 'em, so (laughter)--for them. Speaker 1: What's the name of the book, again? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, you have to look at--and it's the-- Speaker 1: I think the museum is called the Great Plains [Great Plains Black History Museum, Omaha, Nebraska]. Speaker 2: Great Plains, it was, yeah. It's not operative now-- Speaker 1: Oh, it doesn't exist? Speaker 2: --and so her attorney is selling the book to--for--to help with her care, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. So, nobody else-- Speaker 2: Well, they--that's a long story. Anyway, her--she has a son, but the courts took everything out of his hands 'cause he wasn't doing right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What--let me get back to that story later, but that's--but--yes, there's a picture of Joseph H. Jackson-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --sitting there and, you know, people know him in Chicago [Illinois] as the pastor of Olivet Baptist Church, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, but he also was the pastor of Bethel Baptist Church here in Omaha, in South Omaha. Speaker 1: So this is before he moved to Chicago (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is how he started. Speaker 1: Okay, so he got his start here. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Is he from Omaha? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know if he was born here, but he and his brother always lived here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: His brother--he was Joseph and his brother was--what was Mr. Jackson's name? Lived up on 30th Street. I can't think of his last--first name, but-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, they were lifetime friends. Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Whenever he'd come to Omaha, he would come see my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay, so he--okay, so she was close to J.H. Jackson. So, the National Baptist Convention, for anybody watching this who does not know, is the largest black organization in the world, and still is. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: More members than any other organization, and it even--it split in '61 [1961], and it's still the largest. Speaker 2: Right, this was the National Baptist Convention, U.S.A., and National Baptist Convention of America [National Baptist Convention of America, Incorporated]. It split another time, too, as the Progressive Ba- [Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc.], they split off too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's the one, in '61 [1961], where Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor] split off, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 531309 Speaker 1: Your grandmother [Emma Agee Sullivan] was very active. Now, was your mother [Juanita Agee Morrow] active, too? Did she-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, but in a different way. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandmother, of course, all of her activities were mostly church-oriented, and I think--you know, you even have to get back to her mother, which was my great-grandmother. Her name is Mariah Elizabeth Agee Morgan [Mariah Agee Morgan], and in leaving--she was leaving an abusive situation, my grandmother's father, and that's how she came to Omaha [Nebraska]. Speaker 1: Okay, so your great-grandmother came to Omaha trying to get away from an abusive situation in Alabama? Speaker 2: Right, right. But she left my grandmother in Alabama and she came here, and then she came back and got her. Speaker 1: Okay. So she was here during the riot; I guess she was here when the riot was going on. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did you know her? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she lived 'til my son [Wayne Hicks] was born. Speaker 1: Did, did she ever talk about that? Speaker 2: No, no, she didn't. I'm trying to think what Grandma used to talk about a lot. Well, she worked hard, she was at--the head cook at Lutheran Hospital [Omaha, Nebraska] when I was coming up and, and you realized it if you go to the hospital 'cause we always got special treatment (laughter). She had five daughters, two sons that didn't survive, but all five of her daughters, all of my aunts--and we just buried the next-to-the-last one in April. She was a very strong woman, raising her daughters, and she instilled in each of her daughters that--and that was one of the things I'd spoke at my one aunt's eulo- funeral, is that their mother was a strong woman who instilled in all of them a sense of being somebody, wanting something, and being on their own, and she, by herself, end up buying her own home and raising her daughters. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. When did your great-grandmother pass? Speaker 2: Let's see, my son is--she must have passed in 1967 or '68 [1968] 'cause my son was a year old, so it must have been '67 [1967]. He was born in '66 [1966]. Speaker 1: Oh, so she'd be like--how old was she then, do you think? Speaker 2: I think grandma was seventy-six. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So--now, what neighborhood did your family live in--I mean your mother? Was she raised (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] Speaker 1: North Omaha. Speaker 2: Well, but--she grew up in South Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], but my grandmother--they moved to Franklin Street, that's the area, part of the redevelopment area here--when my mother was sixteen. My mother's still in the same house she's been in since she's sixteen, and my mother's eighty-three. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then my grandmother remarried and my grand- and she moved over here on Binney Street when I was one year old, so that was sixty-three years ago, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, North Omaha is a--has been a black community basically in Omaha for a long time? Speaker 2: Well, South Omaha was because of the packing houses. Everybody migrated, migrated to South Omaha because at that time blacks weren't--didn't live past probably Leavenworth [Street], and then they started moving. I think my grandfather bought the first house on Binney Street--the first black on Binney Street in that area when he bought his house. He was married previous to marrying my grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. What high school did your mother go to? Speaker 2: My mother went to Tech [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Technical High. Speaker 1: So, Omaha Technical High School? Speaker 2: My grandmother went to Tech, my mother went to Tech, my father [James Mosley, Jr.] went to Tech, and I went to Tech. Speaker 1: Now, what was, what was Tech noted for? Speaker 2: The best school in (laughter)--it was, probably at that time, dominant--well, it was half-and-half. It was never all-black, and track, football stars. My father was a track star there. Story_ID: 531310 Speaker 1: What's your father's name? We may as well go to him, I guess (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. His name is James P. Mosley [James Mosley, Jr.]. Speaker 1: James P. Mosley. Speaker 2: James Phillip [ph.] M-O-S-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Junior. Speaker 1: All right. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: December 22nd, 1922. Speaker 1: Okay; and he was born here, too? Speaker 2: No, he was born in Muskogee, Oklahoma. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. In Muskogee, okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather [James Mosley, Sr.] was a minister-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --when they came here. Speaker 1: And--yeah, well, what do you know about his side of the family? You said your grandfather was a minister? How far back can you take that group? Speaker 2: To my grandfather's parents. Speaker 1: Your great-grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, were they already in Oklahoma--I mean (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They always stayed in Oklahoma. I never saw them. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather was one of ten or eleven brothers and sisters. I understand that the family name was first--was Moses, but all of--my grandfather and all of his brothers and sisters were born sl- were born free. His father owned their own land and they had their own farm when they all born, and he was a freed slave and their--but their name was Moses. That's what I was told, my aunt told me that. And then they later changed. My Uncle John [ph.], who was the oldest, changed the name to Mosley. Speaker 1: Okay--to differentiate between the slave status and the new freedom, I guess. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that out of their--there were three sisters and seven brothers or, or eight brothers, and I think five of 'em were ministers (laughter). Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, were they Baptist? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My one aunt--my grandfather, he passed and he--while he was a minister here, he founded the Mount Nebo Baptist Church [Omaha, Nebraska] that is here, and built it. He was a painter and a paperer, and a carpenter, and the Mount Olive Baptist Church [Mount Olive Missionary Baptist Church] in South Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], he built that one, and then he was assistant pastor for many years at Mount Moriah [Mount Moriah Missionary Baptist Church, Omaha, Nebraska] down the street here, then he moved to Missouri. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And in Missouri he was at a place called Chillicothe [Missouri]. Don't ask me how to spell it. Speaker 1: Now that's interesting 'cause Chillicothe is a Shawnee name--an Indian [Native American] name. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: It's a--it means their capital, wherever their capital is it's called Chillicothe. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: Yeah. In Ohio, there's a city called Chillicothe (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know Chillicothe, Ohio. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I was reading about Tecumseh, and in the story they said that every time the Shawnee built a capital--and they move around, they don't stay in the same place. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: When they exhaust one place, they move to another, they call the next place Chillicothe. Speaker 2: Well, they were in Chillicothe, Missouri (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A new capital, basically, so-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --it was probably founded by Shawnee Indians, I guess, at some point and--'cause they moved around, you know, quite a bit-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, and did their last, you know, fighting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. You know, I--we used to go visit them when I was a youngster, and the one thing that I--two things that I remember most about Chillicothe, we were in a tornado and my grandfather led a demonstration to open the swimming pool because they wouldn't allow blacks to swim, and so he led a boycott because--she's my aunt but I'm the oldest--she's the child that my grandparents adopted--wanted to learn how to swim and they wouldn't let her swim, so he closed down the pool (laughter), and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About what year is this? Speaker 2: Oh, goodness. I don't know; I was probably about twelve or thirteen, so--I was born in '43 [1943]. It was probably-- Speaker 1: Yeah, '56 [1956], '57 [1957]? Speaker 2: Maybe a little before that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause in '56 [1956] and '57 [1957], I was in junior high, so it had to be before I was in junior high. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-four [1954], '55 [1955]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 531311 Speaker 1: He's [Hicks' paternal grandfather, James Mosley, Sr.] leading demonstrations; this is before, I guess, the general public, you know, seemed to be aware of civil rights (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, he did more than that, 'cause when he left Chillicothe [Missouri], he went to Boonville [Missouri]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and in Boonville, he closed all the bars on Sunday--made 'em close bars on Sunday, he--I went to--I'm trying to--let me get it straight now. I--in Chillicothe, also, after the opening of the swimming pool, I went and went to the movie theater, and all blacks or coloreds had to go to the balcony, and in the balcony, of course, coming from here, that's where I wanted to sit 'cause that's the best seat, but there you had to sit there. But what was so bad, the water fountain and the bathrooms were outrageous, and I told 'em I wasn't going to the bathroom there, and I was, I was like, how old? Eleven or twelve, and I went downstairs and went into the white bathroom, and the manager came into the white bathroom (laughter), and said to me--he asked me who I was, and I told him. He said, "Oh, you kin to that preacher, Reverend Mosley?" I said, "Yes." He said, "Well, you're not from here." I said, "No, I'm not." He said, "Where are you from?" And I said, "I'm from Omaha [Nebraska]," and he said, "Well, you know you're not supposed to be in this bath." I said, "Well, I'm--you go use that bathroom 'cause I'm not, it's dirty." And so he said, "Well, that's okay, you can go." And from that day on, they said everybody went to the main--sat on the main floor, and went to the bathroom. But I mean, you know, they didn't put in the history books but that's what happened. And then when they moved to Boonville, the bars that were open on Sundays and, you know, and it was--his church that was Union Baptist [ph.], and--I think that's them, but I get 'em confused, but anyway, he led a rally with the other ministers, and the white ministers, to close the bars and taverns on Sunday. And so they did that, so he was on their hit list. But he stayed there until he retired to go to Oklahoma and take care of his sister, my aunt, 'cause she was 105. And so while he was there, he--you know, in Missouri, they have like they call the circuit, and they have like the institute, and they go from city to city; well, that particular year he was the president, and we went to Independence, Kans- Independence, Missouri, and in Independence, Missouri they have a cracked Liberty Bell, and the church that we were at there, right across the street from the church was a restaurant cafe, and black people had to go the back to get their food, or you could come in and order it to go, but you couldn't eat in there, so I'd been going every day to get a hamburger, and I was talking to the owner and he was asking me, "Well, you from Omaha?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "What's it like? Could I do business there?" I said, "No, because you don't let people sit down and you---we sit anywhere we want in Omaha." And he said, "Oh, really?" So he went on and he was talking, and so about the third or fourth day I was there, I was bent over to tie my shoes, and his little son, who was about my age, came and said, "N, you can't sit down in here," and I dived over the counter and I grabbed him and slammed him in the wall (laughter). His father said, "That's okay, that's okay, she can sit down, she can sit down, she's a guest from out of town." And I sat down and he gave me free food and set down and talked to me, and all the people looked inside, and then after that, they start going in there to eat. Then somebody went and got my grandfather. They say, "They're gonna kill your granddaughter," and he ran over there (laughter), and he said, "Oh, that's okay sir, you wanna eat, too?" And that cafe opened up. So--I was always a rebel (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A thin, thin segregation line, I guess-- Speaker 2: I guess. Speaker 1: People didn't know how thin it was, I guess. Speaker 2: Right. And they just hadn't tried it, you know. And I really wasn't. I was bending over to tie my shoe, but his son thought, you know--but that's what he knew and, you know, you--I just instinctively jumped over that counter and got him (laughter), and so my grandma [Eda Mosley] said, "I'm gonna send you home, you're gonna get killed down here; your mother and father [James Mosley, Jr.] will never forgive me getting you killed." (Laughter) But--and I guess that, that came from both sides of my family, always being out there. And, and my mother was real active here with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; she was secretary to Whitney Young when he was president of the Urban League here. Speaker 1: Okay, so Whitney Young was secretary of the Urban League here? Speaker 2: He, well, the president, or whatever you call it. She was secretary (laughter). Speaker 1: This was back in the--what, the '40s [1940s], or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the late '40s [1940s] 'cause I was quite young; I don't even remember it. Well, it had to be, it had to be in the late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay. And your mother was the secretary? Speaker 2: She was his secretary. Speaker 1: Okay. What was her name again? Speaker 2: Juanita. Speaker 1: Juanita? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And last name? Speaker 2: Now it's Morrow, M-O-R-R-O-W [Juanita Agee Morrow] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then, it was-- Speaker 2: Agee. Speaker 1: Agee, okay. Speaker 2: Then, it was Mosley, yeah. Speaker 1: Agee Mosley. Story_ID: 531312 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your mother [Juanita Agee Morrow] was the secretary for Whitney Young, we--that's where we left off, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right. Speaker 1: This is like in the '40s [1940s], '50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: In the late--it had to be late '40s [1940s], early '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Did she have any stories about Whitney Young? Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure she does (laughter). I just knew she worked for him; she always makes people know that she did, but I don't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, him being one of the--what they called the Big Six at one time? Speaker 2: Yeah, but he wasn't then, you know--right. Speaker 1: Yes, right, but he was on his way. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: His father [Whitney Young, Sr.] was a big-time--at a school [Lincoln Institute, Lincoln Ridge, Kentucky] in Louisville, Kentucky, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he left here, and when he left here, then he blew up, but here he was just--he was head of Urban League [National Urban League]. Speaker 1: Okay, he blew up (laughter). Speaker 2: And a good-looking man now, I always heard everybody say, "He was fine," (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So we got two--you know--two national figures who were involved with people in your family, Whitney Young and John H.--I mean Joseph Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 531313 Speaker 1: So when did your father [James Mosley, Jr.] come to Omaha [Nebraska]? Now he was actually born in Muskogee [Oklahoma], right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was, he was a little kid. Speaker 1: Little kid? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather [James Mosley, Sr.], like I said, was a minister. They moved here. My grandmother [Eda Mosley] was a school teacher in Oklahoma, and then they married, and I guess they'd been married a long time or either they were older 'cause my father--well, she gave birth to him quite late, I think she was in her thirties, which is late in that time. And so then they came here and he was--like I said, he started Mount Moriah [Mount Moriah Missionary Baptist Church, Omaha, Nebraska]--oh, not Mount Moriah, Mount Olive [Mount Olive Missionary Baptist Church, Omaha, Nebraska], and he was assistant pastor at Mount Moriah. And he also had a church--we used to get up every Sunday morning and--well, I would go with him 'cause I was, I was pulled between two gran- two families 'cause my parents weren't together, and so I got to spend so much time with each. Luckily, my grandparents lived around the corner from each other, so they shared me every day (laughter), so--'cause I'm an only child and my mother's [Juanita Agee Morrow] an only child and my father's an only child, so I got (laughter) ripped apart. But he used to also pastor in Hastings, Nebraska 'cause they didn't have--they had blacks there but they didn't have a church, and he would go there to preach, and he also pastored in Sioux City, Iowa. So we'd get up early in the morning and seemed like we'd ride forever and ever and ever. Now, it's just a two-hour drive, but when you little--and we'd ride--it would be dark and we'd go and so we'd go to church and he--then we'd drive back forever, and ever, and ever, and we would do that on Sunday mornings when I was little 'cause he would also pastor in both of those cities, or towns, they're not cities. Speaker 1: All right so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sioux City's a city. Speaker 1: This is your father or your grandfather? Speaker 2: My grandfather. Speaker 1: Your grandfather, okay. Speaker 2: No, not my daddy (laughter)--okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what about your--now what did your father do? Speaker 2: My father, retired military. He was in the [U.S.] Army for twenty-four years-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he went to Tech [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska], he was a track star, he--I think they still have some of his records that hadn't been broken, but he played football and he was a track star. And he was supposed to go to college in Washington [D.C.], and then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], or-- Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then him and my mother fell in love, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: They went to school together. Speaker 1: They were, they were at Tech together? Speaker 2: And she had three or four boyfriends, and he'd try to beat 'em out, but my father's also a musician and he plays saxophone, and his mother was a schoolteacher but she was a musician also, and she taught music. Story_ID: 531314 Speaker 1: My father [James Mosley, Jr.] played saxophone, clarinet, piano, and he had a band here in Omaha [Nebraska], and he was on the jazz circuit and they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the name of his band? Speaker 1: I don't know. My mother [Juanita Agee Morrow] would have to tell you all that. I've been told but it never--it has never stuck in my mind. I guess I should write this stuff down, but anyway--and my mother was also in a band, she played trumpet. So that's--so, they (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now who did your mother play the trumpet for? Speaker 1: Yeah, she played at school, and in some band--I don't know. I've heard it all my life but it just never--it hasn't stuck, and that's sad to say (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was this an all-girls band, or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she wasn't in the Sweethearts of Rhythm [International Sweethearts of Rhythm], but she was in a band similar. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sweethearts of Rhythm. Speaker 2: Now, that was a famous all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All-ladies band. And [HistoryMaker] Cathy Hughes' mother [HistoryMaker Helen Jones Woods] was in that; she and my mother are real good friends, but she was in a band also. And my father's band they traveled a lot, but by being a minister's son, of course, you know they didn't condone that. And then the war [World War II, WWII] came. I was born in '43 [1943], and the war was just about ending, and my father joined, or got drafted--however it happened--and he went to the [U.S.] Army. So after basic, we moved to San Francisco [California] and we lived there for two years, and he was in the [U.S.] military. And then being young as they were, they separated. She came back home 'cause he was out there in the military--no, let me get that straight. Was he in the military then? I--yeah, 'cause they lived in base housing. And my mother came back home and he was shipped somewhere, but I know he spent sixteen years in Germany, and he was in the Korean conflict [Korean War]. But because of his ability, he was made a part of the military band that would go over to the bases, and he was the conductor of the band, so most of his army life he was in the military band. Speaker 2: Okay, so he--you know, did he have any stories about being in a military band? Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sure. He's alive; you can call him and talk to him (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was asking you if he shared any with you that, that stick out right now that you wanna share with us. Speaker 1: No, none. He didn't--I mean you know, we talked about it but that was a bad time because they'd got a divorce and he married a German lady, and so I--we didn't talk-- Speaker 2: You didn't see a lot of him, I take it. Speaker 1: No, I didn't see him. Just every few years he'd pop in. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so we--I just remember getting a jacket once when I was in the seventh grade. He and his wife came and they--I told my mother, "You're the only one body I know divorces a man and lets him stay at your house." But she was married again, too, and they came to my school and talked. I remember that, I was in the seventh grade, I think, at Long [Long School, Omaha, Nebraska], and he did that. Well--so when he got out of the military, he still continued with his music, and he used to write and play for Andre Previn and some other people. Speaker 2: Okay, now Andre Previn, that's classical music, I guess, right? Speaker 1: No, jazz. Speaker 2: Oh, Andre Previn did jazz? Okay, okay, all right. Now--well, when you think about your parents' personalities, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 1: My mother says I take after my father, my father says I take after my mother. When you see the two of 'em together, it's comedy because I think that my father was only her only real true love, vice versa. My father's been married six times (laughter), my mother's been married three times, so--but it's--they're a comedy. I mean, you know, when--he lives in Denver [Colorado], so whenever we go to Denver, we're always together, you know, and it's funny. I have some pictures we took, and my other aunts died, so I have pictures. I finally got a picture of the two of them together other than when I was little and they're just--they're a comedy act. She talks bad about him, and he tells she's crazy and, and he's, "That's why I couldn't be bothered with you." I mean it's, it's just funny. They're real funny. Speaker 2: Okay. It's still, after all these years, huh? Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 531315 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Hm. (Laughter) It depends--I don't know. Something like when I was real little? Speaker 1: Yeah, first thing that you remember that you remember. Speaker 2: No, not anything stands out, other than just being a child. I know what I used to like to do. All my friends lived in their housing projects; we lived in a house, and I thought that was the most special thing you could do is go to the housing project 'cause you had a lot of kids to play with (laughter) and, and I remember that. That was, that was something; it was always special to me 'cause my cousins and my friends--everybody lived in the projects, and I thought that that was just super, you know. And then I used to go visit into Denver [Colorado] a lot, and I'd go to Chillicothe [Missouri], and I always got to ride the train and--well, I miss that 'cause my son's [Wayne Hicks] forty. He's never been on a train and, you know, I miss that because it's just an experience and, and I always remember just riding a train and hearing the thing go, chug-chug-chug, and sleeping to the train. I--that was probably my fondest memory, was riding the train. Story_ID: 531316 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: On the train? Speaker 1: No, of growing up. Speaker 2: Oh (laughter). My [maternal] grandmother's cooking. My grandmother--early on, before she opened her daycare center, was a domestic, and probably--and she worked for these doctors, and I mean they loved her. This one particular doctor had eight children--had seven sons, and they loved her like it was their mother, you know. They loved her. And I know my mother [Juanita Agee Morrow] used to say that when my grandmother--she stayed with her grandmother, my great-grandmother [Mariah Agee Morgan] 'cause my mother--my grandmother worked in the home and was--did domestic work, and how the--you know, they were separated that way, and my grandmother started her daycare because she said she didn't ever want me to have to work for anybody like that, and she wanted to start a business. Of course, I didn't wanna do the business. But anyway, but she never wanted to rely on working as a domestic and, you know, and she thought it was degrading, but they loved her. They treated her better than family. All the people that I remember her working for--I mean every Christmas, every--I mean all the way up until she died. Then their kids would send her pictures and come back from college and--I mean it was just like they--she was their mother, they loved her. She had--I remember she had to have surgery, and the doctor came in and he said, "You sure look familiar, Miss Sullivan [Emma Agee Sullivan]." And so she said, "Well why?" And so she said, "Well, you know Dr. Kelly [ph.]," and he had grown up in the same neighborhood with Dr. Kelly and his kids. He said, "Yes, I was--." He said, "You used to make those sugar cookies" (laughter), and she said, "Yes." And then he said, "Don't worry about it," he said, "I'm gonna take care of Miss Emma." And he--she had colon cancer and--which I later got (laughter), and she--but he took care of her and--I mean he sat in the room all night with her. I mean that's just how they all loved her, and then Dr. Kelly and them, they were all x-ray doctors, they found out she was there, they all came. All the sons, the ones that are priests, they came, the nun came. I mean, you know, it was just like--and she'd been away from there for years, but they just really, really loved her but she just said she never wanted to do it, so I got to be--I don't know, I was a--early teens. She said, "I'm gonna take you with me 'cause I'm doing a dinner party and you can help." I say, "Okay." All I had to do was take a pitcher of water and go pour it in the glasses. The first lady I went to, I poured the water all over her lap (laughter). She said, "Come in this kitchen and sit down," (laughter) and that was the end of my domestic training. And so I never, you know, I never learned to do that. But she and my aunt, which was her good friend, they both cooked and catered, and they--those ladies would cook and you would cry, the food was so good (laughter) (unclear) you just--yeah. So that was what I remembered the most. And I remember one time we were in Denver [Colorado] and I was with my grandmother. She and I had gone to Denver and my cousins all had--everybody had moved to Denver then, all my grandmother's sisters, and my great-grandmother was a cook. Well, you know, when you're kids--teenagers--we--for some reason, my cousins Billye [Billye Riggs] and Ronnie [Ronnette Davis] and Tommy [Thomas Riggs, Jr.]--and we were--Grandma--we were keeping us--she was keeping us, and she was cooking, and I don't know what made it so funny, she was cooking string beans. Now that I'm older and know, but for some reason she put ice cubes in 'em, and we thought that was the funniest thing we--and we giggled and laughed so hard all day long. And she got so mad until she cried, and we kept saying, "Why you crying?" "You kids are so silly." But we had--we just couldn't understand why she put ice cubes in the green beans. Speaker 1: I don't understand it either (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It makes 'em firm. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: (Laughter) When you cook it, it makes 'em firm--the ice and heat (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you put 'em in the ice before you-- Speaker 2: They were cooking and then she just dumped some ice cubes in there. Speaker 1: In the-- Speaker 2: In the pot. Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: And, you know--but I didn't know it, but we just thought that was so fun--and we giggled and sniggled all day, and we almost got a whipping (laughter) because we were so silly with it and, and I remember that. And I remember another thing. My aunt, before she had moved to Denver with the youngest sister, she had made cauliflower, and I didn't eat stuff like that, and she's determined I was gonna eat this cauliflower. I was determined I wasn't gonna eat this cauliflower. I sat at the table nine hours. I would not eat that cauliflower (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you sat-- Speaker 2: And my mother came that night-- Speaker 1: --okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: --and she said, "What is she doing at the table?" "She wouldn't eat that, and she's gonna sit there 'til she eat it." Momma said, "You can forget 'cause she don't eat anything she don't want." I refused, and to--and I got grown before I would eat cauliflower. I told her it looked like somebody's disease (laughter), and so, you know, things like that. And then my aunt also used to tell us that the way she knew you were clean when you washed up, your nose--you had to clean your nose to a shine. Well, my aunt was quite dark 'cause my grandmother was dark, and her daughter was quite dark, so their nose would shine. My nose wouldn't shine (laughter), and I remember that when I was little--that I'd be in there rubbing and scrubbing trying to make my nose shine (laughter). So those are some things I remember. Story_ID: 531317 Speaker 1: Did you play an instrument yourself? Speaker 2: Piano. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I took twelve years of piano. Speaker 1: Okay, so you must be able to play. Speaker 2: Not anymore. I sold my piano and gave my keyboard to my niece. I can still pick. Speaker 1: Did you ever play in a band, or-- Speaker 2: No, I just played recitals, you know. That's a--but by my grandmother being a music teacher, she started teaching me when I was four, and then when they moved away I stopped, and then I started again. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I sang, I sang in a choir and I sang all through school, I took voice when I was in college, and when we were in high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska], Ms. Brown [Mildred D. Brown], here at the Omaha Star, one of her best friends was one of our relatives. She was cousin to my grandmother's sisters 'cause my grandmother had a different father than her four sisters, and--but Addie Hinton [Addie Foxall Hinton], who was one of the black music teachers in Omaha [Nebraska]--jazz player, musician--she was my teacher but she also had a choral group, and the choral group--as kids, we would sing all over a mall when she'd take us, and we'd appear, and I sang in her group. And then I sang in a college choir. I--when I--I went to Peru [Peru State Teachers College; Peru State College, Peru, Nebraska] here in Nebraska. It's a small college. I was the only black female on campus for the three years I was there. I mean I don't know if anybody ever went before me, but I think I--they told me I was the first black, but I don't know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was this Peru College? Speaker 2: Peru State Teachers College. Speaker 1: State Teachers College. Speaker 2: It's about seventy-five miles from here, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now I don't wanna get you in college yet, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay, all right. Story_ID: 531318 Speaker 1: What grade school did you go to? Speaker 2: Long [Long School, Omaha, Nebraska]. It's gone now--Long Elementary School. It was all-black, segregated school, neighborhood school. Eugene Skinner, which you've heard about him. There's a school called Magnet--Skinner Magnet [Skinner Magnet Center, Omaha, Nebraska]. Speaker 1: Eugene Skinner. Now, tell us about Eugene Skinner. Speaker 2: He was the first black principal in Omaha [Nebraska], and he was the principal there. His wife [Pauline "Linda" Skinner] was my first grade teacher, and what's so ironic about that, when I was born, my mother [Juanita Agee Morrow] worked at the bomber plant; they made the--you know, bomber plants here. They made the planes for the war here (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) During World War II [WWII]. Speaker 2: My mother, my grandmother [Emma Agee Sullivan], and my grandfather [Hick's maternal step-grandfather, Charles Sullivan] all worked there. Well, Mr. Skinner's mother took care of me. She was--babysat me, and so they were like the third set of grandparents, and then I ended up being in the school with him. Speaker 1: Okay. So that was an elementary school, too? Speaker 2: That was in grade school. Speaker 1: Okay, Eugene Skinner. Speaker 2: And so--and we had a lot of activities there but that was--schools were still segregated here then. Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Music (laughter), music. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have any teachers that like stand out, that you remember? Speaker 2: All of 'em. I can remember my first--my kindergarten teacher was Mrs. Jackson. Her name was Blanche Jackson, and she was my kindergarten teacher and I just--I really loved her. And then I went to first grade for one semester, and that--I don't remember who that first grade teacher was because they transferred me to Howard Kennedy [Howard Kennedy Elementary School, Omaha, Nebraska] over near where my grandmother was. Howard Kennedy was a black school, but it still had white teachers, and that's when Mrs. Skinner was my first grade teacher, and I remember the first spanking I got in school was by her 'cause I let the goldfish go down the drain. I remember that, and to this day, I don't touch 'em. She said, "Hold your hands out," and I said, "No, I don't wanna do that." She said, "Hold your hands out." I said, "I'm scared, I don't wanna do that." She said, "Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Hicks], hold your hands out. I'm gonna put these fish in there so we can clean this bowl." And she put 'em in my hand, I opened my hand, they went down the Missouri [Missouri River] (laughter), and I got a spanking (laughter). But she was my first grade teacher. My second grade teacher was a lady named Mrs. Jones [ph.]. She was white, and that's the first time I really saw my grandmother angry 'cause she slapped me and, and what it was is--I mean it's just--other cousins--Barbara King [ph.] was my cousin, and she was giggling and sniggering in the line. We were lined up to go somewhere--to recess, or somewhere, and she told me to stop talking. I told her I wasn't talking, and she slapped me, and when I went home, I had a hand print. You know what happens when we get hit. And my grandmother went up to that school and she called my other grandmother [Eda Mosley], and they both went up to that school (laughter), and I remember that. I was just sitting there looking and they--my grandmother said, "If you ever touch my granddaughter again, you won't know you." And it was so--you know, and I don't know what else happened, but anyway, Mrs. Jones, until she retired, ended up being my grandmother's best fan. She would supply her with books and stuff when she opened her daycare, but I remember she had slapped me and said, "Don't you ever touch her." 'Cause then, you know, you got whipped in a school if you misbehaved. And then I remember after her, I had a third grade teacher, I don't remember who she was. She was Caucasian. My fourth grade teacher, her name was Mrs. Goode [ph.], and she lived down the street around the corner, and I remember her. She was really a good teacher. Because all the schools were in the neighborhood and the teachers lived in the neighborhood, you know, you--anything you did you--they were right on it so I think I had a--all really good teachers. Then I transferred and went back to Long School because my mother changed jobs, so I went back to Long to the fifth grade, and in the fifth grade, I had Mr. Fletcher [Wanasabee Fletcher]. Well, his wife Katherine Fletcher [Katherine Clark Fletcher], was the first black female principal in the public schools here, and she's still living. She's like ninety, and her husband was my teacher. But that year, he had a heart attack, so he--we only had him for half a year. Well, she lived down the street from my grandmother, so I would go see him every day, and then he, he eventually died. I don't know if died that year; I think he died that next year, but Mrs. Fletcher and I, you know, through the years, had always been close. And then I had a lady named Mrs. Grier [ph.]. Her husband was the uncle of Leontyne Price. Speaker 1: Leontyne Price. Speaker 2: Leon- yeah. And she came here and I got to meet her and, and had dinner with her and stuff, but she moved from Mississippi--Mrs. Grier is Mississippi, and he was her mother's brother. So I remember that year. And, let me see who did I have after that? She was sixth grade, and then a lady named Mendola Mosley [Mendola S. Mosley], and everybody said she was my mother and I hated her (laughter). Everybody said--and she wasn't my mother; she was no kin to us, but everybody, you know, had all of that. So, most of the teachers that I had were teachers that were first, or made some kind of historical mark in Omaha. Some of 'em are still living, so they--you know, they--all of them have a big story to tell and--but they were like first; they were first hired and, and at that time, when I went to high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska], there were no black teachers. So I went, I went from an all-black school environment basically, to an all-white school environment, but--well, as far as teachers were concerned, so--there's always been a transaction. Story_ID: 531319 Speaker 1: TV and radio significant growing up? Speaker 2: To me? No, we had the second TV in the neighborhood (laughter), but other than 'Mickey Mouse Club' ['The Mickey Mouse Club'], no, 'cause I really didn't get to watch TV a whole lot because I was real active in school, I was, I was drill team; that's how I started drill team. I was in the Elks, I had piano lessons (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you were on the Elks, drill team? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had piano lessons and choir--the little choral group rehearsals, I was in choir at church, I was on the usher board at church, I was in Red Circle Girls at church, so I really--television wasn't something I got to look at a lot, and of course I guess there wasn't much on it, but it's just something you just didn't--I just didn't look at it 'cause I was very active in everything. They always kept me real active. Story_ID: 531320 Speaker 1: Now, did your family receive a lot of the newspapers? Speaker 2: Okay, that takes you to my first stepfather. He had a master's degree from the University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] in journalism (laughter); his name was Hortense Harlin. Speaker 1: Hortense. Speaker 2: H-O-R-T-E-N-S-E, strange name. Speaker 1: Okay. And for a man, usually (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Harlin, H-A-R-L-I-N. Speaker 1: Okay, Hortense Harlin. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You said he has a Ph- Speaker 2: He had a master's. Speaker 1: Master's degree. Speaker 2: And he'd come to Omaha [Nebraska]--I don't know how he got here, but he came here to Omaha and applied at the Omaha World-Herald, and the Omaha World-Herald is still the only daily paper. And they wouldn't hire him in a journalism capacity because he was black, so he started to work at the Omaha Guide, which was the other black newspaper here in Omaha. It was the first one. It opened--it started before the Omaha Star. Speaker 1: Okay, the Guide? Okay. Speaker 2: Omaha Guide. Speaker 1: There've been several of 'em before the Star--Star's, what, started in '38 [1938]? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but the Omaha Guide was the dominant one. Ms. Brown [Mildred D. Brown] started working for the Omaha Guide and left there and started this paper. My father wrote for them--my stepfather--and my mother [Juanita Agee Morrow] also worked there, too. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he wrote quite a bit. After he'd been there for a while, the World-Herald contacted him and asked him to come to work, and he told 'em, "Take a flying leap," and so he worked at the post office and then, after the riot--the boycott of Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company], he was one of those hired at Coca-Cola. Speaker 1: And there was a boycott of Coca-Cola? Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this was 'bout--'bout when is this? This in the '50s [1950s], or-- Speaker 2: Had to be late '50s [1950s]--fact, it was '56 [1956], '57 [1957]. I have a special newspaper that was put out-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --by Ms. Brown here. Speaker 1: What was the problem with Coca-Cola? Speaker 2: They wouldn't hire blacks-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so they stopped drinking Coke until they did. And the same thing--I mean I'm jumping all over 'cause you, you--I've never had to really think about this. My grandfather [Hicks' maternal step-grandfather, Charles Sullivan] worked for the streetcar when I was a little girl, and they boycotted streetcars, too, 'cause you had to sit in the back. I remember them telling me I didn't have to do that, but I remember them telling me, and he worked for the streetcar. Speaker 1: And did they boycott as the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], or as the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Coca-Cola did. No, Coca-Cola boycotted as part of the de Porres Club [St. Martin de Porres Club] that started here in the Star. Speaker 1: The what? Speaker 2: The de Porres Club. Speaker 1: Oh, de Porres, okay--named after Martin de Porres? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And that was started by a Catholic preacher [John P. Markoe] from Creighton [Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska], and then they--when they got more political, they moved--they didn't have nowhere to meet. Creighton wouldn't let 'em meet there anymore, so they met at the Omaha Star, that's where all their boycotts and demonstrations started. My mother was a member of that, too. And I started my stepfather's thesis in journalism, and so I guess that's where I kind of got my knack because when I was in high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska], I was on the school paper, I was assistant editor of the yearbook, I--she started me doing photography and developing my own pictures, so when I went to college [Peru State Teachers College; Peru State College, Peru, Nebraska], I minored in it and I was also yearbook editor in college my freshman year. Story_ID: 531321 Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the de Porres Clubs [St. Martin de Porres Club], leading. Now, they were leading--now de Porres Club now, were they unique to Omaha [Nebraska]? Speaker 2: I don't know, I think that one was. I mean I'd never heard of it except that. De Porres [Martin de Porres], of course, is a saint, you know, so the church--there's the de Porres Center [St. Martin de Porres Center, Omaha, Nebraska] right across the street. Speaker 1: He's a black saint-- Speaker 2: Right, and this is a black church right around the corner (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the black Catholics--very important to the black Catholics, St. Martin de Porres. Speaker 2: That's the name of the church, St. Benedict's [St. Benedict the Moor Catholic Church, Omaha, Nebraska]. St. Martin de Porres is the church right behind this. Speaker 1: There's St. Benedict's too. Speaker 2: Yeah, this is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) St. Benedict is another black saint--St. Benedict the Moor. Speaker 2: Right, so it's St. Benedict the Moor Church and that was--Catholic Social Services [sic. Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of Omaha, Inc.] was just--the de Porres right, right around the corner. Speaker 1: Yes, Chicago's [Chicago, Illinois] got one of 'em [St. Martin de Porres Catholic Church, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Oh, really? Speaker 1: A lot of cities have a St. Martin de Porres. Speaker 2: I know they do in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: But there's a de Porres club--I'd never heard of one of those, but they, they were actually--there's a, you say it's a (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Started here. Speaker 1: --man from Creighton [Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska]--a professor at Creighton-- Speaker 2: A priest, a father. I call him Marku [John P. Markoe], but that's not the pronunciation but that's what I've always called him. But Marguerita [HistoryMaker Marguerita Le Etta Washington] can talk to you about that 'cause that was real--you know, like I say, by the meeting here in her house--she has pictures of them and everything-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but a lot of the social issues they addressed and attacked, and the boycott of Coca-Cola bottling plant [The Coca-Cola Company] was one of 'em, and they boycotted until they opened it up and start hiring minorities. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So they were sort of like CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] in some ways, I guess--in some respects. Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: CORE would do that sort of thing and mostly (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, but they--it started at Creighton, and Denny Holland, which was a Caucasian, he was with them, so he was like the president, even though--so it was, it was primarily black but it wasn't. It was an integrated club, but after they got controversial, Creighton wouldn't let 'em meet there anymore (laughter), so that's when they started meeting here. Story_ID: 531322 Speaker 1: So, Creighton's [Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska] a Catholic school, basically? Yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm, Creighton University. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I remember a Paul Silas went to Creighton; he was a basketball star (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's my brother. Yeah, he-- Speaker 1: That's your--that's one of your-- Speaker 2: That's one of my brothers. When--I was coming out of high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska] when Paul and--it was Paul Silas, Chuck Officer, Clint Bedford [Clinton Bedford], Claude Thomas, who was my cousin--all of them--he's an A- his mother was an Agee, they were all on the basketball team, so therefore I got to go to the games and the parties (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, Creighton always was a school that had a lot of prominent black basketball players, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Silas, I guess, was the biggest one I suppose. I can't think of anybody else, but he went on to play with the Celtics--the Boston Celtics, and won championships (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But he was the national, and then the little guy--the, the other guy that's, he's playing pro. His wife had twins but they kept getting him on drug possession and then--what was the other guy that's from Louisiana somewhere? Benford--Ben--he's a pro player, he went pro, too. Benoit Benjamin. Speaker 1: Oh, Benoit Benjamin. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Oh, he was seven feet tall. Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew him as a little guy (laughter). Speaker 1: You knew maybe him as a little guy, but he reached seven feet (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know; yeah, he went--he-- Speaker 1: --and he played--and Bill Russell coached him at Seattle [Seattle SuperSonics], yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know all that. Yeah, Paul and I--but Paul was my brother. We--he was my party par- we were partiers. His brother committed suicide when he was here. He's--was in school and he killed himself, hung himself in the dorm, and so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there a story behind that--why he did that? Speaker 2: I don't know why, but I know his brother had depression problems and so as a part of Paul's scholarship, they gave his brother a scholarship. And they have an aunt--one thing I know that's unique about Paul, his aunt lived right there around here on 20th [Street] and Willis [Avenue], so whenever he comes to Omaha [Nebraska], he would always have me take--to her house, but his aunt and his mother, and--must have been his mother--his, sister to The Pointer Sisters' dad [Elton Pointer], and he's their first cousin. Speaker 1: So, Pointer Sisters are from--are they, they from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they're from--wherever they're from, but Paul's-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --mother and their father were sister and brother. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, so those are his first cousins. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah, so is Paul Silas still--is he--is still in the area (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He doesn't come--no, he doesn't live here. Last--he was coaching in Cleveland [Ohio], so I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, he was the Cleveland--who is that little guy that's so popular came out of high school? Speaker 1: LeBron James? Speaker 2: Yes, he was, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With the Cavaliers [Cleveland Cavaliers]? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Did Paul Silas grow up here in Omaha? Speaker 2: No, he came here to college. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Right. He came from California. Story_ID: 531323 Speaker 1: I got you as far as--we were still in grade school. Did we get you to junior high school yet? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, junior--and when I was in school, you went to seventh grade and then junior high is--was the eighth grade, and that was at Tech [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I went from junior high in the same building. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So, Omaha Technical High School. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What was that ex- now, you were on the school paper? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, I don't--let me see--I was always active in school. I was in the choir, of course, I was in the girls'--I was in the traveling choir, I was put in senior choir as a freshman, you know, which you usually don't go until you're about a junior, so I was always in the choir. And I was on the student council, and in the pep club. I wasn't a cheerleader, I was just in the pep club, so I stayed active doing things like that, and then when I was a senior, I was the class treasurer and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: Average, I didn't study (laughter). If I'd studied, I'd have probably been an excellent student, but I--you know, I passed, I didn't fail or anything, but I wasn't, I wasn't an excellent scholastic student 'cause I didn't apply myself to that 'cause I was too busy having fun. But I got all good grades, you know, so I shudder to think what they would have been had I really tried (laughter). But I was--what I was--and then I started with journalism and I was in the journalism club and, and then I was on the newspaper every year, and my senior year I was on the yearbook committee as I mentioned, and they would have a convention every year in Lincoln [Nebraska] for all the schools that had journalism students, and you could go down and you compete in things like copy editing and writing, and all that kind of stuff, and that was something we did every year that was always fun. And our school paper, we had--we used to print our own paper and everything, so we learned how to do the prints and the press, and then I mentioned my stepfather [Hortense Harlin] taught me how to do photography and develop my own pictures, so I used to do that in the darkroom in the school paper. And so--and then when I was in high school, I was active in the NAACP youth [NAACP Youth Council]. When I was vice president of the NAACP youth group, John Clay Smith [J. Clay Smith, Jr.], who is from South Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], graduated from Creighton [Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska], went on to be a part of the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], and a federal judge in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. He was president, even though when they had a write-up about it a few years ago, they--the people they interviewed, told an entirely different story. It was our youth group that opened up Peony Park [Omaha, Nebraska], which was a private park here, and it had a swimming area, and they wouldn't allow blacks in. What really called attention to it was that a guy stationed at Offutt Air Base [Offutt Air Force Base, Nebraska] wanted to go swimming and they wouldn't allow him, so that made the base get involved and didn't--and, and not allow any of the military at the base go to Peony Park, which was the only swimming, you know, area, and private little pools, and so as a result, we went out there and demonstrated. I was engaged then, to my present husband [Alonzo Hicks]. We just finished forty-four years. Anyway (laughter)--and he parked his car right at the gate, and my mother [Juanita Agee Morrow] looked on TV and I was standing on the car, beating on the fence, and what happened was that when we were in high school, our class was half and half--it was integrated because at that time, there was the high school for the kids that lived in East Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], which is Carter Lake, Iowa, had to go to Council Bluffs [Iowa] to go to school, so most of 'em came to Tech. They paid tuition, came to Tech, so there were--it was probably two-thirds still white, and a third black, and so we were real close, and I saw a couple of guys that were on the football team walking by, and they said, "Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Hicks], what are you doing out there?" And I said, "Well, they won't let us swim. They said we had to have a membership in a private car--club." I said, "Are you a member and do you have a membership?" He said, "Hell no, we don't have a membership." And he said, "What you mean they won't let you swim?" "They won't let black people--," at that time, we were Negroes--, "come in and swim." So he went, this one guy--I don't even remember his name, but I just know he was real--he was the captain of the football team. He went out and got everybody in that swimming pool out, and made 'em all leave--all the white people--he made 'em leave. Told 'em they're gonna beat 'em if they didn't get out the pool, and made 'em all leave and they all walked out. And that's when they cracked the door and they--then it was about a week or two later, they opened it up. Speaker 1: Okay. So you had the help of white allies in-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --integrating the pool. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, let's see, when we were in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], there was a skating rink called Crosstown [Crosstown Roller Rink, Omaha, Nebraska] on South 24th [Street], and Wednesday night was black night, and Sunday afternoons. But we said, "Well, you know, we should be able to go any night we wanna go," so he said, "No," so we boycotted that 'til he opened up, you know, and then everybody stopped going (laughter). So, so, you know, I was real active in stuff like that. Story_ID: 531324 Speaker 1: So when it came time to pick a college, I had an uncle or a cousin, or--some part of the Agee family was the president of Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], or the dean--he was the dean of Fisk (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, this is 1961? Speaker 1: Sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And I wanted to go to Fisk. My stepfather [Hortense Harlin] wanted me to go to Fisk, and my mother [Juanita Agee Morrow] just adamantly refused. Speaker 2: And, and who was this cousin? What is the cousin's name? Speaker 1: I don't remember. He's just part of the Agee family, I don't remember the name, though (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But was president of Fisk. Speaker 1: He was, I think, dean of students. I don't think he was president. Speaker 2: Dean of students, okay--dean of students. Speaker 1: But he had come here for a reunion, and he had come here for the National Baptist something, and he had stayed with my great-grandmother [Mariah Agee Morgan], and that's how we met him. So, he was gonna give me a scholarship to go to Fisk, and my mother refused--she adamantly refused. Speaker 2: What did she have against Fisk (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She knew I'd get lynched. She--'cause she knew that I was gonna be in the middle of some demonstration, doing something (laughter), and she, she knew. Speaker 2: So, she saw Nashville [Tennessee] as the Deep South. Speaker 1: Hm? Speaker 2: She saw Nashville as the Deep South. Speaker 1: Yeah, and Kansas City [Missouri] was the Deep South to her. I mean, you know--but (laughter)--and so she just would not let me go. That's how I ended up at Peru [Peru State Teachers College; Peru State College, Peru, Nebraska]. And I was enrolled in the University of Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska]--had my rooms, roommate, had my classes, had everything, and I decided that I didn't wanna go because one of my closest friends--her name was Linda McNeil [Linda McNeil Sayers]--she was gonna go and be--she had a scholarship there, so she was gonna go, and so I changed, and we were gonna go to Peru. The week before school, she said, "I'm not going because Gale [HistoryMaker Gale Sayers] and I are getting married," Gale Sayers (laughter). So, he married my closest friend before he married my cousin [Ardythe Bullard Sayers] (laughter). And they were married and had the children, and when they wrote the story, the 'Brian's Song'? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: He was married to Linda then. And she didn't go, so I ended up going by myself, and that's how I ended up being the only black female on campus. Speaker 2: Now why would either one of you choose Peru over (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause she had a scholarship. Speaker 2: Okay, she had a scholarship and--okay. Speaker 1: And I decided I didn't wanna go to Nebraska 'cause it was too big, even though I was enrolled. And when my grandmother [Emma Agee Sullivan] died and we were going through the stuff, I found my class schedule, my roommate assignment, everything--and she had all that. Speaker 2: Okay now. Now, this is 1961, you're the only black female (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And there were four guys. Speaker 2: --and four guys, five blacks on--this is a small college, though, right? Speaker 1: Yes, small col- state normal. Like there were four of 'em in Nebraska, which were teachers colleges 'cause I had decided that I wanted to be a teacher, by some vast mistake (laughter), and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, so this is--about how many students were on campus? Speaker 1: It was small--probably several hundred, I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 531325 Speaker 1: Well, how was that experience, after coming out of a small black community (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After I got out of it, I realized it was a horrible experience, but while I was in it, you know, I--because I hadn't really experienced it. What I did notice right away, because I liked to write, I would start--well, first thing happened is they had what they call freshman initiation, that I refused to go through, and I told 'em, "No." I said, "You know, I don't know what you guys are used to; I'm not drinking no Gerber juice, I'm not walking around bowing to nobody," only thing I did was the stuff in the dorm where you had to do for upperclassmen. So, when I first moved there, I had a roommate, and her name was Cricket [ph.], and she was from Lincoln [Nebraska], and--'cause I didn't have a roommate 'cause Linda [Linda McNeil Sayers] backed out, and she didn't have one, we became roommates together, and we were very--you know, we were okay. Cricket was--she wasn't nothing to look at, but she was a lot of fun. So then they had what they call the apple orchard days [AppleJack Festival] in Nebraska City [Nebraska], they just had it not too long ago, and there was a football game between Peru [Peru State Teachers College; Peru State College, Peru, Nebraska] and somebody, and they have it in Lincoln--I mean in Nebraska City. So, her parents came, and her neighbor--her parents' neighbor came. At that time Preston Love, Jr., which you've heard of here--the jazz artist here--his son was playing football for Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska], so when they found out that he was my cousin--quote, unquote--you know, we're in the same family, they just ate me up--talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, and they were really nice. But when we got back to school on Sunday, her mother called the dean and said that she didn't want her daughter rooming with me anymore because it would hurt her chances of popularity. Now, I was the most popular person on campus 'cause I was different. Her daughter Cricket wore glasses this thick and picked her nose, so you know who was popular, right? But as it turned out, Cricket never knew her parents were racists, you know, bigoted, 'cause she never had to 'cause she never was around any blacks. And she refused to go home for two years. And so, like the second year, we went to Lincoln for something and I was in the car, and so--but I just stayed in the car, and her mother said, "Well, come on in." I said, "No, thank you," you know. But they were saying it would hurt her chance for popularity. The dean was so mad down at our school that she just said, "I've never met any people so ignorant in my life." But they didn't want her rooming with me, so I end up rooming with a girl whose roommate had come back from Omaha [Nebraska], and she--her name was Marilyn [ph.] and her father was an engineer at the power company, so we ended up rooming together and we had a ball but--until that spring when they had the basketball tournament, and they had the basketball tournaments in Kansas City [Missouri], and she was crying and crying, wouldn't come to the room. I said, "What's wrong with you?" "I don't know how to tell you this." I said, "What?" Her stepfather told her that it probably wasn't a good idea for me to go to Linc- Kansas City with 'em because of Jim Crow, and they might not let me stay in a hotel--that she didn't know how to tell me this. I said, "Oh, it's no big thing, you know, I'll just come down with--," so I went down with the cheerleaders the next day and--but it wasn't true because they had to let the players stay, and we had three players--three black players on our team. But what was so fascinating about it is--was it Grambling [Grambling College; Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana]? Yeah, Grambling's basketball team made the tournament, which was all-black. It was only myself and a girl from Minnesota, the only two black girls in the whole tournament. So all the team came to my hotel looking for me (laughter), and her other team went looking for her, so we had this whole--I had all these giants lined up in the hallway to meet the only other black girl, and it was so funny, and everybo- I said--you know--they said, "Phyllis [HistoryMaker Phyllis Hicks] ended up having more fun than all of us," (laughter). So, you know, that was a bad experience that I had. But one thing, I noticed that I liked to write, so when people had to write like term papers, or had to write essays and stuff, I earned extra money in school writing their papers. They all got A's, but every paper I turned in never got more than a C. That's when it started--something is wrong here, you know. I didn't know what it was; and then, at that time, which was unusual to us, our little gym teacher, I guess, was gay--I didn't know it--and she had invited me to her apartment, you know, and stuff, and we talked, and she kind of approached me but I still wasn't paying any attention, you know. I just kind of played it off and said, "No, I'm not the one," so she flunked me. And that's when I really knew something was going on down at that school, and I notice--I don't care how good my papers were, I'd only get maybe a C, sometimes a B, but I never got any A's down there, and so--but it was--after I was out of the situation, that it really hit me how bad it was. Story_ID: 531326 Speaker 1: I took voice lessons and (laughter) the voice teacher told me, "You have a nice voice but you have too much vibrato in your voice." You know, you know, you--like when you go, "Whoa!" He said, "You need to stop that, that's--stop that, that's a cultural thing." But that's my voice, you know. And so--but he was nice, but he was just saying--he was trying to take the blackness outta me. I told him, "No, I sing the way I sing." And it was--one thing that was interesting, it was a big blizzard in sixty--must have been '61 [1961] going to '62 [1962]. We left out, now seventy-five miles an hour--or seventy-five miles away, takes maybe an hour to come home. We started out and we got as far as Murray, Nebraska, and as we topped the hill, we start seeing trucks jackknifed across the road, and it was ice, and it was--had been storming, you know, started storming, and so I was with a friend of mine, a girl from Omaha [Nebraska]--two girls from Omaha, and this one girl, her boyfriend was driving us back. So we turned around--it took us two hours to go forty-five miles to get back, so we were in Nebraska City [Nebraska], and so the hotels and everything, 'cause the highway was closed, were taken up, and we knew we couldn't, you know, get back to school, so we were stuck. So we were gonna spend the night in the theater and somebody said--so then this guy he said, "Well, my roommate is from Nebraska City," so we called, and they told us to come on out, and we stayed with them. Well, I had just sung in the Handel's 'Messiah' [George Frideric Handel], and what they do down at Peru [Peru State Teachers College; Peru State College, Peru, Nebraska] was a community thing where all the little townspeople would come sing, and the college choir would sing. Speaker 2: Other than the do-it-yourself-'Messiah' thing? Speaker 1: Yeah. And so--but it was an annual thing. But I had sung in the 'Messiah' and they found out that I was staying at these people's house. You would have thought I was Mahalia Jackson. They brought pies and cakes and came just to meet the Negro girl who was singing in the 'Messiah' (laughter), and we ended up staying there four days, and it was so funny. Those girls were crying 'cause they couldn't get home, and their parents were laughing, and I was laughing and my mother [Juanita Agee Morrow] was crying (laughter). Story_ID: 531327 Speaker 1: The Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] walk started, so in sympathy with that, we would--not sympathy, but whatever you would call it 'cause they were all white. We walked from Peru [Nebraska] to Lincoln [Nebraska]--I didn't, I rode. I said, "I ain't walking." Speaker 2: Now, this is like--what year is this? Speaker 1: That had to be '62 [1962], '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So as a demonstration, we walked to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In sympathy for something that Dr. King was doing nationwide? Speaker 1: And see, just--when you turn off the highway, just to get to Peru is seven miles, so that was enough walking for me, (laughter), I'm not walking. So I rode in the car and, and we--cars followed those who were walking, 'cause the guys were walking and pulling the girls in little wagons--it's sixty miles. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. So that was basically what I did. And then I decided to get married, so I got married in 1963. Speaker 2: Now, how did you meet your husband? Speaker 1: He lived across the street (laughter), but he was like seven years older than me so I never--and I always thought he was his brother. His brother's name was Bobby [Robert W. Hicks], his name was Alonzo [Alonzo Hicks] but I always called him Bobby Socks. But Bobby was the one I had the crush on, but Bobby was at Boys Town [Nebraska] and he would only come home on occasion, but I never knew the difference between 'em when I was little, and then he got his car and then I was home and he noticed me, and my cousin was talking about, "Oh, he's so fine." But I thought she was talking about the man that lived down the street and he had eight kids. I said, "Girl, he has eight kids," so, she was talking about my husband. So, I went over to him, I wanted to introduce him to my cousin 'cause she wanted to meet him. He said, "I don't wanna meet your cousin, I wanna date you." I said, "No, my cousin wants to meet you." And so then we started dating and then I decided to get married--decided I wanted to be on my own, so I dropped out of school [Peru State Teachers College; Peru State College, Peru, Nebraska] and we got married. Speaker 2: So was that '62 [1962], or-- Speaker 1: That was '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Three [1963], okay, all right. Now, when you were in school, you attempted to--you know, a lot of students were volunteering in the South--the Civil Rights Movement, and that sort of thing (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, see, I didn't know that, you know what I'm saying. Being there, we didn't know about it. Speaker 2: Or didn't have anybody on campus doing that. Speaker 1: Oh, no, 'cause there were no--I mean they weren't into that at all (laughter), you know; it's just that little thing where we decided to do that little demonstration going to Lincoln-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --but the only--another unique thing--I know that when I was in high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska] I used to conferences, you know, with all the different races, the kids, and I remember this little boy stood up and said, "My parents said you don't enter marriage because your children will come out with spots." I said, "What?" So I ate him up. But the, the girls would come--like they were mostly farmers; they would come to my room and they would wanna comb my hair, they would wanna do--you know, 'cause they only knew what they had seen on TV or what they read about, so they just, they just really thought I was different. I said, "You know, my hair--." "Oh, your hair doesn't feel like a Brillo Pad," (laughter), you know, just, just ignorant, just really ignorant. Speaker 2: So Nebraska is--would it be safe to say that it's a--some of it's a lot whiter than some of the other states, I guess, that black communities (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It'd be real safe to say the population in Omaha [Nebraska], the metropolitan area, is about 465,000, and blacks make up about 10 percent, between forty-five and fifty thousand blacks, and Lincoln is far, far smaller than that. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: They may make up maybe--they probably have maybe twenty thousand--well, not counting college. Speaker 2: I had read somewhere before we came on this trip that western Nebraska had more black settlement back in the old days than (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the old days, right. Speaker 2: But are they still-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: They're not there anymore. Speaker 1: There's a few--two or three families in North Platte [Nebraska] because the railroad goes there. I know a friend of mine, Arthur Justice Chichi [ph.]. He's an engineer, and he and his family lived in North Platte; I think every once in a while, there are a few in Hastings [Nebraska], and a few in Grand Island [Nebraska]. But years ago, there used to be quite--like I said, my [paternal] grandfather [James Mosley, Sr.] pastored a church in Hastings. Story_ID: 531328 Speaker 1: --When you were growing up, did you ever hear anything about any of the Indians [Native American] here in Nebraska, or were they all pretty much gone? Speaker 2: Well, my mother-in-law was Indian (laughter)-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --so--well, she was Indian and white, but her mother was full-blooded Blackhawk--Blackfoot Indian. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So--but as far as growing up, I never noticed hardly any Indian children growing up because they all lived on a reservation. In the summers they would come to Omaha [Nebraska], but in the winters, you never saw Indians. And then I started--after I got married [to Alonzo Hicks], right after I worked--I worked at the Power District [Omaha Public Power District] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did you stop going to school [Peru State Teachers College; Peru State College, Peru, Nebraska] after you got married? Speaker 2: For a while-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then I started going. I went to u- and I went to Creighton [Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska], and then I saw--I discovered I could make all A's 'cause I was paying for it (laughter). And it occurred to me, "Well, you could have did this all along, you know?" Story_ID: 531329 Speaker 1: One question then before we go further is now, did you have any favorite writers in the black press in those days, or a favorite black magazine, or, or a newspaper (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, at that time--my grandfather [Hicks' maternal step-grandfather, Charles Sullivan] used to talk about the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] all the time and we--he would get them on occasion. We would get the Ebony, of course, and the Jet, so we did a whole lot of--we always got those every month, and so I read those a lot. In fact, my [maternal] grandmother [Emma Agee Sullivan] and I--you know, when your parents die, your grandmo- and we had--she died, and six months later my grandfather died, so we put the house up two years later, and she had like probably the first Ebonies. We had stacks and stacks of stuff, and so we gave 'em to different people that wanted. Me, like a nut, I still have, I think, a few of 'em--I should have kept all that, but we gave a lot of that, but--my grandfather was self-taught. He was from Mississippi. Now, he was at the lynching, but he was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's the one in 1919? Speaker 2: And one here. He was there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he talk--that's what--downtown--now this was famous because it was right downtown in front of the courthouse. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: This was during the--I think the mayor [Edward Parsons Smith] tried to save the man, Will Brown (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. And you know, what was so funny, a few years ago, I worked at the election commission which was in the courthouse where that took place, and under--the election commission was in the lower level, and downstairs were tunnels and tunnels. They could have got away. When I went down there, I said, "Look! What's all this?" This is tunneled--they could have gotten away. Story_ID: 531330 Speaker 1: You were saying your mother's [Juanita Agee Morrow] stepfather on the Agee side, I guess (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, on--well, my mother's stepfather--my grandmother [Emma Agee Sullivan] was an Agee, okay? His name was Charles Sullivan, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On the maternal side, then. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: He had talked to us when I was young, and he was in Omaha [Nebraska] when the lynching occurred, and he talked about it, but he'd also had said that what was--with him, is that he had left Mississippi; he was born in Booneville, Mississippi, and he had left Mississippi when he was a kid, barely a teenager, because when he was working in the fields, they had lynched a couple of black guys and they took the kids out and made them watch, and saw them strung up, and he said it just made him so sick and scared him, that he hopped a freight train and just kept going until he landed in Kansas, and then he stayed there for a while and then he came to Omaha, and so he was self-taught; he--I think he only went to the fifth or sixth grade, but he--I would sit him, sit him beside any college graduate 'cause he was just that into education--reading the Bible, reading the papers, and all of that--history. Speaker 1: Now, he was a witness to--did he see the actual lynching of Will Brown in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know if he saw the whole thing. I know he said he went down there, so I don't know if he saw it from the start to the beginning--end. I don't think too many black people were-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it was a riot, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a riot, so-- Speaker 1: I think you're--I think black people would be in jeopardy of being lynched. Speaker 2: Right, so I don't think he actually, you know, was there--would see what happened, yeah. But it was afterwards 'cause they left the body up. Speaker 1: Hm, right. Speaker 2: Right. So he always, you know, talked about the things that he had seen. He was born in 1901. Speaker 1: Okay. He was a teenager when that took place. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Now, over the years--before we get back to college and all that--but over the years, did black people in the city talk about that? 'Cause that--unlike a lot of lynchings, that was done right downtown in the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you hear it--you would hear it mentioned, but it was not part of the history books, it was never taught in school, we didn't know anything about it. If family members or something--the church--something wasn't mentioned, you didn't--I was probably in high school [Technical High School, Omaha, Nebraska] when he even mentioned that to us. Speaker 1: Was that the first time you'd ever heard of it? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The only thing you studied in history in Nebraska was a Nebraska--a Nebraska land book, and you--the history of Nebraska, but you never studied anything about that. You never--there was nothing in there about the Indians [Native American], there was nothing in there about black folks, there was nothing in--you know, but you had to study the history of Nebraska. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when--just to jump back, I remember when they did the bicentennial, or they did--there's something, I was in grade school, and they went and found a song that was written, it was called, 'Omaha,' and when they named the city Omaha. It was, "Omaha, finest place you ever saw; come along, join the throng, and you simply can't go wrong. Forest green in Omaha, Omaha, something's doing all day long, so at night when you are sleeping, think of Omaha." We had to learn that. (Laughter) But that's the only time they would mention Indians 'cause em- Omaha was named after Omaha Indians, and that's--and then there's the Omaha Indian tribe, but that's the only time Indians were ever mentioned when we were kids. And most people, they say--you say you're from Omaha, they think it's nothing but a prairie and horses and Indians and cowboys out here, but that's not true 'cause I never really saw Indians and never went to school with any. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I was asking you about some of the publications, and you said that you--you mentioned the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] but we got off that, but would--did you get that at home? Speaker 2: My grandfather would get 'em on occasion. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Right, and he--I remember as a kid we used to--before we had a TV, when they had the boxing matches, and we would sit at the radio and we'd listen to the radio or--and we would listen to 'Amos 'n' Andy.' He always--we always listened to anything that was black, and I remembered listening to the 'Amos 'n' Andy' show. We'd sit around in a chair, on the floor in the living room and listen to 'Amos 'n' Andy,' the boxing matches, but don't ask me which ones, but there was some--I guess there was good, famous boxing matches I looked at, I don't know (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, you were a little kid when Joe Louis was around, when he was fighting-- Speaker 2: --listened to--yeah, but--yeah. Speaker 1: Floyd Patterson. Speaker 2: Right. Yeah, I remember Floyd Patterson, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But by that time, television was pretty much-- Speaker 2: Right. But I remember listening to all that kind of stuff on the radio. Story_ID: 531331 Speaker 1: After you got married [to Alonzo Hicks], you kind of dropped out of Peru [Peru State Teachers College; Peru State College, Peru, Nebraska] for a while and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Well, what did you do? Speaker 2: I worked at the Power District [Omaha Public Power District], got involved in the politics down there because all of the black, except for two women who had been there for years, worked in the mail room, so I started my campaign. I got that job because my roommate in college, her stepfather was an engineer there, and he had gotten--they got me the job 'cause I had college--in the mail room, you know? And so I, I rebelled. When we used to have to go, there was a plant that was about six blocks; we'd take the mail up there twice a day, then we'd have to go out and wait on a bus to take the bus to go to another plant--it was on 43rd Street. And they said before I came, they used to have to even go down by the river to take that mail, and they'd be on the bus and you're standing out here, and one day it was raining cats and dogs, and they'd give you galoshes and a raincoat and umbrella to go carry this satchel of mail. I told her, "I am not going." This is what--I say, "I have been driving since I'm ten years old, and you have all those cars down there in the garage that belong to OPPD [Omaha Public Power District]. I am not going out in this rain to carry mail or anything else. Now, you can do what you got to do." So (laughter), they took me in to the vice president's office. I said, "I'm not going." I said, "Now, if you want the job, you got it." And he (laughter), he said, "Well, we'll get somebody to carry it; it is raining kind of hard." And from that day on, the women didn't have to take the bus no more. They--he'd started using the couriers. They didn't let us drive, but they started using a courier service. So I guess I've always been a rebel. I just--you know, for wrong and injustice I just had to stand up and let it be known. And so I worked there until I decided to have a child. And in those days there was no such thing as pregnancy insurance, so I had to quit, and then you had to re-apply, but then I didn't wanna go back 'cause it's just--a lot of things had happened there that they discriminated against people, and it's so funny because one guy that started in the print shop there the same day I started, his name is Fred Petersen, ended up being the president of the power company. And we always kind of maintained a friendship through the years, and when he got his first check as president, he called and asked me to lunch and he said, "I just couldn't show this to nobody but you." He showed me his check, and you know, I had a lot of choice words for him. So anytime I needed anything, he owed me--I'd call, "Fred," (laughter), I'd say, "'cause you didn't know anything when you started. I helped you get your promotions." And so it was always a joke, but I said, "It's not a joke." But he ended up being president of the company. And so then I didn't go back to work there. I worked six months at an insurance company, and then they were starting what they called the OIC, Opportunities Industrialization Centers, Reverend Sullivan--Leon Sullivan's program (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. I started--I quit my job with a six month-old baby [Wayne Hicks], and went to work for free. Story_ID: 531332 Speaker 1: Now, what year is this? Speaker 2: In 1967. Well, I was--1966 I started as a volunteer, and I was on the first staff, paid staff, which was 1967--January, 1967. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or was this six--'68 [1968]--'68 [1968]. I'm a year off. Speaker 1: Did you have to go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], or did, did (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Philadelphia for training. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At that time, the people that were hired was the--Bernice Dodd [Bernice Stephens Dodd], who was the director who just passed last year, and we became best friends, and she ended up being the director eventually, after three other directors, and I went to Philadelphia and that was my first--I was twenty-five, I think, and that was my first plane trip, it was my first trip to a large, big city on my own, and Philadelphia was in the middle of a garbage strike. And I said, "This is the big city," (laughter) and--but I spent two weeks there the first time, and I was a part of the movement, and I worked with OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] until 1998. Then I semi-retired and went to work for private industry as a trainer, and then I went to another company and retired from there. But at OIC, I was able to travel the country, I was able to have experiences I never would have had, I met people--I met kings and queens; I met kings from Africa because OIC is national and international. I met Hubert Humphrey, I met--I didn't get to meet him personally, but I got to see him--Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]--and went to testify before [U.S.] Congress, and went all through Washington [D.C.] and, you know, under the tunnels, and I got--all that was possible with OIC--went to the demonstration, we went to the walk on Washington, and that was when I discovered that the streets in Washington have pebbles in 'em. Speaker 1: So you went to the--what is that, the Poor People's Campaign? When you, when you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, that one--this one was strictly for OIC. Speaker 1: Oh, for OIC. Speaker 2: Yes, but they blacked it out and they said it was one thousand people, and it was over fifty thousand people there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is in--what year is this, you think? What year do you think? Speaker 2: Um. Speaker 1: Was it before Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died, or afterwards? Speaker 2: It was after, 'cause I was still at OPPD [Omaha Public Power District] when Dr. King died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And also, it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember at what--that day, and what it was like? Speaker 2: 'Cause he died in nineteen sixty-- Speaker 1: Eight [1968]. Speaker 2: Yeah. No, then it was, it was John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] then, that got killed (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, that was '63 [1963]. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so--no--at--I was at OIC then, and when Dr. King died. And I went there, we went to Memphis [Tennessee]. I didn't take part in any of the demonstrations, but I got to go to all of those places and, and see and, and, and--those people like Whitney Young, and--I had met Dr. King in Omaha [Nebraska] before he had started out there. When he was a Baptist preacher and he was with the congress. Congress met in Omaha twice, and they met the first time in 1958, and he was in a play and it was called--it was written by Luther Campbell [ph.] and Grace [ph.]--what was that Grace's name? Grace, Grace, Grace--they were at the--over the youth division of the National Baptist Conv- Congress [sic. National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.], and he had the lead part, and I remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dr. King? Back in--what is that for? Speaker 2: He was a young man-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, when he was-- Speaker 2: --and he had the lead part in the youth play, and it was--he was like he--I remember the song was, 'Lord, I'm Out Here on Your Word,' and he sang that. And then as--when I grew up, our choir did it, and I had the lead for the female part of it and--but I remember that was the first time I'd seen him here in Omaha. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, so you were in Philadelphia when he died in '68 [1968]--when he was killed? Speaker 2: I was part of OIC, I wasn't in Philly. I was a part of OIC. Speaker 1: But you were, you were here. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Now, what position did you hold at OIC? Speaker 2: I started out as an instructor for keypunch, and then I wrote the curriculum for keypunch, and I started--then I started the retail sales classes and wrote those curriculum, started the clerical classes and wrote those curriculums, and then from there I became--we had a subcontract, and I did the assessment and orientation for the city, and then I came back and I became public affairs, and then we got in the midst of building the--a new facility which was the first new facility built in North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], other than a church, a bar, or a beauty shop. And I was over fundraising for there, and then I became the supervisor and assistant to the director over at job placement and, and that--just did everything. We started as volunteers, but I started teaching typing down there. We didn't even have books; I used to go and type the lessons on mimeograph for my students, and it was during the time when things were opened--affirmative action--so we got a lot of people placed. Story_ID: 531333 Speaker 1: Were you writing--doing any newswriting then, or any editorial writing? Speaker 2: I would do--we had a newsletter, I'd do the newsletter and I'd do the articles that we would send to the Omaha Star and the World-Herald [Omaha World-Herald]. I did the press releases and that kind of thing. And then I had a little TV show that was a thirty-minute show every week. Speaker 1: Now, when was--now what year is this? Speaker 2: I don't remember the years, it was just during all that time. It went so fast I just--I don't remember. I could probably find it when I go back and look, but I just don't remember the exact year, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Would it be in the '70s [1970s], or-- Speaker 2: It would be in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It may be on my resume. I might have remembered it well enough to put it on there. And what was so odd, a lady had done my bibliography. She chronol- she put everything in order about my whole life, and she called it Sunday's child, and I don't know where it is, I think I have it put up somewhere. Then that would have told you everything that I did, step-by-step, my whole life. The show was--we would talk about jobs, and I would interview people on it. I did that for about maybe six months. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was when you would get PSA [public service announcement] time at the local TVs, but that is not now, but at that time they would allow you--and the president of Channel 7, KETV [KETV-TV, Omaha, Nebraska] was on our board of directors, and he put in his budget so much television time for OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers], and we were able to have our own show, and they filmed everything, they did all the documentaries--everything, so that was a good experience. And during that experience at OIC, I also produced seven pageants, and our pageant--the purpose of our pageant was to showcase women that would ordinarily not be showcased. These were unwed mothers, high school dropouts, but they'd come to OIC to get their GED [General Educational Development] high school diploma and get a skill, and as a part of it, I worked with a local modeling agent and they gave them--agency--they gave them modeling lessons and we would have--and they--we had grooming, and they would have to do a talent, and the winners would--got to go to the national OIC convention every year and they got a gift certificate from Brandeis [Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts] which, at that time, was a lot of money, two hundred dollars is a lot of money to buy a bunch of clothes. And they also got four-year scholarships from Buffett--from the Buffett Foundation [Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation, Omaha, Nebraska], so--and we had eight of those that I produced. And prior to that I was part of the--it was a business, it was a Negro businesswomen's club. It was part of the Urban League, and I'd done--my first pageant with them was called, 'Our Girl Friday,' and we had done that one, and then when I went to OIC we were looking for a way to raise money and so we did those. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Yeah, that's--those are the days when the Miss Black America pageant was a lot bigger and seems that it is now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. And we had--we had a Miss Black Nebraska, and all of that. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So--now, how long were you at OIC? Speaker 2: I was there from--official--on payroll, I was there from January 1968 until I left in 1998, but I was still working with 'em, I still work with 'em, you know--I help (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's like thirty years--- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --with OIC. Story_ID: 531334 Speaker 1: Why did you leave? Speaker 2: My husband [Alonzo Hicks] was talking about retiring, and where we had gone from abundant government funding, we'd gone to little or none and, and in that time we've had to rebel when the city tried to take us over with job training, and they cut my job out and I went on unemployment and fought, and national came in 'til we got funded by the city council [Omaha City Council] direct, and so, so during that time, the pay--you know, the government money just got smaller and smaller, and after OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers] took a block grant from the--at that time Republican Party, and after that, those grants went out, and then the money start, you know, getting more and more in the states, that we ended up working part-time. So my husband was talking about retiring, and I said, "Well, I need some benefits," 'cause I didn't know, you know, what benefits would cover me, so then I started--I mean through the years, we all work part-times in different jobs that--so I started working in telemarketing, and I applied for a job; they just said, apply, and they hired me as a trainer, and I worked at that company for a year, and then I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what was the name of that one? Speaker 2: Sitel [Sitel Corporation]. Speaker 1: Is that S-I-T-E-L? Speaker 2: And then I worked there for about a year, and really a year almost to be exact, and then I went to a company called CSG [Cable Services Group; CSG Systems International, Inc.], which is--they do the billing for cable companies and all over the world--all over the country. And I worked there until '95 [1995]--2005, 2005. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I retired. But in the meantime, in the midst of that, or rather, in 2000, I was diagnosed with colon cancer, and I went through a year of that, so I've been seven years cancer-free, so that's, that's one of my high points. But all this time I had--that stemmed back from my high school days of being in the Elks, I started a group, and it was a marching group at our church, and the way it started that every year we'd have a youth revival--we would have a parade, 'cause I'm always really big into parades, and so I really had no intention of even working with it, but the lady who said she'd do it that year said would I help. I said, "Yes." She went--made one meeting and she got sick, so my best friend who is like my sister, her name is Jackie Bose [ph.], she and I--we're best friends from high school and grade school--she came on, so we were--start working with the kids; that was in 1966, too, and I was pregnant (laughter), and so in 1967, they wanted to have a full-time group and I--you know--not me--so they went to our pastor which was Reverend Wade, J.C. Wade [J.C. Wade, Sr.], and he said, "Well, if you find somebody to work with you--." Well, he wanted it because the congress was coming in '68 [1968], and that's how the group started, and I've had 'em ever since. We just celebrated forty years. Speaker 1: Okay. When you said the congress was coming, you mean the-- Speaker 2: The National Baptist Congress [sic. National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was coming, and so he wanted us to lead the parade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I ended not only having the group, I ended up coordinating the parade of the congress, which was one of their biggest, and they had 'em several years after that, parades. Story_ID: 531335 Speaker 1: Your column, It's My Opinion [ph.]? Is that-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. When did you start writing that? Speaker 2: When I came--started working at the Star [Omaha Star]. I came--I retired (laughter) April 2000--April 15th, 2005, and I started working down here at the Star in June, so I retired a whole month and a half? (Laughter) And so then I'd been here for a little while, and I decided I would write this one particular story about the substandard and the government money going to the subsidized private business, and then after that, I started it. And I figure--I write it because it's what I think, I can say what I think, if you don't agree you can write back and say what you think, but that's my opinion whether you like it or not. So it gives me freedom to say what I really want, within reason (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what have been some of the issues that you've (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, there's a filling station, it's right at the base of where they're gonna start this new North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] plan, and it's a Sinclair [Sinclair Oil Corporation] station, and I just happened to--I needed gas, I was coming from city hall, and I went up Dodge [Street], and I said, "Well, I won't go to that one, I'll go to one in the neighborhood," but I happened to look at it and I remember I say, "Well, you know, I'm really on empty," so I stopped and got gas, and then I came on down and I came down 24th [Street], and I got to the one on 24th and Cuming [Street], in a same Sinclair station, but the, the price was forty cents more a gallon. I say, "Wait a minute, something is wrong." So I drove all the way back to Dodge Street to look at it, so the--I was so mad, so I went into the--I stopped to come in there and speak to the manager. They say the manager wasn't there. I say, "Well, who decides who--what you sell the gas for?" Well, I guess they said the manager. I said, "Well, I wanna talk to the manager." So I just couldn't sleep. I got up that next morning bright and early; took my camera, went and took pictures of the one that I got gas from, came down to the one that was in North Omaha, and took pictures of that one being forty cents more a gallon and, and I asked the girl (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Forty cents less, I mean the one-- Speaker 2: More. Speaker 1: Oh, the one-- Speaker 2: The one that I got gas (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, the first one, yeah. It was--that's--yeah, right, okay. Speaker 2: On Dodge Street, it was off downtown. And so then I asked to speak to the manager, I left my name and number, they never called. So I wrote--I took pictures and showed it (laughter), and I put it--I wrote that in Just My Opinion. The manage- didn't--the manager or one of the employees wrote me an email, just real nasty, about that he's the nicest person, that I had no business doing that, and all, and he gave them jobs, and blah, blah, blah. Come to find out, under disguise, the manager was Hispanic--the owner is Hispanic, and had--and nobody knew he was Hispanic, and he called me and he said, "Can I meet with you?" I said, "Sure." He said, "I want you to change that story because I come and they told me not to meet and not to open up 'cause I would have all the--all this, and I don't make the money that the other station--I don't have a quick shop and I don't have--." I said, "Sir." He said, "What they're selling gas for--and they're still doing it, still. You go down there now and it's still forty cents more." And I said, "When you bought your gas and it was the same price as everybody else's gas, granted it may have gone up the next time you bought it, but are you gonna tell me that in two weeks that you bought your gas, your tanks were empty? That you had to raise your price?" "Yes, I had to--I don't make any money off the gas and, and, and you--I just made my money--," and he has a Subway. I say, "Well, you make it off the sandwiches. You're right at the bottom of the hill of Creighton [Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska]." And so he went on, and he just went on and said, "I want you to change that story." I said, "I'm not changing my story." And so he kept on and kept on, and I said, "I am not changing it." I say, "Now, if you wanna write something, your opinion, I'll put it in there, but I am not 'cause it's the fact. Is this not your store? Is this not your sign? This is not the one on Dodge--this is not their sign." So I made a call, and I called all--about seven more in Omaha [Nebraska]. Some of 'em would tell me their prices--most of 'em wouldn't over the phone. So I started going around looking at 'em, and so he changed it a little bit, but then he went right back. If you go there now, he's forty cents more. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I--you know, I just wrote it and I didn't go back and revisit it, which I probably should, because he's still doing it. And people pull up without even noticing, fill up their tanks, and they can go right down the street, or four blocks over, and get it for forty cents less a gallon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's what, that's what inspired me to write those two stories, and that's when I started writing my articles. Story_ID: 531336 Speaker 1: Any other issues? What are some of the other issues? Any-- Speaker 2: We had to look back in the papers. I've written about twenty-five of 'em, so--I know I've written a lot, I just don't--those are the two that strike me the most, but I wrote one--Oh, I know. My husband [Alonzo Hicks] and I went to see Bernadette Peters with the symphony--and one other lady. We were the only African Americans in the whole performance theater, and I wrote about her because she was fantastic, but I just said, you know, "It's just too bad." In fact, I'm going to the symphony [Omaha Symphony] tonight. The--they--I think they read it and remembered it. They called me with free tickets. But that--how we don't go to things that are a little bit out of the loop, but just how inspiring it is, and I made a fact that the symphony orchestra had no minorities in it, and I--what a shame, and then I went back to--about schools, you know. When I was in school, everybody took music. You had to learn to read music, you learn--everybody got their little funny little black flute, and then one day you got instruments. Well, now, it's elective. Kids take it if they wanna take it, and you have to buy the instruments or rent the instruments, and so kids aren't taking music. And everybody I knew took piano. No kids take piano anymore. I gave my son [Wayne Hicks] piano lessons, and him and few of his friends, but the majority of kids don't take piano anymore, so they learn the keyboard and they learn to chord and all that, but they don't learn to play--they don't learn to read, so therefore, you have a lot of musicians that can't read music, and that's at least in Omaha [Nebraska]. And I wrote about a group that I'd seen on TV and it's a--out of Atlanta [Georgia], and it's for artists--for children. And I cannot think of the name of the program, and I've been trying to find it, but it showed of all these children, and they go to these summer clinics and these kids are masters and--in whatever discipline or music, whether it be instruments and piano, or flute or harp and--these kids are good. And I wanted to talk about it, but I wanted to get more information, but I saw it on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], on public TV. Story_ID: 531337 Speaker 1: Yeah. As we speak, with all of your experiences, and especially with the paper, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community here in Omaha [Nebraska]? Speaker 2: That it goes back to some of the way it used to be when I was kid, where it was a viable neighborhood where we had grocery stores, we had the movie theaters, we had businesses--retail businesses. Some were black-owned, not all of them, but the services were here; where you could walk up and down the street and not worry about anybody bothering you or mugging you. And the things that I remember, like on Easter Sunday, they always had the Easter parade where people would walk up and down the street, and then as it got older, it was the Easter parade. More were riding, looking, than those that were walking, but it was always those kind of fun things that, that we do. Every two years we have Omaha Day [Native Omaha Days], and that's a Native Omahan Club, where people come from all over the country every August--the first weekend of August every other year, and that's where you relive, and rehash, and there's activities all week, and this, this past August we did it in--and here at the Omaha Star we did--we had a stroll in North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], North 24th [Street], and we had a trolley, and people were coming and revisiting some of the places, because many of the businesses that I grew up with are not here because after the riots they were burned down and destroyed. Story_ID: 531338 Speaker 1: We're talking about the riots of the 1960s? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were there riots here after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed? Speaker 2: No, the riots--well, it wasn't as a result of that, but it was the result of the riots like in Detroit [Michigan] and those places of just unrest, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, '66 [1966]--the riots in Los Angeles [California], '67 [1967] Detroit after the-- Speaker 2: Right, and ours was after--ours was after Detroit's-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and it happened when that fourteen-year-old girl was killed by the police, and as life does its tosses and its turns, that fourteen-year-old girl's sister is like a foster daughter to me. She married one of my alumni of the drill team that I have, who ended up being a pro football player, and he moved back to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and then--but he came home, and they started dating and, and her name is Carol [Carol Strong Larry]. The young lady that was killed, her name was Vivian Strong, and Carol is her sister, and we're here in the process now working with her for one of my articles we're working on, telling the real story of what happened to Vivian Strong--that the children were playing in the projects and they were in an empty apartment dancing. The police came in and they all broke and ran, and they shot--the policeman claim he shot in the air, but he shot her, and it lodged in her neck, and she was like--not even five feet tall, so how could he shoot in the air and it lodged in her neck? And her sister Carol was with her, but Carol went out the front door and her sister Vivian went out the back door with a bunch of kids, and that's what started the riots (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I was kind of wondering why a police officer would shoot at a bunch of kids dancing anyway. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they said that they were still--but then there was the empty housing project apartment with no furniture, no nothing, and they were in there with a video--oh, not a video, a jukebox or whatever they call it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a portable radio. Speaker 2: --boombox--and they were dancing. Speaker 1: Hm. Speaker 2: And they--he got a call, and they came in gangbusters, and kids broke and ran like kids do 'cause they shouldn't have been in there, and he shot and killed her, and that's what started the riots. And they burned down (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I'm sure it probably wasn't the first time there was a problem with the police. Speaker 2: No, but that was the one that, you know, caused it to be, and Vivian--after she was killed, they burned down most of the businesses on 24th [24th Street, Omaha, Nebraska], but they didn't touch the Omaha Star (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now-- Story_ID: 531339 Speaker 1: --Were most of the businesses on 24th Street black businesses? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. That was our little community, and there were shoe stores, there were clothing stores, there were--but none of the black businesses got touched; it was only those operated by (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, there were other people here that had businesses too, on 24th, not just black? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay, 24th and--what--I've heard of it--some kind of Dreamland [Dreamland Ballroom, Omaha, Nebraska], or-- Speaker 2: That's right acro- excuse me. The Dreamland was a ballroom, and it was over the Tuxedo Barber Shop [Omaha, Nebraska]. It was owned by Jimmy Jewell [James Jewell, Sr.], and that was a place where all the entertainers came to perform 'cause they weren't allowed to perform downtown--Count Basie, Sarah Vaughan. I remember Sarah Vaughan distinctly because she came to my house for dinner. My mother [Juanita Agee Morrow] fixed dinner for her. Well, my mother--my grandmother [Emma Agee Sullivan] and all--everybody else fixed dinner for her (laughter), and she had dinner at our house and I got to meet her. But there was a place called the Offbeat [Omaha, Nebraska] and Dreamland. Those were the two areas that entertainers--when they came. Omaha [Nebraska] was quite an active jazz community, so-- Speaker 1: Okay, so Dreamland was the center of all that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and that's across the street. It's a historical landmark. Story_ID: 531340 Speaker 1: Speaking of the history of the city, the museum [Great Plains Black History Museum, Omaha, Nebraska]--that we were talking about the museum at the very beginning, and Ms. Calloway [Bertha Calloway], that started the museum is now in a nursing home and the museum is closed. Speaker 2: Yes, it needs some work done. And the North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] project that the lady was taking a picture of for--that's a movement to renovate or re- to create some of the things that were there. They're doing this all over the city, and ours is the North O project, and that's part of it is to build another museum. Speaker 1: Did--back in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], was urban renewal an issue here in Omaha [Nebraska]? Speaker 2: We didn't really have urban renewal here. There was a--back to like when the first time I went to a big city in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], when I came back home, I discovered that we didn't have a ghetto 'cause everybody I knew who lived in the ghetto had their own yard (laughter), and when I went to Philly and saw people living on top of each other and high up in the sky, you know, that was like--I said, "Oh, that's what a ghetto looks like--what they call inner-city ghetto." So, we have housing projects, but we never had a heavy concentration, other than the housing project, and so there wasn't a lot of urban renewal. A lot of homes were owned. It's just been in the last ten years that you've seen a lot of vacant land and housing, and lots, but now they're doing that. Now, through economic development and some agencies and stuff, they're building homes, and single-family dwellings, and that type a stuff. They've torn down one area of the projects which our--the church [Salem Baptist Church, Omaha, Nebraska] I belong to bought that land and built a new church on it, and so a lot of those people were relocated into standard sized housing and that type of thing. Speaker 1: So, are you--would you say that Omaha shares a lot of the same urban problems other--I mean some of the eastern and other midwestern cities (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, but it's just later getting here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But now--but as far as like gang violence and that high crime, yes, we're starting to get more and more. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, what's your sense about the future of black Omaha? Speaker 2: Well, I'm--we have a group that we formed called Black Empowerment, and it's a group of just people who work in the community--are business owners that--we're trying to address those, and it's based on [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley's 'The Covenant' ['The Covenant with Black America'], and we've formed our own covenant, and we're taking each aspect of that, and have committees and we're working on each of those things trying to break those barriers down and create more business and create housing, and there's a lot of housing developments that have been erected in the last ten years. Story_ID: 531341 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done up to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could do it again? Speaker 2: Finish school first (laughter). Probably finish school but I really don't--and you know, when people ask me, "Well why did you--you stayed at OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers], you didn't have a retirement--." It was a choice I made. It was a choice because I--every day I felt good because I knew if I helped one person, I had done something, and we changed people's lives. People came there, they--you didn't have the skills to get better jobs, or they had low skills, or they didn't have--just--needed just a little touchup where, you know, where you taught people to put in a honest day's work for a honest day's pay, and many of them went on to be supervisors and managers of the telephone company, IBM [International Business Machines Corporation]. They got some really good jobs and I, I always got satisfaction from that. Maybe it wasn't a wise choice, but it was the choice that I felt that I was put her for as well as--at the same time I started OIC I started the drill team, and thousands of kids have gone through the drill team. I have those that are doctors and lawyers. I have attorneys that come back and, and every once in a while I hear from 'em and--not once in a while, quite often--how it affected their lives and changed their lives and, and we've always traveled. We've been fortunate enough to do two World's Fairs; one in New Orleans [Louisiana] in--what was that, '74 [1974] I think, and we did the one in Vancouver [Canada] where we were selected--four performances, five performances of each. And I've taken the groups to Disney World [Walt Disney World Resort, Orlando, Florida], three times Disneyland [Anaheim, California], Knott's Berry Farm [Buena Park, California], we've gone and represented the local Shriners, so we've been all over the country where kids would not have had an opportunity as adults. In fact, I have a third generation, I have three generations of kids in my group now. As adults, they come back and say that because I showed them that there were other places besides Omaha [Nebraska], it broadened their horizons, and that they were able to travel and want to do more. In fact, my son [Wayne Hicks]--my only child moved to Las Vegas [Nevada] in--but he was able to see all of the country 'cause we went somewhere every summer, every summer. Speaker 1: Okay. This sounds like--that you used some of your educational training to inform the programs of the drill team, you know, to-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --so it was more than just a drill team. Speaker 2: Right, it's--well, it's an auxiliary of our church [Salem Baptist Church, Omaha, Nebraska], basically, but it was the only one of our churches that allowed, you know, non-members to be in, and we used it as recruitment--as a means to recruit, so as a result of kids joining from all over the community, their parents came to church and many of them became members. We don't require that they're members of our church, but we require that they're members of a church, and we do things in church, we go to various other churches. A lot of Caucasian churches have us come out and participate in their services--have the kids march right in church, and so we've been able to, to cross over. Most of the marching we do in Nebraska and Iowa, and communities, they have no minorities, so it's always been an experience. And I can say probably only one bad experience that I remember where it was any name-calling in forty years. The people have always--have welcomed us with open arms, the kids get to see kids, and meet other kids. It's experience from both ends, and they know that all of our children don't carry knives, all of 'em aren't gang members, and all of aren't--but they are actually kids that are doing the same things their children are doing, and they--some--and through the years, when we travel, they have formed friendships, so they're friends from--with kids from other cities and states, and all the way up until their adulthood. I remember one year as a fundraiser, we had the Boys Choir of Harlem here, and we, we did something--the Boys Choir of Harlem had a concert and we formed a citywide youth choir to sing with them, and then my kids danced or, you know, so it was something that was very unique in Omaha, and it was a good experience, and some of those adults now still kind of connect with Boys Choir of Harlem, some of 'em. Speaker 1: Oh, so it made a connection that had a lasting effect. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So it was about development over a long term. Speaker 2: Right. And one of the things--it's harder now, but if you were expelled from school or if you got in trouble, then you were suspended in the drill team. I also still have that avenue. They can bring their homework--our older student can help the younger one if they have it--if they will tell me, or if their parents will tell me. There's a difference in the generations of children now, parents aren't as involved anymore with the rigid--with zero tolerance in the schools, they can get kicked out for coughing, so I can't really just suspend 'em from the drill team 'cause they will kick 'em outta school over anything, you know, and it's not anything that's really meaningful, and so I--you know, I still kind of lift that. But I've ended up going to court, I've only had--I think I can only think of maybe four, in forty years, that have been convicted of any crimes--that I know of personally. And they come back and they come to the house, and my husband [Alonzo Hicks] he, you know--anytime they knock on the door and they just get in there and they sit down and, and laugh and talk, and try to tell me what they did that they didn't think I knew about, and they say, "And we--." I say, "Oh, yeah, I know that." "You knew that?" You know--and that kind of stuff, and so it's always fun. Story_ID: 531342 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today, as we sit here, would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My working with youth, working with--helping people to better themselves and, and letting people know there's opportunities for 'em and--I mean I really should be retiring from the drill team. I'm not able to walk with 'em like I used to walk, but I go on every trip. In fact, we just traveled to St. Louis [Missouri] last week for the Gateway Classics, and so exposing children to other opportunities and to things that they wouldn't ordinarily go to and see. From several years, several of my kids were able to receive scholarships and go on to college, and still--I still recommend and write referrals and help kids that are trying to go to school. It's nothing really formal, just informal--whatever I can do. I always tell 'em once they grow up and get out of Omaha [Nebraska] and leave town, "If you need to call, you can call me collect." And one kid took that to heart. He was on a ship in the middle of the South Pacific, calling me collect. I'm like, what? (Laughter) But I mean they all know that; they know that, that anytime, that if they need to, they can call me collect, so through the years I've had quite a few phone bills that have been pretty big. Story_ID: 531343 Speaker 1: You said earlier you have one son [Wayne Hicks]? He's in-- Speaker 2: He's in Las Vegas [Nevada] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Las Vegas, okay. Speaker 2: --but I really--like I said, I was pregnant with him when I started the drill team, and I kept it going so he would have an activity, and then seeing he was an only child, and seeing he was a little bit spoiled 'cause he was the only grandchild on both sides, and just all the way around, I encouraged him--he joined the National Guard at seventeen, so that was further travel and further things for him to do. And then when he came back and he went to school, to several, on my money, and so then he went to Vegas when I took the drill team to Las Vegas to Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and he fell in love with it, and he say--he came back, worked, saved his money, and he moved out there, and he's been there ever since--sixteen years. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, do you have--is there anything I should ask you, or we should talk about, before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know--I'm a grandmother, I've been married to my husband Alonzo [Alonzo Hicks] for forty-four years. We just celebrated our forty-forth anniversary, and my grandchildren are my--that's my next project. My--I have a three and a half and a four and a half, they're eleven months apart--Irish twins--and that is my goal in life now, for as long as the Lord lets me stay here, is to, you know, help cultivate and--in fact, I just sent them money for plane tickets so they can come here to see their first snow--to cultivate them and try to instill a lot of what was instilled in me in them. And I'm also with my mom [Juanita Agee Morrow], she's eighty-three, will be eighty-four, but she's active. I don't have to do anything for her, she's very--she's more active than I am, but I mean that type of thing is what I wanna do. My father's [James Mosley, Jr.] eighty-five, eighty--gonna be eighty-six, so--keeping in touch with them and trying to keep the legacy going so that my grandchildren will have something to look forward to, something to strive for. Story_ID: 531344 Speaker 1: Now, my last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That I tried to help somebody, you know; that, that I was a Christian, of course, and that--the same song that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--, "If I can help somebody as I cross--as I go along--if I can help somebody with a word or song, then living will not be in vain." So I think that, you know, if you don't leave anything of yourself with somebody, then you have wasted a life. It doesn't matter that, you know--I'm not rich, I don't have a lot of wealth, I don't have a lot of monetary things, and that's not important to me. What is important to me is the difference I can make in someone's life...