 Story_ID: 25001 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Walter Andrew Hill. W-A-L-T-E-R; A-N-D-R-E-W; H-I-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 9, 1946. New Brunswick, New Jersey. Speaker 1: Okay. And, sir, what is your occupation and title? Speaker 2: Well, I'm professor, Tuskegee University, and also hold the positions of Vice Provost, Dean at the College of Agriculture, Environment and Nutrition Scientist and Director of 1890 Research and Extension Programs. Speaker 1: Now, what does that mean? I saw that on something and I wasn't sure what it meant. 1890 Research-- Speaker 2: 1890 Land Grant. Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: The Land Grant University started in 1862 and then the Historically Black Land Grants were founded in 1890. They're eighteen of them in States where those States decided not to integrate in 1890, and so a separate system was developed. Currently, those 18 institutions which are in seventeen States carry out a focused issue on food and agriculture issues and related rural development, environmental related issues and are funded by a formula on a federal government that's matched by state resources. So we have people in the counties--located in counties to serve the public in both urban and rural areas. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. And sir, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is December 15, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at Tuskegee University in the Kellogg Conference Center in Meeting Room B. Story_ID: 25002 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we are compelled to ask as warm-up questions, and they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: One, only one? Speaker 1: Well, you can add more, I guess. Speaker 2: Sweet potatoes and greens, probably in that order. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: The brown, beige family. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: It's not winter; all the others are fine. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The most wonderful experience was Jamaica. Speaker 1: Okay. And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: To God Be the Glory. Story_ID: 25003 Speaker 1: So, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately, so we can keep them straight. So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Tessie Mamie Lucille Paisley Hill. T-E-S-S-I-E; Mamie, M-A-M-I-E; Lucille, L-U-C-I-L-L-E; Paisley, P-A-I-S-L-E-Y; and then her married name, Hill, H-I-L-L. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: You got me on--it's--it's 1915, it's, I believe July 14, 1915 and, believe, Greensboro, North Carolina. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you say 1915? Speaker 2: Yeah, she's 97. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing and what were the stories and history? Speaker 2: Well, when we did our history, we just go back to her father. We do know he was an educator in North Carolina; he was a principal of a school. There's a school in Greensboro named for him, Paisley High School. It's a baccalaureate school. He was a senior deacon in his church, and persons came from that community to visit my mother because he named--he was very instrumental in founding other churches in that community. But his main thing was that he was an educator of the local school systems and very respected in that area. Speaker 1: Okay. And what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: John Paisley Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. Now his last name was Hill? Speaker 2: I'm sorry. John Paisley, not Paisley-Hill. Speaker 1: Is there a story behind the name Paisley, because, you know, we think about this pattern, this Indian pattern that you see on ties and socks? Speaker 2: We don't--we never did find out the history of that name, even when we traced back. We know his wife, my mother's mother was part Indian, I think, perhaps, half Indian. But I--I didn't prepare for that to bring--I could have checked our archives to give you more specifics; I could send you that later-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Specifics on that. Speaker 1: I just wanted to know. That's okay. So, your grandfather was John Paisley and Paisley High School is still in operation in Greensboro? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there any story about where he went to school? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't--couldn't refresh myself on that. Speaker 1: Now, what denomination was it? Speaker 2: Church? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Baptist. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about it? Speaker 2: Well, he wrote two books. I remember one of them had to do with cursive writing, and that's all I remember at this point. Speaker 1: Did he have nice hand? Speaker 2: Hand writing? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I'm not so sure if that was the intent of it. Again, I didn't prep for that. The second book may have been a novel, that had a, you know, which I need to give you more on that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what about your grandmother on your mother's side? Speaker 2: She worked at a--at Shaw [University]. That's where, I believe, he went to school, Shaw was their background in North Carolina, and she actually was a matron; she was a dormitory matron at Shaw for many, many years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I do remember the neighborhood in which they lived was--had a great history to it in terms of developing businesses and educating--encouraging education among the community at that time, and their home was historically preserved for a long period of time, until where it was actually moved to a big--it's conserved, or preserved today in that area. Speaker 1: So the area doesn't have like a name? Speaker 2: There is a name for it. I have to go back to the archives or check with my mom on that. Speaker 1: It sounds like it would be similar to Auburn Avenue or something, or, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, I thought of that when I remembered, yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, every city, or a lot of cities have a place like that, you know, North Omaha, you know. Okay. So the house--their house is actually, now, is it a museum or something? Speaker 2: No, I think someone lives in it, but I know they preserved it; it has, I think, some papers and things associated with it, because of the nature of the house, the houses that were constructed during that period. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story about who constructed those houses? Speaker 2: I believe so. I believe so. Yeah, as soon as we finish, I'll go check that and email you what we have on it. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. It's interesting though. Speaker 2: And then she had a brother, he became a physician. He was--he taught high school first and went back to med school and then he--he became a prominent physician in North Wilkesboro, North Carolina, where he served the black community, and then he was one of the first African American, maybe the first, where he was able to utilize a major hospital in that area. And there's a whole story on him. His name was John Paisley, Jr., so, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, this is your-- Speaker 2: Mother's brother. Speaker 1: --Your mother's brother? Speaker 2: Only brother. Speaker 1: Only brother? Okay. So, your mother's name--okay, okay, yeah, Paisley-- Speaker 2: Paisley-Hill. Speaker 1: --Okay. Paisley-Hill. Speaker 2: Paisley-Hill. She married into the Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. John Paisley, Jr. Dr. John Paisley, Jr. Do you know where he went to medical school? Speaker 2: Yeah, Meharry [Medical College]? Speaker 1: Meharry, Okay. Alright. And what was your mother's, I mean your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: My grandmother's--that escapes me right now. Speaker 1: That's okay. So, are there any--any stories that your mother tells about life growing up? I assume she grew up in Greensboro, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Let me get that right. Now, Winston Salem or Greensboro, Winston Salem or Greensboro, because they were back and forth, and so I'll have to double check, you know, because I didn't spend a lot of time there, but those were the two cities, and it could be either way. But I remember she was an excellent track star, she ran fast; she was always interested in kids, so that's why she became a teacher. You know, we didn't really pick up a lot about her childhood; we learned more about when she went to college. She went to Wilberforce University [Ohio]; she wanted to leave that area, so she went to Wilberforce; that's where she met my father, and she's a AKA, joined the sorority. As a matter of fact, she's a diamond member, and next year she would have been a member for eighty years. She was an excellent student, and went from there to Columbia University [New York] to do her master's in childhood education and then went home, taught for a while and eventually ended up marrying my father and then moving to New Jersey, where he got his first church. Story_ID: 25004 Speaker 1: So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Henry Solomon Hill. He was known as H. Solomon Hill, the way they did it in those days. His profession was as a minister, so he was always known as Reverend H. Solomon Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. I take it he was a Baptist. Speaker 2: No. He was AME [African Methodist Episcopal]. Speaker 1: AME, okay. Alright. That's Wilberforce [Ohio], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Wilberforce, exactly. Speaker 1: And, what is his date of birth, and place of birth? Speaker 2: Well, place of birth, Little Rock--North Little Rock, Arkansas; date of birth, I'm going to have to check that; probably be 1905, something like that. We'll double check on that. Speaker 1: Okay. You say about 1905? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. What do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, we were able to do a little more with his side. Hill Plantation in South Carolina, his--his great grandfather came out of the Hill Plantation; we have pictures of him. And he served in the war, civil war. We have his papers, when he was released from the civil war, so he had an honorable discharge release, and he moved to Tennessee and then North Arkansas where he became an AME minister, then he moved, eventually, to other parts of Arkansas as AME minister. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you know--now, I'm going to ask a risky question here, do you know what unit he served in in South Carolina? Speaker 2: We have all that in the papers. Speaker 1: Because this is--this would be the United States Colored Troupes, USCT, back then in different ways, I think they organized some troupes in South Carolina. David Hunter had some before organize--in uniform, before Lincoln allowed people to do it, and then later on they sent Martin Delaney from Wilberforce to, you know, the island country there, you know, Sea Island and all that, you know, Buford with the 104th United States Colored Troupes. And I know somebody who had a Hill relative from South Carolina, it was in-- Speaker 2: I'm going to get these records before you go. We'll see. Take a look. Yeah, we haven't explored that. You're talking about "The Martin Delaney"? Speaker 1: The Martin Robeson Delaney, yes, right. Speaker 2: Back to Africa, movement? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: That was fabulous. Speaker 1: He was the highest ranking black officer in the civil way. Speaker 2: Wow, awesome. Speaker 1: Had a meeting with Lincoln and then went immediately to South Carolina and formed the 104th with some Hills in it. There's a rela--there's a friend of mine whose ancestor is Hercules Richardson, not Hill, but Richardson, right. Speaker 2: We're going to check that out. Speaker 1: Okay. So there's a lot of history there. Are there any stories from those days about the civil war? Did they tell any stories about the civil war in his family? Speaker 2: Nah, none of that was passed down when we--when we talked with my dad about that. Speaker 1: So, were your father's people involved in the Free Masons? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: Was your dad a Mason? Speaker 2: Now, the Mason--my dad was. I think he got up to thirty-two. I think there was some money and some other issues, my brother also, did thirty two or thirty three, my oldest brother. Yeah. So my dad was there. My dad was really connected in all those aspects of the African American community when we start talking about where he traveled in this country, but I don't want to jump ahead. Speaker 1: That's an interesting connection, too, though. The Masons--there's something about Arkansas and the Black Mason that somebody needs to write a book about. They have a huge website with all these people. In fact, Martin Delaney's son was out there and wrote a book about black--well had his father's book published on Blacks and Free Masonry. Yeah, it's a lot of history. The other people we interviewed, what's her name, Carlotta Lanier, who was one of the Arkansas, I mean, the Little Rock Nine. Speaker 2: Okay. Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, she has relatives that were in the Masons and were there and in Canada, you know. There's a connection, there, somewhere, but I was just saying, there seems to be a pattern of a lot of Masons who end up in Little Rock. Speaker 2: I see, yeah. Speaker 1: Pine Bluff and Little Rock. So, Dad was born--you say he was born in North Little Rock? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: His father, you know, was from South Carolina, right? Speaker 2: No. His grandfather-- Speaker 1: His grandfather, okay. Speaker 2: --So, his grandfather, now where his daddy was actually born, I have to check those records, it might have been Pine Bluff, might have been Little Rock. I have to see where he was born in Arkansas. But, he also became a minister; he followed in his father's footsteps, AME minister, as did his brother, Pleasant--Pleasant(sp)Solomon Hill, and both of them were AME ministers, both of them went to Wilberforce, were educated, came back to Arkansas. Eventually, Pleasant went to Ohio and Athens in that whole area; got a lot of history up in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then--but my--my grandfather spent most of his time in Arkansas, doing different churches and also President of Shorter Community College--Junior College, there in North Little Rock. You could only stay so many years in one position with the AME, so they would move you back and forth, back and forth, and so my dad grew up in Arkansas, moving with his dad, him and his two brothers. Speaker 1: Shorter was another bishop at AME church, you know. There's a Shorter Hall at Wilberforce, it was named for Bishop Shorter. Speaker 2: Bishop Shorter, man, you're connected. Speaker 1: And so, I can't stop it. So, now-- Speaker 2: All connected? Speaker 1: --But, yeah, it's--okay, so, your dad, he's got a lot to look at here. Now, what about your grandmother? Speaker 2: Grandmother? Now, she came out of Ohio. Her family, they met at--I believe they met at Wilberforce. I believe that's where they met. But anyway, in the end they-- Speaker 1: So did your grandfather go to Wilberforce, too? Speaker 2: --Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was quite a scholar, from what we understood. He--we saw some of his published works. And then she was a musician. She was a great musician and a leader, herself, and eventually, there was a period, even there, when he passed away, when she was what they called a lady president, where she managed Shorter College. She taught chemistry, and she was a musician there at that college. But I do know we have pictures of that, her with her students, and they were intimately involved in community development both my grandfather and my father, housing and those kinds of things-- Speaker 1: Now, what was--I don't think you gave us your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: --Okay, Alexander--he was Henry Alexander. Henry Alexander Hill. Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask another risky question, here. Were they related at all to Charles Leander Hill, who became the President of Wilberforce, at some point, in the '50s (1950s)? Speaker 2: It was never brought up-- Speaker 1: Yeah. The president of Wilberforce-- Speaker 2: That was never brought up. Speaker 1: --Was from Springfield, Ohio. Charles Leander Hill, he was a German scholar, among other things. Speaker 2: African American or German? Speaker 1: African American, yeah, Charles Leander Hill. He succeeded Charles Wesley when the schools broke apart. Speaker 2: I do know, looking at my grandmother's skin color and in our photo album, there are whites in that album, and they were Germans, and there was some connection there between the German community and the African American community and so, it was never explained to us, fully, but there are these kids and then there are these black kids, and then, whether they were friends or how they were connected, I have no idea. Speaker 1: Yeah, I do know the college in Springfield is Wittenberg University or Lutheran, German Lutheran, I don't know, it's interesting. Speaker 2: He was my--my--my--on my mother's side, her dad, the one thing we do know, he was keeper of the graveyard, which was a position of some whatever, whatever, so, according to my dad (unclear) my major responsibility, and that's about all we know there. Speaker 1: So, your grandfather was the keeper of the graveyard? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandmother's dad. Speaker 1: Your grandmother's dad, okay? He was keeper of the graveyard in Ohio-- Speaker 2: Ohio, where--whatever her roots come out of, which we don't know a whole lot. Speaker 1: --You're not sure what town was she-- Speaker 2: We have it--I have it all. I just didn't know I was going to be asked, to prep for it, but I'll give it to you. Speaker 1: --Okay. Story_ID: 25005 Speaker 1: Alright. Well, at any rate, in terms of your father [Reverend Henry Solomon Hill], now, he--did he talk about growing up in Little Rock--North Little Rock? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Now, he had three brothers, and one of them, I forget the order, Alec, Dick and Saul. Alec was the oldest, Dick and Saul Hill. And I'm trying to remember which--which is which. One--Alec, I believe, was the musician, a writer in the--in the Duke Ellington era and what have you, and he played with all those great bands in New York, and what have you, and we have quite a bit of the music that he wrote. My brother, who was also a musician, collected all that. The--Dick was the man about town, the way my Dad described him. He was supposed to be one of the best pool players in the State, and was engaged in that quite a bit. And the lifestyle of both of them ended up with them, I think, dying fairly young, tuberculosis in one case, and the other, I'm not quite sure of all that. But--so they lived a fast life, my dad lived--he started off--he was a musician, he was a trumpet player and he didn't--giged around with bands for a while, and then when he got the call in to preach, he had to make a decision, so he stopped cold. But he used to play that horn every once in a while, he'd pick it up, and so we grew up with jazz and black music from the very beginning as part of the household, both the church and the non-church, second component, so we--we love it all-- Speaker 1: Between the sacred and the secular. Speaker 2: --There you go. Speaker 1: Okay. Did your father have any--so are there any stories about growing up by race relations in Arkansas or about the church or playing in these bands? Speaker 2: He never talked much about that. But this is what I will say, I know we were living in--we have to backtrack a little, but we were living in Oakland, California. He--we haven't done his story yet, but he's going to move from New Jersey to Bay Area [San Francisco, California], okay, and then at some point, after he was a successful pastor, in the Bay Area, which we talk about what that meant, he decided to move back to North Little Rock, take up Shorter College to get back to his people, right in the heart of--he talked about the Civil--Little Rock Nine, it was the year that--that Governor Faubus, you know, they had to bring in the National Guard to integrate, and it was the year after that that he went back. Everybody thought he was totally crazy. Why are you going--we here in California with, you know, open everything, integrated, everything, and you going back, and we went back to--across the street from where he grew up. So he took the family back and just told us one day why we were doing it, you know, to work for our people, and that he felt in this role, he would be to--it was the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church--School he would be trying to help build it back up; they were having challenges. He would get to serve in the community in which he grew up. And then his, you know, he didn't tell us, but, eventually, I--we scoped his role to get us involved in the South, and get us educated to understand about our own community in the rural areas. So I'll skip, you know, we can skip and come back, but one of the things he did which infected my whole life while I'm at Tuskegee [University], I'll just do a jump, is that when he would go into the rural areas to recruit, he always took me with him. He had--his mom had projected me to be the minister, to continue the line. So he took me everywhere with him. And first I hated it, but later I found my style when I went to--when we went to a church, I would get with the people my age, and then we would figure out a way to do things, and that's when I got to really see the rural south, the agriculture, you know, small towns, etc., etc. So, but he did that and influenced all of his children in different ways moving back to the South. Story_ID: 25006 Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Rev. Henry Solomon Hill] talk about going to high school? Did he go to high school in Arkansas? Speaker 2: Yeah. Right there in North Little Rock [Arkansas]. We saw his report cards; we have his report cards. He was a good student, not straight A, but community, was the word, that--that's what came across when he talked about North Little Rock and how the people in his time really worked together, you know, through the struggles. The teachers weren't paid that much in all the black communities. And by the time we got back there, it was the same. It was actually--had not changed very much. You had the different sub communities in North Little Rock, and I remember when we first got back that my brothers and I walked across the bridge to Little Rock, because we were used to just going anywhere, museums, any--we'd do any--and these white people hollering at us over the bridge and calling us nigger and all this stuff, and we were just in shock, we went into the stores downtown in North Little Rock and they just followed us around like we're going to steal. My oldest brother who had come back was a marine officer, had come back, you know, he could have killed the guy with one blow, man, he was a big--but that was a challenge moving back to North Little Rock. But did he--did he--mainly, he talked about the school, and then he would just take us around to all the places where all the people he grew up with were. So, he didn't talk a lot about, he showed us, all the barber shops, the restaurants, across the Little Rock, where our--his friends or relatives of my mother [Tessie Paisley-Hill] was, Aunt Tilly and all those, he would just--he just got us involved in a different generation of people his age, and let us see all that, and-- Speaker 1: I've never been to Little Rock. I've heard lots of stories, and-- Speaker 2: --About Little Rock. Speaker 1: --Is North Little Rock the community that the Little Rock Nine came from when they integrated-- Speaker 2: No, they were in Little Rock. Speaker 1: --Okay, so Little Rock and North Little Rock are really separate-- Speaker 2: Two different cities. Speaker 1: --Locales? Speaker 2: Separated by the Arkansas River. Speaker 1: Okay. It's like East St. Louis and St. Louis? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So, he's in North Little Rock. So was Shorter College in-- Speaker 2: North Little Rock. Speaker 1: --North Little Rock? Okay. I know there's some other blacks, there's Philander Smith-- Speaker 2: Philander Smith. Speaker 1: --And isn't there another one? Speaker 2: Baptist College was there too, was in Little Rock. Speaker 1: Okay. And then you have to go out of the city to go to Pine Bluff. Speaker 2: Pine Bluff University, APB-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --Where my dad went to school, UAPB [University of Arkansas as Pine Bluff]. That's where he played football, went to-- Speaker 1: Okay. So he went to-- Speaker 2: --Undergraduate degree there, and then he went to Divinity-- Speaker 1: Divinity School at Payne, was that at Payne? Speaker 2: --Payne. And then he went to--where did he do his master's? That's escaping me right now. Speaker 1: Well, that would be Payne, wouldn't it, I mean, that would be his master's in Theology, unless he had another one. Speaker 2: Well, he did his master's-- his bachelor's divinity, he got a DD, but he did a master's in social work in--no, it was similar like the boys where he did a sociological study of some area and got a master's in there so, the name of that school escapes me now, but we have his thesis. It's quite a piece of work. Speaker 1: He didn't go to Columbus, I mean, to Columbia, too, did he? Speaker 2: I almost said Columbia but, I'll get it for you. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So, your dad was well educated, so he-- Speaker 2: He was, he was. Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: He was a smart guy, he could preach too, he could preach. He loved history, and he would get that history into those sermons and, you know, even as a little kid, you know, you'd sit forward then you'd go back to playing after-- Speaker 1: Now, did he have a favorite historian or a favorite period of history he covered? Speaker 2: He just always said he loved history. We never--I never talked to him much about that, you know, thinking about that. You know, I have to think some more about that. Story_ID: 25007 Speaker 1: So your father [Rev. Henry Hill] and mother [Tessie Paisley-Hill] met in Wilberforce, Ohio, where she was a student at Wilberforce and he was at Payne Theological School which is on the same-- Speaker 2: He was--he was--he was at Wilberforce when they met. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, Payne, yeah. Payne is there, yeah, you're right, you're right. Speaker 1: I know they consider it a separate school, even though it's on the same campus. Speaker 2: Same campus, yeah, you're right, you're right. Speaker 1: So, is there a story about how they met, or what transpired when they met? Speaker 2: No. The only--the only thing we get out of there was that he was extremely shy. He was not a player at all; he was exactly the opposite, and when he needed to get a wife then he just--whatever was there relationship at Wilberforce, he went down to North Carolina and said, would you be my--and they--he had to think about it hard and long, and it was in a--but they--she went. She had challenges. She was smart, she was educated, she had traveled, you know. Her dad was prominent and raised his baby, you know, and so, but she was--she was a remarkable person. I'll see her. She's in the hospital today, she'll be out in the next--but she is remarkable person in terms of--now what I would get from her is adaptability, I mean, you know, she traveled--we traveled--he must have preached in five or six cities across this country. And everywhere we went, she was the anchor, would adjust--help with the adjustment, the family, the community, etc., etc. So--and she'd always find her way into education in that community. There are different stories. When we get to cities, I can remember what she did. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25008 Speaker 1: When you consider your parents' [Tessie Paisley-Hill and Rev. Henry Solomon Hill] personalities and their dispositions and their mentalities, and their looks, even in how they do things, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Well, both. My wife validates that too. The student interest there, the teacher aspect from my mother, and the way I operate with people on a day-to-day, and just--the first name, everybody's equal in that whole thing, loved that individual--into that individual for that moment, got that all from her. He was the--in Little Rock, you know, he built housing, man, he would work the political system and got housing, which is still there for seniors. You know, it was nothing in that area, in North Little Rock, where we were. He built a beautiful structure--he got laundry mats and things so that people in the community would have things. He--and I have pictures of him where he led movements in Oakland--when we were in Oakland, "We will Stand as Men". The Civil Rights Movement there, where we spend our money, and that kind of thing. And I remember he would leave and say, "Look boys, I'm going down to the South to be a part of Civil Rights marches. You won't be eating any chicken for a couple of Sundays. We're just going to have string beans and potatoes", because we had to take the money to participate in the movement, and we would be--it would be, kind of like dark, when he would leave. You know, when I was a little boy, I would say, "wow, where is my dad going" you know. And later on he just remember--appreciated that. So he was--he cared about his people. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --That part from him, the other part from my mom, so, that's why I'm here. Speaker 1: Okay. So, they would have met about, what, 1935 or so, or what? Speaker 2: I'll have to review that. Speaker 1: I tried to add eighteen of your mother's age and come up with a reasonable--would that be 1932 or so, I guess, so, at sometime in the '30s (1930s) they met at Wilberforce [University]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll give you all that, and then the dates. Story_ID: 25009 Speaker 1: Now, you have brothers and sisters, right? Speaker 2: I have four brothers--have four brothers. Speaker 1: Four brothers, okay. And, can you name them all and put yourself in the order? Speaker 2: Yeah, my oldest is Solomon Paisley Hill and then Henry Alexander Hill and then myself, Walter Andrew. You want me to slow down? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. And then Augustus Ormond Hill and then John Dixon Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm in the middle. Speaker 1: So, it was five of you? All boys? Speaker 2: All boys. Speaker 1: Okay. That's interesting, the household there, your mother [Tessie Paisley-Hill] had her hands full? Speaker 2: She did. She'd let us know that. She'd have to leave sometime, say, "I'm gone". Stay away two or three days, come back, ready to take us on. She'd go across the street to Aunt Tilly's house, you know. She had her way of surviving; she was a fabulous survivor, fabulous. Story_ID: 25010 Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Of what? Speaker 1: Well, any memory at all. The earliest one that you can remember. The first time you remember being conscious of thinking about a memory? Speaker 2: Yeah, not like my wife, she can remember everything. I don't remember New Jersey. We left there when I was two and went to Oakland [California]. Oakland was wonderland, for me, as a boy growing up. We lived on Telegraph--well, first we lived in--the west side; can't remember the streets we lived on, and I was trying to recollect there. We had a church. I remember going to church, I remember school, liking school very much, Durant Elementary School. Speaker 1: Durant? Speaker 2: Durant was the first one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Then we moved, I was a little older, so I can remember more when we moved to 34th and West Street. The Parsons--they built--got another house for the pastor, and now I'm start--I can remember a lot about that, walking those blocks, I guess about twelve blocks to school, all the sports activities, we played, myself and my brother--we were in every sports that you could play--every team, you know, that's how we spent our lives as kids, you know. After school on the play ground till it got dark; we had to be home at dark, and then church was church, school was school. Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your dad's church? Speaker 2: First AME Church. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First AME Church in North Little Rock. And when he moved it, again the dates when he moved it from-- Speaker 1: I was asking about the one in Oakland? Speaker 2: That's what I'm talking about? Speaker 1: That's the one, okay. Speaker 2: It was in West Oakland when I first had recollection. I remembering how that church looked and we lived next door. Then when we moved, he moved to Telegraph and Broadway. He bought a church, it was a magnificent church, and that church still stands today. It has a huge congregation. They have a picture of him--have a--they have honored him for that move. They have three big services every Sunday. And it's a hallmark in that community right now. When I went back about five years ago and took my son with me, one of my sons, I mean, it was like--I saw all the--a lot of the old members are still there, they were older, in the choir, and their children, and there was a great, great celebration. So he did a--he did a very good thing in terms of that community that lasts today. That's why I say he was at the peak of his--he probably would have moved on up whatever is the--whatever in that hierarchy within the church in that area had he decided to do that, but he--right at that peak, he came back to North Little Rock. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did he ask to be transferred to North Little Rock? Speaker 2: I think the way that goes, somebody--one bishop asked him to come to California, who he knew. I think that--one of my brothers is actually named for that bishop, and they had a close relationship--it was a lot of respect for my dad within the AMEs as he went through Wilberforce, and he made his contacts with--so he was moved out there, given that church, and he built it up real big, and then in North Little Rock, that bishop there asked him. So what did he go through in his mind, we never talked about it much, but he--I shared with you what he told us, so I have to presume that it was--he felt that's what God was calling him to do at that time. Speaker 1: Okay. So what year did he move to North Little Rock? Speaker 2: Well, let me see now. Let's see, I graduated, around 1960, did I get that right, '59(1959) or '57(1957), maybe '57(1957), somewhere in there. I think about the year before Little Rock Central--the year after Central was integrated-- Speaker 1: Okay, '57(1957) Speaker 2: --'57(1957) or '58(1958), somewhere in there. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Speaker 2: Then I finished a two years later, four years later. Speaker 1: So were you about eleven years old? Speaker 2: Went into the ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, you went into the ninth grade, you would have been 13, yeah 13. So-- Speaker 2: Went into the ninth grade, I just-- Speaker 1: --It was about 1959, I guess. Speaker 2: --Had just been elected vice president in my class at Westlake Junior High School in Oakland, and then we--we left right after that. I didn't manifest that term, yeah, yeah. Story_ID: 25011 Speaker 1: Describe for us some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, so I guess it could be anywhere? Speaker 2: Maybe I'll do both. Well, first from Oakland [California], multiracial, you know, Westlake Junior High, even at--we start with Durant, Durant Elementary was 100 percent, well 98 percent African American, Westside School with good--good teachers. Yeah, there was--no, there were a few Asians and a few Hispanics in our class, but not many. And I just remember the sights and sounds of school, getting in trouble, getting out of trouble, demanding the principal that we elect student officers. I remember demanding that myself, and he said "why", I said, "so we could lead" because we didn't have--he didn't let us do those--I remember getting beat up by a guy, he got me and got the coat over my head, so I couldn't swing and Ricky, was his name, he beat me up; later we became best friends. He was a tough guy. And I remember, like I mentioned before, all of the sports, we went everywhere with the teams. And then I remember--I remember Mosswood Park, where we would spend our Saturdays and Sundays playing. Mosswood Park, as you go on Broadway--Telegraph and Broadway near where the church, and you go up one block and there's a beautiful park there, it's still there. I've gone back, and it was just a great place for kids to get together and do what you should do as kids. I wish every child would have a park like that near them, you know. We had our few fights and things around there, but it was so much more positive than negative. I remember in junior high, the consciousness of about a fourth black, this is Westlake, now, after I left Durant and went to Westlake, a fourth black, a fourth Hispanic, a fourth third and a fourth white, in our school. The composition, it was just kind of--one day I was there, out on the playground, it just dawned on me that that was our composition. I can't--can't quite remember that. And then later, when we moved back to North Little Rock, we went to 100 percent African American community and school, and the transition was--was quite an adjustment. But after that first year, it was fine; it was beautiful after that. But I do remember, in terms of the impact on me, as a person, the ability to accept all--all peoples and try to--that's just deep in my mind. And so I remember later on being at the University of Arizona and the farm workers were picketing and I remember joining the farm workers; I just had to, and then I became a captain at one of the stores and whatever; that goes back to my childhood, you know, positive memories on that. But that's just on the side. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I was asking about sights, sounds and smells. Speaker 2: Sight, sounds and smells. The smells in--now I've jumped. Smells don't come to my mind in Oakland, but they do, very much, in North Little Rock, because the chitterlings, dad would take us around to all the restaurants, and he would take me; we would go eat everywhere. All the good food, I learned a lot there, the barbershops, we would just in, and he was an outgoing person, we go and talk with everybody--hey this is my son, and he'd sit and talk, and we'd get the smells of the barbershops and the conversations and go down to the hotel, down there, I forget the name of that street where--where the black folks were able to go to hotels back then, you know, going in there and meeting all the people, he would just go around and meet everybody. I remember people coming to our home and asking for food, a lot of people moving through, always come to the house next to the church--the Parish house and ask for food. My mom always would give them food, peanut butter, jelly sandwiches, milk, whatever we had, she would always do that. Story_ID: 25012 Speaker 1: In sports, Oakland has a rich sports tradition. So many big professionals came out of--Bill Russell and Frank Robinson, Vada Pinson, it's a bunch of them that came out of McClymonds High School. That's in-- Speaker 2: McClymonds, that was a different--my brother didn't, he was older, he went to Tech, Oakland Tech, so, McClymonds, I remember the name, but that was in a different district. Speaker 1: --Okay. Speaker 2: What I do remember about the professional was the baseball, the three Willys; Willy Mays, Willy Kirland and Willy--wasn't more than three Willys all with the San Francisco Giants, was it at that point? I think it was; that was the phenomenon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what I do remember. I don't remember the professional athletes coming out of Oakland. Speaker 1: Okay. So, did you play baseball? Speaker 2: I played every sport. My brothers and I, we all did everything, we played and we were pretty okay, we were good, we all started or whatever we were. We were small, we weren't that big, but we were fast and practiced all the time at Mosswood Park, so we knew every maneuver, so, great days. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25013 Speaker 1: Now, in school at Durant or Westlake, did you have a favorite teacher or favorite subject? Speaker 2: Interesting. Well, I always was attracted to the science, I mean, in elementary school, I always was. Any class like that, anything connected with science, I was, you know, good in math, but I liked math, but I liked the nature, outdoors, you know. When I went to North Little Rock, I got involved with the Boy Scouts. They had a guy there, a fabulous troupe leader, trying to remember his name, lived around the corner. But the first time I went camping and really didn't want to go home. I remember going out there just falling in love with the woods and the snakes, river and all, so I hid. When they came to take us home, I hid and they finally found me, so eventually I became part of the staff and got into scouts quite a bit. And that just carried through here, even, we produce quite a few Eagle Scouts here. Just love--and where we live here. So there's nature and then there's science. In the early years, we studied rocks. I like rocks, I like trees, you know, and then when we got into science labs in North Little Rock, by the time I got there, I was always, science projects, going to the fair. I remember winning--winning our--winning in the school and then winning the next level and going to the state, and we--we--a lot of things happened, but one of the things I remember, I took some of my friends, I was driving, and we went up to--to the fair to collect my project and this kind of thing, and I turned down the wrong street, it was in the Little Rock neighborhood, so this cop pulled us aside, and my license had expired the day before, and the guy put me in jail and embarrass all my friends had to come, get their parents. My dad had to come get me out of jail, and I don't know that just--I was angry for a long time after that. I don't, you know, hey, my license was out, but I was just angry, could have given me a break. I was trying to plead, I said, look man, got my friends, just one day, I'll go get it fixed, give me a break. Took him to the back, I showed him my science fair, the ribbons we had won, proud all that. I think that made him even more angry. And the problem was I just turned in the neighborhood by mistake, which was more exclusive. So I was a set up for me with these kids. But I--that--that stuck with me a little bit. But we always win science fairs, always did pretty good, math project, science project, lenses, physics, whatever it was, you know, just spend time coming up with something original. So that was--that was there early-- Speaker 1: Did you have good guidance from your parents and your older brothers? Speaker 2: --No one else was really into science, you know, like it goes back to my grandmother, who taught chemistry, I think it was in her, but mine was a--I always had at least one good teacher who would, you know, make you think, you know. I remember at Durant who that teacher was, and then at North Little Rock, by the time I had more consciousness about it, I had a couple of good ones. Now, that was a good thing about being in the black community in that school system in that community, because one of the things was they really did try to find what was within each child and then they would foster that, so remember the guy who was really a great artist, a mechanic, athlete or whatever, and then we would all kind of support each other. I mean, that was such a good thing that we lost when we integrated; that was--and I think that ricocheted--I've talked to many people across the south who felt the same thing. Those teachers were fabulous. And we had a math teacher, a fabulous English teacher, and the science teachers, I'm trying to remember too, they were not, well, they were not the best, but I didn't need that to be the best. I just needed somebody, and then the math teacher was enough for me. I could do my own creativity and then if I needed some input, you know. But the biggest thing was the freedom, I remember once you get an idea--oh, oh, here's how it worked. I remember with the lenses, I went to the optometrist, Mr. Townsend, and he helped me get all the lenses. That's why--I wanted to do something out of the physics project with that, and so I went to another part of the community and got that piece. When it came to the math project, which was really probably my best project, the original one, I had my math teacher who was just great, and he just encouraged us. You know the sad thing about it, I remember one time going to the state fair, and I really had that math when it was all set, and when I got there, the fair was over. The instructions we had were the wrong day, you know, we had, you know, and Mr. Britt, he went with me, my math teacher, he went with me. We were upset, and we were all--feel like--all we could do is just walk around and see what other people did. And I--I never did--he was so furious, he was furious. Speaker 1: Do you think you were deliberately given the wrong day? Speaker 2: I don't know. I have no idea. But it may be for the best because I probably would be a mathematician somewhere instead of doing what I'm doing, and I really need to be doing what I'm doing here. Story_ID: 25014 Speaker 1: Okay, so this is, where, around 1960 or so in North Little Rock, right? Now you graduated from high school, what, in 1960-- Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: --'64 (1964), okay, just trying to put it into perspective. Alright, and is this North Little Rock High School? Speaker 2: No. Scipio Alfagana, can't spell Alfagana for you because we call it Scipio A. Jones, S-C-I-P-I-O, Jones, a local leader. Speaker 1: Okay, Sciopio. It should be Sciopio Africanus. Speaker 2: That's it, that's it. Speaker 1: Yeah, named for--who people mistakenly thought was a black general in the Roman army, who actually got the name Africanus for conquering Carthage from Hannibal. That's who Sciopio Africanus-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Publius Cornelius Scipio. Speaker 2: I wondered how we got that name. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. But he thought that--but people thought it was a black person because of the Africanus. Speaker 2: I see, I see. Speaker 1: And a lot of early classes without the early history didn't know it, so they, you know, so that's how they got the name. So he's a really important figure in black history in that era, I know that--I've heard about him before. Yeah, Scipio Africanus Jones, yeah. Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you for that. Speaker 1: So, high school is named for him, and did they talk about who he was at all? Speaker 2: Never did. Speaker 1: It's a common thing that people don't talk about people-- Speaker 2: That's interesting. Speaker 1: --And I can't remember everything he did, but he was--there's a website devoted to him, all his contributions and stuff to the black community. Speaker 2: Because we still meet--all those class reunions, every couple of years, we meet with all those fabulous group of people. Speaker 1: So, Scipio Africanus Jones High School in North Little Rock. Now, are there any teachers there that are memorable that you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Brittnum, the math teacher, and then Mrs. Smith, the English teacher, who just recently died, fabulous. Boy, everybody needs an English teacher like her. I can still conjugate those sentences, you know, I can--you know and have students now. If they had had her, boy, Miss Smith, literature and grammar, and she taught it so well, she put no one down, and you could get there and learn that, it's a magic in a teacher like that, the art she had, wow. Speaker 1: Yeah, so many scientists that have told us in the last--just in the last couple of weeks that they--about how some English teacher really had a big impact on them, because without that skill, they wouldn't be able to articulate their ideas, you know, and so, so that's--okay, so, Mr. Britton was the math-- Speaker 2: Brittnum, Brittnum. B-R-I-T-T-N-U-M, not sure about the double T. Mr. Brittnum. Speaker 1: Brittnum, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. There was another guy, I can't quite remember his name, yet, who, when I was in the ninth grade, I was a basketball player, the sport that carried the North Little Rock, for me, was basketball, my dad wouldn't let me play football, I had petit mal, he thought I would get hit and get seizures and that kind of thing, so he pull--but he let me play basketball, and I put my whole life into it. So there was a coach, a ninth grate coach, who also taught algebra, and he pulled about four of us and made us take algebra one and algebra two at the same time in the ninth grade. That was fabulous, that--that's what I'm talking about, in terms of having that kind of teacher in the African American Community that really would get to those kids, and if you had a knack for something, they would push you hard--push you quietly and hard. So we really learned both at the same time, so we were accelerated. The unfortunate part is when we--and then we went to geometry, and we kept going with Mr. Brittnum through the geometry, and he moved us to a whole nother level, so that kind of thinking and all that, that analytical thinking, all that got in there real good among all of us, then we had a failed teacher in trigonometry. We should a really pushed up and done calculus at that point. We were ready, but we didn't move to that next level. But it does show you, if you have good teachers, you can take kids anywhere. So I'm very fortunate, thankful for Mr. Brittnum, and that coach whose name, I can't call right now, who was both my basketball coach and my algebra teacher. Story_ID: 25015 Speaker 1: Now, how did your basketball team do? Speaker 2: We probably even-type season. I was a--I could not miss. I used to practice so much that when I shot, I would--I had--I--but a--I was a little timid--I was a little timid, and the coach would be so frustrated because in practice I'd be killing everything, then get out there and wouldn't shoot, don't pass that, shoot the ball, shoot the ball. But there were a couple of games, which I have the records of those games, where I hit the points that made the victory, and you know, there was a couple of times the family was there, so I got enough out of it to give me a good feeling about it, understanding of how sports are so important for young people. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: And my brother Gus, who was a year or two under me, he was good, also. So we kind of came up parallel like that reinforcing each other through the school system; and that was good. Speaker 1: --Okay. I guess Scipio Africanus Jones High School would play Dunbar and Little Rock and-- Speaker 2: You know, man. Speaker 1: --And the other black schools. Speaker 2: Dunbar was our biggest rival. Speaker 1: That was the biggest rival? Speaker 2: They would always beat us. They beat us most of the time. Bigger city, bigger, you know, but there was a year before I got there we had the best--best group, but my group, we used to lose to them. So, I know the Little Rockians who see this, they'll be happy about that, but right on for Little Rock and North Little Rock, that's where I am; two schools that developed a lot of great young people. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were you involved in student government or any of that kind of thing? Speaker 2: No, I did not--let me see, what, no. I do remember winning senior year, when they started voting for who was this, the best this and the most this, they had to kind of close it down because the most popular, the smartest, the this and that, I got so many, I was--I was almost in tears because I didn't know my classmates thought that much of--we were in a big room and they just took the votes, and I kept getting all these winnings--I think I got a record of what all that was, but in the end, they decided that it was not spread enough, you know. So I still got a lot, they gave me so much, but that was just still amazing to me, that classmates who I didn't really know all that well, would, you know, vote for me with all those kind of things, all different categories. Of course, I was not the best looking, I was not the best dressed, I was not the player, I was not, you know, but a lot of the others, I got, and it's great. Story_ID: 25016 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you say you arrived in Little Rock--in North Little Rock [Arkansas] right after the Little Rock desegregation experiment took off. What was the Civil Rights--you said it was pretty rough, still, in North Little Rock, where you couldn't do certain things? Speaker 2: Well, here's what I remember. I remember being in a black community almost all the time. And we were so engaged in what we did. Now, my dad [Rev. Henry Solomon Hill] was different, he was the one interfacing with the broader community and ending up, the economics, now I talked about the housing that he brought and trying to get development for Shorter College and bringing education to people, giving the kids two years and sending them on to UAP to be or Philander, or whatever. So he was the one interfacing with that broader world. Myself and my brothers, we were, you know, going to school, basically. And in the summer what he would have us do, Shorter College had so many needs, so much work needed to be done, so he hired-he hired me, I think I was paid eleven cent a hour, and he would put me with the college fellows who come from rural areas and knew how to work, I mean, they could paint, they could do some--so I was like their little mascot, and they really taught me to work. We worked eight, nine hours a day in that hot sun, painting, raking, mowing, anything. I learned minor carpentry, I learned--I learned so much from those guys, you know, and it was--it was really hard work, but I loved it, I mean, I loved being around the older guys who were doing this. They would kid around some, but you know, they were mostly working. And that was a great experience. So this work ethic piece, that you just make a young person work hard, that is so important. I did that to my son. I'll tell you about that later. He now thanks me for it, too, my oldest son. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25017 Speaker 1: When you were about to graduate from high school, how were your grades, were you the valedictorian. Speaker 2: I was salut. Speaker 1: Salutatorium [sic, salutatorian]. Speaker 2: Salutatorium, because I had some transfer-in grades and other things like this. That was not critical to me. I wasn't even in to that kind of thing, you know. The guy who was val, Big John, he went to Arkansas Pine Bluff, and became, I think, vice president for business, a good guy, great basketball--well, football player, he played for UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], I believe, so, you know, I had a lot of respect for John and what I love--what I had respect for just all my classmates, I mean, I just--they gave us that, you know, so I can't remember many competitions against ourselves. We were always kind of cheering each other on, you know. So I was just totally satisfied with that. No, I was not straight "A", but one of the things, we had a counselor there, Mr. Harris. Mr. Harris, yeah, he was the counselor. I remember him because he existed in a wheel chair, okay. And he had eleven kids and one of his sons, Dennis, was one of my best friends. And Mr. Harris helped all of the students move to the next step. So, you take all your test scores, don't standardize till you do everything, you get your--whatever it was you were trying to go into, Mr. Harris was there; he really was a fabulous counselor. And so I remember we went and took some tests in Little Rock, Big John and myself and others, and came time for college and we all had options because of Mr. Harris. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you chose to--chose Lake Forest College, I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And that's right--it's north of Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Was that--how did you make that choice? Speaker 2: Well, National United Negro Scholarship Fund, a fund for Negro students, you know, I forget the acronym for that [UNCF], but the particular test we took, based upon how you filled it out and your interest, I for some reason put down liberal arts, small college, Midwest. Don't ask me why I didn't say university in the west, but--so they send you back number of colleges that, based on your scores and grades, you feel you would get in and get scholarships. So I applied to those and got accepted to all of them and chose Lake Forest. I liked the name Forest, even though I called them and they didn't have forestry, I said, "Well, I might want to do forestry", well, but we have a beautiful biology, and we can get you this and that, you know. And Chicago, it was near Chicago. I wanted to be near a big city that was enough. Then they gave me a scholarship. I said I just want to get out of here now. I had wanted to go somewhere else. Speaker 1: Okay, so, did you work over the summer to save money to go to school to take with you? Speaker 2: Can't remember, explicitly, but if I did, it was probably right there helping on the college, you know. Speaker 1: Right there at Shorter [College]? Speaker 2: Shorter, yeah. By then I had learned how to really help. Speaker 1: I didn't ask you this, but was your father like a--what was his official position, or did he have an official position at Shorter? Speaker 2: He was the president. Speaker 1: He was the president, okay. Yeah, that's official enough, and the pastor of the church? Speaker 2: No, he didn't pastor then. Speaker 1: So he didn't pastor at all? So he was just sent there to be the president of Shorter? Speaker 2: Shorter. One of the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] churches, they had respected his ability to do fund-raising and all those kind of things. Story_ID: 25018 Speaker 1: Now, Lake Forest College, this is 1964? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Alright. So what was the atmosphere like at Lake Forest? Speaker 2: Well, because of my California experience, you know, moving into an all-white situation, very few minorities when I first got there, was not that much of adjust--by then I could adjust to anything, I felt, after going from Oakland [California]. I had to learn some things. I had to learn--I didn't do that well in my first set of papers. My writing, western civilization, those kind of things, and I had to figure that out. I was--I was--my first semester, where I took chemistry, I did extremely well. I mean, I had a math course, whatever I took in those first few--and the chemistry instructor, Mr. Thomson said, you know, you need to think about getting in this field, and so I majored in chemistry, you know. Did good those--it was tri-quarter systems, did real good those first two semesters in chemistry, and liked it a lot. Almost did economics. The first course I took in economics was--I just--they told you at the beginning, and this is interesting way of teaching. If you want an "A" you have to write two papers, if you want a "B" you have to write one paper. You can do well on the two tests and get a "C", but you have to make a decision now. So I said, I'm just gonna pass, it was a pass grade. I said, I'm not going to write the papers, but after we got through the first test, and I was acing everything, I said, hey, I want to go for the paper, he said, "nah, it's too late." Had I done that I probably would be in economics, because it was really interesting to me. But so was chemistry and the rest was history. I finished in chemistry; it was a great experience, definitely set the background for what came later. Mr. Thompson was a good--he picked me up, I actually worked in this lab in organic chemistry. I did original research there as a undergrad, and we used Argonne National Laboratory [Illinois], go down and use their mass spec and, you know, just worked on inorganic radical compounds. He was trying to synthesize new compounds. And so that whole arena became open to me, and I used to spend hours and hours in the lab--in his lab, working in high vacuum systems, high vacuum techniques, so eventually it go to the place where he would trust me, and I could just run the whole lab. American Chemical Society Affiliates, became a part of that, and went to the meetings there in Chicago, the national meetings and was impressed with that whole dynamic. And--so--so that was a very good experience. Speaker 1: Okay. And you mentor's name, once again, was Mr.-- Speaker 2: Thompson, Thompson, Dr. Thompson. Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Thompson. Speaker 2: Yeah, Doc Thompson. Speaker 1: Okay. So, '64 (1964), those were the years when SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] was down in Mississippi and LBJ [President Lyndon B. Johnson] reelected president and so what was going on on campus, was it a-- Speaker 2: Let me get this right, I went there in '64 (1964), right-- Speaker 1: --Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --Finished in '68(1968). And so, during that period, really like a four-year period, I was not involved in the movement, at all. Trying to think of what I did in the summers. I worked upstate New York for the Atomic Energy Commission, I worked--I can't think back on the other places that I worked in the summers. But nowhere that took me back to the South or engaged in any of that. But, yeah, so the more active time came after I left there and went to Chicago, so '60 (1960), '64 (1964) was just Lake Forest and what it was; growing up, girlfriends, you know, chemistry. And I did do tutoring, I did do quite a bit of volunteer tutoring for kids in the North Shore area and the neighborhoods where there--you know, they had challenges, so that student government, I was like a leader among the black students. Maybe they--they considered me the leader, again, we didn't have a formal, we had our black organization. So when anyone wanted to talk to somebody black among the students, they would always come get me. I organized the parties, man. I mean, you know, we had our little group, and we would go to Chicago. Yeah, and the blues, Little Walter, blues, harmonica, and all that, you know, we would go weekends down and take--participate in that--the culture, plays and all that kind of stuff. Speaker 1: So you saw Little Walter play? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The fellow that's portrayed in the Muddy Waters movies. Yeah. One of the actors plays Little Walter in that. But he was a harmonica-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I remember, and I was sitting there, in this case, with two white guys, my two roommates, and we were in there, I remember just rocking to the music and some kind of way, hit this guy behind me and knocked over his drink, and I looked back and I said, oh, Lord, I'm dead, you know, I don't know if he was going to kill me or not, but he cooled down; it was alright, but that was--I just loved those ventures into Chicago, and that really made an impact on my next move, which was to Chicago. Story_ID: 25019 Speaker 1: So you went to--you graduated in '68 (1968), right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, '68 (1968), now that's the spring you graduated was the spring Dr. King [Martin Luther King] was killed, right? Speaker 2: Man. Man, I'm glad you brought something up, because, actually, my senior year, I went to Germany. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I had studied German as my language, and, so you, if you did so much, you could go and spend a semester there, so I did that. And King was killed when I was over there. And I do remember just being torn apart. Yeah, that was a turning point in my life. And I remember marching in the street. There were huge demonstrations for King, anti-war, I mean, it was all kind of stuff going on in Europe. I got in the middle of all that stuff, man. I remember--I think I took all my books and notes and pictures and I have never gone back and looked at them. It was such an intensive time in my life, and I--I'm going to probably do that when we get back, and they're all in one place. But I traveled around Europe, hitchhiked around, met all kind of people, but that march, when King died, I member locking arms and going down and then the police were coming with their spray guns and all these German tanks and all this stuff, you know. But I remember the rallies, man, and I remember a black man getting up speaking on King, and I was just sitting there; I was in the crowd just crying, crying, and I just knew I had to go home. Speaker 1: This is an aspect of Dr. King's passing or assassination I've never heard before, what the reaction was in Europe or Germany. So what city were you in? Speaker 2: Berlin. Speaker 1: You were in Berlin, Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, West Berlin. Hundreds, I don't know how many, I know you could just, whether it was thousands, hundreds of thousands, I don't know, but it was just like--and people my age, the young people, we stayed in Freie Universitat, which was Free University. And then we took classes and all kinds of things and I just remember with the students, the empathy, the students had from all different countries, wherever they--you know, whatever. Speaker 1: What were the thoughts, I know over here, we speculated about who, you know, had a stake in killing him. Did you have any ideas, you know, any thoughts about that, or did people talk about what they thought? Speaker 2: You mean over there or you mean, subsequently? Speaker 1: Well, both, I guess. What did the Germans--did they have any thoughts about who killed him, or did they blame that on the United States? Speaker 2: Yeah, we did not have those--I did not engage in anybody--discussion on that with them. Speaker 1: And what did you think in terms of-- Speaker 2: Well, the whole period of King and then the Kennedys and what have you, you know, to me, systemic, very scary. I personally, I don't think it was accidental, random, I don't. So that makes you always know you have to be somewhere involved in our own policy and our government to make sure that, you know, good things happen, cause if you don't, you know, people will get control who would just do things they want to do, you know. It's always been that way, it's no different. But that's like in our face, right in our face, you know. So it's a little unsettling, it's unsettling. We got a--bringing it on up to today, we pray about [President Barack] Obama, you know, pray for his safety and then you pray for any leaders; it's a question of safety of our leaders, because once you--and, you know, one of the things it did for me was to say, okay--don't you cannot put all your hope in one person, because all they have to do is get rid of that person, and then you're gone. And so, even what we do here now, again, back to the first name, I mean, you can't be person "X" because they have the presidency or person "Y" who has this position or this position, it's got to be many of us who are fighting for what's right and doing the right thing, and I could get off into some of the challenges we have today, even in science, science application, and how science application and economics fit in and rural and other communities, you know, I have a lot on that, but it stems out of the same motives, it stems out of, you know. You have to struggle, you have to battle for what's right, and then you can't do it as one person, you can't depend on one person. Story_ID: 25020 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you went to graduate school at the University of Chicago [Illiois], right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, uh-huh. Speaker 1: So you just moved south down Lake Shore drive to-- Speaker 2: Into another world. Four years, kind a--you know, the world was happening, then I jumped right into the real of all of it, all of it, in Chicago. So the next three years--three, four years in Chicago was a very transforming period of my life. Speaker 1: Okay. In what ways? Just tell us some of the ways that transformed you? Speaker 2: Well, I'll go to an unorthodox one first. One unorthodox, when I found my way at what we called the communiversity on Saturdays, you know, and it was a group of brilliant black people who would come together and learn history ourselves. Andy-- Andy Thompson was one of the--I don't know if you know Andy-- Speaker 1: I know him, very well. Speaker 2: I forgot the brother from Zimbabwe who ended up being killed and some of the other-- Speaker 1: That's Sitole, Elcon Sitole. Speaker 2: But I just remember-- Speaker 1: Rua Cherie, you're talking about, yeah Rua Chere. Speaker 2: Cherie, yeah. Look at you, man, go head. That was just great. And again transforming it to get that real understanding of African history, African American, African relationships, connection to Europe, European tribalism and not just--just so much. Then about our own community and how we're sanctioned, so that also amongst the University of Chicago people, there were some great organizers, they would be learning, we would meet and informally organize--so it was a lot of self-learning in groups, and I think--I don't know where everybody has gone, but I imagine they went out and did some significant things. That was one piece of it, the other piece of it was, I was now into teaching chemistry. I had done the chemistry. I went to a degree of Chicago to teach chemistry and we ended up at Martin Luther King High, which was then Forestville-Forestville High before they moved into King High, which was a real challenge, challenge school, I mean, seriously, life, death about all the time. So there are Black Stone Rangers were heavy in that influence, and they had farms and they were connecting the science in certain ways, and I was just right there at a pivotal, I lived right there, down the street from the school, just moved right into all of that and the University was over here, so I was between two worlds. My students who came through that rough life in that community. I would go out at night and walk the streets of my neighborhood and see them out there, doing everything, working jobs, doing everything else, see them in clubs. So it was a--I was learning to teach, I was teaching then I was community involved on my own time. Also, the Black Muslims were there, the Nation of Islam. I used to go to the temple and got that whole piece. And then there was more progressive elements working all around us. So it was just a beautiful exposure. And by being in both school, I was able to very much create with science. See, because science piece in there, we had students who would win the city science fair out of Forestville High School. And it wasn't just myself, but again, I'm a person, I love teams, so I give Rudy, Rudy Evans, who was kind of like my senior science and Wesley Smith, these are my cohorts, and we would work with the students, and we actually won, you know, we'd go to University--Chicago Museum of Science [and Industry], where they had a big fair and take first prize, you know. Wade, I remember one of the young guys, brilliant, brilliant kids, you know. And then you walk to school, people running because people shooting guns, you know, right down there. You look out your window and these two guys trying to rape this girl, so you go holler, go down and break--so it's intense, intense, intense community. So what we did, we organized a science fair, and we got everything connected with science in the community, was the gas station, the mortuary, the drug store, we got everybody, brought them in, every school--every student in our classes had to have a project. So we did that--invited all the parents, you know, everything, it was just phenomenal. And one boy didn't make it, one of my superstars, because he was shot waiting for somebody to pick him up and bring him and he just got shot, bullet right in his heart, they couldn't take it out, he didn't die, but I always felt bad about that and, anyway. Story_ID: 25021 Speaker 1: Alright. Go ahead. Speaker 2: I just want to make an observation. I was thinking about my dad [Rev. Henry Solomon Hill] and Shorter College and then thinking about the Communiversity and thinking about Tuskegee [University] and realizing that it is so important for groups. I'll talk about African American, have our own institutions where we do our own self-learning and then interface with the world, you know, because it allows you to garner information, and what I'll call a safe mode, where you can really explore and figure out how it best works for you without having the largest society imposing itself at the same time, then you go out and interface it. And I think that is probably true for all groups, that each group, whether it be Native American, Italians or Hispanics or whatever, to do that, and then we come together and share it. And I'm finding sometime the whole integration mode where you're there and everybody's together and solve the thing, you find out in the end, we end up being marginal in that product, you know. I just want to get that on the table. I truly believe in that. Story_ID: 25022 Speaker 1: Okay. So, 19--this is from '68 (1968), I guess, '70 (1970), I guess? Speaker 2: '71 (1971) I finished. Yeah, went out to Arizona in '73 (1973), so I was really in there until about '70 (1970)--'68 (1968) to '72 (1972). So, I stayed in the Chicago area. I went through that school, then--then, actually, became full time teacher in Forestville High School after I finished the program and-- Speaker 1: Let me backtrack. Now, what program were you in at the University of Chicago? Speaker 2: --MAT, Master in Art of Teaching, chemistry, I focused on chemistry. So, we became fully certified teachers in the Chicago Public School System. And the program was such that it really encouraged creativity, working with the young people in very dynamic ways. I would say one of the--one of my key projects was photography, where I taught general science and we did a unit and what we made, cameras. And then the students would go out and take pictures of their world, and we would display them, and we would do all the chemical analysis of the photographs, you know, and all the trades and chemicals and all that. So, we would film what they were doing, we would have reports on it, we would integrate mathematics, writing and science altogether in the photography unit. That was a big, big, big hit. That was a very good experience. The University of Chicago connection allowed us to have some resources to get the cameras, to get the filming equipment, and let the students see themselves and then reflect back on that and then write essays. And so my class was always full, I mean, it was people who want to visit and then the challenge was the other teachers. And we shared, you know, there was the little resentment, here you bring in these nouveaus, and you have the teachers who'd been working there the whole time, so the secret was, how do you go in and make allies, because you can't do it by yourself. And we fumbled some with that. We didn't get that part. That part was not taught to us well, we had to fumble our way through that. We learned all the techniques, all the education strategy, all the science, hands on, everything you could be armed with, but how do you relate to your peers; and that's still a challenge. What happens to a new teacher when they go into this environment where people have been there and become cynical and have other jobs and kind of lost interest and appeal, and that's a big challenge for America that we need--we have it certainly here in the black belt and in the urban areas, so it's the same thing probably everywhere. We had working for us a group of--five of us, if I remember correctly, where we were in the MAT program, and we decided to have a revolution. We decided to demand that all of us go into the same school. And so we fought within the University of Chicago system, and they allowed us to do it. And it was a person in math, a person in science, a person in English, a person, I think, history and one in art. And so we went into this one school together. And we--for about three years, we were--thought we were phenomenal, but the piece we didn't have together was integrate and cook with the others, so eventually everybody left. But for two or three years, it was--we had the kids, we were--we were going into business. Speaker 1: So this was at Forestville [High School]? Speaker 2: Yeah. We all went into Forestville, and some migrated to Martin Luther King, when they moved to the new school; some stayed a little bit longer. I left when that boy got shot. I mean, that tore me up, that tore me up. I probably went in too intense in the community, everywhere, I was just doing--juggling everything, all the science. I remember we had kits, black boxes, and I put different things in the black boxes so the kid could tell--okay now your job as a scientist is based on what you see coming out and all this, figure out what is the mechanism going inside. You know, just remembering that kind of thing, along with the photography, along with other units we developed. We did a lot of field trips, lot of--lot of to deal with diverse learning styles, you know. So the students were just rolling in. So you had all that and then you had all this community impact, and you had all this political, yep, and just so intensive. I should have gone in a little easier, might have stayed longer. So, ultimately, again, the impact from the Nation of Islam, Pan African Movement, at its height now, Communiversity impact on learning about Africa, I just--my mind just kept going to Africa, but I didn't want to go without a skill set that would be useful. So I said, let me just go into agriculture. So I did an abrupt change in play. Story_ID: 25023 Speaker 1: One of the people that was pushing like, kind of return to the soil philosophy was Reverend Al Sampson, in Chicago [Illinois]. Did you know him during those days? Speaker 2: Return to the soil? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] minister. Speaker 2: I did go to some of the SCLC and Breadbasket and upward Rainbow coalition, but I did not interface with them; that might have been a good interface to happen. I did go [to] the Nation of Islam, went to their farms in Michigan-- Speaker 1: Berrien Springs, and that area, right. Ali had his training camp up in Western Michigan. Speaker 2: Did he? Speaker 1: There were a couple--somebody from Communiversity had a farm out there. Speaker 2: Did they really? You know the Black Stone Rangers had a farm. I went with them--they came to school, some of the older gang, say, Doc, you need to go with us. And I just went with them one day, and they took me out there to this farm, man, they had all these animals and crops, they say, we want you to help work with us on this farm. I just was amazed. I understand Bevel lived two houses down, across the street from me, where I lived in Chicago. Speaker 1: Reverend James Bevel. Speaker 2: James Bevel. And there's a continual connection with him in Alabama with him now. So we interface, but--so anyway, migrating now from science to agriculture. Speaker 1: Okay. You were alluding earlier to the trips you would make with your father out to rural Arkansas? Speaker 2: That was really for the people. Food was always a part of our culture, part of the church, you know, that was always there, but that was not striking me. I was not seeing vegetable farms or whatever, it was always the big farm, cotton and timber and, you know, the livestock and those big things that what you see driving on the road, and no one was helping me see beyond that to the opportunities. But it was just back to this outdoor, being there. And then the people--I loved the people so much in the rural, you know, it just got to where I was comfortable going into anywhere, you know. And it's still like that here. I mean, it's so much love, you just reach out a little bit, and people are going to reach right back and bring you in. And then there's always a child back there somewhere who they want to push up for education. You don't have to--I saw my dad just reach up and get them; he'd bring them in, two years, and then send them on. I saw so many. You just got to reach a little bit. There's a grandma trying to raise a little girl because the mama left. And then if you give that child an opportunity and make sure her life will be safe, she will die for you, you know, that kind of thing. So, going into--all these things fomenting in your mind, you know, Pan Africa, Africa, rural, agriculture, and then the other piece that fit in was food. I became very much conscious about my eating. Now, the Nation of Islam was one piece to that, because there was that one meal a day, and Elijah Muhammad had put down his prescription, you know. And I used to compare that with my own readings--science-based readings. So, I came up with my own diet, and at one point, I was real thin, because I would eat one meal a day, and got sick--real sick once, because I didn't know what I was doing, real sick. But that had stayed with me, because I'm vegetarian now, and that slowly evolved from my understanding food. But in terms of going to where I went to school was Arizona, and at that point, I had a girlfriend, Juanita, and I had visited her home in Mississippi many times, and I loved that too, Enterprise, Mississippi, outside of Meridian. I used to love to go to their family, her grandfather. And again, it just reinforced this rural community, just loving it. And so, we ended up going where we both got accepted to school. Now, that was the decider. Story_ID: 25024 Speaker 1: The University of Arizona? Was that Tempe? Speaker 2: No, Tucson. Speaker 1: Tucson. Speaker 2: And we had been accepted at Michigan, almost went to Michigan, got this close, but in the end, to bring balance into both of us benefitting, in terms of what was her field, and opportunity for both of us, we went to Arizona. And it was--it was--God is intervening here, because Michigan would have been a more natural place to go, more familiarity, still in the Midwest, you know, straight line to the South. And you go way out to Arizona with desert. I knew very little about the Native Americans in the community, desert agriculture, that's not--well, there are parts of Africa that have desert, but that was not what I had my mind set. So we just struck out, got in a car and went, and fabulous experience. Speaker 1: Well, at the time, actually, the biggest agricultural crisis in the world was going on in the Sahara. Speaker 2: Well, go ahead, teach, teach. Speaker 1: That was-- Speaker 2: Desertification. Speaker 1: There's a sister we were talking to yesterday who remembered, who was president of the Links when they tried to raise money to buy trees with Africare, right, organization out in the [Washington] D.C. area, you know, to plant trees in the Sahara to keep the soil from blowing away. Speaker 2: Yeah, dust and soil and water. Speaker 1: So, I know you were thinking about that then, kind of like in the background, you were. Speaker 2: I thank you for giving me that credit, but I don't think that was really on my mind. I was not that conscious about it, I really wasn't. I was more naive, I wasn't as politically sophisticated to hook all that together. I was more focused on her having an opportunity and myself and we just figured that it really didn't matter where we went, as long as we, you know. And so we got there, and believe me, it was really a great place, because they took us right in. There were so few African Americans there, we were unusual. We hit our first classes and did well. Of course, with a chemistry background, I mean, I was just--I wouldn't say easy, but it was just--it just came like that, because I was so hungry for it. And she was doing well in her field, and so they started helping us more. I went in washing dishes in a soil chemistry lab. This guy, Hank Bone, gave me a chance, he said well, he had a big project, had a lot of money, said, well, you can go in there, these are my post docs, they need somebody to wash their dishes, I said, "sure, be great." And I washed those test tubes, seemed like they never had seen them. I mean, I knew the chemistry and how to really get them clean, with the acids and all, you know. And I would just stay there working and working and working. One day they just came in and got me. They had checked me out and everything and said we're going to put you in the master's program. I went to do a bachelor's; I was starting all over. I wanted soils, because I figure, let me learn about that and come up. I didn't know what to do, so I got in that. So, within the summer, we went there that May or June. Before school started, they had me in the master's program, and went through that beautifully, published a couple of papers. Originality came, you know, to do that was real good, chemistry soil; took the chemistry to do soil chemistry and related to plants, that was just--I was just loving that, just kind of a situation. And Farm Workers Movement was the movement around us and then so I joined that and became a picket captain and learned a lot about the Hispanic people and "Viva La Huelga", you know, and I went to a junior college and learned some Spanish, so I could talk, you know, would go in the evenings and got to where I could do some conversational. I remember the women, we went out picketing this one big farm one day; we were throwing rocks. I forget what we were doing, but I just got into it with the rest of the group, and then all the women started coming around cheering me on, cheering me on, because now you have an African American colleague helping them in their struggle. And the young fellows came and said, come on, man, get on the truck. I just jumped on the truck and we drove down that road, and I don't know what it was that we smoked that they were sharing, you know, but I felt different by the time we got back. So that was like accepting you in for being a part of their struggle, and so I have never forgotten that, the unity, you know, just common struggle. Speaker 1: Now, were they part of Cesar Chavez's group? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that was. Speaker 1: United Farm Workers, yeah. Speaker 2: I used to go to rallies where he would speak, United Farm Workers Group. I used to just go, I was quiet, I wasn't--I just had my roll, picket captain of that Safeway store. I had my hours that I would go and ask people to boycott. Speaker 1: Is this a boycott around the grapes? Speaker 2: I cannot remember exactly, but I know grapes were part of it at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was like nationwide when they boycott grapes. They had pickets even in Chicago, don't buy grapes. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly. I remember that piece, but at that time, I don't remember what we were doing exactly. But I still kept up my studies. The black student group, we created a black newspaper, black student newspaper there, I was a part of that on the Tucson campus. And both in--let me get this straight; that would be later, but I'll say it now, because it happened later. My agriculture colleagues, basically, conservative group of faculty and students, basically. Speaker 1: Now, you're making a square there. (laughing) Speaker 2: And then you have your life, and then I remember them saying, Walter, is that you, you know. And I was always quiet about what I was doing here versus what I was doing here. And the same thing happened later on, too. I'm just trying to think now of the science. I do remember, after I finished the degree, I stayed and worked there for a year to really learn hands-on agriculture. I worked on a big lettuce project. I learned a lot about soiled water, measurement, irrigation. I was real happy to get that practical experience. Speaker 1: Now, was that the biggest crop out there in Arizona? Speaker 2: Cotton and lettuce, cotton and lettuce. Speaker 1: Cotton and lettuce, okay. Speaker 2: Those were the big money makers. You hit dry land, you get high yields, high yields. You put those inputs, you know. The days sunlight, days, you know, maybe what you eat when you eat iceberg lettuce, come from those huge, huge farms. And we'll talk some more about agriculture when go on, what it really is, but very thankful for that Arizona experience-- Story_ID: 25025 Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers that were mentors or guides? Speaker 2: Well, Hank Bone, who gave me my first break, Dr. Bone. He was a very good soil chemist, you know, just kind of a cool guy. And I never talked with him much, you know, we never did talk about philosophy or anything. It's just that he's the one who let me in his lab, wash his dishes, and he's the one who said, I'm going to put you in our graduate program, and he's the one who, you know, worked with me to publish those two papers. So, he didn't have to say anything to me, he just did it, you know. I think I was a good student for him. There were others. The racism along the way, which I haven't talked about within the schools, everywhere you had that. But I remember--I'll talk about one battle. I had all "As" with this chemistry background and even some of the classes, I asked for special projects, not to do the regular lab because I could do all that, and so they let me do something--I learned about electricity and circuits in the analytical lab just to do that. And then I remember this course--seminar course where we had to write a paper, and we had to give a presentation. And I know my presentation was off the chain, everybody, you know, was the biggest applause, I was in it. And then the paper, I did two versions of the paper. First I wrote a paper according to the constructed what you would do, then what I had done with that paper, I got published. I sent it off, it got published. And so, when I turned it in, I turned in what was published, peer review, publication. And the guy gave me a "B" and he gave my colleague an "A" who--man, paper, as well. I helped him with all his stuff, and so I was not going to take that. And I said if I got a published paper, and he said--he basically said, well, your paper was not up to standards. I said, well, sir, this has been peer reviewed. I said, here's the original, from which I had made it, but once we did that, we did this, so you see that it was peer review, I could have given you that. It doesn't matter, you didn't do it. So, I went to protest it, and the department head looked me in the eye, and said, Walter, you've been doing good work here, he said, but that man is one of the best people I know on the planet, and I know he would not do you any wrong. I think it would be a big mistake, and he just blasted me. I know I had my right to protest, and so I was going to finish there with one "B", and that was going to be the "B", and I said, I cannot take this, I'm going to fight him to the end. But you know, I thought and prayed, and thought and prayed about it, and in the end, I backed down on that one. I said, you know what, let me just eat this. I said I know I got it, and I know it's going to destroy my opportunity for this experience that's coming next. So I ate that "B" so I could get that work experience the next year. I don't regret eating the "B". They were wrong, they were wrong. And so, you have to decide when you fight, that was one of those "is that the fight" or is it the next one. As long as you're conscious, as long as you're clear, okay, this is wrong, I'm going to let this one go, because we have challenges like that today in Alabama, and almost every other day, we have to make calls like that, that would involve many thousands of lives, certainly our students, our rural residents, those in the black belt. We have to make those calls just about every day. Speaker 1: This is 2012, just think about what it might have been like in 1812 or 1862. Speaker 2: Carver, look at Carver's time. Can you imagine? I mean, I just often think about that. I don't want to get ahead of myself. There's one thing I'm going to say about that and science and agriculture and Carver when we get to that point, so we'll come back to Carver. Speaker 1: Alright. I'll make sure we will. Story_ID: 25026 Speaker 1: So, the University of Arizona, you were there from '73 (1973) to 70, what? Speaker 2: Let me see. I left there, let's see, next stop. Next stop, I went back to Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I went there from--finished in '77 (1977). So I must have went back in '73 (1973), '73 (1973), '74 (1974), I went back. I wanted to get back to Illinois. I had done the desert; it was great. I wanted to get back to green; I wanted to get back to more African Americans. I wanted to be involved in the struggle. I had some friends who were with the mining industry, copper mining industry in Arizona. And when they would have pickets, I would go up and be a part of the support group and just kind of see what that was about. And I remember they were bringing scabs in to take over, you know, and I would see how it affected the families, black, I mean, not black, Hispanic and white. I tried to support them as much as I could. There wasn't a lot going on in the black community in terms of struggle, you know, they were very small numbers. I had friends and whatever, but sometimes I felt, where--how could I help with this, you know, and I was kind of out of place, and so deep inside of me was thinking back to Arkansas and thinking back to my roots and thinking back I need to now take what I'm learning there, and then I still had the Africa--going to Africa goal in my mind. So, anyway, the opportunity for Illinois came because quite a few of the professors at Arizona were graduates of Illinois Urbana, the ones who were helping me with extra projects and all this kind of thing. So, when it came time they all said, Walt, you got to go for the PhD. I wasn't even thinking about the next step, but they put it out there and said we'll help you get in school, help you get this. So, they hooked me up with this guy--I applied to three or four places and got in them all; they had different places they wanted me to go, Wisconsin there and Michigan. But this guy named Toby Kurts at Illinois wrote me a letter, and I just was almost crying when I got that letter, because it just--I hadn't even thought about it that much, but that letter was so full of providing me such an opportunity, you know. He had talked with the people who were there, they looked at all my grades and said, you know, he basically needed me to help him do this work with nitrogen and crops and this and that. I could either work in the microbial soil, you know, he gave me an opportunity to expand my own, do my own thing. It was just a really wonderful letter to have from someone who had accomplished so much in their career. That was it for me, I mean, the spirit. I said I want to go work with this guy, I mean, I don't care where he is, I just want to work with him, and then it was close enough to Chicago. So that took me back there, and a very good decision; thank God for that decision, because Toby turned out to be that kind of guy. He just died a few months ago; he was a friend all the way until he died. Just gave me the labs, you know, I just took over the labs and did my thing there. And he hooked me up, networked for what was to come afterwards. I had many, many opportunities when I finished. Got very good training in soil chemistry, soil fertility, soil plant relationships, environmental chemistry, very good broad background, which is what I wanted. I wanted some theoretical, but I wanted to be able to do--I still had Africa on my mind, so I didn't want to just be so theoretical, so we got that. Story_ID: 25027 Speaker 1: And one of the job offers was at Cornell [University] which would have put me in a USDA-ARS [United States Department of Agriculture- Agricultural Research Service] lab, which was a prima slot. And everybody at Illinois said, Walter, that's your job, you got to take that one. And another was at International Fertilizer Development Center, I went up there, they're based in North Alabama. I knew them, I done some of my PhD work at the International Fertilize Development Center in North Alabama there, (unclear) area, so I knew the people, knew the labs, knew the international scope. And when I went for that interview, they said you can have any country in the world you want, and if you want Africa, you can work here and here. So that was my trip to Africa, it was alright there. But that's when I was walking down the hall--was walking down the hall by my lab, and there's this little sign up there saying Tuskegee University, needed, soil scientist, you got to teach this, teach this, do this; it had all this stuff on here, and when I took that back to my prof, I said Toby, look at this, he said, that's too much. You want to go where you can get a focused start. They want you to do all this stuff, all this stuff, and all the rest of them all discouraged me from taking that job; it was less money, it was less everything else. But given my background that's the only one that talked to me, that's the only job that spoke to my heart. It was never a question. Once I saw that on that wall that I was not going there. Speaker 2: Okay. So, up to this point, what was your assessment of Tuskegee, how did you see it in your mind? Speaker 1: In Arizona there was an announcement about it. They wanted a person, and I saw it, and I actually applied for that, and I got rejected, and the only thing I knew is about what most people know about Carver and Tuskegee, but I had no idea, no idea. So, I didn't know until I came what I was getting into. That was my first trip to Alabama. Speaker 2: But you came primarily because it was a black college? Speaker 1: Absolutely. I mean, yeah. Okay, now I can get back to what I'd been preparing for, not knowing, but it was just instinctively a right call for me. Story_ID: 25028 Speaker 1: Okay, Tuskegee University in 1978? Speaker 2: December, '77 (1977), that's when I really started. Actually, the contact was August, '77 (1977); I think I came around December. Well, I'll say this. I had a great experience at Illinois, again, involved with the student movement, Black Student Movement, a little bit the town community development, but PhD, you got to really put out, and you know I had to really put out. A lot of stress and anxiety, I used to jog all the time to keep that under control. So I was ready, I was definitely ready to move on, and I was ready to move back to the south, I was ready to give Tuskegee a shot. So, I came down and an interesting interview. Now, I don't want to put anybody down, but I'll say this, I was coming into the Department of Agriculture. And I would just say this, I remember talking to the students, as I was introduced as a new faculty who would have to keep up with their notes and try to get ahead, so be--you all be patient with him and all this kind of stuff, and I remember jumping in front of that person and said, oh no, I'm coming here for serious business, anybody takes my class is going to work. I mean, I just jumped out there, and the students later told me, Doc, you were off the chain. We were so excited to see you, because I came to intensify whatever was going on, you know. And with all my background and whatever, I was not coming here to just have a mild pace or a mild experience. So as that was introduced to me, I fought it from the very, very beginning to let everybody know I was coming here for very, very serious business. And I met some people here who were also about very serious business. They had a couple of older faculty, couple of younger faculty. My first couple of impressions were not leading me to come here, the first few people I interfaced with, but I finally met those who would be my colleagues, and that was enough. Speaker 1: Who were some of the ones that impressed you? Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Booker Watley, Booker T. Watley, who developed a small farm model. He didn't do a lot of talking, but he sent me out to see some of the things he was doing with that small model farm and that spoke more to me than what others was saying. Bobby Fields was here, he was a young new faculty, a rebellious faculty; he's at FAMU [Florida A&M University] now. We kind of hit the right similar spirit. I would say those--and then the key person was the provost at that time, his name is escaping me now, but he was the phenomenal administrator. His name will come to me in a minute. I do want to call his name, but the big thing was just being in the green, knew I had a sense of what I wanted to do, feel I could just launch from here, so I came. I called my mom. They took me to a lab that was going to be my lab. Do you know that was Carver's old lab in Milbank Hall. It's no longer the same building, because it was a three-story building, and we gutted it and made four stories out of it. So his place in there is no longer there. But they gave me his lab, and it was--had not been renovated. (laughing) I walked into the lab and fell through the floor, up to here (indicating), yes sir. And I called my mother, Tessie Paisley Lucille--Tessie Mamie Lucille Paisley Hill. I said, mom, I don't know about this. It's not looking good facility-wise. She said, son, just pray the Lord is going to guide you. you'll know what to do. And that night, I did, I prayed hard, hard, and you know, a few years later, we had gutted that building and renovated it, you know. Story_ID: 25029 Speaker 1: Now, tell me, now this is, you know, this would be the beginning of a comedy skit or something. I mean it sounds like--but it doesn't seem funny that for all those years, there were people that followed in the footsteps of George Washing Carver, right. So what was the deal on his old lab, I mean, were-- Speaker 2: Well, scientists-- Speaker 1: --Were they using another space? Speaker 2: The scientists who preceded me were able to get some grants and develop certain spaces in the building where they could carry out quality research, but this was a big rambling--they would give me a new kid coming in--the least developed piece, that would take a lot to develop that room, so, so, yeah, and here's where I want to make a point, because you got to remember that when the 1862 Land Grants were developed, at that time, they were given--starting in 1877, they started getting federal money for research, later they got--1914--in 1877 to 1914 got Smith funding for extension. And every, so many years, Congress would allocate money for them and then they would get equipment--and in each case the state had to match it one-to-one, and then over time it would go to two-to-one, three-to-one, as the state saw their self-interest enter--in 1890, when the historically Black Land Grants were started, not one penny. They did not get a land grant, first of all, which was up to a million acres that they could sell and invest. They never got the land, Tuskegee's one exception, got some of it. Then they never got any of those funds that went along the way. So any research that they were doing was miraculous. It was just like in Carver's time. Carver, himself, would try to get funds from USDA [United States Department of Agriculture], whatever, but often it got blocked and the funds to Auburn [University], even though he would originate something; just the way the politics play in the state and legislation, what have you. So, it has not changed much at all, even all this time. Now, there have been some changes, but I'm bringing this up because this is a big issue in 2012, 150 years after the Land Grand Act, the moral act, they put it in context. 150 years later we are still not getting that one-to-one state match. We finally got the federal match to come in about 1972, well, a little bit in the '60s (1960s), and finally we got some real money in '72 (1972), and then we never did get the match until 2000, and then it dribbled in, 30 percent, 40 percent, 50 percent, so Tuskegee, for example, we're at zero point seven to one, whereas Auburn is at eight to one, so in terms of facility, I understand that floor now, you know, you have to do priorities, you have to share it, you have to work things out, and now I'm in a position to help get that match up, and we've been doing that for the last, you know, "x" number of years, working together with our colleagues to do it. But that's where the political piece connection comes from, because you cannot do science without funding, and you can't do it without sustained funding. And you certainly can't do discovery and then translational research and then, you know, just the whole thing if you don't have mechanisms by which you can do it. And if you're starting a race, you know, 150 years behind, and then say you're on a playing--level playing field, well let me look at your equipment facilities, and let me look at your peer review papers, and so we got 100 and you might have 300, and yet we had nothing for 150 years, and we're graded equally, you know, what--so that's the battle we fight today for our science and the connection to politics which was manifested very recently, even within the state as we try to come together to try to solve this. And I'll say we're still working on it. Let me just put a positive line out here, that the struggle continues and as we speak today, we're working through committees to try to bring some justice. It's a justice issue among the land grants that has a big direct impact on those who farm, those who farm and make money from farming, and then those who get subsidized and those who are able to sustain the environment based on resource access, and we're right in the middle of that as we speak today. So I feel very blessed in my life experience to help get me prepared to be a part of that science connected effort. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 25030 Speaker 1: So, when you were hired in '77 (1977), were you--the department was already formed, right? Speaker 2: The Department of Ag [Agriculture], yeah, Department of Ag. It was in a school of--school of agriculture and home economics, that's how--that's how we came in. So, in terms of its growth and development, yeah, we struggled with that, we worked our way to where we eventually became a college, our program grew, a number of students involved grew, our research portfolio grew and we came at a pivotable point within the whole university along with engineering, veterinary medicine and arts and sciences, business, architecture. So now agriculture is growing now, particularly, since we're now getting some land grant funding and our stature goes up as our research portfolio gets better. We're able to be more competitive now since we have the base funding to go from there. And we build--renovate our buildings, we start bringing agriculture into the modern era, and we can talk from there about some of the things we did that were kind of unique. Story_ID: 25031 Speaker 1: Well, maybe, I don't know if this is the time to talk about tradition of the agriculture here at Tuskegee [University] as we sit maybe a block away from the George Washington Carver Museum, with the giant onions and vegetables and stuff that he was able to grow, my understanding how soil and other things work, had the department built on those games? Speaker 2: We have, and those so many routes we can go, and I'm going to take off, and if you should, interrupt me if I get on a tangent here, because now, we're in contemporary time. First, let me just say a little bit about sweet potato and peanut, which Carver is most famous for, and also southern pea or cow pea, which is another one of the crops he worked on, not as well known, that's the third one, and I'm going to play with those three for a while. What we decided, the cadre of younger scientist, about the period of '78 (1978), '80 (1980), so, we decided we had to have a niche. Now here you have the whole world, you just can't do all of the research, the big university research doesn't do well. So, we first saw the commodity approach, whether it should be cotton, should it be peanuts, should it be--and one of the things we decided, let's take something that Auburn [University] does not have a focus on. You don't want to be in the shadow of your neighbor fifteen miles away working on something where they have twenty people on, been working on for ten, fifteen years, that's crazy. So we started with one of Carver's crop sweet potato. Peanuts was already being well researched for the wire grass area and what have you, but there was minimal research being done on sweet potatoes. The other reason we chose sweet potato as a root crop is part of the family of root and tuber crops, and you go to cassava and yam, etc., etc., which are very critical in developing countries. So we had a natural connection there in internationally with our-- through the International Society of Tropical Root and Tuber Crops. And so it gave us a very uniqueness around which we could develop our students, get international travel exposure, compete for funds along with this crop. And that was a very, very good decision, because we ultimately, received many, many grants from various agencies, USDA [United States Department of Agriculture], USAID and NSF [National Science Foundation], etc., etc. for putting in competitive proposal. Always going from molecular studies all the way to inner cropping, all the way to food product development, added value, animal feeds, ethanol, you name it, sustainability, we could use this commodity and be very, very unique and creative. The other thing I did, it helped us learned team work. We chose a commodity and all of our different specialties, whether it be soils, plant pathology, entomology, food technology, food safety, microbiology, whatever it was, economics, we could all work together and find ways to make this thing be very creative and innovative and inner disciplinary. So, we then--kind of like careers rose around this as we went to national and international meetings, we had a good place, and our students were being respected and even if they left here, and worked on corn or soy bean or whatever, they got that fundamental so they could change crops and do whatever the world needed. So that was a very good decision. So from that respect, there was a continuation of Carver. That led us to, at some point NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], interface with NASA. And that was a huge continuum of Carver. It was a period there, small farmer, crops, vegetable for selling, but in terms of the nouveau, what the NASA project did was allow us to deal with all of these subjects simultaneously for a targeted purpose. And at that time, they chose crops, they chose white potato, and they chose soy bean, and there was about six or seven crops that a panel of specialists from across the nation and world chose as the key crops that would be used for food for space. It was not going to be a meat diet, it would be a vegetarian diet, it would have to have crop with certain kinds of physiological traits. In other words, you had to grow in a closed system, so you couldn't have a real tall plant, you know, like a big tall corn stalk, or something like that, it would not work. And it had to be somewhat compact, it had to produce a high yield per unit area, you know, per dense volume, high nutrient content, minimal nutrient requirements, and the other one was produced--a good producer of oxygen, you know, as it absorbed soil and gave off oxygen for the human persons who would be there. So there was a whole set of criteria. And when the first round of crops came out, sweet potato was not on the list, and when we saw that, we said, we got it. We knew exactly that we could go in there and make that case. We had already worked as a team, already publishing, had everything set, we just had to get to know NASA and cut to the chase; we did it. And we have for about fifteen, was it fifteen or twenty years, I can't remember, we got about one to one point two million dollars a year, just to do sweet potato for space. And it totally transformed us and brought Carver to life. And if you have a chance to see the Carver Museum, we have an exhibit in there that spells all this out. Everything about that whole NASA project, everything is in there as an exhibit. Now, maybe they'll just let you in to see that part, it's in the back. But we spent very careful time with our NASA colleagues to create that exhibit. We had two space flights, we sent plants up and garnered a lot of information and published all that; lot of peer review papers came out of this, lot of interface between the life scientists and engineering, it was fabulous, it was just food science. It transformed us into knowing what we could do if we tear down our internal discipline barriers and shoot for the stars. And the only reason that stopped was during the Bush era, they actually killed the whole life science program in space, the budget cut, even in Florida, where they had major facilities that we used to go down and (unclear). Speaker 1: Is this the older Bush, George Herbert Walker, or George W. Bush? Speaker 2: The younger-- Speaker 1: Is this the younger Bush? Speaker 2: Yeah, younger Bush. Speaker 1: Okay, younger Bush. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a monetary, yeah. Speaker 1: And when did you all start working with NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]? Speaker 2: '85 (1985). Speaker 1: '85 (1985). Speaker 2: '85 (1985), yeah. Story_ID: 25032 Speaker 1: I have a note that you sent up some sweet potato roots, I guess, into space, to see if they would take root--how they would take root? Speaker 2: We took cuttings-- Speaker 1: Cuttings, okay. Speaker 2: --Put it up and they did root, and they we did a comparative study here on earth, and we did that; it was published. You see an example of it in the museum. That was great. Speaker 1: You were studying the kind of sugars that roots produced and what the nutritional content would be? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: I think you discovered the sugar content increased, actually, in space? Speaker 2: I don't know. Don't hold me to detail, I can't remember exactly, but, yeah, we just have to look at it and see what we found. I do remember that it was hard to get anything up in space. Thousands of people wanted their experiments to go up in space. How did we make--how did we get two up, little Tuskegee, how did we get two up? Now, we know God did that. Let me tell you, Bruce is his name, I'm just bad with names. I'm going to get these names. There's a person's name--make a note of it, there's a person's name I want to call who--I want to call about four names of people, some at Kennedy, some at Johnson and some at headquarters, who were unusual human beings, I mean, that's--another part of this journey, is, you know, there's always these wonderful people out there who, if the opportunity presents itself, they will step to the plate, and they helped us. They did it by the book, we had to meet the standard, you know, but even when you meet the standard, you still have to have that little political push, I don't care how good you are, how good your proposal is, how good your past experience, if somebody's not there in the back room when they make that final cut to say let's go get that one, then you're going to miss it. We had some of those. Speaker 1: These four people were your advocates within NASA who believed in what you were doing? Speaker 2: Al Friends and Bill Knox and I remember the guy down at Johnson, one, two, three and this guy that's going to be four of them whose names need to be recorded by somebody. We honored them all here. In the museum, you'll see a picture where we brought them, gave them special things, you know. Speaker 1: Let me ask you a sweet potato question here. What is the difference between a sweet potato and a yam? Speaker 2: Well, two different families altogether, like a rose and a carnation. There's no--no connection except the term, yam, we use for sweet potato, incorrectly. We call it a yam, and some people say that came from the Africans who are here and have the yam tradition in their mind. It looks like yam, so the term yam stuck. I don't if that's true or not, but what we call a yam is not a yam, it's a sweet potato. You've eaten real yam, if you (unclear), you know. Speaker 1: Yam festivals in Ghana, you know, that's a big (simultaneously)-- Speaker 2: It's more like a white potato, I mean, taste, it's like a thick white potato, but, you know, you can get them in different sizes; they can be this big (indicating), they can be this crude-looking skin, just a completely different plant, but they both are root--or root slash tuber crops differentiation if they grow underground, and that's the commonality, and then along with cassava, becomes the major--cassava is number, of course, but in determining starchy food that Africa and many other parts of the world use. Speaker 1: In South America too, African people, you know, use cassava. So, these are all root, these are root based. Now, is the sweet potato native to America? Speaker 2: Well, South America, yeah. It hit into Africa and then spread everywhere else, but it's origin is from South America. Story_ID: 25033 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, the sweet potato is a primary food item that you were here at Tuskegee you were experimenting with. Speaker 2: Yeah, during that period. Speaker 1: Well, I guess I should ask you what are the properties of the sweet potato that make it ideal for the situation? Speaker 2: You mean for space? Speaker 1: Yeah, for space. Speaker 2: Well, actually, it's ideal for both. And number one let's start on earth, you'll see it growing it anywhere. You go around the world, even in cold parts of the U.S., there's a short season, they got a short 30-day variety, and you can grow it in New Jersey, New York, you can get some varieties everywhere, and it adapts to almost any type of soil, I mean, it's like a poor-mans crop, that's why in China, people began to not like it, you see movies--you see movies where people are imprisoned or in areas are doing poverty in China, and where they go to eat, you'll see them pull out a big sweet potato and pull out a big roasting pot and they'll eat it, that's why it's the poor man's food, that's why they say they don't--they won't eat it if they don't have to eat it now, because they had to eat it when there was nothing else that was there to feed bellies. But it's--when you travel the world, it is a phenomenal crop, because it's the internal parts, you know, all different colors, purple, yellow, red, orange, you know, and that different nutrient associated with that, you know, and of course the orange flesh is the one we push with the beta carotene, which is a very critical--critical need for that in many developing countries have vitamin A, you know, so you have it there in a natural crop. Your carbohydrate, of course, and then you have a lot of various nutrients that are also in there, vitamin C and other nutrients. It can store--you can store it, you can even, you know, like Carver did, you can substitute it in wheat flour and then make everything you can think--you can make with wheat flour, you can make breads and all kind of product from it, you know, you grind it up, or you can mix it with wheat, and make some very delicious products as Carver proposed during the war when wheat was becoming more scarce. So, it's a versatility in terms of utilization. And it easy for preparation, all you have to do is bake it, you don't have to do exotic things with it if you don't want to, then the other part is, you can eat the leaves. The leaves are tender; if you cut them the right way, you can eat them as a green vegetable, and we've done that both here and in African, which I'll tell you about that in a second, but it's very common in the Philippines and other parts of Asia where the greens are used in salads and that kind of thing. So, then in terms of its growth pattern, you can grow--there are some varieties you can grow in 30 days, but usually it's between 30 and 90 days, so you take an average of 60 days, that the short growing season, you know. That would allow you, if the climate is right, to grow a couple of crops per year. So, those are some of the--and we learned how to grow it, and our biggest discovery was that we learned how to grow it without soil. See, prior to that, you think about it, we looked at our Russian scientist colleagues and Japanese scientist colleagues, who had a head start on us looking at sweet potato as a food for space, and had not figure out yet how to trigger it in a non-solid media. And if you're thinking about space, you're talking about low weight. So you don't want to be solid-type weight, you know, put a plant in the soil. You don't want soil, so if you could do it hydroponically, just add a little water--a little strip of water at the bottom with a thin film of nutrient solution that would be what you want to be able to do, if you could do it, so we actually patented that process. We figured out how to do it, we figured out how to trigger enlargement without a solid material around the primary routes. That was what we did, patent that. That was where we did kind of a breakthrough. Speaker 1: I was reading where you have two patents, right. Hydroponic-- Speaker 2: Yeah, modification of the first one. That, you know, that was good for Tuskegee, because Carver never patented his work. We are a place where, I think, we're always coming up with something just by being small and having all these disciplines and (unclear) we just kind of fumble on very creative, but we haven't been sophisticated in capitalizing on our findings going back to Carver. As a matter of fact, we have a history of not capitalizing on our findings, so this was a breakthrough in that there are many, many more patents pending now at Tuskegee, which are in legal hands as we speak, because of more sensitivity to what this means and that was a great breakthrough for us, those two patents. Story_ID: 25034 Speaker 1: Well, once we succeeded with sweet potato, that's a sugar crop that became the key sugar crop, because out of that you can sweeten your products. And we didn't have sugar cane and other crops there. Now was the oil crop. And peanut had the possibility because they had dwarf varieties that wouldn't take up a lot of volume if we could get the yield, etc., so we took on peanuts for NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration], and we were very successful. We had to learn peanuts peg, just like sweet potato grows underground, you had to figure out how to trigger that root. Well, we had to figure out how to get the peanuts to peg then they form the nut, you know. So, that again, took a lot of creativity in terms of the mesh and how we had to do the physical design, so we did a lot of trial and error, and we came up with a system that worked. So, we--not only did we develop a system for sweet potato, but we developed a system for peanuts. We got very good yields out of that. So that's published work also. So those are our two major contributions then NASA went to herbal crops. Where can we go in the next space flight that can go right now? We still are stocking with food, so we did several different plants and have published now in the different herbal crops and some of our team has done that work. And right in the middle of that is when NASA started closing down. But what we've done, we kept the work going. If we have a chance we could take you out to our growth chambers to show you how we kept that. And if you think about it, you're providing not only the nutrition but the light, and you're supplying the atmosphere, so you have a closed environment, so that allows you to measure any variables you want. So we have a beautiful system for thinking, even globally, where we might be in changing the environmental system and dealing with any kind of plant. And so we decided to keep that capability and keep looking for opportunities to use that expertise as we go on. We have an extensive set of green houses and growth chambers to do this kind of work. Where we're shifting to now, it's good to do science, it's great to do great work that has an impact, and of course science and technology has a big impact on our economy. Our challenge became, the one that Carver could not finish, during Carver's time, even though he developed the jesup wagon--and along with Thomas Campbell and the others, helped to start the cooperative extension system, which would go out in the communities, help the farmers, learn how to grow better and produce a market and take care of the land, and this kind of thing, because of segregation, because of slavery, segregation, Jim Crowism and general oppression, stealing of land and all that whole history that cuts across the whole south, Carver was never--when he wrote to Booker T., he said, "I'm coming to help our people"; he put that in two letters. You'll go back and you'll see the reason why I'm coming is to help our people. And you think about what he did for peanuts, yeah, he helped the peanut industry survive, but if you look at the number of black farmers growing peanuts, it's hardly any. There was a politics in terms of who could grow the peanuts and who could have the quotas, so all that came into it. Story_ID: 25035 Speaker 1: And then if you look at who's making money in agriculture in Alabama and across the south, very few African Americans are making money. As a matter of fact, many, if you go and visit our farmers today, most of our small farmers, they stuck it out just because they love farming. But the biggest problem they had over the years, they were not organized to serve in one voice and they didn't have a sustainable market. They could grow, they could grow, because they were growing for the big farmers. But again back to our politics and coming back to our economic pieces, so where we are today, and I get a little emotional on this one because of after having put in so many years, and working on the science side, how to better grow the plant and how to irrigate it, the economics in general, the pathology, even working with root crops together with our brothers and sisters from Africa and the Caribbean and Latin America, etc., etc., there was very little money coming back to our small farmers, our African American farmers in the south. And it was getting to where they were getting older and the children were moving away because it wasn't any money coming in. Well, this was happening with all farmers, but especially the rate was going bad for African Americans. So what happened, just two years ago, just a couple of years ago, Wal-Mart, believe or not, changed their value system, globally, to come up with sustainability platform that valued small farmers, whether they be in China or Costa Rica or Mexico and then they finally realized, well, what about at home. This guy name Ron McCormick and some others in Wal-Mart who helped bring this about, when they developed a heritage program, you should go on line, and you can see it: Sustainability Heritage Wal-Mart. And I was there when they had that first series--second series of meetings. And cut to the chase, they gave Alabama farmers a chance by saying, if you can grow certain crops, you choose the crops and get them up to standard, we'll buy them from you and we'll give you a premier price, you name the price. And we started working with these farmers about two and a half years ago or so--and just you know what, this week, this week, we shipped more greens from farm--African American farmers, predominantly, in eight counties in two to three days than we did the whole year last year. And last year we thought we had done something. Story_ID: 25036 Speaker 1: So the market opened up, then the question was, could you grow the quality and the quantity to meet this demand. Now, a lot is into this, I mean, it's a life's work of research extension, people working day and night, mothers, uncles, everybody helping and pitching in, young people coming back. But now that there's cash flowing back to the families, it's a new day. And we just, on December 3rd, a new cooperative, a new marketing cooperative was announced and the farmers who had been doing this have come together, elected their leadership, and they are now calling their own shots. And the markets are open, they also are shipping in addition to Win Dixie, I mean, Wal-Mart, they have Whole Foods and they have interest from Win Dixie, and they have also shipped to Glory Foods. And so they're seeing now that if they stay together, they can make it. Now these farmers are predominantly small; there's a couple of bigger ones who haven't been growing vegetables who come into to support the farmers. Our extension and research group are there. It's going to be a lot of science issues; it's going to be different now, because what we're going to have to do to make it, we're going to have to get irrigation on every farm. This is number one. We just won a big science-based grant from the Natural Resource Conservation Service; a million dollar grant that would be the beginning to put the irrigation on the farms that have bought into this working together. And then there are other possibilities, our plant pathologists are going to be critical, our entomologists for pest management. Some people want to eventually move into an organic product, you know. There are other commodities, the three commodities watermelon, peas and greens are just starting points. But for example, there are two hundred stores just in Alabama alone of which we have access to all two hundred stores. All we got to do is meet the quota, and this is business. We're a year ahead of time. Can you supply all the stores this amount, and have you met the safety standards, have you been inspected, your farm inspected so you can meet it. We just had two of our lead farmers inspected this week. This is a beautiful week, and they both passed. That may seem small to the world; that's huge for us and symbolic for the whole south. They brought teams in from Florida and Alabama to actually go to the farms and look at all aspects. They have worked very hard and they passed. We were very nervous about that, because that determines which market you have access to. So our science piece now is going to have to stay very closely linked. Let me show you another way we'll go. We are now selling product, raw product, raw product directly. You go into any Whole Foods or some of these other modern markets, and you go into the frozen food part, and you'll see all kinds of burger, veggie burgers, veggie pies, just go down to Montgomery and look in some of those stores, made out of the same products that we grow, that our farmers grow. We have a fabulous food science group. So that's the next step, the next step is food product development, adding value. And then, again, that's employment that's tied directly to the farming community and back to these small rural communities where some money can be generated in an integrated approach. We have to do this. That's what Carver--when Carver said I want to help our people, you know, to help the mass, to help the large numbers in the rural who work and can form together, if that means you got to help them be organized, they're organized, but we facilitate, we help support what they're doing, and then we bring science to the table where they can add value to their crops in a safe manner; and we bring economic finesse and encourage their entrepreneurship so that they can be the owners. That's another thing we want, wealth creation. We're trying to do this in a manner that doesn't have a middle person come in and make that profit. That's another thing. Many people will say, well, let me take the product and make that next level. I said, well, whoa, whoa, we're trying to get the farmers who till the ground to form their own coop, they'll actually deal with an integrated approach that's different for our rural African American community. That's where in the kind of like in the latter part of my career here, that's where I'm standing. Story_ID: 25037 Speaker 1: I think my whole life kind of set me up to get back into those rural communities so those young people could see where if they worked the land, smart about it, they can actually develop some very good businesses. We're looking for multimillion dollar businesses that can be sustainable. And our role in the University is to be their research arm, just like a new product is developed where competitors come in, you got to keep adding to that, you know, innovating, get that new product. So, now the role for Carver's university for the HBCUs for our science, our best brains, not just do research that ends up going up where those already making all the money take that and make more, just put it in the generic pool and then those who have the resources take it and move with it. But you have a conscious connection of your best science minds trying to work and use nano technology, use biotechnology, use irrigation technology, use computer technology, use all of our expertise in engineering, etc., etc., to actually help build a community, and then keep it viable and tie directly to prepare the young people. I could show you slides of once we got this business rolling, the young men and young women were there. You didn't have to go ask them to come, how can I help, they're getting in there to put labels on packaging, they're getting in there helping to move boxes, they're getting in there, all this is great, hey, can I--how can I get more involved in this, you know. Parents are talking good, public is good, even--I'll just say this, the legislature of Alabama, which again, we're trying to get our one-to-one match, which someday we'll get that and it's some great people there who have helped us in the past, they came up with two million dollars to build a processing packaging facility for these farmers and the ground will be broken for that next year, and then right outside of Selma, there will be a major packaging and staging plant for distribution of these crop. So that shows you, if our legislature will see that economic piece to invest in that, they'll invest more in the future and the return will be great to all of the citizens of Alabama. So I applaud those legislatures who took the leadership and did that, thank you very, very much. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sorry about that. Speaker 2: This is in Selma [Alabama]? Is there any particular representative that's really been an advocate for you? Speaker 1: Yeah. I'm thinking about the current politics. Speaker 2: Okay. All right. Yes, sir. Speaker 1: I was screening as I talked, but there are definitely some. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I want to make sure I say all of the names at once so I get it right. So that will be another thing I'll give you. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, we won't sweat you on that then. Story_ID: 25038 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about some of your development of students here in terms of their careers and that sort of thing? Speaker 2: Wow, wow. Well, we're saving the best part for last. From day one the students at Tuskegee University have just been phenomenal. I mean, it's worth working a career here because you get to see young people develop their full potential. I think the unique--that would be a statement made by anyone working at just about any university. I would say, "what is unique"? Well, if I think about my 4.0 students who walked in as 4.0s, perfect grades, organized, time management, focused, balanced, you know, they might be a 4.0 and be an ROTC commander or 4.0 and leader of saxophone section of the band or engineer, football player, and most places talk about those students, you know, these are our superstars, and what have you. And then you have your--I don't want to say other end of the side, because we're all God's people and just different, and you have the other side who just did not have that preparation and have not yet met their stride and they're coming and really struggling with fundamentals. And we all have that at our universities. And the elite universities control that sector very much, so they get to produce very high through put, 95 percent finish in four years, five years high ratings and all that because there selection process is so exclusive and they have a way to select people who are so ready for that and it's not just academic preparation, but it's emotional. So you'll find a higher proportion from two-parent families and stable, whether it's a single parent, a stable situation by which they go into college so they can adjust and balance. And when you have a situation where you have very severe challenges in the home that have come up when the child's life then they bring that to the academic situation, that really does put another piece in there that we have to sort out, so what do you do with that group. Well, now, let's throw him over here, they don't need to be in college, or they should go to community college, or they, you know, will work their way through. But if those find their selves here, if they find their way here, with the prayers of the grandmother and the grandfather and the scrapings of the church and others so they can find their way here, because their aspiration of that community and that family for that child and they see something in that child as a veterinarian or nurse or engineer or agriculturist or chemist or whatever it is then that's what we try to meet. And then there's everybody in between and this whole range of in between which really is the main group because they are the bridge, and you know, you find such heart in here or whatever and so the question becomes how do you have an institution which Tuskegee has done for so long, of being able to make these connections and then your product coming out, goes off into the world and makes their significant contributions. All universities are having this challenge today. Our school systems have left so many students unprepared and so, I would say based on those that have come through in the past and the way that we're structuring for the future, I would like to add one point to the general discussion, I feel that one of the things we should go back to is a lot more hands-on connected with the theoretical computer and, you know, or I just say basic learning. And what I really mean by this is we can use agriculture, we can use technical aspects of engineer, we can use things that need to be done here at the university, in our communities and get students involved as a part of their learning process and find a way to help them generate the resources to pay for their education and bring this mind and hand together. And that's where Tuskegee started years ago. And just my opinion is part of where we need to go back to. It doesn't mean not do all the molecular biology, you know, computer technology, nanotechnology, everything that's out here, we need to expose our students to everything possible and do it in an integrative way, but we need to do a lot more hands-on, just like the students who are with us when we were packing the greens the other day, 10:00 at night, I mean, the spirit they got from that, I imagine they're going to be all straight A students next semester, just from packing those greens. Now that's what I'm saying, let's find a way to get that done. My son went to school here. Fabulous education, he majored in architecture, he loves design, but while he was going through school, he just took advantage of the whole learning experience, and I got to live the life through his life. I've been working here for a long time, but I never got to see what really happens to a student when they come to Tuskegee like it did with his life. And it is marvelous. I am totally confident in what he's going to do in the world and the kind of self-confidence it gave him, the basics, the ability to work with all kinds of people, etc., etc. Story_ID: 25039 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American Community today? Speaker 2: Hopes and concerns, yeah. It's getting real competitive out here. Multi ethnicity is here to stay. It's not just black and white, Hispanic, Asians, Native Americans, immigrants of all types, African Americans. You're going to have to compete, you're going to have to be organized, you're going to have to be unified. You got to form alliances, partnerships, know when to break them, know when to make them, you're going to have to be globally savvy. And to survive and thrive and have your children have equal opportunity and justice, you're going to have to fight for it, you have to be smart about it. And I honestly believe that--I think our spiritual connection, you know, we can't put that aside. It's very critical that we--we have that unity, but what we really got to do is make sure we put enough effort on economic development along with that. To me those are the two pieces now. Even without cooperative, the spirit among the people, the love they have and confidence, the trust they gained over the last two months is part of why they're making money now. It's not like you can disconnect these two, because once you split which is a commonality off in our community, we get mad and walk away, and we have splinter groups, we cannot afford that anymore. So you get to that point where you're struggling, this is where you have to look at the bigger picture and say why are we in this, it's a spiritual way we can connect this and give and take and share with each other for the sake of our children. So that unified piece which I saw in North Little Arkansas, and our community, little community there with Miss Smith, you know, and Mr. Brittnum and how we used to take care of everybody, whether they were handicapped or what was their ability is just that, we've done it before. You know, we've done it before, our people are much more educated, we have a lot of people who know about a lot of things except they don't invest it back in ourselves. They invest it in their own fortunes or they invest for a private sector world that is selfish and only wants to gain its shareholders a bigger profit so you get that brain for a salary, but that's fine, but then how do we build our own, how do we build it so it can now connect economically and community-wise with others. Tuskegee's always been a place where international guests come from all over the world. Agriculture is always one of the dynamics, so I've seen it so many times. I'll tell you, this new project gets more excitement from our international guests than just about anything else. Why, because it's the whole chain. You go from planting the seed all the way through retailing out of Wal-Mart. You see it on the shelf and you see people buying. We see that watermelon being totally sold out, all the greens gone, and you see the checks come back and go into those pockets, I mean, and that, you know, that dynamic is what they need in the different countries in Africa, whether it be Ghana or Tanzania or Kenya, wherever they come to visit from, they say we're trying to find the same thing for our small farmers, where they can be collectively and sell it to big markets that can get a return and from there develop with our rule. I went to a conference in Rome dealing with the same issues. So globally, people were from every country of the world, especially the poor countries in Indonesia, poor countries in Latin America, they put the common themes in terms of what was needed for these families to survive, the same thing. And the other piece that was a part of it was the role of women. So you deal with small farm cooperatives, the role of women, markets and you have, you know, and irrigation and other things come into that role, but you have what's needed anywhere in the world to bring equity and justice in the world, so if you move passed the top ten two percent, ten percent, wealthy, those who are running it and try to talk about the mass of the world's people, you know, then that's where we are together. So Tuskegee is an important part, and a part of that international link; we always have been. Maybe we're more conscious of it now, and maybe we'll be able to encourage and work with others to make it sustainable. Story_ID: 25040 Speaker 1: What are some of the organizations that you volunteer for? Speaker 2: Okay. Volunteer organizations. I work at Tuskegee University and I volunteer at Tuskegee. I'm just, I'm just--(laughing). Speaker 1: I'm sure it's right, too. Speaker 2: Black Belt Community Foundation, I love that group; Grass Roots Foundation that saw that we--we have philanthropy already in our community without any outsiders giving us a penny, through our churches, through our sororities, fraternities, through organizations, we collect money and we do things with it for students, for the poor, for whatever. So, we say, let's just look across the Black Belt, and let's try, in unity, see if we can do something collective with our philanthropy. And here we are seven years later, you know, having given out somewhere between two and three million dollars in grants to local community organizations who never get grants, you know. And they do things for their youth, for the elderly, they do all kinds of beautiful things. So, I love working with them. It's a multiracial group, very sincere people, and we've had several bigger foundations help support us, etc., etc. I still support our boy scouts. I still believe in that exposure to the natural resource base. We have some great leaders in our area, the Robinsons and others who are-- Mr. Burns, who works with those kids and do great things. There's a group, the Agriculture--the Alabama Agriculture Land Grant Alliance, very interesting, I'm currently chair, we rotate the chair between the three land grants in the state, and it's that organization that allowed us to break some barriers between Auburn University, Alabama A&M University and Tuskegee University and with the legislature to help remedy some of the inequities in the funding. That's a group still worth struggling with as we move into a new time frame, but the fact that we could form an alliance that would help all of us, that's good for Alabama, that's very, very good, and I want to continue to support that group. Story_ID: 25041 Speaker 1: Tell us about the Southern Food Systems Education Consortium? Speaker 2: I'm glad you asked about that; SOFSEC. Okay, for a ten-year period what happened was this, six 1890 Land Grant historically black universities came together and said, let's work together, let's break the tradition of being separate. The catalyst was the kill-all foundation who wanted to fund, maybe about fifteen units across the country, but they had to be in partnership with community-based organizations, they had to be some way regional or dynamic, and they had to be addressing critical issues. Cut to the chase, we did it; we wrote a proposal. And here's the thing, we had done proposals before, not six of us, but number one from the very beginning, we shared resources, credit and leadership. We said it from the beginning, our value system was put in place, and we stuck to our value system. Now, what was the net result? We won over all the groups that was funded by Kellogg, we won one of the largest grants, if not the largest, to cut across the region. We shared the funds, just about equally, but it was based upon work, it wasn't just a given. When we moved in another direction, to generate other resources, we moved the leadership around, so Tuskegee started as the leader, then it moved, I believed to Ft. Valley, then I believed it moved to Alabama A&M, then it moved around to other--so that made each institution be comfortable and trustworthy in SOFSEC, that whenever they heard the word SOFSEC, they knew they were going to get a fair shake, so they would put their best people in. And what did we do, well one of the things we did was focus on K through 12 partnerships, and we had a micro grants program that spread like wild flower; $500 to teachers who had nothing to work within their rural schools; fabulous products came out of that for the kids. It was the best investment, matter of fact, that should be a national policy of some type, to get a little money in the hands of those creative teachers, and the local people who were doing the selection. Another piece was small farmers, and that's even manifested today with our new co-op that I talked about a little while ago, that has continued through those six land grants and expanded. And the leadership, the ability to organize, the understanding of the challenges that the small farmers had in common, all that which was learned together during SOFSEC, whether you want to go organic or not, how the markets were, totally manifested today. And then small business development sustainability were other pieces of this, natural resource development, etc., etc. We also--one of our biggest almost successes, where we had legislation developed for the Black Belt Commission, similar to the Appalachian Regional Commission, which has been funded for so many years, and I'm not sure how those monies flow, but we actually did the politics, and we had both from the Senate and House side a legislation submitted to congress for a Black Belt Regional Commission which would have done the same thing. It was about that time where the economy bust, and it was taken off the table, but the beauty of it, we must have had 150 organizations across the south who were co-sponsoring it, fighting for it. By then we had expanded from six states to nine. We have some documents on that, that we will share with you on it. We had our legislatures come to us; everybody was proud of that work, and it showed what we could do in terms of shifting policy to benefit our constituency, especially the poor. So, that's SOFSEC but what we decided to do, we're in the process of writing a book, now, to capture that because it was funded for seven years, and then for three more years, we funded it ourselves, and that was the most important part that once we got the impetus, we saw the value, and we paid money out of our own sources to keep it going for three--we kept it going and we put most of that money aside. What we're doing now is pulling it back up to use it to document for posterity of what we can do when we work together. Story_ID: 25042 Speaker 1: You want to tell us about some of your graduate students and what they're doing? Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: I don't want to get you in trouble by naming people. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm just trying to think. Well, I just think of two right off, Audrey Trotman is now with NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration]; I think she runs the program. I forget the name of the program that she's over; Owassu Bendeli, who I named as someone you all should probably interview, went on to get his PhD--Audrey got her PhD from Texas A&M and Bendeli got his from North Carolina, and he led a whole movement of African American organic farmers across the south. I mean, I think what he did is significant; he's retired now but he an (unclear) student who came in and did that. Many of them are actually with USDA in the program direction or program leaders or--many are in fact deans at our different colleges, March(sp) at Delaware State, I forget the guy's name down at Southern, but for many of our HBCUs, they've actually became leaders--academic leaders at those institutions. A few have gone into the private sector working for food-related companies, there have been, you know, Pepsi Co., Kraft, most of your food companies have our graduates who have gone on and become, either research leaders or food product development leaders. We've had many, many international students who've gone back home and are leaders in their countries. Right here in Alabama, like I talked about the Black Belt Community Foundation, one of our graduates is the president of that, so some have returned home to help with our local organizations. Some of our--I have no shame in this, because people say you should let your graduates come and then send them off into the world, but we have kept a couple of them here, and I'll mention one, Raymon Shange, who came through, his PhD in integrated bio scientist, and who is now the assistant director of our Carver Integrated Sustainability Center, and all the projects I was talking about, based on his PhD thesis, whatever, he's going to be intimately involved. So, I want to make that point that in addition to community development, product development, all that that we talked about is a scholarship that go along with it, so we are having our graduates do both. And a big part of that is what we call participatory research, where the people in the community, who are a part of what we're doing when we do the write-ups they're authors or co-authors, and that's a new stream in terms of where we're going for the future. Story_ID: 25043 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently, if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: I'll tell you one thing, it's not a matter of changing this, but all this is happening, that's why I'm so happy in this period of my life. One of the things I saw long ago because of the SOFSEC [Southern Food Systems Education Consortium] was the need to integrate, and if you have an engineer here and Ag over here and business over here, they don't have a way to bring their dynamic people together, you're in trouble from the very beginning. And I would have--we recently brought research funding from USDA [United States Department of Agriculture] and extension funding from USDA together for integrating. What this does was get our research out there in the counties, as well as in the lab, so we can be multilevel at fundamental, you know, lab, holistic level, you know, fundamental, and then we can get a translational and participant, we can now do all of those simultaneously, instead of do one and then transfer it after ten years. So we can put things out in the real world as we go. I would have moved this further--I would have moved this together a long time ago. I would have--we have new--all of our PhD programs are inter disciplinarian integrative. We would have had all of our graduate programs have that option, instead of just mimicking how we were trained; we were trained as microbiologist or statisticians or, you know, economists or whatever. And so when we set up our programs, we set them up just like that. And that does--a small university like us no good, I mean, we just can't compete like that. So our strength is in our bridging, and thank God the society is ready for that now. I don't know if they were ready twenty years ago, but you can get funding now; people prefer this, and there's a way to go in this. So, I still would have, years ago, done it and been ahead of the game, you know, as opposed to now doing it. But we're moving fast with it, it's okay, we're just working on a strategic plan, and that's going to be a core value, integrated inter disciplinary, everything that we do, because we know that's the way to go. Story_ID: 25044 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today, would you consider to be your major accomplishments or your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, again, I feel very thankful I was able to help start those inter disciplinary PhD programs. You look back on my career, and when I try to write my resume, I say co-develop, co-develop, co-develop, because it really took different people counterparts to pull all this together. So that would be one thing that I co and shared a lot of accomplishment versus trying to claim something as an individual. Likewise, the way our farmers are moving now, is the first time I really have hope that we can make a profit--that they can make a profit, that they can make money and they can stabilize, the first time where the university clearly played an integral role in helping that to occur, and our job, now, is to keep that role. And if we could keep that model, and just move that model in other places, that would be--I would just be so happy. And then I do love that fact that we take students of all types, that we aren't just taking those who are already so prepared, you know. And then our challenge now is to find ways where they can learn from each other and accelerate the learning process way beyond anything expected. See, that's going to be the genius in that, that's going to take our nation to the next place, not that you just keep siphoning off and then make you do the slave labor and you become our leaders or I'll put you in jail, you know, who can't do this. We just build more jails for you versus these, or just keep bringing people--you know, I love our immigrants, we're all immigrants of some types, except the slaves who were brought here by force, but, you know, you can't just every time you have a need here and just push this group to the side. That's going to--our country is going to suffer for that eventually. So we want to be among those who help solve that problem, you know. I think we will be, especially the way Tuskegee leadership is going now, and ready to go. Story_ID: 25045 Speaker 1: Okay. Sir, tell us something about your family, now, are you married with children? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I thought you were going to say okay and it's a wrap. Speaker 1: No, no. Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, I'm very, very blessed in that category. Yep, Jill Hill, Jill Harris Hill is my wife and lifelong partner, and love her to death, so that's a blessing. We went to Lake Forest together, but we didn't hook up then. We hooked up much later, which we were both ready by the time we hooked up. We had three sons, Shaka, Askia and Osei, all named for great African leaders, and then their middle names are family names. Shaka is a coast guard, officer diver. He always loved the water, and he's fulfilling his dream, and my second son, Askia came out of the womb reading, I mean, we didn't do anything, he was just--had the gift of math, etc., so he's working on his PhD at Purdue in computer engineering, he's married and doing fine, and then my youngest son, Askia, just graduated in May from Tuskegee in architecture. Speaker 1: This is Osei, right? Speaker 2: Osei. Did I say Osei? Speaker 1: You said Askia. Speaker 2: You know more about my family than I do. Okay, let me say, Osei, my youngest son, he graduated in May, and he's actually trying to be an entrepreneur. He can do design things out of this world, and so he has several contracts, he has his business set up, he travels a lot, he's international in his outlook in what he does, and so we just, you know, praying that he'll--he's happy. He would like his contracts to be a little bigger, but he's just out of school a few months, you know, so he's working. He does some very good work. He's not being an architect, you know; he hasn't had that calling yet, but in general design, you know, that's where he is or doing. So, yeah, we're very happy, blessed, thankful. And my mom, who's ninety-seven lives with us, Tessie. She still lives with us and still gives inspiration to the family. And her grandsons got to grow up with her present and so that--we know that blessing of that, so good to go. Story_ID: 25046 Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, a couple of things. Where I've gotten excited, I'm thinking back on myself. I really want to be remembered as a team member who really helped with the economic sustainability of our small farmers in our rural community, helped, because that's a huge one, that's a huge one. But even if we make this project a good start and get a strong cooperative and as a model for others and that those who are buying the products from the people who are in the stores, and they see that brand, and they know they're going to buy that brand and the companies know that that's a safe product to buy, and are willing to give a good price, and their reputation of those coops becomes a household name, just like any other major brand, you know, parallel, that would be so huge, because we don't have much of that. And I want African American people to be major owners, if not sole owners, major owners. I would love to be identified with one who had that happen in this modern era. That's number one. Number two, even more so than now, get a lot of feedback from students, when they go out. A lot of love comes back. But what we did here, I want to be remembered as a part of the team that transformed Tuskegee University in this era to really shake off the shackles of the status quo in ways of operating, based strictly on tradition, and move itself to where it's really a highly productive university, actually producing those students really ready and then serve the society in a unique way. But the first thing is you got to look in the mirror and totally transform yourself. So I want to be a part of that team that transforms us. And we're right in that nexus, as we speak. So there's hope that I can be a part of that; we've done a little bit of it, but really out of the box. A kind of revolutionary term that puts us in the right place, you know. So that means your partnerships, you know, your politics, everything in it. So, that requires God's help, number one, and it requires a team who are determined. So, I really want to be known as one who helped to develop and encourage; I would like to be known as an encourager, a person who encouraged the other team members to stay at this, to be persistent until we accomplished that goal. With that done, the rest will take care of itself, the students, the community development, all those pieces. We actually are blessed here. Look, we're in a--there's about nine to ten thousand people in this city, about another eight, nine thousand in the county. We got water, land, resources, got the university, we got a VA hospital, we're between Montgomery, the state capitol, you know, Auburn, the highway runs through us, I-85, we have waterways, you know. It's like we're underdeveloped, we voted 85 percent, I think we're the third voted blue--in terms of blue states--blue counties, we must be in the top five in the nation. So, to me that means we have some principals of justice and etc. going on. So, why haven't we developed, and then you extrapolate that across the Black Belt of Alabama and then across the Black Belt of the south, you know have a major national dynamic where major part of your citizenry are underserved and left behind and have tremendous need, but there's also great hope and great intelligence in here. So it's nothing but a raw opportunity. I mean, it's just raw opportunity. It's the place to be. This is it, I mean, this is--and everything we can do here in terms of--we can make the difference here. It's small enough where one, two, three, four, six working together can make a huge difference as opposed to Chicago or New York or something like this. And then what we do is very easy to share across other counties and across other states of similarity and places around the world, because a lot of places around the world are similar--have similar dynamics. So, it has been my theory that the reason we're undeveloped is God is waiting for those six, ten, twelve, fifteen to get on it, because we could have easily been taking over and all kinds of things happening. So, therefore, I'm very hopeful, very hopeful that--and in my lifetime, you know, that as more people come, as you do this kind of video, who knows what piece of this--I just pray that there will be a piece of this that goes out to somebody and touch somebody who will say, "yes, I want to come and join", you know, and join in this struggle for--it's really for all humanity. I've been talking about African Americans, but really it's the connection between African Americans, Hispanic Americans, whites, immigrants, women, everybody working together, so it's just as our starting point, and so it can be a place that has an impact on the whole world. So, nothing impossible, and I'll close with this. What you started to ask me, what was my statement, "To God Be the Glory". Well, one of the things I do believe, I do believe that as we do our work, if we praise at the same time, praise the creator at the same time that we do our work, I do believe our blessings flow. That's a different mindset from our fortune five hundred leader, perhaps, but I do believe in serving a leadership, and I do believe in praising as we go, and then I think the miracles will come. So, I'm looking for the miracles, and we going to work 24/7 for it. Amen, amen, amen. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's for my dad. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: And my grandfather and my great grandfather. I had to end on that note...