 Story_ID: 30607 Speaker 1: All right. My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archives. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is John Kermit Haynes, J-O-H-N, K-E-R-M-I-T, H-A-Y-N-E-S. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: October 30th, 1943, Monroe, Louisiana. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm professor of biology at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and dean of science and mathematics. Speaker 1: All right, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is April 15th, I think -- April 14th, 2011. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: This is Morehouse College. You're in Nabrit-Mapp-McBay Hall, again, in Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 30608 Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight "People-Magazinish" type questions that only require a short answer that we ask as a warm up, sort of. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Probably blue. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Love lamb. Speaker 1: Vacation, I'm sorry, vacation destination? Speaker 2: Love Paris [France]. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: One of the ones that I use really frequently is that "we're trying to build a house--we're building a house at the house". I frequently use that in referring, in talking to students. Speaker 1: Okay, that kind of reminds us of that Spike Lee song that opened "School Days", "I'm building me a home-- Speaker 2: Right, that's similar to me, right. Story_ID: 30609 Speaker 1: Right. Okay, well, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. We'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Sure. Her name was Grace Ross Haynes, G-R-A-C-E, R-O-S-S, H-A-Y-N-E-S. Speaker 1: And what's her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I actually don't remember her date of birth, but she was born in Monroe, Louisiana as well. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. I know we have here May 16th, is that, does that sound-- Speaker 2: That's correct I think. Speaker 1: And 1917? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back, first of all, can you trace them? Speaker 2: Actually, I have not done that seriously. And so I sat with my mother, and she took me back to her grandparents [Bertha Cook Haynes and Daniel F. Ross] on both sides. But I must tell you, I can't tell you anything. I have that information in my file, but it's not in my memory. Speaker 1: Okay, well, you might have some general information from stories. Do you know what they did for a living or did they have a story about coming out of slavery or-- Speaker 2: I don't know those stories. And so I know that my mother's father [Daniel F. Ross] was a lawyer. And so he did a fair amount of traveling in the South. And one of the reasons that she ended up going to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] is because he apparently, on a trip to Atlanta saw students dressed in uniforms. And so he sent his daughter in the ninth grade to the Spelman Academy. And so she spent four years of high school as well as four years of college at Spelman. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Her mother [Bertha Cook Haynes] was a church piano player. And so my mother also was a pianist. And so she learned how to play the piano from her mother in the church. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother grow up in Monroe [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: Did she have any stories about growing up, what it was like, you know, for a young, black woman in Monroe in those days? Speaker 2: I don't know those stories. I don't know that she actually told us those stories. So I can't recall any, anything about her youth actually. Speaker 1: Okay. It seemed like she'd be fairly well-to-do if her father was a lawyer, you know. Speaker 2: I think she was, I think she was a middle class, young person who had some amenities. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she major in music or did she-- Speaker 2: I think she majored in French. I'm pretty sure that she majored in French. Speaker 1: And did she go on to teach? Speaker 2: So she taught languages in high school. So she spent most of her career as a teacher as well as a counselor. So in her latter years, she actually began to work as a counselor in high schools as well as a state reformatory school in Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she have any stories about Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] that she shared with you 'cause I know she persuaded you to come to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]? Speaker 2: Yeah, so lots of stories and again, it's hard for me to remember. She talked about some of the important people at Morehouse and Atlanta University who she had had the opportunity to work with, either as an assistant or to take classes from. So that's one of the things that actually sold me on coming to Morehouse, the stories that she told because not only did she go to Spelman as an undergraduate, but she came back later and did a master's degree at Atlanta University. So, and there were people like Baycote (ph.) and others who were at Morehouse, Atlanta University as well as Spelman who were powerful influences on her. Speaker 1: Okay, was she here when Dr. Dubois was on campus? Speaker 2: I think she may have been. I'm just, I'm just not sure. Story_ID: 30610 Speaker 1: Okay, it seems like it's likely. But, okay, well, let me go to your father's [John Kermit Haynes, Sr.] side. Can you give us your father's--now, you're a junior. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So your father is the same name? Speaker 2: Same name. Speaker 1: Same name, exactly. And what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I don't know. So I can tell you his place of birth. So he was born in a little town in North Louisiana called Gloster which is near Shreveport. Speaker 1: Okay, now was he older than your mother [Grace Ross Haynes]? Speaker 2: Yes, I would imagine six or seven years. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So we're talking about maybe 1910 or so? Speaker 2: Yeah, it could be 1907. That seems to, could be, could be older. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family? Are there any stories about-- Speaker 2: Well, it seems that I know, I heard more stories about his side and in part, because he was a great storyteller. But he grew up on a farm and so his parents owned, I think a fairly large tract of land. And he had three sisters--two sisters and a brother. And he and the two sisters actually went to Bishop College which was in Marshall, Texas. So Gloster is very close to Shreveport, Louisiana and Marshall is not that far away from Shreveport. And so all of them actually received bachelor's degrees from Bishop College. He had an older brother who I think was in the construction business in Seattle, Washington. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I think that all four of them really received a great deal of support from the father [Elmo Mitchell Haynes] and mother [Mary Samuels Haynes]. And so I knew both the father and mother. I did not know my grandparents on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories about--now, this is an important I always ask, are there any stories about how land was acquired in your family? Speaker 2: Don't remember. So my father, I'm sure I've heard these stories. Speaker 1: Because we know it was a struggle, coming out of a situation where there was slavery, whether they were slaves or not, it's still a story, you know, about how they acquire land. Speaker 2: So, again, I just, I wish I could tell you the story. So I'm sure that my father told the story. I just don't recall it. Speaker 1: Okay. And is the family history basically, is there an origin of the family that's not in Louisiana? Speaker 2: Again, I don't know it. And so there is a person in the family who now is doing this sort of thing. And so her name is Karen Rome, and so she's located in St. Louis, Louisiana--St. Louis, Missouri. And so if you really want to know something about the Haynes family, she's the person to actually talk to. She knows far more about my family than I do. Speaker 1: Okay. I don't, just if you know (unclear), I'm just asking because I've got to ask these questions. But is there, were your mother or your father the first generation to go to college? Speaker 2: So again, my mother's father [Daniel F. Ross] actually was a lawyer. And so he finished college. Speaker 1: But your father, yeah-- Speaker 2: I suspect that my father was probably--and his sisters were the first ones in that family to go to college. I suspect that's true. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Okay, so is there a story about how they met? Speaker 2: I believe they met in Atlanta. So both of them actually came to Atlanta University to work on master's degrees. And so my father's area was mathematics. And so he, for some reason didn't complete the master's degree, but my mother did. And so both of them, coming from Louisiana for whatever reason, actually found each other. And I think that's what began the relationship. Speaker 1: Okay, now, your father became the principal of Lincoln High School in-- Speaker 2: Ruston, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's like a regional high school for-- Speaker 2: I think it was primarily for Ruston students. Speaker 1: Oh, in Ruston, okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 30611 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, okay. Now, do you have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: So I have, I had two brothers one of whom was three years younger who died about five years ago. His name is [Alphonse] Maurice [Haynes]. I have a younger brother whose name is Darryl [Ross Haynes], and he lives in our family home in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. We actually had at least one other brother who died of pneumonia early on. His name was Andre. So there were four boys. My mother [Grace Ross Haynes] had four boys. Speaker 1: Okay, and you're the-- Speaker 2: Oldest. Speaker 1: Oldest, all right, okay. Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah, probably so. I was born with bowed legs. And so one of the things that my mother forced me to wear early on were braces which were very effective in straightening my legs out, but I can remember being carried around by my mother and my father [John Kermit Haynes, Sr.] and having to struggle very early on. And so I would imagine that I wore those braces for a year or two. And it made a difference. When I look at pictures of myself as a baby, my legs were quite bowed. And so that's something that really has stuck with me, and that probably is one of the earliest memories that I have. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, can you describe--now you grew up in, partly in Ruston-- Speaker 2: So we started in Ruston [Louisiana], and then after a while, we moved to Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. So I moved to Baton Rouge when we were in the, when I was in the third grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I went to grades one through two at the Lincoln High School in Ruston and then my mother [Grace Ross Haynes] decided to move--so both my mother and father were very active in Civil Rights [Movement] in North Louisiana, and the climate became very heated. And so my mother decided to move to Baton Rouge and several years later, my father actually joined us. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you basically grew up in Baton Rouge. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Can you describe the neighborhood you lived in and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Okay, so I spent most of my early years on Southern University's [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] campus. And it turns out that many of the faculty members at the campus at Southern [University] actually lived on the campus as well. And so I had lots of interactions I think with kids who aspired to higher education. And so as a student at the [Southern University] Lab School, I was on occasion taught by faculty members from the college, and I actually had many good teachers at the high school because many of them were wives of faculty members at the college. They themselves were educators typically K through 12. So back in those days, Southern University Lab School was an experimental school. This is where the practice teachers, this is where those students who were in education did their practice teaching. And so, it was really a good, good school. And so I think I got a good education. When you talk about smells, I think of the good food that we used to eat. So one of the challenges that we faced as students is that if we went off campus to get red beans and rice or a Po Boy [sandwich], we could get put out of school. And so periodically, we would sneak off the campus just to get, to dine on a Po Boy. Speaker 1: Now, why was that--it seems like a rule that, you know, would be an archaic kind of rule, but why would they have a rule that you couldn't-- Speaker 2: Oh, I think it was protective. And so the Southern University environment was a more protected environment than the rest of Scotlandville. So that area of Baton Rouge is called Scotlandville. And then, we were young people, and so the elders were simply trying to protect us from harm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so I think that, you know, it's a reflection of the conservative nature of African Americans, I think. They can be overly protective, but I think in more cases than not for good reason. Speaker 1: Okay, now the president of Southern, I think when you were growing up was Felton G. Clark, Sr., right or was it-- Speaker 2: So, no, it was Felton G. Clark, Jr. Speaker 1: Junior was there by that time. I know his father had been president before. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Okay, and so the idea was to protect the students from going into Baton Rouge proper? Speaker 2: Yeah, Scotlandville proper, in particular. Speaker 1: Scotlandville, okay. Speaker 2: Right. And so the principal at the high school was a woman, a giant I think in K through 12 education in Louisiana. Her name was Mrs. Bowlly (ph.). And I've forgotten her first name. So for much of my career at Southern [University] Lab School, Mrs. Bowlly was the principal and near the end, Dr. McKelpin (ph.) was the principal. And so we didn't have much to do with Felton Clark, but he was an imposing figure. And my father, he and my father were good friends. Story_ID: 30612 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what did you like to do when you were growing up? Did you have any, express any interests in science as a youth? Speaker 2: Well, you know the--not particularly. So, I was sort of a late bloomer. And I think I caught fire around the tenth grade. That's when I began to take myself more seriously. And I became actually interested in all of my subjects. And so I used to represent the high school at state rallies, state competitions in the field of English. So I became very interested in English. I was very interested in the courses in business that I took. I was interested in chemistry, biology, physics that I took. Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's go back to grade school for a minute. So what were you interested in, in grade school? Speaker 2: So in grade school, I don't think I was a serious student. I don't think I was excited necessarily about learning. So again, I just, when I hit ninth or tenth grade, for whatever reason, I just took myself a lot more seriously. And then in-- Speaker 1: Well, when you think about it, was there any incident or any-- Speaker 2: I don't recall, I don't recall. Story_ID: 30613 Speaker 1: Okay. So, did--now, you say your family was involved, your parents [Grace Ross Haynes and John Kermit Haynes, Sr.] were involved in political activities or Civil Rights activities. Do you remember exactly what they were involved in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: So I think my father [John Kermit Haynes, Sr.] was very interested in the plight of black teachers. And he had, he, as a principal, had become a community leader. He also owned a funeral home. And so I think that people came to him, black people came to him with various issues, and he was strong enough to challenge the authorities. And so on one occasion, as he was traveling out of Ruston [Louisiana], he decided to drink water out of a fountain that was reserved for whites. And the service station owner actually came out and hit him in the head with a bottle. And so that's, that, of course, is the danger that you encounter if you sort of cross the line. And that, of course, angered him a great deal. He actually filed charges against the person, and really was on the, at the point of doing bodily damage to the person if his friends had not restrained him. But he was a person who took himself very seriously. Speaker 1: Now, where did such a lawsuit go in segregated Louisiana? Speaker 2: Yeah, I just, I don't think it had much of a chance. I mean you do this as a matter conscience. But again, I think that he pushed the system. So he was one of the people who tried to make the system work. And so I don't know whether he thought that there was much of a chance, but he was certainly one to test the system. And I just don't how it was, how it was resolved. Speaker 1: So, this is--now, how old were you about, what year was this when he-- Speaker 2: I was probably eight, nine, ten. Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty three [1953], '54 [1954]? Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is pre "Brown versus Board" or right around the time of "Brown versus Board of Education [1954]"? Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes, right. Speaker 1: Just before the integration of Central High School in Little Rock [Arkansas]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, was he a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: I'm pretty sure he was. So he was, he was well connected. So when he became president of the Louisiana Teachers Association, he frequently had Thurgood Marshall, Mary McCloud Bethune, Martin Luther King come to speak at his annual convention. So I think he was well connected to the Civil Rights leaders across America, and particularly, in the South. Speaker 1: Now, this is risky ground if you're an educator in a school in Louisiana. From what I understand, Louisiana state's board of education, you know, was a white body that controlled the black schools. And that was what got Felton Clark in trouble later on in the '60s [1960s] from what I understand. But how did that, now he was the principal of Lincoln [High School] until, up to-- Speaker 2: I don't know when he actually became president of the Louisiana Education Association or the Louisiana-- Speaker 1: But that was a separate job though? Speaker 2: Yeah, separate, completely separate, right. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: But it was like taking his mission now to a larger stage. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I guess it would also be taking it out of the control of the State of Louisiana because if he represented the black teachers-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely-- Speaker 1: --they paid him. Speaker 2: --that's true. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: And so it was an independent organization. Speaker 1: It was like a union for the black teachers? Speaker 2: Right, right, absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this makes a difference-- Story_ID: 30614 Speaker 1: Right, and so he [father: John Kermit Haynes, Sr.], again, had a funeral parlor. Speaker 2: Now, this was a big deal now (laughter). You skipped over that real fast-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --but being a funeral director, the funeral director in most black towns is usually one of the wealthiest men in town. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And we know this. And so, he's got an income from being a funeral director. But he has to get a state license. I mean this is, I'm just trying to set this up. This is Louisiana. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: So, he had, you know, he had to be very wise in terms of how to manipulate. Speaker 1: Right, right. So, I, again I presume that he had a license as a funeral director. But my father [John Kermit Haynes, Sr.] actually owned a number of businesses. And what he would do is hire people to run the business. And so the Elam family in Louisiana ran that business for him for a number of years. Speaker 2: Elam, E-L-A-M? Speaker 1: E-L-A-M. And so one of the stories that he told is having to go to a lynching where a young black man had been lynched and to take his hearse to the lynching and actually have to cut the person down to take him to the funeral home. And so growing out of that funeral home was an insurance company. So my father was very business-oriented. He was not necessarily interested in making money because he didn't attend to his businesses like a serious businessman. His work with the Louisiana Teachers Association was all consuming. That was his passion. And so teachers would call him from all over the state and he would get in his car, and it would be no problem for him to drive two hundred miles. I mean he was always away from home. Speaker 2: Yeah, that sounds like he was really busy, and really active, having to collect a body from a lynching, something I'm sure other people have had to do, but I've never heard that story before. Speaker 1: Um-hum, yeah. Story_ID: 30615 Speaker 1: So when you were growing up too, that's when civil rights was in the news on television. I mean I assume it was on the news. It may not have been on television in Louisiana. I don't know. Some states blocked the knowledge of that, I mean they-- Speaker 2: Certainly, but it was in the air. So we knew about it. And so students at Southern University [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] began to protest. And I happened to be--and this is something that comes to mind, I was president of my senior class at Southern, and I led a walk out of Southern University Laboratory School in unity with the students who were protesting at the college. And I don't recall specifically what they were protesting. But the principal of our high school put us out of school for a day or so just because we violated certain protocols at the school. Speaker 1: Now, are these the same demonstrations that were led by the Bailey Brothers. Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, yeah. And so Ed Brown, H. Rap Brown, so H. Rap Brown was one of my good friends. He was a classmate of mine. And so his brother, who was two or three years in front of him was at Southern University. And so Ed Brown who came to Atlanta later and was involved in the voter registration project, was one of the early leaders. And so that, I think he was a powerful influence on H. Rap, by the way. Speaker 1: Okay, so Ed Brown was the leader and that was, his relationship to H. Rap Brown is? Speaker 2: Brother. Speaker 1: Brother, okay. Okay, all right, well, with the tense environment around civil rights, I mean, well, you know, well, Southern has a real familial atmosphere as we well know. But there was, was this like an intergenerational tension sort of around civil rights on campus? Is that why there was a walk out? Speaker 2: Um-hum, so, and so the idea is that we didn't think the elders were moving fast enough or sufficiently confrontational. And so Ronnie Moore, and so as we talk about this, Ronnie Moore was also president of the student body at Southern. And I'm not sure whether he came along a little bit later, but my father [John Kermit Haynes, Sr.] actually worked very closely with him. So he was a charismatic speaker and he led a number of demonstrations at Southern as well. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now, what was the upshot, and so you all were suspended for-- Speaker 2: For a day or two. Speaker 1: For a day or two by the principal. Okay, but other than that you graduated on time and no problems? Speaker 2: Right, right. So the other point that I would make to you is that we existed in essentially separate societies then. I mean whites and blacks really had very little interaction with each other. And so if you were lucky enough to be middle class, I mean you were sort of sheltered. So one of the things that my parents would never let me do is to ride a city bus. So I never sat in the back of a bus. I just never, didn't ride it. I was never allowed to go to a city theater. I never had to go up to the balcony. And so we were protected from a lot of that, and it's just that it was absolutely separate, certainly not equal, but separate. And so again, those of us who were lucky enough to be middle class had those benefits as well. But again, I think that middle-class folk went out of their way to actually protect you from the insults and the danger from, coming from whites. And so they looked after us like mother hens. And so that, you know, this notion of being over-conservative, I think is probably well founded, the need to do it. Speaker 1: Now, did you notice a difference between how you and other middle-class black youth acted as opposed to those who did not have that protection? Speaker 2: Not really, not with regard to civil rights or what we did with regard to the fact that we lived in separate societies. So I think there were a lot of kids in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] who didn't have the same opportunity that I had who ended up in prison. Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, I just was thinking, in different, you know, different extremes, you know. First of all, they're economically disadvantaged, which you are not as much as they are. You all probably could have made more if you'd have been white, but I'm just saying that they are economically disadvantaged. Then they have the added insults-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --that your parents essentially protected you from, they got them, right? Speaker 2: Yes, and I just don't know how that manifested itself. I mean it's my view that those who led the movement were the more educated, and I think they tended to be the more middle class. And so we were taught at places like Southern that we were equal. And so at some point, this contradiction becomes glaringly apparent to you. And so if you have any spirit, it's something that you're forced to confront at some point. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Speaker 2: Now, but I should point out to that this, in those days, this was extremely dangerous. And so even though my father was actually going and putting himself in harm's way, he really, for the most part, tried to keep us from doing it. And it was only the most, you know, when you think about people like John Lewis and the Freedom Rides [1961], you know, that takes a special kind of courage. And so there were, the leaders who emerged were people who went beyond just having this knowledge that there was something wrong with this. They had an enormous amount of courage because this was a life-threatening thing that you were doing. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: And so if you left Baton Rouge, for example, as my father did frequently, and some of these young people, and you went into the back woods of Louisiana to promote civil rights, this was a dangerous thing for you to do. And so I'm talking about the late '50s [1950s], so this is when I was in Louisiana, the '50s [1950s], well into the '60s [1960s]. Story_ID: 30616 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now back to academics in school, now what was your favorite subject in those days? Speaker 2: When I was in high school? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: So, again, I was interested in a lot of things. And so I decided at some point that I wanted to be a physician, but I don't know necessarily that biology as a high school student. So it depended on who taught me. So, again, I had the good future when I came along of being taught by a number of powerful women. So the women stand out in my mind, and so I gave a talk when I was--one of the talks that I gave at LSU [Louisiana State University], I just talked about the importance of black women in our, in the development during those days. And so I can remember a woman who taught me civics, and I remember her very well. I remember another woman who taught me algebra, powerful. And a woman who taught me English, powerful. And so, so, again, I was interested in a number of things. And so I've always been, I think, even when I chose to major in biology at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I've always been interested in a lot of different subjects. Speaker 1: Okay, well, we're gonna pause here a second. We make a notation every half hour. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 30617 Speaker 1: Okay, so you were talking about the teachers in school [Southern University Laboratory School] and you wanted to be a doctor which seems like, and that's usually where someone with a scientific aptitude is channeled. So-- Speaker 2: So I don't know that I had a particular aptitude in science. So I, you know, when I was a junior in high school, I started making very good grades in everything I took. And so, again, I was interested in business, the courses that I took in business. So I've argued that it's, I could have been happy doing one of any number of things. I just, for some reason, chose to become a physician, and it may have been due to the fact that doctors were held in high regard in the black community. So when I came along, you were either a preacher or a physician. And so teachers were valued, but K through 12 teachers were not held in the same regard as physicians and ministers. And I'm sure that shaped my thinking. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you seem to be an outgoing kind of gregarious person, were you like that in high school? Speaker 2: I think, yeah. You know, when I finally took myself seriously, I became a very popular guy. And so one of the signs of popularity and extremely popular. And so I loved people. And so one of the, I was called the "King of Hearts." There was a "Queen of Hearts," in my senior class, and I was the King of Hearts, and I, it was a measure of my popularity. I was president of the senior class. I played football and baseball and did a lot of things, had very good relationships with the teachers. And so it was, you know, it was a wonderful period in my life in particular, the last couple years of high school, probably the last three years of high school. Speaker 1: Okay, because a lot of scientists we interview are like loners. They really (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and so I'm not, yeah. And so I think that when you look at black folk, we get pulled into science by a number of different paths, I think. And so I don't know that we're necessarily nerds. I mean if you look at us as a group, that we're necessarily nerds as kids. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's not even a black term, just to say-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's true, that's true. Yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: (Unclear) kind of imposed on (unclear). But, okay, as a senior in high school, did you graduate with honors? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the second-ranked student in my class. I was salutatorian, and it turns out there were--so, again, if I--there was a woman who transferred to the school from a Catholic school. So probably the best school in the city was a Catholic school that was called St. Francis Xavier [Catholic School]. And so those students, and in general, students in Catholic schools in Louisiana received far better education than kids in public schools or even at Southern [University] Lab [Laboratory School]. And so when I competed against students from Catholic schools, I didn't fare that well. I thought I was a hot shot. But I wouldn't necessarily win when I would go to the state rally. So this woman, her name was Carrie Ann Williams, and I just saw her at our fiftieth reunion. She transferred to Southern Lab in about the ninth or tenth grade, and she was as serious a student as I have ever seen. And so she was the valedictorian. It turns out that there were three of us who were salutatorians. So if I had started earlier, it's conceivable that I could have been a co-Val. But, so I was one of the top students coming out of the high school after a late start. Speaker 1: Okay. So we said earlier that your mother [Grace Ross Haynes] sort of persuaded you to go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], right? Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: And so was that like a done deal basically. You weren't thinking about any other-- Speaker 2: Well, she and I argued about it because I used to--I went to camp at least once or twice, I think in Boston [Massachusetts]. For some reason, I fell in love with Boston. So I used to, it was a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] camp that was called Camp Dorchester. And so I started thinking about going to school in Boston. And so my mother and I argued back and forth when I was a senior. I don't know that I ever got around to applying to any institutions. She wanted me to go to Spelman and so she finally said to me that, okay, so if you go to--not Spelman, go to Morehouse, she said, if you go for a year and decide that you don't like it, you can go anywhere you want. And so that was the clincher. And, of course, after that year I never even raised the question again. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now had you traveled a lot as a youth? Speaker 2: Ah, not much. So I'd been to Boston. I don't know, been around the state of Louisiana. My father [John Kermit Haynes, Sr.] was always traveling, and frequently we were with him. I don't know that I had been other places. So, no, I don't think I had done a lot of traveling. Story_ID: 30618 Speaker 1: Now, before we get you in college, I didn't ask this question and so I'll ask it now. When you consider your parents'[John Kermit Haynes, Sr. and Grace Ross Haynes] talents and dispositions and attitudes, even their looks, who do you think you take after? Speaker 2: My mother [Grace Ross Haynes], my mother. But it's a combination. So as I get older, I begin to look more like my father [John Kermit Haynes, Sr.]. But I look more like my mother. I think my disposition is more like my mother. My brother, [Alphonse] Maurice [Haynes], actually was more like my father. My father was about 6'2". He was a big guy, fair skinned, brother, was about 6'1", 6'2". And he was far more gregarious. My father was really a man of the people. So his concept of family was a big tent. So everybody who met him became a member of his family, and he was dead serious. And that's why people called on him from all over the state. They would get money from him. They would get service from him. Whatever you needed, they knew to call J.K. He spent a lot of his time just dealing with, on the phone, just dealing with the issues and problems, various problems of people around the state of Louisiana. So, my brother, you know, when I became serious about studies, I spent a lot of time studying. Maurice did not spend a lot of time studying. And he was a much better athlete. And so one of the problems that we have with athletes is they get spoiled. So he didn't take his studies, bright guy, I couldn't beat him playing chess. As many times as we played, I don't think I ever beat him playing chess, very intelligent. But he preferred to spend his time actually in the streets. And that's what my father did, basically. Story_ID: 30619 Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting. So, all right, so we go to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Your freshman advisor is Benjamin Mays. Now, there's a big question now, (unclear), now, how does this happen? Speaker 2: Believe it or not-- Speaker 1: He was the president, right? Speaker 2: He was the president, but he and his wife had fifteen freshman advisees. And so his home sat where this building [Nabrit-Mapp-McBay Hall, Morehouse College] is located. And I stayed in the freshman dorm which is still Graves Hall which is right across the green here. And so periodically, he would have his advisees over for dinner. And I remember him sitting right next to me at mid-semester of my freshman year asking me how were my grades? And so at that time, I had five A's and two B's and they were never that good again, but I was pleased to tell him, five A's and two B's. Speaker 1: So that was the best thing--I mean that's pretty, that's good. Speaker 2: Yeah, I made actually a mistake in retrospect of pledging a fraternity in my freshman year. So I had visions of actually majoring in more than just biology. I was thinking about majoring in even chemistry and mathematics. And so I took more chemistry than you had to take as a biology major. I took more mathematics than you had to take. And so I had these grand visions of myself as a scholar when I arrived here. But when I pledged in the second semester of my freshman year, I got completely off track. And it was very time consuming affair, and it impacted my grades. And so I don't think that I ever quite--it took me a while, to say the least, to recover from that. Speaker 1: So I've got two real good questions, I guess. One is, why did you choose biology as a major? Speaker 2: So I wanted to go to medical school-- Speaker 1: Pre-med, okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, and so most biology majors were, I mean that was the major that most students chose who were interested in going to medical school. Speaker 1: And the other question is, where is it? Okay, oh, what was Dr. Mays like? Now, we've heard so much about Dr. Mays. What was your impression of Dr. Benjamin Mays? Speaker 2: So, you know, I, I--he reminded me of my father [John Kermit Haynes, Sr.]. And so, you know, when I look at people like that, I don't, the soft side of them does not stick in my memory. So I viewed him as a giant, a person who I had the greatest respect for. I held my father in the same regard. And so it was inspirational for me just being in their presence. And so it's hard to tell you what he was like as a person because it's, I just, it's not in my memory. I think he was a nice person who was clearly deeply interested in students. Otherwise, he would not have been a freshman advisor. I remember him speaking in chapel. He was a wonderful speaker, and so we had to go to chapel every day at 9:00 o'clock. And frequently, he was the speaker. If not, it might have been Adam Clayton Powell, other giants from around the country. So again, I think my memory of him is more as an icon, leader in black America, a leading educator, a person who put Morehouse [College, Atlanta Georgia] on the map and defined this notion of the Morehouse man, the Morehouse mystique. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know we hear stories of him walking in the cafeteria and standing on a table and delivering a speech to the students. Speaker 2: Right. I just, I didn't witness that. Yeah, yeah, but really a powerful speaker. I mean he was a minister, a minister and a mathematician. Speaker 1: Okay, so you started Morehouse in '61 [1961]? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960]. Speaker 1: Sixty [1960], okay, so you were ahead of your-- Story_ID: 30620 Speaker 1: Yeah, so, again, I started school when I was four and so when I came to Morehouse, I was either fifteen or sixteen. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Now, when you started I believe if I'm right about this, I think that there was organizing on the part of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] or students to demonstrate in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Right, this was the hay day of the movement in Atlanta [Georgia]. So during the time that I was here, there was a great deal of activity. And so people like David Satcher and Julian Bond and leaders from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] were among us. And so people were picketing stores downtown and doing a variety of things. Speaker 2: Okay, now, I didn't realize that David Satcher, now, he becomes the Surgeon General of the United States. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So I didn't realize that he was a student activist? Speaker 1: Yes, and so David was the, David has always been a soft-spoken person who assumed roles of leadership. So he was the president of the student body at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And so, you know, as president of the student body, you're called upon to take certain stances, but I think it certainly, knowing David, it's something that he would not have had to be prompted to do. But, again, there were people like Julian Bond around who really were very intelligent and committed activists. Speaker 2: And this was, these were SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] led, okay. Speaker 1: SNCC, right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I think SNCC had a far greater impact on us, of course, as students, and that's what SNCC was all about, than did SCLC. Speaker 2: Now, even though Dr.[Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was a Morehouse man, and had a, left a legacy here at Morehouse, there was a--this, I know I've heard some of these stories before, but there's a lot, sort of a tension between his legacy and the Morehouse that Benjamin Mays was trying to guide in terms of protecting the students and other things. Speaker 1: Well, I don't think that Benjamin Mays. And so there's always a little bit of that, but I think that Benjamin Mays really was fully supportive of student involvement. And so I think at a certain point in time, the leaders of black America realized that we had to make certain sacrifices. And the students, and you see the demand came from the students. So I don't know that Benjamin Mays, I mean Benjamin Mays made us respect ourselves as men. And so everything else may have followed from that. But this was, the drive to challenge segregation came from the students. Speaker 2: Okay, I just thought I'd heard, and correct me if I'm wrong, that there were sanctions issued against students that participated in demonstrations and sit-in's and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that--I'm just not sure that Benjamin Mays did that. I don't recall there being any sanctions, and there were a lot of things that happened during the time that I was here. And so, again, if there were sanctions and I think ultimately, they were an effort to try to protect us. They certainly were not an effort to protect the status quo. But I don't recall any sanctions during the time that I was here. Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause there're a number of campuses and I may have it mixed up with Atlanta U [University] or Clark or Morris Brown [College], you know. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, we went across the City of Atlanta, picketing, Rich's and other stores downtown. Speaker 2: And was there an immediate result to any of the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, just, you know, things began to open up. And so the leadership of Atlanta began to talk behind the scenes. And, you know, the solid veneer began to crack. I mean it took some time, but that was a sort of confrontation that was necessary. I can remember walking in front of either Davidson's or Rich's [stores] with a sign that I was carrying. And this large, white, young guy came up to me and just sort of ripped the sign off. I mean that was, that's, you know, that's the sort of insult that you faced when you were doing this. And so you just kept walking with a stern upper lip acting as if nothing had really happened. It's tough to do. Speaker 2: And so you all were trained in nonviolent direct-- Speaker 1: Well, most of us were not trained. I mean the leaders were trained. The leaders were trained, but most of us really didn't--and so I was not a person who was that active, quite frankly. So if there happened to be a call for a demonstration in the cafeteria, and I heard about it, I might decide--and that's the way a lot of this happened. I might, you might decide to just go downtown and picket. There was a core group of leaders that were always doing this. But most of us were, had to pay more attention to our studies. And so on a weekend, you might say, well, I'm gonna join the group to do this. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 30621 Speaker 1: Some people like Lonnie King, and I think that Lonnie King may have been here. He may have been a senior when I was a freshman so Lonnie was one of these guys with Julian [Bonds] and others. That's what they spent their time doing. Speaker 2: Now, was David Satcher a biology major too? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay, so did you see a lot of him in the biology department? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So one of the powerful influences on the biology majors during that time was a guy by the name of Roy Hunter. And so Roy Hunter was one of, Roy loved David Satcher, and so when I came along under Roy Hunter, and so when I give talks about my mentors, he's the one who I always mention first at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 2: Now, why was Dr. Hunter so important? Speaker 1: He was a powerful, powerful instructor. So he was a guy who had polio when he was a kid, and so he spent his life on crutches before he moved to a motorized cart. But when he taught at Morehouse, he was on crutches. Yet he could draw these beautiful diagrams of anatomy and embryos on the board, and he'd talk with such facility about the subject. And so for those--it turns out that he and Dr. [Frederick E.] Mapp who was the chair of the department at that time, did not necessarily get along. And so Roy Hunter's tenure at Morehouse was short-lived. But for those of us who came along during the time that he was there, or here, he was a tremendous influence on us. Speaker 2: Now, where did he go when he left Morehouse, do you know? Speaker 1: I think he became chair of the Department of Biology at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland]. And he eventually became chair of the Department of Biology at Atlanta University, and at some point, he went to work for Lou Sullivan at the Morehouse School of Medicine as an administrator. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So one of the things that I regret most is not bringing him back to the faculty at Morehouse when I became chair of biology. He and I used to talk about that. I just couldn't pull it off. So one of the things that I did as chair of biology was to move in the direction of hiring people who not only taught but did research. So Roy was way beyond doing research, but he was such a giant that I wanted to have him in the midst just to have that history and tradition and the power that he conveyed just talking to students. And I just didn't pull it off. And he always reminded me, I'm still waiting for you to invite me back. I just, just couldn't do it. Speaker 2: So, he's passed now? Speaker 1: Yeah, he died, I guess, about ten years ago. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, but a great mentor. Speaker 1: Powerful mentor. Speaker 2: Okay, now we always hear a lot about Henry McBay. Did you have him for-- Speaker 1: I took him for, I had him in general chemistry class, and was also powerfully influenced by him. People were more frightened by Henry McBay. So he's known for either producing chemists or producing politicians or ministers. So Maynard Jackson used to tell the story that the reason--because Maynard Jackson apparently wanted to be a physician when he came here. And so Henry McBay turned him towards politics. Speaker 2: So in other words, he, you either succeeded sort of-- Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: --big time here or he pushed out of-- Speaker 1: That's right, right. So he was very demanding, put a lot of emphasis on the mathematical basis of chemistry. He would fill up the board with just equations, and he wrote beautifully. And his, he had sort of an extreme attitude about things, and so he frightened a lot of students. I mean I thought he was a great instructor. I enjoyed his style of lecturing. And I don't think I felt intimidated by him. Speaker 2: That's interesting. Okay. Story_ID: 30622 Speaker 1: But that style is no longer popular. So what we're trying to do now is to not frighten students. We're trying to actually facilitate their acquiring a taste for learning. And it's a different approach. Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a discussion like that we had yesterday at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] with one of the scientists there. And he was saying that Georgia Tech's philosophy was to basically, either frighten the students away or bring them along where, when he was at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], he said it was more--if we got you in, if you made it this far, we were gonna make sure you made it. You know, and that was the attitude, rather than-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I like the latter attitude. And so, you know, when you bring a student into a place like Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], it seems to me that student has met your acceptance criteria, and therefore, there's a certain obligation that you have to the student to do everything that you can to make that student succeed. And so higher education in general has had the point of view that repre--, that we are a filter, that it's only the talented tenth that should come out the other end. Well, this is a different time. That's a model that's no longer sustainable. Speaker 2: Okay. I was thinking, especially, looking at the African American community and some of the obstacles and problems that students might have that are different that might be a wrong attitude to have in an institution of higher learning. Speaker 1: Right, in particular, with regard to African American students, you have to be, you have to think very broadly. And you also, it means that you have to be sure that your institution really has all of the support services that are necessary. And so, what we're talking about here is beyond the curriculum, beyond the interaction with the teacher. We're talking about counseling. We're talking about financial aid and so on. And I don't know that all historically black colleges have the resources, and again, this is a resource question, to be able to provide that kind of support for students. Speaker 2: But you're saying they should. Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, absolutely. Speaker 2: Okay, all right, now did you have Dr. [Frederick E.] Mapp? Speaker 1: Yes, so Dr. Mapp taught me, and so Dr. Mapp was a mentor--he was not as powerful a mentor. Dr. Mapp was less approachable than some people. So he was a little bit stand-offish, but I actually did research with Dr. Mapp. I took a couple of courses from him, and while I didn't see the letter of recommendation that he wrote for me to go to graduate school or medical school, I suspect that it was pretty positive. So I think I had made A's in all of the courses that I took from Dr. Mapp. Speaker 2: What about Dr. Burney? Speaker 1: I took a couple of courses from Dr. [John?] Burney. So he was the chair of the department when I first arrived. I think I made A's in all of the courses I took from Dr. Burney. Speaker 2: And we have a list of people. Did you know Dr. Walter Massey, the physicist? Speaker 1: I know Walter very well. Now, Walter actually preceded me at Morehouse. So he was gone by the time I got here. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So, well, during your Morehouse tenure, did you decide to, were you still thinking about going to medical school at that time? Speaker 1: For most of the time. So when I got around to applying to schools, I applied to a number of medical schools. And I, Roy Hunter convinced me to apply to one graduate school, Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], which is where he went. And so I was accepted at several medical schools, didn't get accepted at--at the time I was thinking about going to Harvard, didn't get accepted at Harvard. And so I decided to go to Brown, to graduate school. And even when I arrived at Brown, I was still thinking about the possibility of going to medical school. Story_ID: 30623 Speaker 1: So you were going to graduate school in biology? Speaker 2: Right. And so, but after the first year at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island], it was such a compelling experience that I never thought about medical school thereafter. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I applied to both medical school, because I was a little bit conflicted and applied to Brown because of Roy Hunter. Speaker 1: Okay. So, now at Brown, your research advisor was Donald Kimmel? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right, okay. All right, now, who was he and what was that (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: So Donald Kimmel had M.D., Ph.D. And he was a developmental biologist. Now, Roy Hunter was a developmental biologist who worked with a legend in neuro developmental biology by the name of Mack Eds. And so I went to Brown to be a developmental biologist like Roy Hunter, right. That was in the back of mind, but Don Kimmel was a developmental geneticist who had worked with two of the leading people in the field at Johns Hopkins, a guy by the name of Clement Market and another guy by the name of Ursbrum (ph.). And so I, you know, among the various faculty member, when I talked to Don Kimmel, he said, yeah, let's work together. So back in those days, developmental biology probably had the greatest influence in the field of biology. Speaker 1: Now, the question that a layman asks, and I'm one of them- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --is what is a developmental biologist? Speaker 2: Okay, that, a developmental biologist studies the development of the embryo. And so those changes that begin to take place when a zygote is formed, when an egg is fertilized by a sperm, dramatic series of cell divisions, cell movements that actually shape an embryo and eventually convert the embryo to the adult form. All of that is what we call the field of embryology; very complex field. But some of the leading scientists in the country in biology in those days were in the field of development. And so I felt really privileged to be working in the field of developmental biology. And so Don Kimmel was a young guy who was very open. I consider him to be a powerful mentor. I've had him come to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] to speak when I chaired the Minorities Affairs Committee at the American Society of Cell Biology. I had him serve on the committee. Don Kimmel actually allowed me to do what I wanted to do, and, you know, to me, to be able--to work on a Ph.D. and do what you wanna do is really, it's a rarity. But it seems to me that that's what a Ph.D. should be all about. And so I sort of, I sort of floundered, in a sense, because I would pick one project and decide that I was not getting anywhere and then try something else. So I ended up working on a number of things before I finally found something to complete for my Ph.D. Speaker 1: Now, you were doing a combined master's-- Speaker 2: No, so back in those days, most good graduate schools had actually stopped giving the master's degree. So the master's was considered to be a terminal degree. So if they didn't think that you should work towards a Ph.D., they gave you a terminal master's, and you left. So, most graduate programs now--so the master's degree to some extent is coming back. But, you know, you go now to work on a Ph.D. And so if for some reason your advisor and others think that you're not really Ph.D. capable, they will give you a master's, or let you sort of terminate it with a master's degree. So I was never on a master's degree program. Speaker 1: Okay, and you're glad, I'm sure. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Now, who is Dr. James Ebert? Speaker 2: So Jim Ebert was the director of the embryology course at Woods Hole. So I took the embryology course at, in 1966. And so it was an honor to be accepted into that course. So that course, you know, Woods Hole is considered to be, back in--particularly, back in those days, if you had the opportunity to go to Woods Hole to take a class in the summer, it was a great honor because the number of applicants for those courses was just huge. And so I had the opportunity to take the embryology course and Jim Ebert was the guy who actually led the course. So Jim Ebert was a leading developmental biologist, embryologist, who was on the faculty at Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Now, what did you decide to focus on as a, you know, four-year Ph.D.? Speaker 2: So, at some point, so Don Kimmel was actually studying a particular enzyme during development. And so at some point after all of my other efforts had failed and, you know, I was trying to work on problems that I thought were a little bit more important, I decided that I should go ahead and work on that same enzyme. And so I studied this enzyme that was called, that's called tryptophan pyrrolase [tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase]. I studied its regulation during the development of frog embryos. Speaker 1: Okay, we have to pause here for a moment. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 30624 Speaker 1: At this point before I go any further, I will ask you had you heard of sickle cell anemia at all? Speaker 2: Not when I was a Ph.D. student. Well, it turns out that it was not part of my memory. But when I went back and looked at my genetics notes, and I have a habit of just keeping things much too long. So I took genetics from Dr. [Frederick E.] Mapp, and there was some reference to sickle cell anemia. It was not enough such that it became a part of my memory. So I heard about sickle cell anemia when most African Americans were hearing about it when Richard Nixon in 1971 made it--in a speech that he gave to Congress, made it a national priority. And that's when I actually, I was stunned that there was this disease that affected primarily African Americans that we really did not have a good way of treating. So that's when I decided to work on it. Speaker 1: Okay, and Dr. Roland Scott wouldn't have meant anything to you at this point? Speaker 2: So, yeah, it's very interesting. So, one of the first jobs that I went looking for after completing the post-doc at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was at Howard [University, Washington D.C.] with Roland Scott. Now, it turns out that Roland Scott was too busy to talk to me. And so he had his second in command just spend much of her day with me. But, and I just don't know how this whole thing ended, but I was looking for a job. And so I went looking to work with Roland Scott at Howard. Speaker 1: Well, that's forward. So, we'll go back to the Ph.D. (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, so Roland Scott was a name that I came to know. Now, not at as a prominent researcher. And so I was interested in research, I mean, so he led the center at Howard University. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, tell us about your dissertation and what was it about? Speaker 2: So, now the dissertation had to do with just studying, and it's been so long since I did that-- Speaker 1: Tryptophan oxygenase? Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's called tryptophan pyrrolase and tryptophan oxygenase. And so I was simply looking at the changes in the, how this enzyme was regulated at different stages in development, okay. And so, you know, back in those days what we were trying to do was to understand how different genes or the products of genes were regulated as cells became differentiated, okay. And so I think that's what I was trying to do, just to study the role of this enzyme and differentiation of cells or in the embryonic development of this organism, the frog. And I must tell you, I just can't remember what I discovered at this point. So that was not my life's work. And so when I started working on sickle cell anemia, I spent, you know, the vast majority of my career working on that. Speaker 1: So in this case the dissertation basically demonstrates to those who are judging your candidacy for Ph.D.-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --your competency and your trajectory in terms of what (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, not necessarily your trajectory. So, what you have to do ideally is to actually contribute something that's original. And so you have to do some original work. And so it doesn't mean that you will spend the rest of your career and frequently, you do that. So when I came along as a developmental biologist, I began to realize--so I came along in the hay day of molecular biology where we were developing all these tools now to study biology at the level of the molecule. And so I decided that I really needed the tools of molecular biology in order to study these very complex processes that we could describe in development. But we really had no way of doing sophisticated analysis. Story_ID: 30625 Speaker 1: And so after my Ph.D. I stayed at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island] for another year and worked in the field of molecular biology. I did a post-doc with Seymour Lederberg on a phenomenon that's called host restriction and modification in bacteria. And again, basically, what I was trying to do is to learn the tools of molecular biology. Now, it turns out there I worked on a phenomenon that involved restriction enzymes. Now, at the time, most people didn't appreciate how valuable these restriction enzymes would be in making recombinant DNA molecules. And so the guys who won the Nobel Prize actually were leaders who actually were able to see that these enzymes that cut DNA can allow you to cut DNA from one source and attach that piece to a DNA from another source. And so that is a recombinant DNA molecule. And it is that technique which revolutionized biology. So we now know a great deal more about how genes are regulated in part because of this recombinant DNA technology. So I spent a year working with Seymour Lederberg before I heard about sickle cell anemia. And so after I heard about it, I had to make a decision to go to work with Vernon Ingram at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] on sickle cell [anemia] or to continue my work on molecular biology by going to Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland]. So Phil Hartman at Johns Hopkins was interested in my coming there. And so Phil was interested, I think, ultimately in my becoming a faculty member at Johns Hopkins. And I think Johns Hopkins was trying to look, to reach out to find some minority faculty members. And so the idea was that I was gonna do a post-doc and maybe post-doc slash instructor there. And so that would have been, to some extent, an extension of the work that I had already started doing at Brown. But I decided to go to MIT just to start working on sickle cell. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So was it the, I guess when did you really did really get focused on sickle cell? I mean how did you-- Speaker 1: It was just-- Speaker 2: --did it come through the media like everybody else or--? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, that was it. I was stunned. I was stunned in 1971 when I heard that there was this disease, and again, I thought I was hearing it for the first time, that affected African Americans, that we didn't have an effective treatment for. Speaker 2: Now, I remember, I think, I believe 'Tony Brown's Journal' or 'Black Journal', I think it was called, had a broadcast about it. And I think Dr. Effie O. Ellis from Chicago [Illinois] was on, perhaps, and there was an expert, maybe the doctor from Howard [University, Washington D.C.], discussing it. And that's when I heard it for the first time. This was '71 [1971] or so, in the media. And we looked around. None of us knew anyone that had it. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I later on would meet people that had sickle cell, but I didn't know anyone or in fact they had--they might not have known they had it. Speaker 1: That's true. And so one of the first things that, you know, once Congress passed the Sickle Cell Control Act in 1972, one of the goals was to identify people who were carriers as well as people who had the disease. Speaker 2: And I think I also read about it in the Black Panther newspaper ['The Black Panther'] (laughter). Speaker 1: That's interesting, yeah. So the Black Panthers were doing health in the community and they saw it as an issue. Story_ID: 30626 Speaker 1: Yep, so at any rate, so, well, I don't know if it's a good time to ask this or not, but I think that we were concerned that, I think the National Science Foundation was concerned about us asking about procedures, you know, how you do what you do as a biologist. What are the tools, and what is your day like as a biologist? Speaker 2: Okay, so I'm no longer a practicing scientist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, so I'm a practicing, I mean I still teach and that consumes a fair amount of my time. Speaker 1: Well, in those days. Speaker 2: Oh, in those days. Speaker 1: In those days, what would you-- Speaker 2: So, but you have to talk to me, you have to ask about specific times in my career. So when I did a post-doc at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I would get there in the morning, and so the first year I worked at MIT, I continued to live in Providence, Rhode Island. So I would drive, it would take me about an hour and a half to get there. So I would drive to Cambridge every morning and drive back to Providence in the evening. And so I was spending three hours a day just driving. But I would get there at 9:00 and 10:00 o'clock [a.m.], and I would work until 10:00 o'clock in the evening. So back in those days, it was expected that post-docs would actually maybe just go home for dinner and come back in the lab and work on weekends. So I spent virtually all of my time doing research. Now, it turns out that Vernon Ingram had an appointment at Columbia [University, New York]. And so when we didn't get blood from some of the hospitals in Boston [Massachusetts], he would, when he would go down to do his work at Columbia, he would go by Harlem Hospital [New York] or somewhere else and would get a sample of blood. And so he may come back on the train at 11:00 o'clock [p.m.], and I might have to spend all night doing research. That's just the way it is. You know, when the sample arrives, you have to process it. So that was a full time, that was beyond full-time research. So this is what we expected of graduate students in the top institutions, what we expected of post-docs. It's really, it's really a major amount of time that you spend working on research. Now, the nice thing about it though is that you enjoy it for the most part. So you again, and if you work at a place like MIT, you're working on things that for the most part are really important. And so that sort of drives you on. I can remember, you know, back in those days, we used to use glass pipettes. And so I can remember that I'd be so nervous sometimes because of the importance of an experiment that I was doing, my hand would be shaking, okay. Now, when I left that post-doc, I then became, I took what's called my first real job, when you become a faculty member. So I went to Meharry [Medical College] and was on that faculty for five years. And so I taught and did research. Story_ID: 30627 Speaker 1: Now, I guess it's generally expected, after a number of interviews with scientists, it's expected they do a post-doctorate-- Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. So I won't hire anybody at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] to a position in the Division of Science and Math who has not done a post-doc. And so I did two of them and so nowadays because the job market is tight, it's, you know, sometimes these post-docs have to do three, four and five post-docs before they can actually find a real job. Speaker 1: Now, being a post-doc, is that analogous to being an intern as far as the (unclear)? Speaker 2: It's the, yeah, yeah. So it's a thing that you do after you get your Ph.D. to either, to learn more about what you were working on for your Ph.D. or to venture forth into a new area. But it's also a time where you can really concentrate on your research. You know, as a graduate student, frequently you have to teach. You're a teaching assistant for laboratories. And you have to take courses and so on. So this is strictly research, and you wanna put yourself usually in a high-powered situation where they're doing research and publishing. So it's a time where you can get your publications out, okay. So it allows you to sort of hit the ground running when you assume the role of a faculty member. And so one of the interesting things that happened during the time that I was in Cambridge [Massachusetts] is that I became associated with a group of post-docs, African American post-docs who decided that they wanted to go to an HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities], not as one or two individuals, but as a critical mass. And so the idea was that in order for our transform an HBCU, one person can't do it. You have to take ten. And so there were about ten of us and we actually started giving seminars to each other. Ken Olden was probably the leader of the group. Ken was doing a post-doc in a lab at Harvard Medical School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Jim Townsel, a neuro scientist who was working at Harvard as well was a member. Luther Williams, who was not I think in Cambridge at the time, was a part of the group. So there were a number of us who actually started to negotiate with the DeWitt Stetten at NIH [National Institutes of Health]. And it turns out that he was, I think at the time, second in command. And so we were led to believe early on that we could get a grant of perhaps $2 to $3 million to take to a historically black college as a group to actually fund this effort. It turns out that we didn't get the money, although two or three of us, and my wife [Alberta Hill] became ill. And I couldn't make the trip. But two or three of us actually made a tour of a number of HBCU's and came back and said that the dean at Meharry [Medical College] is really very accommodating, wants to see us come. The facilities at Meharry are nice. He's developing a graduate school. That's where we should go. But once we didn't get the money, the group fell apart, but, two of us ended up, Jim Townsel and I, went to Meharry, the remnant of the group. And we actually shared a fairly large lab during the five years that both of us stayed there. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 19-- Speaker 2: So this is 1970. I was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] from '71 [1971] to '73 [1973] and so I left to go to Meharry in '73 [1973]. Story_ID: 30628 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So who was the head of the Morehouse, I mean the Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: So Lloyd Eland was the president and Charles Johnson was the dean of graduate school. So he was the guy who we, Jim and I, reported to and worked most closely with. Speaker 1: Now, was Dr. Elam related to the Elam's in Louisiana? Speaker 2: I don't think so. I don't think so. He may have, but I don't think so. I just, I never heard of that before. Speaker 1: Okay, so what was that experience like? Speaker 2: My experience at Meharry? I think for the most part it was good. I had a lot of freedom. I had support. Meharry had chronic financial problems like many HBCU's [Historically Black Colleges and Universities]. And so one of the reasons that I decided to leave was that I just got tired of dealing with the chronic financial problems of the institution. And so I think the summer before I left, they were asking us to take perhaps a pay cut. And so I just, and so Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] had actually called me several times during my tenure at Meharry and asked me to come back. And so I was really gung ho research and wanted to do--there was a developing sickle cell center at Meharry. And so I wanted to actually just stay in place, but again, Meharry was not as supportive as I thought it should have been. Speaker 1: Did you have the equipment you needed? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I had a nice laboratory at Meharry. You know, I was, I was a, for the most part, happy guy. I had graduate students. I had high school students working at my lab, and I thought we were doing some good things. But we just had these chronic problems, chronic financial problems. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there for five years. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 30629 Speaker 1: Were there any major breakthroughs or-- Speaker 2: So, you know, I've spent most of my career working on sickle cell membranes, on models of sickle cell membranes. And so I've been studying the proteins in those membranes. And so I was working on the effects of calcium on normal red cell membranes. It turns out that sickle cells have increased calcium. And so I was working on a model system where you would put calcium into normal cells just to see what calcium did to normal cells. And so I saw a number of changes in the membranes that I thought were really interesting that I reported, I presented and so on. And so what it suggested was that calcium might be having similar effects in sickle cell. Speaker 1: Okay, so, okay, now, then Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1978? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, now, you're back home so to speak. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Was it like coming home? Speaker 2: In a way. So I knew many of the people here [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. The person who recruited me back, who was chair of the department was a good friend of mine who was one year behind me at Morehouse, who was a member of the same fraternity. And so I knew other people on the faculty. Speaker 1: All right. Now, in '78 [1978], now you published a paper, 'A New Anti-Sickling Agent Invitro Studies, Its Effects on SS'--well, you can say the rest (laughter), what is this "ether-- Speaker 2: Erythrocytes. Speaker 1: Erythrocytes and Hemoglobin S. So, well, explain to us what that is? Speaker 2: So back in those days, and so I was working with a chemist at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. And so he was a guy who was always synthesizing new molecules. And so, you know, in those days much of the research was directed towards finding a molecule that would actually prevent the aggregation of hemoglobin s. So that's what causes cells to sickle. And so we found this chemical that actually prevented the aggregation of hemoglobin s and would prevent the sickling of cells. Now, I left it at that. So now he played around with it for a few years. It, you know, that's--it never got to clinical trials. And I can't tell you why. So that was not my main line of work though. So I was interested in the membranes. So I was still, for the most part, studying changes in the membrane of sickle cells, looking for something that could help me understand why these cells behaved differently in the circulation, than normal cells. Speaker 1: Okay, you don't know what happened to the-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Well-- Speaker 2: And, you know, again, so it's like research, you become focused on certain things. So when I first started my work in sickle cell, my dream was to develop a treatment. You know, one of the things that you begin to realize as a scientist is that, that really is a, it's almost farfetched. It doesn't happen like that. What you end up doing is becoming interested in solving a problem or figuring out something. It turns out to be a small piece of the whole picture. And so I became focused on sickle cell membranes. And so I was trying to figure out what was wrong with sickle cell membranes. Now, if I could have ever taken it to the point where I said, well, this is clearly--in other words, I was able to show what was wrong with it, but I never showed that this was why these cells behaved differently in the blood stream. So the major problem in sickle cell anemia is that these red blood cells get caught when they're passing through some capillaries. And so it is due to some change in the membrane. So some of the capillaries in the body are very small. And so you've got to be deformable as a cell to pass through. Sickle cells tend to be more rigid. Speaker 1: Plus, they're shaped like, is there a shape (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Well, no, they have the normal shape. Now, they can sickle when the oxygen tension goes down, and that usually happens, you know, in the tissues, okay. But that's not the main reason that they get caught. So a change is taking place in the membrane. They're stickier on the outside, and the cell is less deformable. So as they're passing through some of these small capillaries, occasionally they get caught. And that's a vasal occlusion. That's a very painful condition. It is due ultimately to a change in the membrane. And so although I could detect some changes in the membrane, I could never figure out how to show that these changes in the membrane are a cause of the, either the increased stickiness of the cell or the reduced deformability. If I could have made that connection, then I could have moved towards a treatment. That's the way you sort of do science. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You can't just say I'm gonna develop a treatment and then just do it. It doesn't happen like that. Speaker 1: Okay, that's the old days of alchemy where you develop some solutions, and drink them to see if it works-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you know, that's the (unclear), right. But a lot of people think that's what happens-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that that's what science is about. So it's not about that. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this is, so you're dealing with why the membranes are sticky, why they're rigid-- Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: --why they get caught, cause I remember seeing a graphic. I think it was on 'Tony Brown's Journal'. And in my mind it still exists, of these sickling cells are tumbling through the blood stream. And they showed like a regular round one was going through the sickle ones, they got caught up with each other and jammed up. Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum. Speaker 1: That was the, you know, full graphic the way it showed. Speaker 2: So, now, you know, sometimes they actually stick to each other, and so you can get something approaching a clot. But, again, a single cell can be enough to actually block one of these capillaries. Story_ID: 30630 Speaker 1: Okay, but this paper seems to suggests to me that you came up with some sort of a breakthrough, but a treatment, but it was never processed into a drug or anything? Speaker 2: Right, right. So, again, the organic chemist, that was sort of his baby, okay. I was very busy. So I was working with another biochemist who was analyzing the lipids in membranes. I was analyzing proteins. You can't do but so much. Now, again, he's still to my knowledge at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and has developed all kinds of other compounds. That's what he does for a living. He develops compounds and he allies himself with people who are working on problems, and he asks whether these compounds might be useful in your system. Now, he was part of this sickle cell center through. So he and I worked closely on that particular project. But at that point, I was no longer that interested in developing a treatment that actually prevented the aggregation of hemoglobin s. That's what that did. I was more interested in focusing on the membrane. So if I had developed a treatment, it would have been something that actually prevented the changes from taking place in the membrane. Speaker 1: Okay, so you would have headed it off at the pass rather than-- Speaker 2: Well, no, actually, the pass is that the hemoglobin and closer to the pass is at the gene. See, now, we're talking about actually going in, cutting out the gene and putting a good gene in. I just happened to become very interested in the membrane. So the closer you can get to the base, the less problems. So the gene, the protein is hemoglobin and the aggregation of this protein now leads to changes in the membrane which consists of proteins and lipids. So, ideally, you wanna go closer to the start of things. But I had just become very interested in the membrane. Speaker 1: Okay, for what reason? I mean for-- Speaker 2: I spent a lot of time. One of the reasons that Vernon Ingram and I decided to start working on membranes is that when you choose, decide on a project for a career, you choose it for a number of reasons. And one of them is that you wanna get into an area where the competition is not huge. So virtually everybody back in those days who was working on sickle cell was working on the hemoglobin. That's really where the action was. So we decided, we were two of the first investigators to begin working on the membrane. So we said, let's work on this that a lot of people are not looking at, and see if we can make some original discoveries here. And the more I thought about it, the more I concluded that ultimately it's changes in the membrane that actually cause these cells to become caught in capillaries. And it made sense to me to work on the membrane. Speaker 1: Okay, so you continued to do that at that time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right in '78 [1978]. All right, okay, so you're promoted to full professor in '79 [1979], is that true? Speaker 2: I think (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, or '80 [1980], maybe '80 [1980]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now, Hugh Gloster is now the president of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and you're back? Speaker 2: Right. So Hugh Gloster actually called me at Meharry. So back in those days, Hugh negotiated with almost everyone who was hired by Morehouse. So that's sort of a small--he and the business manager really, one of the ways that they kept on top of the finances was to do a lot of things themselves. And so he called me and actually negotiated a salary with me. Speaker 1: Now, does that create any resentment in the department that you enter? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: The president has hired you and-- Speaker 2: No, because, again, I think this-- Speaker 1: Everybody's hired like that? Speaker 2: --I think that was the standard operating procedure. Speaker 1: Okay. I know in some schools, you know, the department gets upset or the dean of the school gets upset. Speaker 2: Yeah, it can do that. So this does not happen anymore, okay. But it happened back in those days. Speaker 1: Okay, nowadays, the department makes the decision? Speaker 2: Right, and so you make a recommendation to the provost and usually I will, as dean, I will call and negotiate salary and so on, at least for the Division of Science and Math. Story_ID: 30631 Speaker 1: Okay. All right. I think in '84 [1984], I think bone marrow transplantation in a child with sickle cell produces the first reported cure. Okay, what was your reaction to that at the time and-- Speaker 2: I don't know that I remember it so I don't know that I kept up with it. So bone marrow transplantation has always been something that I felt was so risky that I never thought it would actually end up being a method of choice. And so I don't know that I was overly excited about it because I knew about the problems that we have with transplantation, okay. So bone marrow transplants cost over a hundred thousand dollars and there, when the clinical study that was done a few years ago indicated that there was a 10 percent mortality. This is a very risky procedure. So, you see the challenge is that when knock somebody's bone marrow out, which is what you have to do. So what you do is give a sickle cell anemic chemotherapy and you essentially kill all of the stem cells in the bone marrow. So all of your blood cells come from stem cells in your bone marrow. That means that all of your immune system cells, your red blood cells, all of that now, we're gonna knock all of those out. And so we then give you this transplant that's gonna repopulate your bone marrow. Well, you know, some people actually don't get through chemotherapy. Some people actually get infections that kill them before this other, the new bone marrow takes. Now, you know, once the bone marrow takes, you know, you then begin to make white cells and so on so you can fight off an infection. But before it's established, you're in a vulnerable position. And finally, if the tissues are not matched, if the graft sees you as foreign, it's called graft versus host disease, it's going to begin to attack your tissues. And you could, you die. And so 10 percent of people in this clinical trial who received a transplant died. This is very risky procedure. Now, we've improved it some since then. But we still have this problem of transplant rejection in this country. So when we solve the problems of transplant rejection, then we will be able to do bone marrow transplants at much cheaper, with lower mortality, and that will be a cure, a cure, not a treatment. Speaker 1: Okay, we've gotta pause here. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 30632 Speaker 1: Okay, so this, during this time you're still doing research on the membrane, the sickle cell membrane? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And we were talking about the bone marrow transplant and all the problems with that, but it is a cure, but you've got a 10 percent chance you might not make it and it's very expensive. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: And it's also hard to find bone marrow donors too from what I understand. Speaker 2: It's true. Speaker 1: It's very difficult. Speaker 2: And so African Americans, and so the appeal has gone out for African American bone marrow donors. And I just don't, I don't know what the response is. But there's just a reluctance for us to register. Speaker 1: I hear it's kind of a painful process to extract bone marrow? Speaker 2: Yeah, to take bone marrow. Speaker 1: But again, I think this is a matter, it's a life saving procedure. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it will save someone's life, it has the potential for that. So, now, well, what directions did your research take, you know, from this point through the early '90s [1990s], I think, I guess the culmination of your research is '93 [1993] with the publication? Speaker 1: I just, so I haven't kept up with it. But, so, in terms of direction. So when I came to Atlanta [Georgia], one of the problems that I had in Nashville [Tennessee] and that's why I was so interested in studying a model because the black population in Nashville is relatively small. And so I had difficulty getting sickle blood. Atlanta has a much greater population of African Americans, and when I first came here, I became a member of the board of the Sickle Cell Foundation of Georgia. And so I had much more access. And so I started to concentrate on sickle cells as opposed to these model systems. So when I was at Meharry [Medical College], I spent a lot of my time just studying this calcium loaded normal cell that I was using as a model of the sickle cell. So now I could get my hands on sickle blood, and so my graduate students and I really concentrated our efforts on looking for changes in the membranes of sickle cells, and so--and I'll show you a picture before you leave of my laboratory, but at its peak, I had four graduate students, four or five undergraduate students and maybe one or two high school students. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So we found a number of alterations in sickle membranes, primarily using the technique of sds [sodium dodecyl sulfate] gel electrophoresis. We could never show, though that these changes actually related to the tendency of these cells to become entrapped in capillaries. Speaker 2: Can you kind of explain that procedure, the one you just described? Speaker 1: Yeah, so the procedure involves just solublizing the proteins in the membranes. So normally, the proteins in membranes are not soluble in water. They're soluble in this oily membrane. And so sds is a detergent, and so like detergents solublizing oils, they actually, they solublize membranes. And so when this technique was developed, it allowed us then to separate the different proteins in the membrane on the basis of their size actually. And so this is called SDS Gell Electrophoresis. So we can solubilize the membrane proteins and then we can separate them and we can compare them. So I could compare a sickle cell membrane proteins with normal membrane proteins, and we saw differences. And, again, the only problem is that we could not establish whether any of these differences related to the tendency of these cells to be less deformable or more sticky. And that sort of brought that work to an end. Story_ID: 30633 Speaker 1: Now, my work since then, if I can proceed, so again, it's an effort to try to figure out what's going on. So sickle cells have less water in them than normal cells. And we have a fairly, we have some idea why that happens. But I did a sabbatical back in, I guess, 1992 or-- Speaker 2: Ninety one [1991] it says here. Speaker 1: Ninety one [1991], okay-- Speaker 2: With Dr. Goldstein? Speaker 1: Yeah, Leon Goldstein. And so the idea was to understand. And so he had been working on fish red blood cells, skate red blood cells for a number of years--he's a leader in this field, and looking at how they do what's call osmoregulate. So these skates [fish] can live in a lot of different kinds of water with regard to salt concentration, okay. So the salt concentration can vary tremendously and they adjust. And so they're always regulating the amount of water in their cells, and I figured that if I could understand how they regulated the water, then it might tell me something about human cells, regulated water. So we did, and so we published that paper back in 1991 and '92 [1992]-- Speaker 2: And the regulation takes place on the membrane level? Speaker 1: At the membrane, right, that's right. And so I was, again, using this as a kind of model for what might be happening in sickle cell. And so at some point I started doing some work with Robert Gunn. And so we actually made some presentations of that work, but nothing published. And so it was following up, trying to understand how potassium is transported across these membranes because it's potassium transport now out of the cell that leads the cell to lose water. Okay, so sickle cells tend to be dehydrated, and that's one of the reasons that they're less deformable, okay. If we could figure out how to put the water back in, that would help these cells get through capillaries, okay. They are dehydrated because they lose potassium. And so Bob Gunn who was one of the world's leaders in the study of membrane transporters, how ions are transported across the membrane, he opened his lab to me, and I worked with him for two or three years before he, unfortunately, died. And we were trying to understand how potassium, why sickle cells transport potassium at a greater rate out of the cell because that's why they lose water. And we just, again, we made a couple of presentations at a sickle cell national meeting, at a couple of other meetings, but-- Speaker 2: What year was this? This was after '93 [1993], I guess, after you worked with Dr. Goldstein? Speaker 1: No, that's, yeah, that's after. Yeah, that's in the 2000s, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. I wanna go back and just, and correct me if I'm wrong, but they--I know we have, our note here is that your work with Dr. Goldstein is, you feel that this was your greatest scientific contribution? Speaker 1: I think so. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, because what we showed at the time was that we characterized a channel in the membrane. And we just, we gave it, we characterized it far better than it had been characterized before. I think, I just have to go back and look at that paper. So Leon [Goldstein] knew that there was some protein that was involved in this. We described it for the first time as a channel. And I actually did some experiments to give me some idea what size the channel was and so on. So I think probably. Story_ID: 30634 Speaker 1: Okay, now this, this knowledge, you know, can be--what I'm figuring out, I guess with a lot of these interviews is that when you come up with some new knowledge, it can be applied to a number of different things. And we can't imagine necessarily what it might be. Speaker 2: That's true, and that's why you cannot, it's hard for you to decide what the priorities are at the front. That's why America has done far better than Russia and China because in Russia, for a long time, certain things were funded. What you wanna do is fund things broadly and, because it's hard to predict what's going to happen, okay. And you just can't, you can't force breakthroughs. It doesn't work that way. And so our system has been much more open. But, again, what you're always doing is looking so once you become interested in the problem of sickle cell, all of my work has been aimed at trying to help me understand some aspects of sickle cells, okay, why they become trapped in capillaries, and it was my view that it has to do with the membrane, okay. So it's led me to become interested in water transport across membranes, potassium transport across membranes, the structure of membranes. Speaker 1: Okay, and I would think, now, I guess, I would think as we become more computerized and there's more data bases available that scientific research can be sorted in more exciting ways than ever before. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So I think there are people who are actually sorting research. And so there are a number of benefits of being able to communicate much more rapidly. So science now is far more collaborative. And so that means that breakthroughs will happen faster. You know, somebody does something in China, it's immediately online. You know, we're publishing online now, so there's not the long delay, and there's almost open source. So you can put information that you feel confident about online that's not necessarily been peer reviewed. Now, there're dangers to this, of course, right. If it's not peer reviewed, that means you could be wrong. But there's much more open access to information. And so that's got to be helpful. Speaker 1: There's the public perception that a scientist works in a lab on one big project, and then has to have a eureka moment where he gets excited, does that hurt the funding for real science, do you think? Speaker 2: I don't know. I think it's a misperception. I don't, I just, I haven't thought it through to know that it really impacts funding. So-- Speaker 1: Well, you hear these senators make, you know, they'll hold some research up to ridicule based on a specific thing that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I think that some research can be held up to ridicule. But I think the peer review process is what makes it stand the test of, stand the acid test. So rarely is a grant funded, now, one of the reasons for getting rid of earmarks and pork barrel is because that is not peer review. I mean the scientific process of peer review, or the peer review process is one that really tends to select against things that really are not of value. So when you get a grant, it's been reviewed by a number of people who are experts in the area. And so this is not something that's due to the fact that you--we hope, not just due to the fact that you know someone, okay. It's not some wild idea. So the public's money is being well spent. And so I think to the extent that they know about the review process, I think that they would be happier with the expenditures that we make for science. Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me go back and ask you about--well, now have we tracked the membrane research down all the way to the conclusion of, I mean to the end of--are you still working on it though? Speaker 2: No, so I'm through. Speaker 1: So you actually stopped. When did you stop working on it? Speaker 2: When Bob Gunn died, and Bob died, I guess about five years ago, something like that. So, again, I had closed my lab at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. You begin to realize that you can't do it, even though I had a lab here, I was not using it. And so we've given it to one of the new investigators we've hired. And so he opened, and so I would go to Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] two or three days out of the week, and he and I would--so he [Bob Gunn] had a big lab, and his assistant was helping us. And then he developed this medical problem and died of T-cell lymphoma. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I have not done anything for the last five years, although I continue to keep up. I'm a cell biologist, and so I'm always reading journals. And I tend to keep up with what's going on in the field of sickle cell research. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 30635 Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us about, I wanna go back and ask you about Project Kaleidoscope. Now, what was that and-- Speaker 2: So Project Kaleidoscope and Howard Hughes, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute [Chevy Chase, Maryland] probably over the course of the last fifteen, twenty years have contributed more to the reform of undergraduate science education than any other organizations. Project Kaleidoscope was started in 1990 by Jeanne Narum. And so she just stepped down. And so the kick-off was at a meeting at the National Academy, National Academy of Science. And so I was invited to that meeting to talk about what we were doing at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] with regard to promoting research among undergraduates. And so that's been one of the things that I've been doing since I've been here. You know, I thought that undergraduates should have the opportunity to do research. And so nowadays many of our students actually do research regardless of what their career goals are. So Kaleidoscope, again, is an organization that is involved in reform of undergraduate science education. And Jeanne has gone and, what she does is to put on these workshops. And so she will get people like me. She will get college presidents. And she doesn't pay any of us. But we go, I've been to colleges and universities across the country just talking about things, what we do to support research at Morehouse, how we connect the goals of the biology department to the strategic goals of the college. So what's she's trying to do is to get institutions to transform themselves. And so she brings young faculty members to workshops, and she has people of my age talking to them about how to be agents of change. And so it's really a wonderful organization. Now, this organization, by the way, has just become a part of the American Association of Colleges and Universities. And that's a wonderful connection. So the AAC&U is the major organization in this country that promotes liberal learning, liberal education. Speaker 1: Okay, and her name is Jeanne-- Speaker 2: Narum, N-A-R-U-M. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so we've hosted a couple of her workshops at Morehouse. And, again, I've been a workshop speaker on a number of occasions. Story_ID: 30636 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '89 [1989], this building [Nabrit-Mapp-McBay Hall, Morehouse College] was dedicated. Can you tell us about that? Speaker 2: So I can tell you that the chair of chemistry, and I was chair of biology at the time, we worked with the architects rather closely to design the building. And so we had Mapp, Nabrit and McBay. I have pictures of the occasions. We had the dedication right out on the, in the front area there. And so it was dedicated for these, it was named for these three giants. Speaker 1: Okay, is this James Nabrit? Speaker 2: No, this is Sam Nabrit. Speaker 1: So, this is-- Speaker 2: Family. So that's a wonderful family story. So all seven of those Nabrits actually were, did big things. So it was seven members of the family, Jim Nabrit who was president at Howard, Sam Naybred--Sam Naybred was the first Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate to get a Ph.D. Now, Jim Naybred was a Morehouse graduate as well. Speaker 1: Sam Nabrit was the first-- Speaker 2: First to get a PhD. And so he was-- Speaker 1: Now, what did he get his-- Speaker 2: I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was chosen by John Hope. John Hope was a, I think the first black president of Morehouse. He looked white. He had received his Ph--he had done his undergraduate work at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]. He picked Sam Nabrit to go to Brown to get a Ph.D. Sam Nabrit is the first black person to get a Ph.D. from Brown. And Sam started a lineage, there's a connection between Morehouse and Brown. So Roy Hunter was part, one of Sam Nabrit's students. And I was one of Roy Hunter's students. And I've sent one of my students, Frank DeSilva to Brown who got a Ph.D. a few years ago [2001]. So there is this connection. And so Sam Nabrit's picture hangs in a hall at Brown, and for that unveiling, Walter Massey and Fred Mapp went to Brown for the occasion. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, yeah, I didn't know that. I'm glad you-- Speaker 2: So this was a building that was built to house the biology and chemistry departments. Now, at the time, I think we were renovating Merrill Hall which is where chemistry has always been and Hope Hall, which is where biology has always been. Now, those buildings are now back on line. And so Hope Hall continues to be occupied by biology and Merrill is now occupied by chemistry, but what I did when I became dean was to open this building [Nabrit-Mapp-McBay Hall, Morehouse college] up to psychology. And so the second floor is occupied almost entirely by people from psychology who needed the space; good investigators by the way, good faculty. Story_ID: 30637 Speaker 1: Okay, now in '94 [1994], you chaired the American Society for Cell Biology Minority Affairs Committee. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Well, tell us about black participation, sort of the history of black participation in that society and your committee? Speaker 2: So, some of my good friends, Winston Anderson at Howard [University, Washington D.C.], Jim Wyche, who is now at Howard, but Jim spent a fair amount of his career at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]. So they were some of the early pioneers in the American Society for Cell Biology. But there were also some leaders among the white scientists who realized very early on that the minority presence was really too small. And so, and George Langford is another name to be considered, but they decided to create a Minorities Affairs Committee to bring minorities in and to be sure that minorities in the organization prospered. And so this committee has really been of great importance to the society. So among the people who chaired the committee was George Langford, Jim Wyche and others, and I followed Jim Wyche. And so one of the things that we did, well, actually, Jim did this before us, but we got a large grant, a mark grant from NIH [National Institutes of Health] to support the activities of the Minorities Affairs Committee. And so Jim's grant was maybe a million or two, and we actually increased maybe to three or four million. They have continued that grant. It maybe be seven or eight million dollars. And so that gave us a certain amount of leverage in the organization. So we bring in far more money to the American Society for Cell Biology than any other entity. And so we began to actually play, try to play power politics and so on that led to some problems. But again, I think rather the MAC [Minorities Affairs Committee], as it's called, and nowadays, there's a MAC in almost every professional organization of scientists. And so one of the things that I tried to do when I was chair of the MAC was to create another organization that we call the Super MAC where we brought the chairs of the MACs from different professional societies together. And so we've met a couple of times in Washington [D.C.], just to see if we could coordinate and actually have a greater impact. So there's an American Society for Microbiology that has a large number of minority members and a large MAC. And so we met with them and other MACs and so for a few years, we were going down that path. Again, these things are, they're hard to sustain. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, confederations and groups are hard to sustain. Speaker 2: Right, but let me just mention one of the things that the MAC does. So, Woods Hole [Marine Biological Laboratory] continues, Woods Hole doesn't, the Marine Biology Lab at Woods Hole doesn't have the same standing as it used to. That, once upon a time was the place to go. And to get in those courses, I not only took the embryology course, but when I was a faculty member at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], I applied and was accepted to the physiology course. Now, it is physiology now that I think is the premier course. So it shifted from embryology. But to get into those courses is really a sign that you have arrived almost. And so one of the things that cell biology, in particular, the Minority Affairs Committee did with Woods Hole was to get them to accept more minorities into those courses if, in fact, we would provide the financial support. And so part of that grant went towards supporting minority students in physiology, embryology, neurobiology, the courses at Woods Hole. And so because of that grant, the representation of minorities at Woods Hole in courses has gone up over the years. And that's something that we were looking at. We were counting numbers every year and paying close attention to it. The same thing is true for Friday Harbor [at the University of Washington]. Friday Harbor is a Marine bi--and so, we strategized this. So we had Woods Hole on the East Coast, Friday Harbor is on the West Coast. Some minority students and now, the Minorities Affairs Committee deals with Latinos as well as Native Americans. Some minorities on the West Coast don't want to come all the way over here. And so we had a deal with Friday Harbor to accept students, and we would actually pay for it. And so that's the kind of difference that the MAC [Minority Affairs Committee] makes. We have a travel award so that students from HBCU's [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] who might not be able to afford to come to the meeting, if they apply for a travel award, we support their efforts. Story_ID: 30638 Speaker 1: Okay. So in '95 [1995], Walter Massey becomes the ninth president of Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. He's a physicist. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did his presidency facilitate science at Morehouse? Speaker 2: Not as much as we thought it would, although Walter [Massey] was very supportive of a number of things that we did. So one of the important things that Walter did was to create three divisions at the college. So we have Business and Economics, Social Sciences and Humanities, and Science and Math. That was his idea, and so we've split the college now into about three equal parts. With about a thousand students--at the time, he was here, we had about three thousand students. And so his idea was to reduce the scale of the college more like it looked, and to make it more like it looked when he was a student here, so when I was a student, there were only eight hundred students at Morehouse. So he was trying to promote faculty-faculty interaction, faculty-student interactions, etc. And that actually had a transformative effect. So when we created, when we brought the three--six departments together that constitute the Division of Science and Math, it's been a, there was an explosion of activity. And so we meet, as a faculty, every month. People are talking across disciplines. And at some point, students finishing the division will have a more interdisciplinary education, which is where we wanna go. We're developing interdisciplinary curricula, interdisciplinary research and so I think while, at the time, it didn't seem like such a momentous deal, it has had an enormous impact. We began the Division of Science and Math with a grant that we got from the Packard Foundation. Walter was on the board of the Packard Foundation. So that's very helpful. So Walter is connected to the titans of American industry. So he brought the heads of GE [General Electric, Fairfield, Connecticut], Motorola [Inc., Schaumburg, Illinois]. Walter is more of a scholar than he is a business person. So he's not known for twisting arms. And so they didn't leave perhaps as much money as they might, but they came to know about us. And so the current president [Robert M. Franklin] I think is more of an arm twister, and I think, so we're gonna reap the benefits of what Walter has established. But Walter had to deal--you know, people have said about Walter that he's a guy who thinks very broadly. He's now the president of the Art Institute of Chicago, right, so (laughter). So he's had a very broad prospective, and so I think that he was a wonderful president at Morehouse. I don't know that he could afford, because we had a number of problems that he had to deal with. I don't know that he could afford to just tackle the sciences. So I think what he did was to seed something. And the fruits of that will be manifested in the years ahead. Story_ID: 30639 Speaker 1: Okay, now, everything is presented on a timeline, I apologize, but I have a note in here about Hydroxyurea. Speaker 2: Yeah. And so that is, that's being used to treat some patients. Now, again, any treatment for sickle cell anemia is a treatment that a person starts and takes for the, you have to take it for the lifetime. That's not a cure. And so there still is a concern. So we don't just give this easily to patients. There's still a concern about the long-term effects of taking Hydroxyurea. If a person takes Hydroxyurea for twenty-five years, for forty years, what are the consequences? What are the side effects? So we're still looking for a better drug. And the other point is that Hydroxyurea only reduces the frequency of crisis by 50 percent. And some people actually are resistant to it. Some people are not, some people don't benefit from Hydroxyurea. And we're trying to figure out why that's the case. So we say that Hydroxyurea is not the magic bullet. Now, it's the first drug to be approved by the FDA [Food and Drug Administration] for sickle cell anemia, but it's by no means an ideal treatment. And there really is this continuing concern about its toxicity. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna ask about this anyway, but it probably is not of any views, but I remember reading an article years ago about a doctor in Nigeria that supposedly had a cure. There was a plant and plant tree. Did you hear about that? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, in fact, I wanted to, there was a doctor, who I heard speak at the first national sickle cell meeting which I think was back in 1972. His name was Kanote Ahoolu (ph.). And so he had a patient load in Ghana at any one point in time in his hospital of two hundred patients. I wanted to actually go and spend some time actually studying his patients. So a number of things have been reported from Ghana and perhaps Nigeria of roots and so on. And so, you know, one of the points that I make is that Africans have been dealing with sickle cell anemia for centuries, and so there're probably any number of herbal remedies and so on that might be effective. What we do in the West is we purify the active ingredient. And so that's not been done. So there is nothing that I know of that's come out of Africa, a purified ingredient that has promise as a treatment for sickle cell anemia. Speaker 1: Now, I probably should have asked this earlier too, but I remember now--my mind is going back into the old Tony Brown show some years ago, but is it true that Africans don't have as many crises because of malaria? Speaker 2: No, that's not true. Speaker 1: Malaria has nothing to do with--okay, cause we were told that the reason why the trait is so prevalent in Africa is because people are-- Speaker 2: Protected against Malaria, okay. Speaker 1: Against Malaria, yeah. Speaker 2: But sickle cell anemics really are so sick that they're dead by the age of five. Speaker 1: Of sickle cell? Speaker 2: Yeah, so now it's true that if you're a carrier in Africa, that's why this gene has persisted at such a high frequency in Africa. If you're a carrier--it doesn't mean that you don't, you're not killed, you have a greater protection than if you're just a so-called normal person, okay. And so that's why this gene has been maintained in the population. You see, if, in fact, you die as a kid before the age of five, you don't have kids. And so you don't pass the gene onto the next generation. And so if that keeps happening over and over, that gene will be eliminated from a population, right? And so one of the questions, well, why didn't that happen? It's because carriers now, people who are AS [sickle cell trait carrier], have some protection, and as long as they have that protection, so they're not killed as frequently by malaria. You're gonna keep that gene in the population. As long as an AS person can conceive a kid with another AS person, you're gonna produce sickle cell anemic with the same probability, a 25 percent probability. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, we're gonna-- Speaker 2: Okay, I have to rush off. Speaker 1: That's right. Thank you so much. Speaker 2: Thank you. You asked the right questions. Story_ID: 30640 Speaker 1: All right, okay. Now, your parents [John Kermit Haynes, Sr. and Grace Ross Haynes] passed away in '96 [1996] and '97 [1997]? Speaker 2: Yes, right. Speaker 1: Okay. I have a quick question here that came from the office. What lessons did they teach you that impacted your perspectives on life? Speaker 2: So I think that one was that education was terribly important. And so when I finally began to take myself seriously, I think I listened to them more. And so education was something that they talked quite a bit about. And I think, you know, being responsible, taking your responsibilities seriously. They were sort of leading lights in the community. And so ideas about leadership, I think I learned something about leadership, in particular, from my father [John Kermit Haynes, Sr.] and how much was expected of those who were given fruits. So I would say those things primarily. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I think, I guess I might mention that, you know, they had a strong sense of family. I have not been as family oriented, but I appreciated the value of family just based on looking at the way they interacted with their families. Story_ID: 30641 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '99 [1999], you were named the David Packard Professor and Dean of the Division of Science and Mathematics at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Now, this is in-- Speaker 2: Not quite. I was named the David Packard Professor and Chair of the Department of Biology. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, and later I became the dean of science and math. Speaker 1: Okay, so what's--okay-- Speaker 2: And so that actually happened a long time before I became--so I became dean in 1999. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I had been David Packard chair and chair of biology for sixteen years before that. Speaker 1: Okay, so this is-- Speaker 2: So shortly after I was promoted to a full professor, I became the chair of the Department of Biology and also the David Packard chair holder. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, did you, what was your relationship to Roland Scott? Did you ever really-- Speaker 2: So, I met him, and so, he again was--you know, at historically black colleges, we do a lot of things. And so he was head of the Sickle Cell Center at Howard [University, Washington D.C.], and at the time that I visited, he was writing a speech for the president. And so he didn't have a lot of time, the president of college, didn't have a lot of time for me. And so his second in command spent most of the day with me. And that's, that was the one interaction that I had with Roland Scott. I saw him at a distance at sickle cell meetings thereafter, but that was it. Speaker 1: Okay, in terms of, so meetings, these are meetings of the Sickle Cell Foundation or? Speaker 2: No, this was actually in Washington [D.C.]. So this is before I had moved to Atlanta [Georgia], and this is-- Speaker 1: Oh, I know about that meeting when you were trying it but I mean-- Speaker 2: Okay, oh, I see. Speaker 1: --later on. Speaker 2: So, no, these were national sickle cell meetings. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So there is a sickle cell, there is a national sickle cell organization which is independent of the researchers who come together periodically who are supported by NIH [National Institutes of Health]. And so I went to several of the meetings that were supported by NIH. In fact, the first meeting that I went to, the first national meeting that NIH called was a meeting in New York. And that was primarily of people who were working on the disease, researchers. And so the sickle cell, the National Sickle Cell Association may have actually been founded some time later [phone ring]. Okay, phone, let me turn this phone off. Story_ID: 30642 Speaker 1: Okay, and there are so many, well, AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] is a big issue in the black community now, and there are other health issues, you know, that at the time, in the early '70s [1970s] sickle cell anemia really took on like a singular importance because it was seen as something that primarily affected black people. Has the lack of publicity around sickle cell anemia hurt the cause? Speaker 2: Yes. And so nowadays, we have newborn screening laws in most states. So most African Americans know at birth whether they're carriers or whether they have sickle cell anemia. When I ask students in my class at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] what their hemoglobin phenotype is, they don't know. And so it's important for us to know whether we are carriers or not. And so, you know, carriers produce most of the sickle cell anemics in this country. And so sickle cell simply does not get the same attention now that it once did. And it may be that it's overshadowed by other kinds of maladies like HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], which probably do far more damage. Speaker 1: Now, is sickle cell like screened before people are married now? I mean are they doing a screening for that? Speaker 2: So that's, yeah, and so one of the initial, one of the goals of the Sickle Cell Control Act [1972] was to identify carriers in the population so that they could be counseled. And so what you would tell them is that if they actually conceived a child with another carrier, that there was a one out of four probability that the kid would have sickle cell anemia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so the point that I'm making is that many of the young people who've already been screened at birth don't know what their hemoglobin phenotype is. And they could very well be carriers and not know it, even though we've already determined. Story_ID: 30643 Speaker 1: Okay, now in the '90s [1990s] and early part of the 2000s, you're published quite a bit. There's a textbook chapter and some other things. But it seems that you become more involved in administration than in research. Is there a reason for that? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean what you begin to realize is that you can't do but so many things. And so it became really a major problem to do all of the things that I was trying to do at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And so at one time I was the director of the Office of Health Professions, and that was a major task at the college because the major goal was to send black students to medical school. At the same time that I was director of the Office of Health Professions, I was chair of the Department of Biology. And I was trying to run a research lab, and I was still teaching. And so at some point, you make a decision that you can't do all of these things. And so I left the Office of Health Professions. I, at some point, closed my laboratory, and I began to focus on being chair of the Department of Biology and teaching. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's still more than a full-time job. Speaker 1: Yeah, yes, I agree with you, that is, and that's-- Speaker 2: So, you know, when you do research, research is clearly a full-time job. It's more than a full-time job. You are actually doing a disservice to the institution if you try to do research without a full-time commitment to it. So I've always prided myself on being one who organized his activities. And so I had graduate students in my laboratory supervising undergraduate students, undergraduate students supervising high school students. But still you have to, you have to stay on top of what's going on. And so it got to the point where I, when I was director of the Office of Health Professions, and that was consuming a huge amount of my time. And so I would stick my head into my laboratory and that was, my graduate, that was the extent to which my graduate students would see me unless they came to the Office of Health Professions. And so you begin to realize that you're doing a disservice by continuing to do research if you don't do it full time. Speaker 1: And talking to Dr. [John] Hall, he was, a lot of his interview was spent discussing some of the research opportunities that came about by the collaboration of Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] and other institutions to free up research time. But that's still a difficult thing to do in small institutions. Speaker 2: Um-hum, I think if you're talented and young, that is, when you're at the top of your game, I think these institutions are interested in collaborations. So when I first arrived at Morehouse, John Hall had really a very successful, atmospheric chemistry laboratory and had an appointment at Georgia Tech. I mean he was a rising star. I mean the problem that we have at historically black colleges is that if you're successful at bringing in grant money, they make the assumption that you'd make a good administrator. And they make it, make you an offer that's hard to turn down. And so if you are interested, those of us at historically black colleges I think are interested in institutional transformation. I mean we're interested in moving these institutions ahead and so it's awfully tempting to turn down an offer to be a chair of a department or a dean for that matter. And so, but you understand that when you take on those responsibilities, that that's, again, another full-time job. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so you have to make a choice at some point. Now, I, again, I've managed to juggle a number of hats at Morehouse. I'm always doing a number of things. And that's made my life, I think, very interesting. But at the same time, it sort of, it wore me out. I, you know, I exist really pretty tired most of the time. Story_ID: 30644 Speaker 1: Now, do you, is there interest in your membrane research that, you know, still, in terms of people here on the campus working on it? Speaker 2: No, so I was the only one working on it. And so biology is so diverse that people are working on a million and one different problems. There are other people at other institutions who are still working on sickle cell membranes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But now the focus has turned to the genetic level, I think. And so we're right at the point of doing gene therapy. And so that's, you know, if you can do it at that level, that's where you should attack the problem. Speaker 1: Okay, so trying to turn off the switches on the enzymes-- Speaker 2: Yeah, trying to, yeah, so, if we can turn on fetal hemoglobin, that's one of the things that people are trying to do. So normally, we make fetal hemoglobin during the fetal period of development. And when, at about birth, we turn it off. It turns out that fetal hemoglobin prevents the aggregation of sickle hemoglobin. And so if we can increase the fetal hemoglobin in an adult to the extent that it's 30 percent of the hemoglobin in the adult red cell, the cells don't sickle. So that's one of the things that they're trying to do. The other is just replacing the gene, the sickle gene. So that's what we call gene therapy. Story_ID: 30645 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, it says here in 2004, you joined the World Learning School for International Training? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now, what is this and-- Speaker 2: So, it's one of the leading study abroad organizations in the country. And so Walter Massey at the time was on the board of the Packard Foundation. I mentioned that earlier. And the Packard Foundation was interested in more students, more minority students studying abroad. And so they may have been responding to a grant from the, from World Learning [School for International Training]. And so Walter brokered a relationship between World Learning and a number of historically black colleges. And so I was the point person at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. One of the things that was attractive to me about their programs is that, first of all, they sent students to the developing world and the students had to do research. And so, since I had put so much emphasis on students having research experiences at Morehouse, I actually, I was enchanted, attracted to this. And so I worked very closely with these folk, and I had all of the people around me working with them for five or six years. And we had a very productive relationship. And so Jim Kramer, who was the president at the time, asked me to join the board. And I served on the board until I resigned, I guess a year or two ago. Now, my board membership was not nearly as productive as what we did with the staff before I became a board member. Story_ID: 30646 Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 2005, it says here that you published an article entitled 'FIRST, a Model for Developing New Science Faculty'. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So what are your ideas about developing new science faculty? Speaker 2: So this described the first program that we are involved with at Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia]. And so, it's a post-doctoral program that unlike other post-doctoral programs, emphasizes teaching as well. And so, all other post-doctoral programs just simply focus on research. And so, this is a combined research, teaching post-doctoral program. And so, the post-docs have a research mentor at Emory, and they have a teaching mentor at one of the Atlanta University Center colleges. And so it's an effort to provide faculty members who can hit the ground running, not only in research, but teaching as well. So in general, we don't prepare people to teach. I mean there's no preparation during Ph.D. training or post-doctoral training to teach. And so this was a new idea of a person at NIH [National Institutes of Health]. Let's prepare people, the faculty for the next generation, the next generation of faculty, let's prepare them to both do research and teach. And so [Robert] "Bob" Gunn is the guy who came to me with this idea. So I told you that I worked in Bob Gunn's lab at a certain point, but he actually came to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And he and I sat down in the conference room with the Department of Biology and actually talked about putting this grant together. And it was such a good idea that I have been involved with it since then. And so that was a paper that we all published in 2006 or so which was one of our first reports to the community at large about the success of the program. And one of the things that we pointed out is that these post-docs published at the same rate as traditional post-docs. And that to me, was astonishing because they take on teaching assignments. And those teaching assignments apparently did not get in their way of publishing. And so that made it really attractive, that you could actually do research and teach and it didn't cut down on your research productivity. See, a post-doc is about research productivity. This is a new model of a post-doc, and so it's providing additional exposure to the post-docs, but it actually doesn't apparently detract from their research productivity. And that to me was astonishing. Speaker 1: So, I think most people would probably assume that a college professor teaching science who has had training, teaching training on some level? Speaker 2: They haven't, they have no training. So they don't get, you know, like K through 12 teachers, they're not, they don't major in education. So they have no formal training. Now, some graduate programs are beginning to give some opportunities. Emory has a number of opportunities for both pre-docs and post-docs. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. I saw it getting ready to go and I-- Speaker 2: I'm moving around too much. Speaker 1: (REATTCHING MIC): Speaker 2: You're doing what I would do (unclear), yeah, it's hard to sit still, really. Speaker 1: Excuse me. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So, yeah, so we're all assuming wrong that there's really no--so this is a good thing, I would think. Speaker 1: It's an excellent program. So it's one--I wanna point out, it's one out of about twenty such programs around the country. And this is the idea of Cliff Poudry (ph.) who is, heads minority programs in NIGMS [National Institute of General Medical Sciences], at NIH. Story_ID: 30647 Speaker 1: Okay, so what are some of your hopes for Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] in the future? Speaker 2: So, we're focused on several things. And so what I see the division doing is promoting faculty and students. So those are the two things that we're trying to do. I'm trying to develop a certain capacity to do research at Morehouse. So I want all faculty members doing research. And so we're trying to provide them with opportunities, assistance in writing grants and so on. At the same time, we're developing the infrastructure at the college to better support research. So it's one thing to get a research grant. It's another thing to carry out the research successfully if the institution is not adequately supportive. And so it's important that we have a supportive infrastructure. So I want more faculty members doing research and in order to do research, you have to get research grants. And so we've got to improve our grant-writing abilities, but at the same time, we wanna improve the support services for research. Now, with regard to students, what I'm trying to do is to expand opportunities for students to do research. I happen to think that research is one of the most powerful ways of educating undergraduate students. And so to the extent that we can get students involved in research labs, we will be more successful in educating them. And this is independent of what they wanna do in their career. The second thing that I'm very interested in doing before I retire is moving us more towards an interdisciplinary education across the sciences. I want our students having a broader education in the sciences beyond just their major. And so students now will major in physics or chemistry, but it's my opinion, and I think that we're hearing this from graduate schools and industry as well, that they're not actually coming out with the kind of broad education that you need to really solve real problems. So the real problems that we're trying to solve like in energy and so on are not confined by a discipline. They are interdisciplinary. They involve a number of disciplines. So nature is not compartmentalized into biology, chemistry and physics. We've organized it just to learn it. We've organized departments and disciplines to learn it, but more and more we're beginning to understand the overlap between disciplines. I want students leaving Morehouse with a better understanding of the overlap between disciplines and prepared to do research in those boundary areas because that's where the important problems are nowadays. So, those are some of my concerns. One of these days I'd like to see us build a new science building at Morehouse. And so this building would actually be a vehicle to actually achieve some of these interdisciplinary goals and also to provide some of the departments at Morehouse which don't have adequate facilities, with a first-rate facility. Story_ID: 30648 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you've had a successful career, and you've done a lot of things that have been important and made an impact on the students and the university and on research, but when you look back at everything you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently now if you could? Speaker 2: I think, you know, I was always interested in being really a scientist of some renown. And so it's conceivable that I could have pursued my scientific career in a way that could have led to greater success. So one of the reasons that I think I began to think about diversifying my career is that I don't think that I achieved the kind of success early on that I thought I might have. So I think I could have been really even happier if I had achieved the status in this country of a person who contributed significantly to science. So my contributions are fairly broad, and so many of them have to do with the large number--well, one of them certainly has to do with the large number of students I've mentored at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And so I take that very seriously. But that's the one thing that I probably regret, that I didn't achieve greater success as a scientist, but again, it's not something that I lose any sleep over because I think when you come to work at a place like Morehouse, you realize the limitations in the system to actually support doing research as you would do it at a "Research One" institution. And so it didn't take me long, after I arrived at Morehouse to know that undergraduate students really mattered more than my own research and that simply having undergraduate students work in my research lab was simply--was not a way of actually addressing the needs of undergraduate students. And so my teaching then became, in fact, more important. So we were still, in those days, primarily a teaching institution. And teaching is still valuable. I mean the form of it has changed. So instead of my giving lectures all the time as I used to, it's more interactive. But still, I do think the interaction that you have with students and, you know, the way we do it in most institutions is in the classroom, is very important at the undergraduate level. And so I had to make some decisions. And so I realized early on that I couldn't continue to give the kind of attention that you must give to research to be the kind of success that I had hoped to be. Story_ID: 30649 Speaker 1: Well, you seem to have been someone who took the advice of mentors and were able to become successful. Are those, have you been able to, like distill, I guess the advice your mentors gave you in a way that you could, that you--it forms what you do with students today? Speaker 2: Yeah, I, well, I think that I've been impacted by a number of people. I was impacted by my father [John Ker] in a powerful way. I was impacted by Benjamin Mays [President of Morehouse College, 1940-1967]. I've mentioned to you Roy Hunter. I've been impacted by Don Kimmel. I think, and there are some things that sort of stand out. All of those folk were extremely generous. They were interested in preparing the next generation. They gave of themselves, and so I get a great deal of pleasure in actually helping younger people. And so we, all of them set high standards, and so I don't compromise on my standards. And so we talk about wearing, putting a crown over your head that you grow tall enough to wear. And so I hired most of the people in the Department of Biology [Morehouse College], most of the older people in the Department of Biology. And what I was trying to do was to hire people who had really excellent expertise but who were really very serious about themselves and the way they taught. And so biology, I think is an extremely strong department at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And I feel very good about that. And so when you ask, what have I learned? I've learned a number of things from my mentors, one of which is to have high standards and to insist that the students and the colleagues who work with you have high standards. At the same time, what I've appreciated is that everyone needs support. Everyone needs supports. And students need probably more support than faculty members. And so I do everything that I can to support younger people. And so I think that is my reputation as dean. So people come to me and in a sense, it's almost like the big tent philosophy of my father. You know, people from all over Louisiana would pick up the telephone and call him. They would ask for money. They would ask for his assistance, and he was, he would give his last penny. And so my mother [Grace Ross Haynes] used to complain about the fact that he would give money away when we might not have it, and that's just the way he was. And so I see some of that. I have some of that in me, so I'm very generous in supporting, especially young faculty members. And so if you were to interview them, I'm sure they would tell you that they've appreciated this or they come to me looking for support, students come to me looking for support. And so I think it's, I take that responsibility fairly seriously. Story_ID: 30650 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what today when you look back over everything you've done, I think you've addressed it on some level, what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: So, I think what I've done to improve education in the sciences--let me put this way, education first in biology at Morehouse [College, Atlanta Georgia]. So I think I had an im--a significant impact on the operation of the Department of Biology. And since I've been dean now, since 1999, I've been able to actually spread some of that to the other departments. And so one of the things that we've done that's made us successful is that we've raised large amounts of money. And so grant writing has been critical. And so we've been able to create kind of an oasis. So most historically black colleges don't have a lot of resources. And in that regard, even though Morehouse is one of the richest, there're real limits here in terms of resources. And so we've been able to exist at a higher level than most other departments at Morehouse because we have written grants. We're writing grants on a regular basis. And so I gave a presentation to the faculty last year and indicated that we had about twenty million dollars in grants in force on that particular day. So we ranked among liberal arts colleges, we rank number five [5]. This is among all of the liberal arts colleges at Morehouse with regard to sponsored program dollars coming into the college and virtually all of that is coming into the Division of Science and Math, okay. So we are bringing in a huge amount of money to do programs that benefit students, that benefit faculty. So as I indicated, we have one of the leaders in the nation in the area of active learning who will be with us tomorrow to do a workshop. And this workshop is not just for science faculty. So faculty members from across the college have signed up for it. And so we, through these workshops are beginning to transform the way we teach at Morehouse. All of this is, these things are supported by grants. None of this money comes from the college. The college cannot afford to give us this kind of money. We are constantly writing grants. We're getting three million dollar grants, four million grants. We get a significant number of grants from the National Science Foundation. We get money from NIH [National Institutes of Health]. We get money from DOD [U.S. Department of Defense], DOE [U.S. Department of Energy], Howard Hughes Medical Institute [Chevy Chase, Maryland]. We're constantly writing grants, and that really has been critical to our success. So our budgets, we haven't had to just exist on the budgets that we get from the college because they're not enough. We've been able to increase the budgets of all of the departments in the division based on the external funding that we've brought in. And it's made a difference. It's made a difference. Speaker 1: Okay, we have to pause here a second. Story_ID: 30651 Speaker 1: Now, those watching this interview might think that, gee, Dr. Haynes looks a lot like Lerone Bennett, who--another Morehouse man, a famous Morehouse man and editor of 'Ebony Magazine'. You were talking (laughter)-- Speaker 2: I'm frequently mistaken for him, and so if I, when I go through the Chicago [Illinois] airport, people will approach me and call me Lerone. And usually around commencement time, people will come up to me and say, you know, will sort of embrace and thank me for all of the great work that I've done for the community. And they're talking about Lerone Bennett. Sometimes I don't tell them that I'm not Lerone (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, you couldn't have a better person to look like. Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely. So I respect the work that Lerone Bennett did. And I always enjoyed listening to him talk, a very dynamic speaker. Speaker 1: Now, how did your parents [John Kermit Haynes, Sr. and Grace Ross Haynes] feel about your accomplishments? Did-- Speaker 2: I think they were very pleased. So, they could have been upset when I chose not to go to medical school, but they actually valued an institution like Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]. And so I think they understood what an Ivy League education meant. And so I think--my father [John Kermit Haynes, Sr.] used to brag about, he'd tell his friends in Louisiana that J.K. doesn't seem to know when enough education is enough. He says he's now at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And so he was bragging about the fact that I left Brown and gone to MIT. So, they were, they were really very pleased about it. And when I came back to, when I went to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], because my mother's father [Daniel F. Ross] had some connection. Maybe Meharry at one time was associated with a law school. And it may be that that's where he went to law school. I just don't know. But they were very pleased when I went to Meharry. And they couldn't have been more pleased when I came back to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. So, my parents were very supportive of all three of us. And so I have to tell you one more story. When I was a student at Brown, they sent my youngest brother [Darryl Haynes] to prep school in Providence, Rhode Island. So he went to a prep school that was called Moses Brown School. And so Brown and Moses Brown School are Quaker institutions. They were started by Quakers. They're much more generic now. And so my youngest brother and I spent four years together in Providence and he was frequently at my apartment and so on. And he really received a first-class education and started out at Columbia [University, New York City, New York]. So he was accepted at Columbia. And this is during the hay day of the Civil Rights Movement, probably the late '60s [1960s] or so as I recall. And, you know, Columbia is right in the middle of Harlem [New York]. And so kids on the street were actually sleeping in his room. I mean he was a very generous sort of guy, just in the tradition. And so at some point, that, I think, began to affect him. And so he developed, he started having problems with depression. And so we had to actually take him out of Columbia. And he's never really recovered from that. Speaker 1: Were some of his experiences in the movement [Civil Rights Movement]? Speaker 2: I just think, yeah, he may not have been prepared for New York at the time. But again, I think trying to be a student in New York during the Civil Rights Movement and being concerned about people on the street presents major challenges. It becomes very difficult for you to concentrate on your studies. I mean you begin to think that there are these larger issues and so on that you need to devote your attention to. And so I don't know if the stresses actually got to him at some point, but he actually developed depression. Speaker 1: Okay, a clinical depression? Speaker 2: Yeah, and so he's been, he's had major psychiatric problems since then. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But we, I guess the point was that my folks were so keen on a good education that they actually--and this cost them a lot of money to send him to a prep school, but it was a brilliant idea to actually send him to a prep school in the town where I was actually working on my PhD. And so he and I had a good run for the four years that he was there. And so I think I, we may have left there about the same time. I went to Boston to MIT. He went to New York to Columbia. Speaker 1: Now, my memory is fuzzy now, since we started this morning, but didn't you have another, you have another brother too, right? Speaker 2: My middle brother, yeah. So my middle brother was a great athlete. And so he went to play football at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan]. And so this is when Michigan State was a powerhouse. And so this is when they had Bubba Smith-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --and other great athletes. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name was Maurice Haynes. Speaker 1: Maurice Haynes, okay, all right. Some people may remember him as a football player. How is he now? Speaker 2: He's the one who died five years ago. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: So he was born with a bicuspid valve, and so it turns out that people who were born with a bicuspid instead of a tricuspid aortic valve tend to have heart problems. And so he developed some heart problems late in his life and died at the age of fifty-nine. He died too early. Speaker 1: Okay, now you have children? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is why I spend so much time working with students. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, are you married at this stage? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, so you do have a family? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah, you and your wife [Carolyn Price Haynes]. Did you wanna say anything about your wife? Speaker 2: So my wife is a powerful person. I met her when I went to Brown, went to Providence. And so we, I think after dating for a long time, we were married, and we've been married for forty-plus years. She is a very independent person and has allowed me actually to focus much of my work and time on, at the institutions at which I worked. So I think I've been very fortunate in that sense. I mean she, again, she does her own thing. She's very independent and has allowed me the luxury of really giving this work a huge amount of my time. Story_ID: 30652 Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything I need to ask you before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything. Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Chuckle) So, as a person who loved life first of all. I think to be living is something that is beyond incredible and wish I could live eternally. Also, as a person who loved people. So I genuinely love other people, a person who believes in service. So I'm a guy who likes to move organizations, systems forward. And so one of the great pleasures that I have is having spent thirty two years at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I can actually look around the campus and see some of my work. I mean the greenhouse that sits next to the biology building is something that I wrote a grant to Howard Hughes [Institute of Health] to do. And so someone said to me once upon a time that the powers that be are not gonna allow you to build a greenhouse in prime real estate on the Morehouse campus. Well, there it sits. The biology building, Hope Hall, I wrote the grant to renovate the building. We tore the whole building down and built a new building, and I wrote that grant. So I've just, and when you look at the programs that we have in place for students, many of those programs really represent my ideas. And I've initiated the writing of the grants and in many cases, written the entire grants. And so I feel, you know, this notion of making improvements in systems is something that really is important to me. I value black institutions, I think, highly and wanna see them prosper and have come to realize that we can do better. And so I've sought to push Morehouse to do everything that I could to move Morehouse ahead. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very, very much. Speaker 2: Well, my pleasure. Speaker 1: At this late hour, we'll let everybody go. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Story_ID: 30653 Speaker 1: This is an addendum. I was just reflecting on a way, as we were on our way out that your office, you know, is so African centered, you know an African American is the person who this office belongs to, and it's kind of reflective of the time you came along. Speaker 2: Yeah, so interestingly, I became interested in art when I was a student at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. So my roommate and I became very interested in art as well as classical music. And so I'm getting a little bit off point here. And so the influences that we had were faculty members. So when we took the art appreciation course, the guy who taught us art was an Englishman who was so passionate when he described different works of art that he could almost be brought to tears. And so I left Morehouse with a sense of appreciation of art and a variety of music. I had a huge jazz collection when I was a student at Morehouse. But I also developed this appreciation for classical music. Now, my mother played [Frederic] Chopin. I told you my mother was a piano player. And so she had classical music around the house. I don't think I listened to it. But when I left Morehouse, I was listening to [Johann] Brahms and Tchaikovsky and so on. When I went to Providence, my wife [Carolyn Price Haynes] was associated with a group of artists and musicians in what was called the, it was an African-centered house that was in the city. So the city gave this group of artists and musicians a house, an abandoned house or something like that cheap. And they renovated it and made it an African, I think it was the Afro-American Cultural Center or something like that. Well, at some point, I became the chair of the board of that organization. And that's when I started buying some of their art, and I still have a few of those pieces in my collection and just took off from there. And so I do a lot of traveling around the world. When I go to Africa, Tanzania, there's an artist in Tanzania who I've become a patron for. And so he will usually come to my hotel or either I go to his house. He will show me fifteen or twenty paintings, and I will pick one or two. And so I have a passion for art. My house is filled with art. And now my office filled with art. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I've heard several times this week that science is colorless, but that does not necessarily mean it subsumes your cultural identity. Speaker 2: Right, absolutely. And so I do consider myself a humanist. And so Robert Franklin talks a lot about renaissance at Morehouse and producing renaissance men. One of my fellow students actually at Morehouse referred to me as a renaissance man. And it, and that goes back to what I told you before about my interests in high school. So even as a student at Morehouse I was interested in a lot of things. And so I developed this interest in art. And so I'm always looking to buy now another painting. So I'm about to buy one now, and this gets to be fairly expensive (laughter), and so one has to set limits. Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much. Speaker 2: Thank you, again. Good talking to you...