 Story_ID: 144898 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: My name is Jack Hampton, J-A-C-K, H-A-M-P-T-O-N. Speaker 1: Now is Jack your given name? Speaker 2: Yes it is. Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: Don't have a middle name, no. Speaker 1: Do you have any nicknames? Speaker 2: No nicknames (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, okay now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth is January 18, 1947. Place of birth is Chicago, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation sir? Speaker 2: Today presently I'm a stained glass glazier specializing in repair and restoration. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and you have been, now you have some other careers too, you know, that I think is sig, significant. You wanna mention some of those maybe? Speaker 2: Well, when I first started off I actually worked for Sears Roebuck [& Company]. I was a salesman for Sears for ten years selling plumbing and heating and then I left Sears and I went to Montgomery Wards [Montgomery Ward]. I worked for them for a number of years as a salesman, manager, assistant, vice president of the company. I owned a tire business for a number of years, done my stained glass for about thirty-five years now, part-time and full-time. Speaker 1: Now you were a deputy sheriff--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah I was a deputy sheriff for a lot of years on and off, what they call political posse (laughter) and I'll say a total of about ten years with the sheriff's department. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is the twenty-first of July 2004 [July 24, 2004]. Speaker 1: Okay and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at St. Agatha Church [St. Agatha's Church], 3100 West Douglas Boulevard, Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 144899 Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --we always ask and they have short--they only require a short answer-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and they're lightweight questions. The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, that's kind of hard to say. You can judge by my size that I eat some of everything. I don't think I really have a favorite. I just like good food. I lean more toward fish than anything else. I'd eat just about anything you put in front of me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color, not really. Onyx, I like onyx, it's a nice deep pretty color, but favorite no. Being in the stained glass business is almost impossible to have a favorite. I have to lean toward all of them, yeah. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Time of the year I think for me is fall. It's not too hot, not to cold, it's just right, yeah fall. Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No, believe it or not, I haven't been on a vacation in almost twenty years, a real vacation, so no I'm not--I'm waiting 'til I retire. Speaker 1: And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I do, but I can't say it on camera (laughter). Not really, no. I think I lean towards saying, never give up, never give up no matter what. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 144900 Speaker 1: Now I wanna ask you about your family history-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family. We'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's full name is Rose, R-O-S-E, Newman, N-E-W-M-A-N. Speaker 1: Great, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in Jackson, Mississippi, around 1924. Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about her side of the family? Speaker 2: My grandmother was half Chippewa Indian and half African. We're still working on the genealogy to find out exactly the origin. My grandfather he owned the largest farm in Jackson back in the '50s [1950s] for a black man. Other than that basically you had, I have about nine uncles, six aunts, and they all migrated to Illinois back in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: Okay and so the family came, came to Chicago [Illinois]--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: Right, on my mother's side, yep. Speaker 1: Okay, are they--do you have any--are there any stories about the--or how far back can you trace your ancestors on your mother's side? Speaker 2: On my mother's side, we can go back as far as the Chippewa Indians and the African slaves and the basic stories are that they, blacks were living with Indians at the time to get away from slavery and of course my mother, my grandmother was born half Indian and half African. Other than that, we're still researching the, the stories. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That's what I'm planning to do in my old age. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Retirement. Speaker 1: Is, is there a story about why her family left Mississippi? Speaker 2: It was the same old story that we've heard for years and years and years the slavery, the opportunity to vote, the freedom of getting away from the area. During the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] Mississippi was a hotbed and everybody fled and my family did the same thing, fled to the North. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay now did your mother [Rose Newman Hampton] tell, tell you about growing up in [Jackson] Mississippi or did she talk about how she grew up in-- Speaker 2: Yes she did. Speaker 1: --school or any of that kind of thing? Speaker 2: Most of the time--well my mother she, she never graduated from high school. She went all the way to becoming a senior and then moved to Chicago [Illinois] and started working right away, but the stories that she told us about being down on the farm made me want to go every summer as long as I could up until I was about sixteen years old. I spent every summer in the South learning about farming and agriculture and that type of thing, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I enjoyed it, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 144901 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father's side of the family. What's your father's full name and can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: Okay, my father's name is Wellington, W-E-L-L-I-N-G-T-O-N, Hampton, H-A-M-P-T-O-N. My father he was born in Centralia, Illinois. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now exactly where that is I don't know, but my family then came to the Chicago [Illinois], on my father's side, they came to the Chicago area in the '50s [1950s]. My father did graduate from high school. That's when he met my mother [Rose Newman Hampton] and-- Speaker 1: Did, did he graduate out of Centralia or, or in Chicago? Speaker 2: He graduated in Chicago from Englewood High School [Englewood Technical Prep Academy, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay and he met your mother around-- Speaker 2: At Englewood High School also. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a story about how they met that he tells--that they tell? Speaker 2: Well not really. He saw this beautiful young woman one day and fell in love with her and that was it (laughter). Not a whole lot of history behind that, but it was two people meeting at a time when I think they just came together at the right time at the right place, high school. Speaker 1: Now, did your father--how, well how much do you know about his side of the family in terms of how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, again right now what I'm doing and I'm planning on doing on my retirement is study our family's genealogy because it's lost. We in my family don't know a whole lot about our background and our history, and that's what I'm planning to do. But, as far as Centralia, Illinois, before that my great-grandmother [sic, great-grandfather] he was English and from what I understand he married a black woman when he came from England and that's where the Hampton name came from. Speaker 1: Wellington sounds like a very formal name. Speaker 2: Formal name, yeah British name, and yeah, it was British. So, I think when I do my research I might have to go to England (laughter). Story_ID: 144902 Speaker 1: Well what kind of people were your parents? I mean what was your mother [Rose Newman Hampton] like, and what was your father [Wellington Hampton] like, and what did they like to do and what did they do for a living? Speaker 2: Well, my father, this is a long story if I may tell you. My father, he was like any other man out here he got married, had three children, and he wanted the best for them. They weren't the most educated people in the world, but they were hard working. My father worked construction for a number of years and one day he just came home and decided he wasn't gonna work construction anymore. Matter of fact my job was to clean the concrete off of his boots and one day he came in and kicked his boots off and told me I didn't have to clean the concrete off. That was how I made my allowance, so I wanted to know why. More importantly, my mother wanted to know why. So, he told her why and that was the first time I saw my father get beat up (laughter) by my mother. And what he did was he decided that he wanted to be an entrepreneur. He wanted to work for himself. He didn't like working twelve, fourteen hours for somebody else making the money that he did. So, what we did was we gathered up all the junk we had in the house that we wanted to get rid of and we took it to Maxwell StreetMarket area [Chicago, Illinois]. Sometimes ago they used to call it Jew Town and my father set up a stand there and we started selling what we had to make money for the family. Well as the years went on, my father became somewhat of an antique dealer. He--I can remember one time I was riding with him on his truck and there was a table in the alley and he said, "Boy get out there and get that table." I'm like dad you know we're in the neighborhood, you know the little kids are gonna see me get the table (laughter), you know, so that's how I learned how to fight growing up. But, I got the table out of the alley and my father took it home and he went down in the basement and he was like a mad scientist down there mixing chemicals and cleaning this table and everything. And so after about a week we go back to Maxwell Street my father laid out an antique rug and he put just this table on the rug and I'm wondering, you know, what about the rest of the stuff we got, "Naw leave the table there." A couple came by and they asked him how much for the table and his thing was well make me an offer. They said well would you take four hundred dollars for it. He said four hundred dollars, oh no, no, no, I turned down much more than that. Now, I'm saying to myself oh wait to I tell mom (laughter), wait 'til she hears this, and so the next person came by they asked him how much. He told them well I turned down four hundred already make me an offer. The man said well I'll give you five hundred for the table. My father said, "Oh no it's worth twice that and more," and the man he said, "Oh yeah it's worth a lot more money than that, matter of fact it's worth well up in the thousands of dollars." So, he didn't buy the table. The next person came by offered my father eight hundred dollars for the table. He turned it down. I'm like wait really you gonna get it for real now when we get home and I tell mom, and so the people that offered him the eight hundred dollars he told them look I'll take no less than one thousand dollars. They said well look how about if we give you eight [hundred] know and come back in an hour or so with the rest, would you hold the table for us, and my father did. That day he sold that table for one thousand dollars. And little did I know at that time that I was getting a lesson in entrepreneurship and in, in sales. The people came back bought the table and of course we sold the rest of our stuff the rest of the day. But, when we got home my father laid the money across the table and my mother was impressed. Not only was she impressed, I was impressed because he peeled three hundred dollars right off the top and gave it to me. Here I was a kid about eight years old with three hundred dollars in my hand for one day's work and he explained to me that some people work three or four weeks every day, you know, and this was in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: In those days-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a one hundred dollars a week-- Speaker 2: Was a-- Speaker 1: --was a factory salary-- Speaker 2: --salary yeah. Speaker 1: --for a man-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --a grown man. Speaker 2: So, I realized then that there's something to sales and there's something to entrepreneurship and in the back of my mind I was too young to know what an entrepreneur was, but, and I was too young to know what my father was doing, but he was teaching me how to grow up and be my own boss. Story_ID: 144903 Speaker 1: You asked about my mother [Rose Newman Hampton] also in regards to--my mother when she left the South she came to Chicago [Illinois] and she enrolled in Englewood High School [Englewood Technical Prep Academy, Chicago, Illinois] also. She went to work in a cleaners. It was on the old 63rd Street Halsted [Street] area and she worked there for a number of years as a desk clerk type of thing. But, as my family grew, brothers and sisters, my father [Wellington Hampton] wanted my mother to be a homemaker and so she stayed home and took care of the children, reared the children, kept house, and every now and then when mom wanted to get away she would go and find a little part-time job somewhere doing something, you know. I think that was to get away from the kids or something. But, other than that my father did a real good job of taking care of the family growing up. Story_ID: 144904 Speaker 1: --What's your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Of? Speaker 1: Of growing up, what's your earliest memory? Speaker 2: Oh God, I can remember way back to grammar school and even before then. I can remember having to stay with relatives when I was born. We didn't move around a lot, but we had a lot of relatives in Chicago [Illinois] and my family was the type where if someone needed a place to stay they could come and stay with us. If we needed a place to stay, we could go stay with them. My father [Wellington Hampton] was always the type to make sure that everybody had something to eat. Part of his whole being was feeding the entire family, and he would go buy bushels of apples and tons of meat and just distribute it through the entire family, yeah. That's one of the things I remember. Growing up it wasn't too bad. I had a normal childhood. I grew up in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], went to grammar school, Sherwood grammar school [Jesse Sherwood Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], nothing exciting, went to Englewood High School [Englewood Technical Prep Academy, Chicago, Illinois], so pretty much normal. Now the thing that I remember most was I started--we moved one year to Altgeld Gardens Public Housing [Altgeld Gardens Homes, Chicago, Illinois], and my brother drowned in the Calumet River, and I think that's the thing that stands out more than anything in my life. Speaker 1: When you were little kid? Speaker 2: About eleven years old. Speaker 1: You were eleven? Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I think that's about the only real bad thing I could think about, but growing up I had a pretty good life, pretty easy life. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 144905 Speaker 1: Where did you live in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: We lived at 451 West 64th Street. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were there until you were about eleven years old (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I was there, let's see, we moved there I would say 1960. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, 1960 I was maybe twelve, thirteen. Speaker 1: Okay, so you moved from Altgeld [Gardens Homes] to there-- Speaker 2: To there yeah. Speaker 1: --to, to there, okay all right, okay. So did you spend your early years at Altgeld or did you? Speaker 2: Well, what happened was we lived at 55th [Street] and Wentworth [Avenue] and most of my life growing up and then we moved to Altgeld Gardens and we were there for about three years. My father [Wellington Hampton] didn't like it, so he moved us back out and that's when we moved to 64th Street. Speaker 1: Is that when Altgeld was new? Speaker 2: That's when it was new. Matter of fact, I remember house trailers. People lived in house trailers waiting to, to move into the units, yeah. And I remember my father working on the landscaping out there also. That was his part-time job. He made a little extra money doing that, yeah. Speaker 1: Now, these days it's sort of a stigma attached to living in the projects, but it wasn't necessary true then, right am I correct? Speaker 2: Oh no back then I could remember some of the best times I had in life. My first bicycle. I could leave it outside on the front porch, back porch, never got stolen. I could remember community people coming together having community meetings concerned about how the front yards looked, you know, no cars, raggedy cars on the street and that type of thing. Oh, it was beautiful back in the '50s [1950s]. It was ideal, but for some reason my father just didn't like that community-type living. Story_ID: 144906 Speaker 1: Now what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh, well let's see. I remember there was a lot of cooking going on at my house. My family believed in Thanksgiving dinner and inviting anybody and everybody over that wanted to come by and eat, and they could take home as much food as they want. Sights, I could remember my father [Wellington Hampton] teaching me how to hunt, duck hunt, pheasant hunt, rabbit hunt. I remember those sights, those, being in the woods, the smell of gun powder, the beauty of just watching animals run and deer and you know and there was--he had a thing that if you, if you're not gonna eat it, don't shoot it and so I grew up around guns a lot and so I never had a need to go out and carry a gun on the street like these kids today or shoot. I did a lot of that when I was a kid with supervision. Story_ID: 144907 Speaker 1: Well, tell me about school, I guess. You went to Sherwood School [Jesse Sherwood Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: I went to Sherwood grammar school. Speaker 1: Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], that's the first--did you go to two different grammar schools I guess or just? Speaker 2: I went to, oh gosh, now you gonna make me go back to when I was five years old (laughter). Betsy Ross Grammar School [Betsy Ross Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Betsy Ross. Speaker 2: --Betsy Ross. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I went there and then-- Speaker 1: 61st [Street] and Wabash [Avenue], yes. Speaker 2: Wabash yes and then I left there and then I went to Sherwood. Sherwood grammar school I wasn't the smartest kid in the, in the school, but, excuse me, the thing I remember most about that school was that the teachers were very helpful in developing the children's lives and helping them along the way. You see my parents [Rose Newman Hampton and Wellington Hampton] weren't the smartest people in the world. They didn't have college degrees, so they had mother wit. They had the ability to survive. So, the formal education I got and to learn about college and all that kind of stuff I had to get from teachers. The thing about it was that one of my teachers, Dr. Finch [ph.], who was a teacher there at the time, he wound up becoming one of my personal friends in my adult life. He made me realize that I could go forward, and I thought I was just an average normal kid and he said no you've got something that, you know, you need to develop and we didn't know what it was, so they allowed me to dabble in science in grammar school. I had a science teacher that would give me the chemistry set and let me use the chemistry set that I couldn't take home. My parents said oh now chemistry, no chemistry you won't be blowing up our house. So, I was able to dabble in chemistry at a young age and consequently a number of science fairs I won during grammar school. Matter fact during the '50s [1950s] there was a big thing about rockets and Sputnik [1957] and, and missile and Russia, and one of the things I built was a CO2 rocket and one first place in the science fair, which got me on the front page of the [Chicago] Defender newspaper back in those days. The exact date I don't remember, but we're talking about quite a few years ago. Speaker 1: How old were, know you were at Sherwood? Speaker 2: This is high school, yeah, not grammar school-- Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --grammar school, Sherwood. Speaker 1: Sherwood okay. Speaker 2: So I couldn't have been no more than thirteen, fourteen at the time. Speaker 1: Now Dr. Finch was a teacher? Speaker 2: Dr. Finch was a teacher at the time and then he, he was also a counselor, and he made me realize that, you know, I could go forward and do some things and to this day I see Dr. Finch and he remembers me just as well as I remember him. So, he was one of my first mentors of grammar school. Story_ID: 144908 Speaker 1: What did you, what were you like as a little boy? What did you like to do, I mean we know about science, but what else did you like to do? Did you like music or television or movies, or did you, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, you gotta remember now we're talking about in the '50s [1950s] TV was just invented (laughing). Matter of fact I remember the first day I saw my first TV episode, which was 'Howdy Doody' on my uncle's TV. The whole family came over and it was like we were at a theater. The exact date I don't remember, but I know it was early '50s [1950s] and so we didn't get a lot of TV in because we didn't have TV's at the time. We got a lot of radio in. I listened to the 'Lone Ranger' and those type of things on the radio, but I spent most of my time exploring. I was one that I worked after school. I worked at grocery stores bagging groceries. I delivered newspapers. I would help people home with their groceries. I shoe shined, and then I made my little money and I helped my family with that and that allowed me to buy things that I needed, I wanted for myself, a new pair of shoes, a short or whatever. So, I was able to go to the museum. I spent a lot of time at the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois] walking. I spent a lot of time fishing, hunting when I was a kid, exploring, finding out, meeting people, you know, finding out why this guy's hair is blonde and mine's black, you know, and talking to people. I was, I was a very inquisitive kid. Speaker 1: So, you would come and take the 63rd Street L [elevated train] all the way to the lake [Lake Michigan] near the museum and, and explore at, at--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We would take the 63rd Street-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah we would take the 63rd Street L to 55th [Street] and Garfield [Street] that's, and we would walk through Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois]. They had a few lagoons there they that they stock with fish and then we would walk over the Museum of Science and Industry and, and walk back. Sometimes we'd spend our little money on that we had, so we had to walk all the way home, but spent most of my time exploring neighborhoods, things like--it was sad, a lot of my friends had never been downtown. They were fourteen years old and never been down to the Loop, you know, so I wanted to go see the Loop. I wanted to see what was in the Loop (laughter). In those days, they didn't have a Sears Tower [later, Willis Tower, Chicago, Illinois] or, or--they were just building the Prudential Building [later, One Prudential Plaza, Chicago, Illinois] or the--a few other buildings, so we didn't have that many skylines. Story_ID: 144909 Speaker 1: 'Kay, so we were talking about your activities when you were young and you know, fishing and-- Speaker 2: Exploring-- Speaker 1: --exploring-- Speaker 2: --museums, and going downtown Chicago [Illinois], meeting people. I could remember one time we read the newspaper that a little green man had come to Chicago and he was sighted in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois] and we didn't know if he was an alien or what, but it was on the front page of the [Chicago] Sun-Times, and they had the children in an uproar, you know, little green men, a Martian, and you know we had the missiles going on with Sputnik [1957] and all this kind of stuff and so a couple of friends of mine we decided that--Curtis [ph.] I remembered his name, we decided that we were gonna find this little green man and, and we were gonna capture him and wind up on the front page of the newspaper and become famous. So, sure enough we went to Washington Park and sure enough we found the little green man. Well, what it turned out to be was an old black man of smallest stature who was a derelict and he lived in the park and all of his clothing was green and so we found him and of course we didn't attack him, you know, and bring him back to the newspaper, but we found that he was a very intelligent man and he sat and talk with us about why he was there and why he was dressed in green and he talked to us about what we should be doing and our future to ensure that we didn't wind up being bums or derelicts and that experience to me was, it was phenomenal because you can learn from anybody, even a derelict. So, yeah I had a pretty good fun, fun like growing up. Speaker 1: So, he just kind of lived in Washington Park off of the land, huh? Speaker 2: He lived in Washington Park off of the land and he wore green because he would blend in with the trees and bushes and stuff and people couldn't see him. Well, eventually they did find him and matter of fact he told me something that to this day I still remember. There are some parrots, parrots that frequent that area and the Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] area, the Washington Park area. I forget what type of parrots they are. Speaker 1: Yea, these are I--what you're referring to are the monk parakeet. Speaker 2: Monk parrots [sic, parakeet], yeah they're pretty big too. Speaker 1: Yeah, the monk parakeets from South America-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and they, how they got here--do you have any information on how they got here? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is what-- Speaker 1: All right okay. Speaker 2: --he told me. He said that believe it or not these parakeets are originated in southern Illinois. Where they came from nobody really know, but they originated in southern Illinois and in the history books they showed this parrot being indigenous to the area and what happened was this parrot migrated to the lake front area [Lake Michigan] from southern Illinois, so for years they thought this parrot was extinct and today they're over there thriving by the thousands from what I understand. Speaker 1: Right, it's sort of for those who are watching this who aren't from Chicago it is a Chicago phenomenon. Speaker 2: It is a Chicago-- Speaker 1: They're on the lake now,-- Speaker 2: --yeah, they're on the lake now. Speaker 1: --light green-- Speaker 2: Yeah and-- Speaker 1: --large parakeets-- Speaker 2: --very large. Speaker 1: --and they make a lot of noise,-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah they do. Speaker 1: --huge nests and-- Speaker 2: We wonder how they survive the winters being a tropical bird, and this is what I'm saying people in the old days we met people, we talked to people, we learned stuff. You meet people today you say good morning they just turn and look at you like you're crazy, so yeah I remember that, that's growing up. Speaker 1: These para--these parakeets have a long history. I didn't know how long they've been here, but they've--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I, but I've found out that over the years that they were indigenous to southern Illinois and they think, they thought they were extinct. So, that's something. Somebody, you ought to do a story on that (laughter). Speaker 1: Maybe so. Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 1: Interview an ornithologist. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, sure. Story_ID: 144910 Speaker 1: So you did a lot of exploring and met some interesting people. You go downtown [Chicago, Illinois] you said you, you were-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --the first ones of your friends to actually go downtown. Speaker 2: Yeah, we--and explore downtown, the big stores and shopping. I think that's what got me interested in retail. I would go downtown and see people buying things, giving money, and, and in those days they used cash. They didn't use a lot of credit cards and I thought it was amazing that people had money to buy stuff and buy things and I said, well when I grow up that's what I wanna do. I wanna sell stuff, and sure enough, that's what I wound up doing all my life selling stuff. Story_ID: 144911 Speaker 1: You had a story that you need to tell us about your father [Wellington Hampton] inventing polish sausage. Speaker 2: Oh yeah. When my father quit his job and went to Maxwell Street [Market, Chicago, Illinois] and started selling antiques, well when my mother [Rose Newman Hampton] realized how much money could be made down there at that time and I could remember my mother [sic, father] making as much as $1,800 dollars in one day. My mother decided to, she would start going with us and she brought my little sister along. Matter of fact, I think I have a photograph of her, and in that setting. And mom would bring us food, sandwiches and stuff to drink and eat while we were selling wares. Well after a while, the different vendors asked my mother, you know, to make some more coffee and they would buy it. Bring some more pops and they would buy it. And after a while my mother started her own little business. Like she was selling potato chips and pop and then it got to the point where they wanted some of the sandwiches that we would eat. My mother would make pork chop sandwiches and sausage sandwiches, and we would have that at lunch time. Sometimes, she would make breakfast sandwiches and after a while she started making sandwiches and selling them to the other vendors. Well, one day my mother and father got the idea say look we're selling junk so to speak on this side, why don't you and my sister sell food on this side and my father and mother bought out a barbecue grill and they started barbecuing hamburgers and sausage and hot dogs and people not only that worked there, but then those people walking up and down the street started buying. So, one day--Maxwell Street was called Jew Town and the reason why it was called Jew Town because most of the Jewish people in that area owned the stores and on Sunday they would put their wares out on the street to get some, make some extra money. Well, one day some people came to my father and they said look we want you to work for us and of course my father was not about to work for anybody, he quit his construction job, and they wanted him to sell food for them, and he said oh no what I'll do is I'll show you how to set up what I have here. I'll show you where to buy your product from and there's enough money here for everybody. So, my father had this, went home back to the basement, and here he come out with these blue prints that he drew on if he was to have an ideal stand what it would be like. So, he presented the stand to these people and they built the stands on Maxwell Street on separate corners. And of course my family kept their, their stand and he showed them how to cook pork chops 'cause pork was from what I understood was not in the Jewish tradition. He taught them how to cook sausages, polish sausages, and how to grill onions and how to get the fragrance going so people all over the place would come to your stand. And of course after that, hence the Maxwell Street polish and from that day on it was--I could remember we would run out of hot dog buns or hamburger buns, and he would send me around to different stands and they would give me armfuls of bread to bring back and then a few minutes later a truck would pull up and unload whatever he needed, so yeah those were, yeah that was Maxwell Street story. But as the years went on, it changed a lot, but yeah we made, today I'm still a flea marketer because of that. I, if I can't sell something at the flea market, I gotta go to the flea market. Story_ID: 144912 Speaker 1: The onions seem to be a big part of that, you know, the-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, the grilled onions. Speaker 1: Yeah, the attraction 'cause you smell those onions. Speaker 2: Yeah, and not only that, the secret was--should I tell you a secret? All right, the secret was take some of the grilled onions and drop them on the flame, you see, and that would make the smell aroma and then take some of the sausage grease and pour it on the flame, then that would make the aroma and then of course he [father, Wellington Hampton] threw a little wood on top of it, you know, to make it last, but yeah he, he, he invented the Maxwell Street [Market, Chicago, Illinois] polish. Speaker 1: Those are legendary and-- Speaker 2: They are-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --all over the world. Speaker 1: So, the Maxwell Street polish sausage was not invented by a Jewish man or a Polish man but by-- Speaker 2: No it wasn't, it was-- Speaker 1: Black man. Speaker 2: --black man (laughter), my father-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: --Wellington Hampton, yeah. Story_ID: 144913 Speaker 1: In grade school [Jesse Sherwood Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], now were you a good student in grade school? Speaker 2: Well, I think I was, I was a average student. I was not the smartest kid in the class, but I wasn't the dumbest kid in the class. Matter of fact, there was--I mentioned Mr. Finch [ph.], Dr. Finch earlier. That was one of the reasons I got to know him because I had missed taking a standardized test because I was off sick or something and so I had to take it when I got back to school and they put me in a little room and gave me the pencil and the test and I can remember him making fun of me after the test saying that I used my fingers to count (laughter), and, but he looked at the test and said that I had the highest score in the school, but I thought I was just an average kid. I didn't realize that, you know, I was learning something (laughter), so to speak and from that day on I think that's why Mr. Finch kind of befriended me, you know, he said you, you've got potential, and I'm glad he did. Speaker 1: Okay, now where, were most of the teachers in your school black or? Speaker 2: Most of the teachers, I will say about fifty-fifty. Speaker 1: This is Sherwood? Speaker 2: Sherwood grammar school, yeah, and it was not--I can't remember any real problems or anything in school. I can remember I asked one teacher to teach me how to play the piano and she did. She would have me stay after school a couple of times a week, days a week, and she would teach me the keyboard. And I never learned how to really play, you know, I dabble a little bit by ear now, but the first time I heard real music on a piano was in grammar school, yeah. So, I had, I had a pretty good childhood growing up. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you play sports? Speaker 2: I was not a very active in the, in sports. I didn't like the idea of getting hurt, getting bruised up, but you know I could throw the football, I could throw a baseball. I, I was more into exploring things rather than, than sports. I enjoy sports. I liked going to the games and cheering. Matter fact I'm one of the best crowed hecklers out here (laughter). I'm a pretty good crowd heckler. Speaker 1: So you started that early--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: I started that early on in life yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, I enjoy doing that, yeah. Speaker 1: All right now what was your favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Science. Speaker 1: You--(unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah science. I was amazed about science. It always--if--it always made me wonder what made this work, why did this, you know, how can you make bombs and make smoke and make fire and how can you take two sticks and rub them together and make a telephone can, you know, all that kind of stuff. It was, it was interesting. There was a magazine out that was very popular. It was called Popular Science at the time, and when everybody else was reading comic books I was reading Popular Science because I wanted to know what the cars were gonna look like in the future and you know and sure enough a lot of that stuff came to pass. They tell me that some of those magazines are worth a lot of money now, yeah. Wish I had just one (laughter). Story_ID: 144914 Speaker 1: Now in high school, you went to Englewood High School [also known as Englewood Technical Prep Academy, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Englewood High School. Speaker 1: Now, Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] today is a community that's trying to pull itself back up (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (simultaneous) Pull it back, back together. Speaker 1: In those days it was a community that was in fairly good condition, right? Speaker 2: The thing I remember about Englewood the community most was, and we talked about this during the break, that there were gangs, but they really weren't gangs. They were bad kids that kind of band together, but you had your good kids and the bad kids were just afraid of the good kids as they were of anybody else. Matter fact, we used to have little rock fights bad kids against the good kids, but never anything like shooting each other, you know stabbing each other or killing each other no. If there was a fight, we used to put a chip on the shoulder and if you were tough you would knock that chip off and sometimes that was the end of the fight (laughter), you know nobody got hurt, or we would draw a line in the dirt if you was the toughest you stepped across the line. Maybe you tousled a little bit, but you never really got--and I remember the community was just that, a community. We could walk the streets at night. We could walk the streets during the day. Nobody--you weren't afraid of anything. You weren't afraid of nothing. Even the police didn't harass you. I was a teenager before I realized abuse that a policeman would cause, but people would tell you, you do something and before you got home your parents knew about it because somebody's mother or father saw you doing it or maybe you'd be doing something and somebody else's parent grabbed you by the ear and take you home. But it was a community then, and Englewood High School--I enjoyed it going to high school. It was really one of the best times of my life. Story_ID: 144915 Speaker 1: We're were talking about-- Speaker 2: Englewood High School [also known as Englewood Technical Prep Academy, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: --high school, Englewood right, the community of Englewood and high school. Did your family, was your family involved in church a lot, or at all? Speaker 2: My memory of church was my father [Wellington Hampton] was not a, he was a religious man. He was God-fearing, but he was not one for going to sit up in church every Sunday. He would go on special occasions, but he was not--now my mother [Rose Newman Hampton] on the other hand she was very religious, but growing up she had a lot of going to church every Sunday and was made to go all day stay in church. So, what happened with church was they would make me, being the oldest of my brother and sister, they would make me take them to church (laughter) and so yeah we would go to the Baptist church in the area and we learned to, we were baptized Baptist. Speaker 1: So, you had to take your brothers and sisters to church basically? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I think that was an excuse for my parents to have some free time. Speaker 1: Now, I neglected to ask this on the first reel, I should have, but how many brothers and sisters do you have and can you name them? Speaker 2: Okay I have one brother Randy Hampton [ph.], and I have one sister Yvette Hampton [ph.]. Randy is married, have two children, a lady by the name of Idell, live here in Chicago [Illinois]. Randy, he's about forty-nine years old now. My sister she's about forty-seven years old. She lives on the North Side of Chicago here, and she's into retail also, and she's not married, never wanted to get married, and never wanted any children, so (laughter). God bless her. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you were impelled to take the two of them to church? Speaker 2: To them to church on Sundays. Speaker 1: So you went to a Baptist church? Speaker 2: We went to the Baptist church in-- Speaker 1: Which one did you go to? Speaker 2: --I can't remember the name of the church. It was in the--what I remember the most was it was in Altgeld Gardens [Altgeld Gardens Homes, Chicago, Illinois] and it was Mount Moriah [ph.] or something like that I think and, but when you're young you know church, Sunday school type, type of stuff was like a way to get away. You know you had more fun there than, than, than worship, you know (laughter). So, as the years went on we were not forced to go to church. We went to church if we wanted to, but as, as life went on I wound up marrying a Catholic, so I had to switch over. The woman I married was a staunch Catholic-- Story_ID: 144916 Speaker 1: What was it [Englewood High School, also known as Englewood Technical Prep Academy, Chicago, Illinois] like for you? I mean you got like there are several high schools in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] first of all which is-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --I think very few communities have that many--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --right you have a couple of technical colleges. You have Parker [Francis W. Parker School, Chicago, Illinois]. You had Teachers College North [Chicago Teachers College North, Chicago, Illinois]. You had Tilden High School [Chicago, Illinois]. Not too far was, you had Hyde Park High School [Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], but high school was one of my better times. I, I found that I could go to school, learn my lessons, have a few activities, go home, work my part-time job, and it was more relaxed. I think because of the subjects. I--one day I happen to take a drafting class and I can't remember the drafting teacher's name right now, but, but he then informed me that I was his best drafting student. I had no idea I had the ability to draw. Then, my woodshop teacher, a Mr. Tobin [ph.], I had a lot of respect for him because he helped me get a job that I kept all through college. He told me that I was his best woodshop student. I got involved with the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and wound up becoming sergeant major. I didn't want to be colonel, captain, I wanted to be sergeant major. He was the baddest guy in the [U.S.] Army (laughter), and I, I kept that position until I was a senior and I was known through high school as a sergeant major and it gave me that tough guy image, you know, [U.S.] Military type image. But, what happened with drafting was my, my drafting teacher he took me aside and he gave me some of his old drafting equipment and supplies that he went to school with, which was a lot better than the regular students had. You know, they had number two pencils, I had mechanical pencils. I had never seen a mechanical pencil. They had the old pencil sharpener where they sharpened theirs. I had a little one that, you know, sharpened a lead, you know, it was, it was exciting. They used pencils, I used ink. And the paper they were drawing on was regular drafting paper. He gave me a roll of silk paper, you know. So, I realized that, that these teachers were taking an interest in me if I just applied myself. So what happened was he told me one day that he couldn't teach me anymore in drafting and I had a year to go in high school. Well, what am I gonna do I like this drafting stuff. I think I may want to do this for a living. He said well I'm gonna help you take some home study courses from Chicago Technical College [sic, Illinois Technical College, Chicago, Illinois], the school I went to, and you will be able to use your time in class to do your extension home study course. I'll help you with it. So, sure enough my family they didn't know what it was gonna cost for me to sign up and go to college. They were scared to death because all the rumors, you know, black kids didn't go to college. You didn't have enough money to save to send a kid to college. So, my teacher he convinced my parents [Rose Newman Hampton and Wellington Hampton] that I should take this home study course and that the monies that I worked for at Maxwell Street [Market, Chicago, Illinois] and my little grocery jobs and newspapers would be enough to pay for it. And the teacher also had the school give me a grant hoping that when I did graduate from high school that I would attend that school, and I did, I did. And when I graduated from high school, I had whole year full of college credits towards architectural engineering. For the first time I'm gonna be an architectural engineer specializing in math and science, unheard of in my family, you know. Is the boy normal? (laughter) Story_ID: 144917 Speaker 1: Your courses well laid out-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --by the time you're a senior at Englewood [High School, also known as Technical Prep Academy, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: By the time I was a senior, I knew what I was gonna do. Speaker 1: Your course is laid-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --out for you. Speaker 2: And then as high school went on, I thought maybe you know the war in Vietnam was going, getting started back in the '60s [1960s] and-- Speaker 1: When you were in high school, you started in what '62 [1962]? Speaker 2: Sixty-two. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: Came out in '65 [1965] right? Speaker 2: Six, '64 [1964], '65 [1965] January '65 [1965]. We call it '64 [1964] you know it's that one month don't make a difference (laughter), but Vietnam was going big and here I was a sergeant major and yeah I'm going to war, you know, so-- Speaker 1: Did you have an understanding of, of politics--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No I didn't, no I didn't. Matter of fact it was--by this time we had a TV in the house and when the news came on it came on so fast and they used words that we didn't understand and, and they would take things out of context and so it was kind of hard to get an idea of what this Vietnam business was about and, but I figured well if I'm gonna wind up getting drafted because one of the things that a high school kid worried about is you have to register for the draft when you turn sixteen. You have to get a draft card. You have to carry that draft card. If you're caught on the streets without your draft card, you could go to jail, and what's the purpose of the draft card, so in case we have to send you to war we know where to find you. So, I really didn't have a real good idea, but I thought if I was gonna go to war and get drafted, I might as well go to ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and get a idea of what's this [U.S.] Military thing is about. Story_ID: 142490 Speaker 1: So we were talking about the draft and the importance of having a draft card-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --and your decision to take ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] so you would be prepared-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --if you were drafted. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now you also in high school [at Englewood High School also known as Englewood Technical Prep Academy, Chicago, Illinois] would study martial arts, taekwondo right? Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: And how did you get, how, how did you decide-- Speaker 2: How to do that? Well again I was always exploring. You know things happen for a reason and you don't know why. Well when I was in ROTC I was on what we call a rifle team. In those days, we actually shot live ammunition in a gun range in high school (laughter). Speaker 1: High school students doing this right. Speaker 2: Yeah, high school students, ROTC. Speaker 1: Now the live ammunition is not in high school but it's around the school-- Speaker 2: Yeah we were in a range and we were able to shoot competition against other schools. Well, self-defense was part of the training of ROTC, but it wasn't what I thought it should be, so one day I went to the local YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] to, for a shooting match. See in the old days the YMCA had a gun range and kids who wanted to, who shot as a hobby could join that YMCA and YMCAs would shoot against other YMCAs and we had twenty-two rifles and everything. Speaker 1: Now, which Y did you go to? Speaker 2: Southtown Y was 64th [Street] and Union [Avenue], and I could remember as a little, as a high school kid going to the hardware store buying boxes of ammunition, kid, and so anyway while I was at the shooting match, which I lost by the way, downstairs in the gym they had a judo class going. And, so I went and sat in on the judo competition and I thought it was the most amazing thing I had seen, people throwing people around with precision and you know I could use this on the streets with these bad guys (laughter). And so come to find out one of my teachers was a black belt in judo. And so I approached him and of course he let me go to some of the tournaments, told me where they were, and so consequently I started learning judo from a guy by the name of Purdue [ph.]. Well, as the years went on, I became more interested in other forms of the art like jiu-jitsu, karate, sikido [sic, aikido], and so I went to Purdue who was at the Hyde Park YMCA [Chicago, Illinois] and I joined his class and he taught me basics of karate and as the years went on I learned a little bit about karate, a little bit about taekwondo, jiu-jitsu, and the whole shot and it, it was interesting. As the years went on after I got married, that's a different story though, after, while I was in the [U.S.] Military overseas in Germany, I took a class over there in judo and karate and when I came back to the United States, of course, you know I wanted to study some more at karate and I met an instructor by the name of [Vincent] "Shorty" Mills, he was only 6'7" (laughter), and he took me under his wing and taught me martial arts, promoted me, and that's where I met my wife [Jennifer Hampton]. She was a brown belt in karate at the time and-- Speaker 1: So this is like much later (unclear)? Speaker 2: It is later on, yeah in the, in the years. Story_ID: 142491 Speaker 1: When did you meet your wife [Jennifer Hampton]? About what year was it? Speaker 2: I met my wife in 1972. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It happened to be at a birthday party and friends of mine invited me to the party because they knew I was in martial arts and they knew she was in martial arts, and they thought we would make a match (laughter) 'cause none of the guys wanted to date her because she was tough, you see, so no, nobody wanted a woman that could beat them up, you know, so they thought we would make a good match and we did. We met and we hit it off. She told me that evening when I took her home that she was gonna marry me, so oh okay, so it was a done deal. Speaker 1: It doesn't get any better than that. Speaker 2: Doesn't get any better than that, yeah. Story_ID: 142492 Speaker 1: Well let's take you back to high--so you graduated from high school [Englewood High School, also known as Englewood Technical Prep Academy, Chicago, Illinois] in 1964, '65 [1965]. Speaker 2: Sixty-five-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --January of 1965. Speaker 1: So in those days, you could graduate in January, I guess right? Speaker 2: Yeah, we had two--January and a June graduation and it was very important to us which one you graduated. I graduated in January, you know (laughter) yeah. Speaker 1: So when you gra--you graduated and you just went to Chicago Technical College [sic, Illinois Technical College, Chicago, Illinois] full-time? Speaker 2: Well, I had a job my, I think I mentioned earlier that my woodshop teacher he helped me land a job at an upholstery shop. Along with woodshop, we had upholstery class and I was pretty good at upholstery. So, he helped me get this job at an upholstery shop. Well, the upholstery shop was on 62nd Street. I can't remember the exact street, Wentworth [Avenue], and after I graduated from high school the upholstery shop moved to 22nd Street near Halsted [Street] and the school that I wanted to go to Chicago Technical College was at 2000 South Michigan [Avenue]. So, by this time I'm eighteen years old and I decided well those days it's time to leave home. I figured that I was able to support myself. I was working and I had the ability to go to Maxwell Street [Market, Chicago, Illinois] and all these different places, so I didn't think surviving--it would be easier for my family, my mother [Rose Newman Hampton] and father [Wellington Hampton], to support my sister and brothers if I left home. So, anyway I moved in to the New Michigan Hotel [Chicago, Illinois], which was at 22nd [Street] and, 22nd and Michigan, and that's the old-- Speaker 1: Is that the-- Speaker 2: Al Capone hotel [The Lexington Hotel, Chicago, Illinois], yes (laughter), yes and-- Speaker 1: Tell it Al Capone actually-- Speaker 2: --atually lived-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --yes, they actually, his safe was in the basement and everything, yeah. Speaker 1: That's the one that Geraldo Rivera had the television special-- Speaker 2: Yep, right what happened was the school had an agreement with the hotel that students could stay there in a room as if it was a dormitory for thirty-five dollars a week. And I'm figuring you know I got a job I'm making one hundred dollars a week I can go to school right across the street, I can jump on the bus and go to work right down the street and for thirty--I still had money left over, you know. And every Friday I would treat myself to a big dinner at that place called Bats Restaurant [sic, Mama Batt's Restaurant, Chicago, Illinois]. But, I graduated and went on to Chicago Tech and I worked at the upholstery shop, and I lived at the New Michigan Hotel. I finally moved up to the tenth floor where Al Capone lived. Now, Al Capone's suite, no they wouldn't give it to me. I wanted it, but they wouldn't. They gave me the suite on the other end, and this was, by this time I had, I was paying forty-five dollars a week and I had a living room, a dining room, a kitchen, you know, at this hotel. I was big time. When I turned twenty years old, I was, I thought I was the man (laughter). Speaker 1: That's impressive-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --when you're twenty years old. That's great. Speaker 2: Yeah, so I left home at eighteen. Story_ID: 142493 Speaker 1: So this is in the--yeah, in the mid-'60s [1960s] (unclear). Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], '67 [1967]. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I stayed there and again, then I got the bright idea--oh I needed a little more money 'cause I was moving on up apartments (laughter), I wanted a car and girlfriend and this type of stuff, so I landed a job part-time on the weekends working for Burns Security Agency [sic, William J. Burns Detective Agency, Chicago, Illinois, later Securitas USA] and-- Speaker 1: Now did you get that job as a result of your martial arts experience or ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] or? Speaker 2: No, I just, I needed a job. I saw a go on the L [elevated train] one day, the bus going to work and he had a uniform on and looked very official and he had a tag on that said Burns Detective Agency, you know. I said wow you know I would like to do that. So, I talked to him and he told me where to go and they were hiring, so I was twenty years old at the time and I went down to Burns. They hired me. I lied and told them I was twenty-one, but I was only twenty at the time. So, they hired me and put me in a uniform and everything and they would send me out to different places. Well, the nice thing about it was I could take my school books with me and I could study while I worked security. Every now and then, every hour or half hour or forty-five minutes I had to get up and go punch a clock, but still I could study and I was up anyway most of the night, so that worked out pretty good. Well, as the years went on I worked a couple of years for that company part-time, I wanted to become a detective. You know all the detective movies were coming on now, Matt Helm and all these court movies and they hired a private eye and all this. I wanted to be a private eye [private investigator], a detective, and so I went to one of my superiors who was a retired police officer who they had hired and his name was McClam [ph.] and he was a black guy. He was the first black guy they hired in this position. So, I went to him and sure enough he hired me, said, "I'm gonna make you a detective," and I worked with him for almost a year and a half and they called me an operative (laughter). Story_ID: 142494 Speaker 1: So I got to do all the things that detectives did, taking photographs of people and-- Speaker 2: Interesting stories from this period of time? Can you tell us about a story maybe about--? Speaker 1: Of being a detective? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Well, let's see. I can remember one day they sent me out on a job. There was this man he was a big time executive and he claimed he got hurt on the job and, hurt his back, and my job was to go out and try to get photographs of him doing things, doing things. So, sure enough I pull up in front of his house. It was one of the big prestigious suburbs and, by the way there were no black people out there, and the story goes on, and I'm sitting there in my car with the newspaper (laughter) waiting for this guy to come out of his house and empty the garbage or do anything. After a while he comes out of the house jogging, jogging, so I'm taking photographs. In those days, the only thing we had was a little 110 pocket camera. We didn't have all that pretty stuff. And so he's jogging and I got pictures of him jogging. So, I was happy. I went back and told him I got the pictures, I got the goods on the guy. So, they sent me out the next day. So, the next day we want you to get some more stuff. This time see if you can follow him. So, the next day I'm sitting there in the car with my newspaper up and a lady comes out of the house. This was white community now, no black people. So, I stood out like a sore thumb. A lady came out of the house and walked over to my car. She said, "Good morning sir, how are you?" "Fine." "Would you like to come in for a cup of coffee?" "Well ma'am no I can't come in for a cup of coffee." "Well, evidently you must be a private investigator or a cop or something. You're sitting here for two days taking pictures of my neighbor, come in and I'll tell you about him." Well, little did I know that the neighbor didn't like this guy, okay, so I'm scared to death. A young black kid twenty years old in this community, you know, going up in the house with this lady. So, she takes me in and we sit down and have a cup of coffee and she tells me everything we needed to know about this guy it was incriminating. Another good story as the years went on cameras came out with telephoto lenses and stuff, and I really got into that kind of stuff. So, they sent me down to Elkhart [Indiana], no Galesburg [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: --(Unclear)-- Speaker 1: --Indiana, and, no I'm sorry Galesburg, Illinois, and that was Elkhart, Indiana, and there was a company that made house trailers and they were supposed to make like oh, nine trailers in a week's time, but they were making ten, but the tenth trailer was coming up missing. So, my job was to find out where that tenth trailer was gone. By this time, the James Bond movies were coming out and I figured I'm gonna, I'm James Bond now (laughter). I got this big camera with all these lenses and I'm in the woods taking photographs, and sure enough we found that one of the trailers were being shipped out of the state and they were being sold all over the country independently. So, yeah that was a good time, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now, so you, did you, you did this and working in the upholstery place or, or did you (unclear)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, I did, yeah I worked during, at the upholstery place in the afternoons after school into the evening and then on the weekend, the Saturday or Sunday, I worked as a private investigator trying to save money to buy me a Pontiac GTO convertible (laughter). Speaker 2: A goat, they call it. Speaker 1: Goat, yeah with the scoop on the front, yeah. I wanted that car badly. Story_ID: 142495 Speaker 1: Your life was kind of interrupted by the draft, right? And-- Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened was the World's Fair [1967 International and Universal Exposition] came to Chica--to Canada, Montreal [Quebec, Canada], and I was doing security work with the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] at a place called the International House and, where foreign students stay that were students there. Anyway, I got wind of these students at the International House were going to the World's Fair. Now, I had never been out of the country. I'd been to few different states, but never out of the country, so to me this was exciting and I decided well I wanted to go with them, with them. So, I had enough money saved where I could buy my ticket. We took a train and we went and we stayed up at the University of Montreal [Universite de Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada] on their campus and I toured the World's Fair. And by me being a drafting architectural student one of the things that got my attention was a housing project called Habitat [sic, Habitat 67, Montreal, Quebec, Canada]. It was supposed to have been the housing problem solver of the future, so I wanted, really wanted to see that first hand. So, I stayed there for about two and a half weeks, came back to Chicago [Illinois]. Little did I know once you get a visa the federal government finds out right away and I guess they must have assumed that I was going to Canada to dodge the draft because in those days they were drafting, it wasn't voluntary, but I wasn't. I was in school. I wasn't afraid, and I was in military, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], I wasn't afraid to go (laughter). So, when I got back a few weeks later I got a draft notice that you are drafted and it was my senior year in school, my last semester, so I was really upset about that, but I went willingly, no, no problem. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were drafted into the [U.S.] Army right? Speaker 2: Right into the Army. Speaker 1: Now this is 1968. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968], I think it was January. Story_ID: 142496 Speaker 1: Up to this time now, a lot going on in the country. We've had the March on Washington [1963]-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: --Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is killed in '68 [1968]. Speaker 2: Dr. King was killed while I was in basic training, yeah. Speaker 1: And do you remember how the Civil Rights Movement affected you and your family--(unclear)--? Speaker 2: Well, the community I grew up in was predominantly a black community, and we didn't have the problem of racism in our community. As a kid, I didn't know about--racism was outside of the community. Racism was in Mississippi. It wasn't here at home. So, it really didn't affect me a whole lot. I knew about the marches. I knew about the protests. We would see them on TV, and a couple of times I got involved. One time [HM] Jesse Jackson was on 55th [Street] and Garfield [Boulevard] had a big sign you want a job, sign up here. Sign up to get the job, but I had to carry a sign (laughter) to protest. That was the end of my protesting. But, but when I got drafted in the [U.S.] mMilitary Dr. King was killed. The next morning the military got everybody on post in a giant formation. I don't know how many thousands of people and they told us black, white, whatever else that if riots start on this post that everybody would be court-martialed and jailed. They threatened us with everything, Article 15 and, and whatever. They even threatened us to send, we'll send you to war, send you to Vietnam if you, you know you wanna fight we'll make sure, and there were no problems, none whatsoever. We went about our military duty--job like we were trained to do. Story_ID: 142497 Speaker 1: Did you stay in the [United] States or were you sent to or did you eventually go to Vietnam? Speaker 2: No, I didn't go to Vietnam. What happened was, I've been lucky all my life. I went to Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, for basic training. After I left basic training, they sent me to Fort Ord, California. While I was at Fort Ord, I took my advanced training and that was in infantry, so I was destined straight to war. But, for some reason I lucked out and my first duty assignment was at Fort Carson, Colorado. Everybody else is getting, going to war, I'm going to Fort Carson. Everybody said I was lucky. I got to Fort Carson and one of the things they say never volunteer for anything, but we were in a formation one day and the colonel came before the formation and he said I need a clerk, a company clerk. Well, I couldn't read or write that well, at least I didn't think I could, and I didn't volunteer for that. I need a carpenter. Well, I had woodshop, I was pretty good at woodshop. I threw up my hand. He didn't pick me. "Oh, I need something else," I can't remember. It was about five or six things he, and I figured I could do those things, so I volunteered and never got chosen. So, then he said, "I need a photographer," and I had a 110 Kodak camera, real little with the little cartridges out there, and I kept that in my pocket. And I threw up my hand and he said, "Hey you, you can do everything, all right, you're a photographer?" I said I got a camera right here, you see. So, he said okay I am gonna make you my battalion photographer. So, his name was Lieutenant Colonel Frisco Short. I think this man saved my life. He took me aside and asked me if I really knew anything about photography, and I told him not a whole lot, you know I did this private investigating thing with some cameras. So, he decided he was gonna send me to school. So, I went off to a military school there at Fort Carson to learn photography, which was like two months or so, and which I did. I learned the basics of photography, how to develop and all, all this kind of stuff. So, I wasn't the greatest writer in the world, so he assigned a guy with me. He was a writer and I was the photographer, and his thing was he wanted to become a general and he said, "Look you guys you keep me in the newspapers, keep me in the magazines and I'll keep you out of Vietnam." Deal. So of course being--they gave me the title of public information officer [PIO]. Story_ID: 142498 Speaker 1: So, now I got a band I'm wearing on my arm and I can go anywhere. I got a card in my pocket said I can go into top secret areas without being challenged and I have a top secret clearance and this was like better than being the police or something (laughter) because nobody bothered the PIO, public information officer, and as long as I, we stayed clean and did what we were supposed to do we were, we could come and go as we please. They would-the colonel [Lieutenant Colonel Frisco Short]--we met with him every morning. They would give us assignments, and we would go do those assignments and nobody bothered us. So, anyway what happened was Lieutenant Colonel Frisco Short one day came to me and he said, "Jack the United States Army has developed a school called a recondo school and it's supposed to be the toughest school the military ever had," and it was wrote up in all the military magazine, Army Times magazines and stuff, and he said, "I want you to go to that school." And I'm like I don't want to be a recondo, you know, that means war, I'm training for war, and it was called a recondo prep school and basically what happened was my job was to go through the course, the actual course and while I was going through the course take photographs of what was happening firsthand. The writer was to write about it, and sure enough we went through the course. It was a two-month course, and we went through the course and we graduated with honors and certificates and everything and we got the pictures. Well, sure enough the time came for me to get my orders to go overseas duty, and my orders came back, go to Germany. So, Lieutenant Frisco Short kept his word, yeah. Speaker 2: You didn't have to go to Vietnam? Speaker 1: Didn't have to go to Vietnam. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 148232 Speaker 1: Okay, sir, tell us about Germany. Where did you go in Germany? Speaker 2: When I first got to Germany, I went to a base called Fiori Kaserne. It was located forty miles south of Frankfurt [Germany] in a small town called Aschaffenburg [Germany], and our job was to back up the troops guarding the Berlin Wall. That was our sole purpose was to be there to keep Communism from spilling over to the other side. A few strange things happened when I was in the [U.S.] Military also. I found that I liked going to school. I liked learning different things, so while I--when I first got drafted I was in basic training they made me an armorer. That meant that my job was to take care of the weapons. Now, after a while I didn't understand why, but then they, I found out that because I had had ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and we had weapons training, guns, that I knew about guns, so I was a great candidate for the arms room. They found out that I had an engineering background, mechanical engineering background, so I was a great candidate for handling the weapons. But, I did that along with my regular Military duties. But, what happened when I got to Germany though I'm being interviewed by the sergeant major who I liked because I was a sergeant major, and he realized that I was a photographer and they didn't have much need for a photographer over there, but he realized that I had the ability to be an armorer. So he--he assigned me to a company and made me, sent me to school in Switzerland, a small arms school, and where I learned to maintain, repair weapons, and I was there for two months and I came back and they assigned me to the arms room as a company armorer and what I did was throughout my career in the Military there was I was an armorer and I handled repair of the weapons and maintenance of the weapons that type of stuff. I also participated in live fire demonstrations of different type of weapons, which was I thought was pretty cool. And that was about it for, for Germany for me in the military. What happened was I was a young man like anybody else and I ran across a young lady who was German and she was mixed with Italian and she was mixed with a little black and they called them war babies and she, we kind of dated awhile. She showed me around Germany. Well, when I got out of the military I decided to stay in Europe a little while because I was an architect, architectural engineering student and over there was some of the greatest architecture in the world, so I had the ability to take these photographs, so I'm out of the Military, I'm living with this lady, and I'm taking, traveling all over the country taking photographs of everything architecture. Well, when I developed my pictures I realized that a lot of photographs were of stained glass windows, I didn't know what that was about. So, I ran out of money, so I had to find a job and to get my ticket to come back to the United States. So this young lady she introduced me to her brother and uncle who had a glass shop, Sholmyer glass shop and they hired me and they taught me how to repair stained glass windows. Speaker 1: Now what was the name? Can you spell that for us? Sholmyer. Speaker 2: I don't, I'm not sure, but it's S-H-O-L-M-Y-E-R, I guess. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not sure of the spelling. Story_ID: 148233 Speaker 1: So, after a while I realized that I was learning about stained glass. I would show them my photographs, and they would point out different things and we would go out on jobs to repair windows and they would teach me about stained glass and eventually I made enough money to buy a ticket to come back to the United States. This was in 1970. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, that was the end of my [U.S.] Military career. Speaker 2: All right, so you developed, learned a skill, another skill. Speaker 1: Another skill. Speaker 2: In Germany. Okay. Speaker 1: In Germany. Story_ID: 148234 Speaker 1: So when you came back, what did you do? Did you apply that skill immediately when you came back? Speaker 2: Well, when I came back, my first concern was--see I had left home at eighteen and I had been gone from home for five years or so and then a couple of years, so to go back home was a no, no. You know, I'm too old to go back home, you know, but I went back home. By this time, my family was a little better off. My, my mother [Rose Newman Hampton] and father [Wellington Hampton] they owned a six-flat building now. The building we lived in they bought eventually, and I got an apartment on the first floor in the building, so that was like not being at home, but the next, that was a Sunday when I got home, the next day Monday I went out looking for a job and I went to Sears, Roebuck [& Company], which was located on, at 63rd [Street] and Halsted Street in Chicago [Illinois]. I walked in and of course now I'm a veteran, you know, I have certain rights (laughter). I want a job, you know, you're veteran minded, right, so how about a job. Well what can you do? Well, I can't do much of anything, but I know how to sell stuff. I know how to sell things. What kind of things have you sold? I've sold some of everything. I've sold furniture, and I've sold tools. Well tell us about your background. My background is in architectural engineering. Well, you going back to school? Yes I am and of course I did and I got, received my bachelor's. I took a refresher course and took the test and finals and got it. But, I went to Sears Roebuck and they denied me. So, I went to a few other places in the area they didn't hire, so I'm disappointed the first day back and didn't get a job and so I went home and by the time I got home my mother told me, "You got a phone call from Sears Roebuck. They hired you, you start to work tomorrow," so the next day I went to work at Sears Roebuck and they put me in the furniture department as a salesman and because I knew about upholstery, I knew about fabrics, I knew about furniture, you know wood, and stuff, so I fit right in. And that was the first time I had realized that I had the ability to make money at selling stuff. This was 1970. My first year income was $18,000. Story_ID: 148235 Speaker 1: Now in 1970-- Speaker 2: That's a lot of money. Speaker 1: That was a lot of money. Teachers were only making fifteen [thousand dollars]. Chicago police officers were only making fifteen thousand [dollars] and here I am making eighteen [thousand dollars]? You know, I like this sales thing. So, anyway as my career went on with Sears [Roebuck & Company] I wanted to learn something, so the store was looking for someone to teach how to sell draperies. So, I'm saying to myself well you know why don't we create a department called interior decorating. They thought young ideas, okay. So, okay we'll send you to this shop they gonna teach you how to make drapes. And sure enough I went and learned how to make drapes. I came back to the store, this was only like a week of training, came back to the store they gave me the title of interior decorator coordinator. So, and they advertised an interior decorator coordinator and I would go out to people's homes with my swatches of carpeting and my photographs of furniture and my samples drapes and I was an interior decorator coordinator, and I did that for a number of years and then I became afraid of that job. Simply because back in those days I was young, I was handsome (laughter), at least I thought it was, and most of the calls that I would get to come out to the home were from women, and a number of times I would be in a customer's home showing them draperies or carpeting or furniture and the husband would come home not knowing that I had an appointment and a few times I had to leave in a hurry (laughter). They didn't want to hear the Sears stuff, you know. So, I, I realized that that job could be hairy, so we developed a system where when we call the customer, "When will you and your husband be home?" But then again after a while I became discouraged with that because you know it wasn't macho selling drapes (laughter). Story_ID: 148236 Speaker 1: I wanted to get back into the engineering end of the business, so I applied to sell plumbing and heating because my father [Wellington Hampton] owned this building and he taught me about plumbing and how to fix things and my background in school had to do with, I knew what a catch basin was an overhead drain was and I knew that stuff, so of, of a furnace, a boiler, pipe fitting, it all fell into place and so they hired me as a plumbing and heating salesman, and I would go out to people's homes and actually sale them a new furnace or a boiler, tear out the old one put a new one in guaranteed by Sears [Roebuck & Company]. I stayed with Sears for almost ten years and of course I liked going to school. So, I told Sears I said you know I would like to become a manager. You know it looked like a pretty good job, prestigious type job. I wanna become a manager. So, Sears said well you have to, you don't have any experience in management and marketing and sales and all this type of stuff, but they said well we have a Sears Institute, which they did. It's a home study deal. Oh, that's perfect I'm accustomed to home study, you know, I know what to do. So, I took courses from Sears Institute and marketing, how to run a department, how to run a division, sales, management, the whole shot. I received average As and Bs and got certificates and so on. So, anyway, after I completed all the required courses that Sears had to offer I applied for a simple job as a department manager. Basically, I didn't care what department I wanted to be a manager. So, they told me well we can make you the manager of the shoe department of the shoe department. Manager of the shoe department wait a minute hold it. I'm an engineer (laughter), I have a degree in engineering, I'm not gonna sale shoes. I want a management job, and they politely told me they said, "Well Jack if you don't take this job in the shoe department we can't hire you as a manager." Why? "Well, we don't have any black managers." Well, then it hit me why did you have me take all of these courses in management? "Well, if you stay with Sears one day we will, and you'll fit right in." Well by this time I was disappointed, discouraged, and I quit. The next day I went to Montgomery Ward, downtown Chicago [Illinois] State Street walked through the door, they hired me right away to sale TVs. Within a month's time, I was an assistant manager. Within a year's time, I was a manager over about six different departments. Then after that, they made me assistant executive vice president of marketing, merchandising, and my career took off in that area of retail. Story_ID: 148237 Speaker 1: Well, as the years went on with Montgomery Ward's [Montgomery Ward, Chicago, Illinois], I still had this urge to be an entrepreneur. Didn't know why, but I had this urge, but now I realized that my father [Wellington Hampton] instilled that in me. Corporate world was not what I thought it was gonna be. I thought the corporate world meant new cars, company accounts, going to parties and (laughter) dinners and actually it was more work for me than anything and I became solely discouraged with that. So, I quit my job and I went to Maxwell Street [Market, Chicago, Illinois] (laughter). Speaker 2: This sounds vaguely familiar. Speaker 1: Sounds familiar. I quit my job. By this time, I was married, a couple of kids. Quit my job, went to Maxwell Street, my wife [Jennifer Hampton] thought I had lost my mind, I was crazy. You had a good job, a good career and you gonna go do what? I'm gonna sell junk at Maxwell Street. What do you have to sell? Nothing. So, I got in my car and I went through the alleys just like my father did and I picked up junk so to speak in the alley, went home, repaired it, paint it, fix it up, took it to Maxwell Street and sold it. And I did this on Saturdays and Sundays for a number of years. By this time, my father and mother [Rose Newman Hampton] they were up in age and they no longer went to Maxwell Street, so they were kind of happy that I took--I didn't sell food, but everybody knew who I was, you know, and then political things changed. Jane [Margaret] Byrne became mayor and she-- Speaker 2: '83 [1983] now. Speaker 1: Yeah, something like that and she-- Speaker 2: No, no, no, I'm sorry '79 [1979] Jane Byrne--(unclear)-- Speaker 1: Okay, yeah I don't remember the exact year and so she made it mandatory that everybody on Maxwell Street have a business license. So, we had to get a business license ID card. We had to get tax numbers and all that kind of stuff, and then Maxwell Street started to fall. It was no longer Maxwell Street that we, that I grew up with. Story_ID: 148238 Speaker 1: The atmosphere over there [Maxwell Street Market, Chicago, Illinois] maybe--describe that for us on some level because I think it's historical (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Oh God, the atmosphere--early in the morning, five o'clock in the morning, four o'clock in the morning very quiet, very dark trucks, cars, pulling in slowly. Merchandise tables strapped to the top of the cars. People finding spots to set up their tables and the early morning you can hear the clanging and banging of tables being opened and, and merchandise being put out on the tables and then slowly you start hearing people talking, voices speaking to each other good morning, you know, hope you have a good day. How's the weather, you know, hope it doesn't rain. As it became daylight, more tables, more people starting to, shoppers starting to flow into the area. Early morning what you did as a seller was you had somebody watch your table while you ran around the [Maxwell Street] Market [Chicago, Illinois] real quick to see if you could find a deal (laughter), and you would buy that deal whatever it is from your competitor and you would bring that deal back to your table and you would sell it at a profit and sure enough I got in the habit of doing that. I would go down real early in the morning I would go around to all the dealers and I would buy stuff, and I would bring it back to my table and double the price and sell stuff. Then the aromas of the food, all the different smells and then you had all kinds of things going on. You had pickpockets. You had to be aware of pickpockets. You know that was a big thing. You put your money in your pocket and all of a sudden a pickpocket come along. You had to be aware of, of thieves. Turn your back somebody steal your stuff, there goes your profit. You had to know who the police were in uniform and out of uniform so in case something happened you can call them right away. That atmosphere was, it was, it was great. It was a friendly atmosphere, comradery. There weren't that many black people selling at Maxwell Street and I would go around to the different tables you would see Lithuanians, Pols [Polish], Jews, everything you can think of was in that area. Everybody speaking in different languages and everybody treating me with respect and it was because of my father [Wellington Hampton]. I can remember people saying, they called me Hamp, Little Hamp. Little Hamp come here and they would shove money in my pocket, say take this to your father and, and the reason why they did that was because after my father set up those stands at Maxwell Street they made him the market master on Saturdays. The market master was basically somebody that, that collected the money. What happened with the money was this, the area was political and it was run by alderman and congressman, and, and gangsters. What kind of gangsters I don't know, but it was-- Speaker 1: John D'Arco and-- Speaker 2: Mafiosos and that type of stuff. So, if you wanted to sell your wares in their neighborhood, set up your table, you had to pay a percent of what you made, okay, and they would come around and whatever you gave them they were okay with. If you gave them ten dollars fine, five dollars, or I don't have anything this week. Oh, no problem see you next week. And so what they did was my father didn't want any pay for helping him do those stands down there, so they made him market master and people would just bring him money, and they would see me and they would stuff money in my pockets. There were times when I would have $3,000 in my pocket as a little kid. Story_ID: 148239 Speaker 1: But anyway getting back to what I-- Speaker 2: Yeah, your Maxwell Street [Market, Chicago, Illinois] career (unclear). Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm selling on Maxwell Street and as the years went on, I decided that, you know, I had to be an entrepreneur. I had to do something else. I'm, I've learned all of this business from Sears [Roebuck & Company, Chicago, Illinois] and Wards [Montgomery Ward, Chicago, Illinois]. I can apply this, I'm smart enough to apply this and start my own business and-- Speaker 2: When in this process, did you become-- Speaker 1: Entrepreneur? Speaker 2: --no, a sheriff's deputy? Speaker 1: Oh, okay let me finish this and I'll tell you. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: So, one day I'm standing on the L [elevated train] platform at Adams and Wabash and I'm looking over the L platform and waiting for the L. I don't know what happened to it, but it wasn't on time. And I'm looking and for some reason I'm counting automobiles going by. I'm saying well I could sell automobiles, that's a lot of money. Then I started daydreaming well if I sold automobiles, how about if I sold trucks they cost more money, more, more commission for me and what about the guy selling airplanes and boats I could sell one Boeing 47--[Boeing] 747 for ten million dollars think of the commission I could make on that. Selling is where I want to be so, but for some reason it hit me on each car that passed there were four tires on the ground and one in the trunk and automobiles they buy accessories, you know you need air and you need fix a flat and you need wrenches and tools and you, you need parts and all of this. You know the automobile industry you know that's something I haven't done before I would like to do that. So, while I was working at the flea market I went to work for Vogue Tire Company [Vogue Tyre & Rubber Co., Chicago, Illinois], which was supposed to have been the most prestigious tire company in the world. They hired me right away as a salesman, and I would go out to the dealers and sell them tires to put on the new cars and so I learned the tire business through Vogue, but I still, I wasn't making the money I wanted to make, so one day I became discouraged with that because they had me chauffeuring people around when I should have been selling and that cut into my selling time. That cut into me making a profit for myself, money for myself. So, I left the company, started my own tire business, yeah. Speaker 2: What was the name of your company? Speaker 1: Tires Plus [Chicago, Illinois] (laughter). Speaker 2: Where were you? Speaker 1: We were 82nd [Street] and South Chicago [Avenue], yeah, so I had five hundred bucks, I rented the place, fixed it up, and opened it up and I hired a couple of Vogue employees, and so we started off doing the tire business. Story_ID: 148240 Speaker 1: --Now you had asked me about a sheriff. When did I become a sheriff? Now we're skipping around here a little bit. Back when I was in the [U.S.] Military, before I went to the military I was working for Burns Detective Agency [William J. Burns Detective Agency, Chicago, Illinois] and when I came on leave a couple of times from the military, you get like a month. I had a part-time job, I always worked, working for Woolworth's as store security. So, I did investigating, store security. I did some of everything. So anyway when I came home on leave I would go back to work for Woolworths for that month while I was home to make some extra month. We didn't get paid that much in the military. So, anyway I met a couple of guys that worked there that were big shots for the [Cook County] Sheriff's Department, lieutenant, sergeants, big time people and you know I'm always, I was impressed with that badge and that uniform and so I asked them you know how could I become a sheriff, you know, deputy sheriff? Pretty badges. They were good and big, you know (laughter). So, and then they told me and basically what it was are you politically connected? No. What does that mean? How do I become politically connected? Well, if you become politically connected then you can get a letter from your ward committeeman alderman and you would take that letter to the sheriff as a letter of introduction and they will hire you. You know do I have to take a test? Not if you got five hundred bucks (laughter). So, anyway this was in, I'm trying to remember, '68 [1968] I think it was when I came home on leave. They had the Democratic [National] Convention here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: '68 [1968] yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's when the riot broke out. Speaker 1: Yeah they had the big riot [1968 Chicago Convention Riots, Battle of Michigan Avenue]. And I was home on leave at that time, and so the deputy sheriff that I worked with at Woolworths they said look you wanna be a sheriff come with us. So, we went on downtown and Sheriff [Richard J.] Elrod at the time he, he got hurt in the riots. Matter of fact he was hurt so bad that he became a paraplegic. A lot of people didn't know that because they didn't show him on camera, but he had to walk with two canes that kind of strap to your arm. And so Elrod developed a riot squad, so to speak, 'cause this was unheard of the sheriff's department did not have a riot squad who was trained for riots, and so anyway I'm in the military I can't, I gotta go back. Well while you're here you gonna be on the riot squad. You're gonna train for the riot squad. So, learning, and we had military boots and khakis and stuff, you know I'm accustomed to this and I'm young and handsome, and I'm strong (laughter). Story_ID: 144927 Speaker 1: We were talking about the [Cook County] Sheriff's Department. You said [Sheriff Richard J.] Elrod was hurt in the riots [1968 Chicago Riots] and a lot of people didn't know it and they were, they were trying to put together a riot squad-- Speaker 2: Riot squad yeah. Speaker 1: --and so they got you as a-- Speaker 2: I'm one of the first members of the Cook County Sheriff Riot Squad, and we were sworn in and everything and sure enough before I went back to my [U.S.] Military training it hit the news that Sheriff Elrod had formed an illegal riot squad and for some reason the newspapers and the TV didn't like the idea that he was able to swear in deputies and we--and issue us guns with no training, but that was just the reverse. Everybody that he swore in were either already a deputy sheriff or they were military, like me, you know, and we all did have training and so on. So, I then went back to my military duties. Story_ID: 144928 Speaker 1: But then when I came back home, back in the '70s [1970s] and I moved over, over on Harper, 82nd [Street] and Harper [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], and I'm trying to remember the name of the community, and one day I received an invitation to come to the 8th-- Speaker 2: That's Avalon Park [Chicago, Illinois] I guess right? Is that the one? Speaker 1: No, it was I'll think of it in a minute. Avalon was like a little further over. I received an invitation to come to the 8th Ward regular Democratic [Party] organization and for a meeting and I'm like well you know I can get into politics a little bit. So, I, I went to the 8th Ward meeting and I met [HM] John Stroger, who is now president of the [Cook] County Board. Well while I'm doing all this remember I'm still at Maxwell Street [Market, Chicago, Illinois] selling my junk, and my father [Wellington Hampton] had passed away and my mother [Rose Newman Hampton] had inherited my father's truck, which was a Chevy [Chevrolet] type step van, and what my father did while he was selling food there he converted this truck into like a, a kitchen where he did all of his cooking and stuff. That was his stand so to speak and he, we, we sold, he sold food out of that. So, when my father passed away my mother gave me his truck and sure enough I'm back at Maxwell Street selling food. Well, Jane [Margaret] Byrne said we have to have license and the law in the City of Chicago was that a truck like this could not have a license to sell food because you had to have, it had to be connected to plumbing. You had to have a washroom where the customers could wash their hands, and besides to sell food you have to have a food service sanitation certificate. So, here I am off to school again (laughter) out at Olive, Olive-Harvey [College, Chicago, Illinois]. I took the food service sanitation course and I a graduated got my certificates and so on. Now, I go to get my license they said no such license you can't have a license. So now I go to the powers to be at Maxwell Street and say hey you know I'm not gonna stop selling food, you know, but I'm not gonna get tickets and stuff and be harassed you know, what are you gonna do? You go back to [Chicago] City Hall and apply for a license. I went to city hall and I applied for a food service vendor's license, what they call a cart license, and I got it. It was the only food service license ever issued, cart type license ever issued for that type of truck in Maxwell Street and I to this day I still have the tag, only one, and haven't been one since. So, hence I'm learning politics. So, that was basically the end, end of that. Eventually--I've always sold at the flea markets. Story_ID: 144929 Speaker 1: So you're a deputy sheriff on the side now, and-- Speaker 2: I'm a deputy part-time--oh, how did I become a sheriff? I be--went to the meeting, I'm selling food at Maxwell Street [Market, Chicago, Illinois], go to get my license and the truck's gotta be inspected by the health department. Well I'm like hey I got political connections here, no health department. So, the guy came out. He lived in the 8th Ward where I lived, and trying to remember his name, and I'm telling him like it is look I got political connections, I don't care what you say health department or not I'm selling food. So he said calm down young man, calm down. He said come to a couple of meetings and here I'll approve your license here, you know, so he gave me the approval and everything, which enabled me to get the license. Come to a couple of meetings, you're a young guy we need to learn politics. So anyway I wound up becoming the assistant precinct captain and then I eventually becoming the precinct captain and my son was born, Jonathan, just after [HM] John Stroger lost his son to death, asthma I think it was, he died of asthma, and my wife [Jennifer Hampton] and I were so upset and we, John had become, Stroger had become friends, family. So, we named our son John Hampton, Jonathan Hampton and we asked John Stroger if he would be the godfather and of course he did, and we had it officiated in church and the whole thing, baptized him. So, John Stroger is my son's godfather (laughter), legal godfather, and so after that I started playing the political game and I went and asked for some favors and the next thing I know I'm at the sheriff's academy taking classes. I get my state license and whatever it is that you have to get to become a deputy sheriff legally and so, and I worked what we called holiday court and special events and every weekend I worked and on Christmas and New Year's I worked. If they had big events, I worked. One of the major events I remember was that El Rukns [gang, Chicago, Illinois] was having a big problem with the police, Mark Clark and all that, the Black Panthers. Speaker 1: That was El Rukns or the Black Panthers, which one? Speaker 2: It was both, it was both. It was around that time Black Panthers and the El Rukns. Speaker 1: This is 19-- Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974], '76 [1976], something like that. Speaker 1: Okay, now Mark Clark was dead by, by that time. Speaker 2: By that time yeah. Speaker 1: The Black Panthers got killed in '69 [1969] or '70 [1970]. Speaker 2: Seventy. Speaker 1: The El Rukns now still had, and they had morphed into the El Rukns by the late '70s [1970s]. Speaker 2: By the late '70s [1970s], right. Speaker 1: They started off as the Blackstone Rangers-- Speaker 2: Blackstone Ranger, yeah exactly. Speaker 1: [Black] P. Stone Nation--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: P. Stone Nation. That's when gangs really started to, to grow, and what happened was for some reason the sheriff would always assign me to whenever the gangs went to court, whenever they went to jail. I was always assigned to that, that project. I don't know why, I never asked. It was, it was interesting. So as the years went on, it was a political job. It kind of faded out a little bit, so, but I had fun (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 144930 Speaker 1: Now you were running a tire shop [Tires Plus, Chicago, Illinois] (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I opened a tire shop, I learned the tire industry, the tire business. I did that for about five years. Speaker 1: Okay. Now and this leads us to, to, well I just want to point out too that your, your, your wife [Jennifer Hampton] at that time was, she was a police officer--(unclear)--police officer? Speaker 2: Well, that was a funny story too. I met my wife at a birthday party via martial arts and we got married. We, we dated for five years before we got married, and we were married for five years almost before we had our first child. She said she wanted to make sure I was normal (laughter) before she had children. She became a deputy sheriff also. We had, she, she had a master's degree, much smarter than I was, pretty woman, and she, she worked for southern, oh God the university down at southern Illinois. Speaker 1: Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois]. Speaker 2: One of those schools. Anyway, then she came back--she would drive back and forth every day and that was kind of hectic and rough on the car, expensive. So, she got a job working for the [Cook County] Sheriff's Department also, and the unique thing about that was--you know strange things happen in life you can't explain. One day I'm walking down the street, don't know where I was going, but it was on Stony Island [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] going towards 79th Street and this paper was blowing in the street. I'm trying to read it as I'm walking along and I stop, pick the paper up and I'm reading this paper and it says to the effect that there was going to be a class at some hospital in regards to rape, rape. You know and I'm, this doesn't make any sense to me. I balled the paper up and threw it away, I'd been reading garbage on the street anyway, but after I got home I'm telling my wife you know I saw this piece of paper I don't know why I saw this piece of paper you know it doesn't make sense. She know working for the sheriff's department and the sheriff then said they wanted her to teach self-defense at the training academy, which she did because she was a martial artist. I didn't want to teach self-defense I wanted to carry the guns (laughter), and so she became discouraged with teaching self-defense over there. So, I had told her you know that thing I read on rape, rape pre- prevention why don't you start a class for the sheriff's department on rape prevention. She said hmm that's a pretty good idea. So, I said lets write it up real quick. You know you can go to work, you can have a desk, you can go by the schools and hospitals and you can talk to people, do that public relations things, you know. So, we wrote it up and, and then we presented it to the sheriff it was a great idea, great idea. So, then after a while they had to sign a Dr. Conte [ph.] to our team. I became a part of her team, and Dr. Co--we got a company car, a sheriff's car to take home with us, free gas (laughter). Dr. Conte was a doctor of philosophy or psychology over at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. He agreed to work with the sheriff's department because we had to learn how to talk to children about rape prevention, about don't touch, you know, that deal if touch and tell and-- Speaker 1: Bad touching. Speaker 2: --bad touching and good touching, so we sought out a lady who was in the same field, trying to do the same thing and she had invented these dolls, anatomically correct dolls. So, the sheriff's department bought a bunch of these dolls, so my wife would go to the schools and she would teach the kids and I got, I think I may have an article or two about rape prevention. It became a big deal. It became a very big deal. Consequently, I got involved with a program called the We Care Role Model program to do basically the same thing via a couple other organizations. But, anyway, she became, she was a sheriff of--and so she--they were making, the police started making money. They started making eighteen, twenty, twenty-five, twenty-four thousand dollars to start and I'm saying no you gotta leave this sheriff's job, I do too (laughter). They making more money over here, so she--in those days you had to take a test and buy a stamp to take the test, twenty-five dollars [Chicago] City Hall, buy the stamp, then you qualify to take the test. I went and bought the stamp for her, put it on her application. She didn't take the test, and the reason she didn't want to become a cop at the time. So, eventually I convinced her to take the test all right. They hired her, but she couldn't go to training because she got pregnant. So, they said okay we'll wait until your pregnancy is over and then we'll call you again next time we hire cops. So, sure enough they called her the second time, but she couldn't go she was pregnant again with my second son and they called and said this is the last time. They called her the third time she went to work for Chicago Police Department and she became a regular police officer then, you know. So, yeah she was a Chicago cop. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 144931 Speaker 1: Through all this activity and all these different career paths and--now how did you decide to get involved in stained glass? Speaker 2: When I was in Germany, I told you the story where I ran out of money and I had to go work for a glass company [Sholmyer Glass Company]. I came back to Chicago [Illinois] and went to work for Sears [Roebuck & Company] and now remember I was a junk man along with my father [Wellington Hampton] traveling the alleys and so as I was traveling the alleys looking for junk to sell at the flea market, I would run across stained glass windows, broken and busted and thrown in the garbage. Oh my God you know these are beautiful windows and they're just throwing them in the garbage. Over in Europe, these things are worth gold. You know they idolize these things. So, I started picking up stained glass windows and storing them in my basement, my garage. Well, when I started selling at the flea market [Maxwell Street Market, Chicago, Illinois] I said well you know let me take a couple of these windows out there and sell and I would repair them and take them out there and sell, but I had some broken ones on my truck one day and antique dealers scarfed these windows up like they were something good to eat and even the broken ones, we'll take them. So, I started picking them up in the alley and taking them to the flea market. I took them so fast I didn't have time to repair them. They were buying them. No matter what price I put on them. I was selling them cheap at first ten dollars apiece. Then I went up to twenty dollars apiece. Then I went up to fifty dollars apiece. Then I went up to one hundred dollars apiece. I had busted windows they're paying this kind of money for, so this a repaired window $250 dollars I could get at the flea market. So, I decided I said well let me find a company that I can go back to work for doing stained glass, 'cause there's money in this business and there was no company around to find, couldn't find anybody. I ran across one company and they were Polish I think. They couldn't even talk to me in English enough to tell them I wanted to work for them. Anyway, so I had, the windows that I repaired I used the broken windows that I found, the scraps and I repaired them and I took them and sold them. Well, I couldn't find enough in the alley, so I started going to the city dumps, and I would go through the garbage out there and I would find these windows and take them--I've had a number of tetanus shots by the way (laughter), and, and I would sell these windows. Well, after a while the selling of the windows and people got to know that I did stained glass, had the stained glass and they would come to me, "Look we want one this size and this size and this color and that color," and so I had learned how to make stained glass windows, so I started using scraps to make different designs and I would take those and I would sell them, get me two hundred dollars for one of these things. Take me four hours to make one. And so after while looking around for suppliers in glass I found that somewhere around 1920 stained glass fell out of favor in this country simply because there was nobody around to repair it. Most of the immigrants that came to this country that did stained glass they died off, and as they moved North from the South their children didn't take over the trade. They learned the trade, but they didn't take over the business. They wanted to be lawyers and doctors and dancers and actors or whatever. So, I wound up inventing my own tools to, to do this trade with and I wound up inventing techniques of doing things to repair windows and I realized that the stuff that I learned in Germany I'm applying here, okay. Now, there's nobody around to teach this in the street to, but my two children they were around all the time and they learned, so I would draw little cartoon things like Mickey Mouse and I would teach them how to cut glass and how to solder and do what we call foiling and you know they would make little Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck and they would hang them in their windows, but, they were going to flea markets with me too and what happened was I treated them the same way my father [Wellington Hampton] treated me. If they went to the flea market with me and they sold, I split the money with them. Here they were little children running around with a lot of--one day a lady called me from the neighborhood grocery store and said, "Mr. Hampton said your children Jack and John, yeah, they have too much money." I said, "What are you talking about?" "They come to the store and they got a lot of money. What are they doing to get for all this money?" "They work you know." They have twenty and thirty dollars and they just little. I said,"Yeah they work at the flea market and they, that's their money to do whatever they want with it," and, "well the other kids are gonna rob them," and all that. I said, "I don't think so they're into martial arts too," (laughter). So, so getting back to stained glass as the years went on I only found one other guy that did stained glass in the Chicago area he was a black man. His name was Mack. I forget his first name, but his last name was Mack [ph.], and he advertised in the oh it was a black phone directory called the 'Black Book'-- Speaker 1: 'Black Book Directory.' Speaker 2: 'Black Book,' yeah he advertised in that a lot. Speaker 1: About what year did you really start dealing with stained glass? Speaker 2: Full--part-time right off from 1970 when I got back. Full time I started doing stained glass somewhere around 1985 full-time. Speaker 1: So, there were only two, only the two af--the two African American stained glass people in town? Speaker 2: Yeah, those, it was the only other guy I could find. Speaker 1: A guy named Mack. Speaker 2: Yeah, so anyway, matter of fact one day he passed away, and his wife and I became very good friends. She befriended me because I was in the stained glass business, and she's a family friend right today. Story_ID: 144932 Speaker 1: As the years went on, I ran across a guy. He had a stained glass store in southwest suburbs of Chicago [Illinois] called Southwest Stained Glass [Studio, Oak Lawn, Illinois], and this guy I went by his shop and met him and we had something in common. Not only did we do stained glass, he collected Al Capone memorabilia stained glass windows, so like booths and stuff like this, anything that was associated with Al Capone had stained glass he collected it and the rea-- Speaker 2: Were there such items around Al Capone? Speaker 1: Oh yeah Al Capone he had his favorite booth at Batts Restaurant [sic, Mama Batt's Restaurant, Chicago, Illinois] was made of walnut wood and it was stained glass had his photograph in it, yeah, yeah. But, and, and he was wrote up in the newspaper, [Chicago] Tribune I think about his collection of Al Capone memorabilia and we got along because I lived right there in Al Capone's hotel [Lexington Hotel, later New Michigan Hotel, Chicago, Illinois]. I lived on the same floor where Al Capone lived and so we, we became friends and he passed on in years. Then I ran across another guy in Homewood [Illinois] him and his wife Esposito [ph.] they did stained glass, they passed on. And it seemed like everybody I met doing this trade passed on, so I'm still out here by myself. And then one day I don't know why I got the bright idea trying to find an association, so I finally found the United States Stained Glass Association [later, Stained Glass Association of America] in Missouri and I called them and they made me privy to everybody around that was doing stained glass. I became a member of the association. I started going to seminars and conventions and things like that. As the years went on, one day I decided well I'm tired of Maxwell Street [Market, Chicago, Illinois], the weather was cold and so I'm gonna open a shop at 103rd [Street] and Western [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Seventy-five dollars I rented office space. It was a one-room shop and I--people would bring me windows to this one-room shop for repair. It was next door to an antique shop and they sold stained glass and they would tell people that I was next door and they would bring me stained glass for repair. Well, about six months later I had to move out of there it was too small, so I rented a bigger shop $175 a month, second floor over the karate school (laughter). I knew the guy, Mike [ph.], and so he fixed it up where I could get the whole second floor almost for 175 dollars a month. So, while I was in the tire business I tried to get a loan, a small business loan, and it didn't work out and that's a story in itself. If you want I'll tell you that story that's-- Speaker 2: That made national news. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah that made national, world-wide news. But, what happened was the word got out that I was looking for a loan and one day while I'm in my shop at 103rd and Western I get a knock at the door and there was this tall white guy came in and he's the president of Blue Island First National Bank [sic, First National Bank of Blue Island, Blue Island, Illinois] and he said, I'm eating my lunch McDonald's at the time on the desk, and he came in introduced his self and he's looking around and he's looking at my stuff so to speak, people wanna see stuff, and he's saying, "You make money at doing this?" I said, "yeah." You know he said, "I never heard of anybody making money at doing stained glass." I said, "Yeah you know." He said, "Evidently you do. The lights are on, you know it's warm in here (laughter), you know the bills are paid." I said, "Yeah I'm making a living at doing this." And he said, "Well look, we have a problem in Blue Island [Illinois] and if you would consider moving your operation to Blue Island, my bank will make you a loan." Story_ID: 144933 Speaker 1: So, the president [of First National Bank of Blue Island, Blue Island, Illinois] said, "If you come to Blue Island [Illinois], move your operation to Blue Island, we'll make you a loan. How much money do you need?" "I don't need a whole lot of money. All I need is like $10,000 to grow my business." "Well, $10,000 you know we don't make loans for $10,000, you know. We make loans for a minimum of $80,000 and up." Eighty thousand, I don't need $80,000. I wouldn't know what to do with $80,000 at one shot. That was at that time. But, anyway the reason why he came to me was because he had heard that I was having trouble getting a loan via the [U.S.] Small Business Administration. This particular year, I can't remember the exact year, but it had to be in the '80s [1980s]. I applied for a small business loan, and they turned me down. And the reason they turned me down was because I didn't have a business plan, a marketing plan. Well I knew what that was because I was taught by Sears [Roebuck & Company, Chicago, Illinois] and Montgomery Ward's [Montgomery Ward, Chicago, Illinois] what a marketing plan was and a business plan was, so I said oh that's all I need, I'll put together a marketing plan, business plan, and I applied for the loan. Well I went and applied for the loan and they told me, "Oh no, no, no we can't loan you any money it's a marketing plan and a business plan, but you didn't go to school for this." You mean I gotta go back to school to learn how to do a market plan and a business plan. So, I said, "I don't think so." So anyway I went from bank to bank to bank to bank trying to get a loan, everybody turned me down. What do you have for collateral? I own a home. Well, we don't want to loan you money against your home because if you don't pay us back then we gotta take your home. That's the only collateral I have. I have a car. Well, your car is too old and raggedy for us to loan you any money. So, I started to play the political game. I went to a bank. I will not mention the name at this time, but it was a bank in the black community and I applied for a loan. I thought if I saw a black loan officer he would understand where I was coming from. He did not have the courtesy to interview me for a loan. Speaker 2: A bank, this is, this is a bank that is still functioning? Speaker 1: The bank is still functioning, yes. I think it's under another name now, but it's still functioning. He didn't have the courtesy to interview me. I then went to another bank downtown Chicago [Illinois], big bank, and I walked in and told them I would like to apply for a business loan and the lady had me fill out a little application and everything and so she said, "Okay we'll call you." I never heard anything about the loan. A week later I went back to inquire about the loan and the lady said, "Oh we can't loan you the money." "Why can't you loan me the money?" "You have no collateral." So, I said, "Well I'm in business." She said, "Oh you need a corporate loan then. I said, "Yeah I need a corporate loan." So, I'm kind of dressed casual like I am now and she said, "Well go up to the sixth floor." I go up to the sixth floor and when I got off the elevator the door opened up and I was immediately in an office, a hall, it was office all office, and before I could get two or three steps off the elevator a lady approached me, "Yes may I help you?" I said, "Well my name is Jack Hampton I'm here to get a loan." She grabbed me by the arm, turned me around and said, "Oh no we can't make you a loan," put me back on the elevator and sent me downstairs. My question was, down in the lobby, "Why can't you make me a loan?" You didn't, you know why won't anybody interview me or even entertain the thought of me getting a loan. Story_ID: 144934 Speaker 1: So anyway, by this time I had become involved with the Cosmopolitan Chamber of Commerce [Chicago, Illinois] and I took, I had been a member with them since 1970 and I had taken a number of classes in business with them and eventually I wound up being a lecturer for the Cosmopolitan Chamber of Commerce and I donated my time free for them to teach other people how to become entrepreneurs and to teach them some of the problems, about some of the problems I had in growing a business. Well what happened was one day the chamber of commerce had a meeting with all the big named banks, and they had business entrepreneurs come to this meeting so could learn what it is this people want from us in order to give us loans to, to grow our business and it was an education. Basically, what they said was that we were young black men who that--they were afraid to loan money to. So, one of-the [Chicago] Tribune newspaper asked the chamber of commerce if they could interview some of the entrepreneurs and they came to me and asked me if I could consider doing an interview with the Tribune, which I did, and I told them basically what the problem was. Black men cannot get a loan. Entrepreneurs cannot get a loan. I don't care if it's our own bank. They advertise on TV if you need a loan come to us and we'll help you, we're business minded and all of that, and it's not true. It is not true. So, this wound up in the business section front page of the Chicago Tribune, and it became, it went on the United Press International. What happened from that was a man called me from California. I was really surprised because he said, "Jack I see your picture in the newspaper, you're a young black guy you're gonna probably wonder why a white guy is calling you." He said, "But I'm an entrepreneur too, have been," he said, "I'm very successful." He said, "I had the same problems." He said, "It's not just because you're black." See back then we were talking about racisms and, and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and, and you know black power and all this kind of stuff and, and everything that happened to you happened because you're black (laughter), well he made me realize that it wasn't that with our conversation on the phone and so then I realized that other people were having, whites, Jews, everybody was having problems getting loans from these banks. So, I let the paper know that this is what was happening. So, this guy he called this bank that walked me out of the door, out the elevator, he called up the president down there and said, "Look my money is in your bank, a friend of mine need a loan I'm gonna send him down there and I expect you to take care of him." Well, I go back to the same bank. I step off the same elevator, the same lady approached me and it's like that I told you, you know, I'm sorry I'm here to see Mr. whatever his name was at the time and of course he then gave me an interview, and I still didn't get the loan. But, the problem [First National Bank of] Blue Island [Blue Island, Illinois] was having was that Blue Island [Illinois] was a good old boys' town at one time and all the old businessmen in that area were dying out and had died out and nobody would take, was taking over the stores and, and starting businesses and Blue Island was almost like a ghost town. Store after store after store after store was boarded up vacant, unoccupied. So, I moved in to one of the shops and they made sure I got a pretty good price, five hundred dollars a month, and they made me a loan, a thirty thousand dollar loan, which I applied to my son's education (laughter) not my business and we formed a businessmen coalition and we realized, came up with some ideas to bring Blue Island back up. And the ideas that we came up with were let's make it an antique town. You see I knew about antiques and junks and flea markets (laughter), so I was able to rent another store right next door and open an antique shop. It was actually a junk shop, but it had antiques, they were antiques and my stained glass business, and it started to grow. They started to grow, they started to grow, and Blue Island started to grow. Antique shops popped up everywhere in Blue Island. When I first moved there, I was a major player in the community. After so many shops moved in, I just became another player. Story_ID: 144935 Speaker 1: There were other people that were aspiring to be politically involved, and I was tired of it by this time. And as the years went on, I operated my business out of that little shop. I taught classes out of that shop. I did seminars all over the country out of that shop. I've done churches all over the country out of that shop. Homes all over the country, all over the city out of that little place. It afforded me to own a home, a nice car, company vehicle, send my kids, one of my children to private school, American Boychoir School, Princeton, New Jersey, which was sixty thousand a year. It afforded me to send my same son who's up at Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] now, he's a senior. He'll be coming out hopefully in December and I won't have to pay any more money there. But, the stained glass business has been good to me. And I've taught oh maybe one thousand people this trade. Stained glass now has come back with a vengeance. When I first started, there were no, there was one association [United States Stained Glass Association, later Stained Glass Association of America]. Now you have five or six associations. When I first started, I couldn't find anybody in Chicago [Illinois]. Phone books full of people now do stained glass. When I--five years ago I looked on the Internet nobody out there doing stained glass. There's so many people out there now on the Internet doing stained glass that my web page is hid out there somewhere. So, back in the '70s [1970] and '80s [1980s] I was a major player, '90s [1990s], but now just another player, there's so many stained glass stores popping up. But, my niche is I specialize in repairs and restoration. There aren't many people doing repairs and restorations because I learned in the old country so to speak and most people that are doing stained glass now are doing it as a hobby. Speaker 2: Yeah there are kits and-- Speaker 1: Kits and, yeah, something I can do when I retire and they see me making a living at what I do they say oh if he can do it I'm sure enough smarter than he is I can do it, you know. So, they come to me and they learn the craft and they, they go out and they promote themselves as stained glass artisans and they teach other people and so on. So, the industry has come back with leaps and bounds. And one of the things that helped the industry in this city was that we have what we call a bungalow program [Historic Chicago Bungalow Association, Chicago, Illinois], Chicago Bungalow is a house that is indigenous to Chicago and that house was designed to support a house, a family of four to six children with a basement, first floor, and sometimes an attic. Most of the times they had three, four bedrooms, nice living room, formal dining room, front yard, backyard, just right for raising a family. And the unique thing about it was they had stained glass windows and there were only unique to the Chicago area and-- Speaker 2: They're usually on the side or the front-- Speaker 1: Front. Speaker 2: --at the top. Speaker 1: At the top, transoms over the doors, that type of thing, and what happened was Chicago all of a sudden, well no slowly, started getting into the rehab, rehabbing. Instead of tearing it down and building new, let's rehab it. And what happened is people that moved out of the Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] area, out of the Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] area, out of the Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] area they're moving back because they want to recapture their childhood. I wanna live in grandma's house (coughing), excuse me, and part of grandma's house was that stained glass window. Well, that stained glass window was missing now. Who can we find to make that window? Who know enough about this community to replace that window for us, and I'm that person. I've been all through our community. I can walk through our community, drive through our community and I can tell you I made that window, this one, or this window. I can reproduce a window now and put it next to an original and you would not know that it was a reproduction. I have a collection of window designs unknown stained glass artisans that I've collected over the years that started around 1802 to about 1920. Story_ID: 144936 Speaker 1: Here's a question I have in regards to this, is stained glass art and maintenance a skill that was, that black people participated in back in slavery days or you know--? Speaker 2: Believe it or not, I hope you believe it (laughter)-- Speaker 1: I know wrought iron is one that's, that's definitely black, New Orleans [Louisiana]-- Speaker 2: Right, New Orleans. Speaker 1: --that's an African skill. Speaker 2: Yeah it is. Wood carving and that type of stuff also. What happened was when I first went into the stained glass business I was very adamant about it. This is something I have to do and people thought I had lost it all, that I had gone crazy. I'm gonna, I'm gonna quit a good job to do this and it was like black people don't buy stained glass, you know, but they didn't see what I saw. I saw the community being redeveloped. I saw people moving back into these homes. I saw people wanting these stained glass windows. I saw the price of stained glass go from nothing to sky high. I've seen it in the garbage, and what happened was I was beginning to doubt myself until one day a relative mentioned to me that it was perfectly logical that I go into the stained glass business. Like why? You had an uncle who owned a glass shop on 47th Street near Lake Park [Chicago, Illinois] next door to your other uncle who owned a liquor store called Gills Beer [ph.] where they used to make gallons of beer, that's a story, (laughter), and your uncle used to repair stained glass windows. My mother [Rose Newman Hampton] then told me that when you were a kid you used to go visit your uncle and you would stand there watching him do what he did stained glass windows. I had no idea. It totally blanked it out from my mind. Then it came back it's in my blood, it's in my blood. So, yes repairing windows come natural. Building windows come natural. I can make a stained--I have made stained glass windows in an hour, one hour's time. Not that difficult patterns, but I've made hard patterns in four hours, yeah, so it's in my blood. Story_ID: 144937 Speaker 1: What's the process like, briefly? 'Cause, you know, I guess people can read about how to do it in the encyclopedia, but as far as you're concerned and how you approach it, how do you approach dealing with a stained glass window? Speaker 2: Well believe it or not you're gonna, I hope you believe it, you're gonna be the first person I tell tricks of the trade. You know when, I found over the years that when you teach people something they're not fair, they're not honest with you. They come to you to learn what you do, pick your brain, and then they--and I've been told you're a sucker for teaching me this. Now I can go do this and take your business from you. Well, you don't teach everybody everything (laughter). This is the first time I'm gonna tell you what, what, what's what. Okay, the process of making a stained glass window is basically this. You fire the glass, in other words you go to a glass, a glass factory will blow the glass, big balls, and they cut it in half, laid it out and they kind of roll it, and then they cut it into squares and that's your glass that you use. Now they make glass on assembly lines. They don't hand roll it anymore. A few places still do, but not, not many. And okay you got your glass, you cut your glass, you have your glass cutter, you cut your glass and certain types of glass cut a certain way and you need a certain type of glass cutter to cut that particular glass. Some glass is harder than others, some are soft, some are brittle, and you need a certain type of glass cutter. You have to know what type of glass you're dealing with. That's one trick of the trade a lot of people don't understand. Number two is the type of the glass, type of glass cutter. In my glass cutting bowl, cutter bowl, I may have at any time six or ten different glass cutters for different things. The way you score the glass cutting the glass and the way you break the glass is very important. Remember early on in the, the interview here I told you I had to make some of my own tools, well one of the things in the industry is that now tools are being made. They got all these geniuses making tools for cutting glass and half of them don't work. They have a thing called a glass running pliers. Okay love that tool. Why? Because the customer almost every time is gonna break their glass, the student who's buying glass from you will almost every time break their glass and gonna buy some more glass from you. That I think is the worst thing in the world you can do is sell people tools that don't work and, and teach them with tools that, that that's gonna make them come back and buy from you, unscrupulous, but, so what I do is I teach people how to take a piece of glass and break it over your knee, yeah, break it on the side of the table. You don't need running pliers to break that piece of glass. I teach people how to take a pair or ordinary pliers and chip the glass around to shape it to what you need. Now they have tools, saws, band saws that cost hundreds of dollars that you can cut it to the shape, but the band saw, the blades break easily and you have to buy new blades 'cause you can't repair them. You know that's not fair. So, I teach stained glass the old fashion way and I only teach with the tools that you need. The average stained glass kit that you buy to learn this trade, hobby, cost you anywhere from three to six hundred dollars. My toolbox is valued at maybe ninety dollars. That's all you need, and these tools are sometimes ten years old. Story_ID: 144938 Speaker 1: Another trick of the trade is a lot of people don't realize how important what we call re-bars are, reinforcement bars in the stained glass window, in the church you saw a window bowing out, the round window, and one of the reasons it bowed out was because there was no reinforcement bar to help it stay in place. A lot of people don't realize there different types of reinforcement bars. Those you can see, those that you can't see, that you put into the window and it makes a stronger window. A lot of people go for these cute new designs and they, and, and with large pieces of glass and after a while the windows fall apart. Well, the trick of the trade is the smaller the piece of glass, the more lead you have, the stronger the window. A few tricks of the trade on repairs and restorations. A lot of people don't realize another reason why windows bow out is because the wood around the windows, frames, the window frames, they get wet from moist- from the rain and the wood swells and, and the window bow out. The windows gotta go somewhere, and the wood when it swells it forces the window out. Well, a lot of people will go in there and they'll take an antique window and cut it apart to make it fit a frame. Trick of the trade is you take the window out, cut the wood frame, flatten the window. How do you flatten a window? I've seen people take torches and heat them (laughter). I've seen people step on them trying to flatten them out. Trick of the trade is you go in and you cut each joint, each joint and you then slowly flatten that window out okay, a little at a time. You don't want to break the glass, it's an antique glass. A lot of it has been hand painted by artists. We have no idea who they are. Another real trick of the trade, this is the trick of the trade. This, I'm gonna put it out here and you heard it first here--stain, the lead that you use in a stained glass window is in most cases not pure lead. During the war, lead was used to make bullets. Lead then became scarce for projects like stained glass, so people who made lead they started putting other products, mixing it with the lead, and I call it garbage lead because whatever they had they put in there. They put zinc. They put steel. They put whatever they could get in there they would put in, in there to extend the lead. And what happens is over the years this lead would, the, the steel would rust and the lead would deteriorate, fall apart causing the window to deteriorate and fall apart. Well, the problem has been how do you repair that window. Okay you have a church window ten feet tall, five feet wide. You can't solder upright. You have to take that window out lay it flat, then you can solder it. But, how do you solder because the solder that we use today would not adhere to that solder because it was garbage solder so to speak. So, I developed a technique with a tool that I don't think, I think I was the only one that ever used this tool called a Dremel tool. I think I made Dremel rich now (laughter). I discovered that I could take a Dremel tool use a basic little wheel go in and clean each joint like a dentist would clean the teeth. I could clean each joint that's broken where the lead is and I could go in with a high grade chemical and clean that. A nickel, the chemical that would give a nickel coat, coating over that rust and so on, making it easy to come back and re-solder and then hence you have a strong new basic window. But, the secret is the chemical nickel. Story_ID: 144939 Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about some of your work and stuff, and your favorite and--you do stained glass windows for homes and for religious institutions too, right? What's your favorite work to do? Speaker 2: You know I really can't say that I have a favorite because I like everything that I do. I like doing repairs and restoration more than I like making new windows simply because I'm an artist so to speak, that's another story, art institute (laughter), but I'm not a great artist and I like working on great artists' work. I like working on the [Louis Comfort] Tiffany windows. I like working on Louis Sullivan's windows. There is a sense of history there. I like finding a window and finding out who, who did it, caught me digging in the ear (laughter). I hope you edit that out. I like work, find--what happens with stained glass windows is this. Stained glass windows came about for churches and the stained glass artisan was usually assigned to that church for life. It took him a lifetime to make those windows. And when he passed on his son took over and finished the work and sometimes eight or nine artisans would work on one window, but the windows were made for the glory of the Lord, not for the glory of the individual. So, it was considered taboo to sign your work, okay. So, a lot of stained glass windows are out here that are unsigned. You have no idea who made those windows unless you find the blue prints of the church or go into the archives of the church and find out who that person was. So, I like the idea of discovering these windows and finding out who made them, if it was somebody famous, a Frank Lloyd Wright student or you know discovering stuff. My, one of my favorite windows is in a house right off of Jeffrey [Avenue]. I can't remember the exact address, but it is around 72nd [Street] and Jeffery [Chicago, Illinois] right off, one block east of Jeffery and this house, a young man bought it and they came to me asked me to restore the windows that are there. There was only two windows left in the building that are original windows. And so I went and looked at the windows and it hit me that I've seen these windows before. I've seen this technique before. Before I make these windows, I have to do some research. So, of course, downtown Chicago City Hall years ago on the tenth floor you could go up there and find blue prints of old buildings. So, I discovered that this house was built by a Frank Lloyd Wright student right there at, right off of Jeffery, I think, don't know, can't remember the name of the street, and these windows had a Frank Lloyd Wright flair, air to them. And after I found that information, then I could go in there and reproduce the windows that were missing, and I did. I went in and reproduced them. You can't tell the originals from, from the new ones that are in there. But, that was, that's one of my favorite finds, one of my favorite discoveries. Another church, a window that I like, all-time favorite very simple, very plain was a church called Allen Metropolitan [C.M.E.] Church somewhere around Union [Avenue] and 116th [Street, sic, 110th Street, Chicago, Illinois], I think, and the windows--I've been there a number of times to repair the windows 'cause they play baseball out there, and the windows get broken. But the windows are just plain colors, rectangles, and they're floor, ceiling height and beautiful, beautiful windows, just, and no designs, but the color is amazing. Favorites, I don't really have a whole lot of favorites. I like 'em all. Story_ID: 144940 Speaker 1: Now you worked on the--there's a famous set of stained glass windows that are fairly new at Saint Edmund's Episcopal [Church, Chicago, Illinois] on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois]. I think they're about five years old now. Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened over there was, I was not the contractor on that job. I was a sub-contractor on that job, so some of the work that I did over there was, it was minor, but it wasn't a whole lot. It wasn't my job. One of the churches that I do like and I'm still, I hope that I have a few years left I might be able to do one or two more before I really retire, was Mount Pisgah Missionary Baptist Church, 4600 South King Drive [Chicago, Illinois]. I went over there and the windows were falling out. The holes in the windows were so big that the heating bill in the winter time was running them out of there. People had to sit in the church with coats on because the windows were so bad. That church is one of my favorite. There's a skylight there that I was hoping that I could have got the contract on, about a million dollars to repair. I'm still hoping for that one, and we might get it anyway, yeah. Speaker 1: Mount Pisgah is a huge church. Speaker 2: Huge church. Speaker 1: I met the reverend over there-- Speaker 2: Jackson [ph.]. Speaker 1: --Jackson yeah. They have an annual [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] program there with AmeriCorps. The church is, it's, it's hard to keep up with repair. It used to be a Jewish-- Speaker 2: It used to be a Jewish church. Speaker 1: --synagogue-- Speaker 2: Synagogue yeah. Matter fact the book I showed you earlier that church is in there. And what I found out was real strange most of the churches I work on are synagogues of some sort or huge churches you know. Speaker 1: On Jeffery near 71st [Street, Chicago, Illinois] there was a synagogue. Speaker 2: Yeah there was a synagogue. There is a story behind that too (laughter). I can tell you stories about a lot of these churches. Speaker 1: Old Landmark [Church, Chicago, Illinois], Old Landmark. Speaker 2: Old Landmark yeah, but yeah I've, I've done work on all the major churches in the Chicago [Illinois] area at one time or another either minor or major repair, large or small. There's so many of them that no one particular church come into mind and most of the work I've done has been repairs and restoration. Story_ID: 144941 Speaker 1: Okay, now you've taught your son, you know--now how many children do you have? Speaker 2: I have three children. I have a daughter by my first wife who I was married to for three days (laughter), and I have two sons by my second wife [HM Nelvia M. Brady-Hampton] who was I married to for thirty years. Three days, thirty years, go figure (laughter). Speaker 1: Really three days? Speaker 2: Yeah, I decided this wasn't for me, but my daughter was conceived and, but it took me five years to get a divorce, yeah. But-- Speaker 1: Is one of your sons that's involved-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I have, my oldest son his name is Jack Hampton [ph.] and that's my buddy. He's been my running buddy. I don't know why, but I guess fathers tend to lean toward their first born. I don't know what it is, but he's so much like me, and I really enjoyed, enjoy teaching him and his other brother the things that my father [Wellington Hampton] taught me to make them rounded complete men and these kids they soak this information up like sponges and he works with me. They've been around me all their lives doing stained glass, and he's just as good as I am. Sometimes I hate working with him because he's one of these people that don't want to stop. He'll start a project and want to finish it, you know. I wanna work from nine to five (laughter). He wanna work from nine to nine, you know, nine to midnight you know. Speaker 1: From nine to whenever he gets finished right-- Speaker 2: To whenever you finish you know I'm like you know come on you know. So, but yeah he's twenty-four now. He's still a young kid. He's got great ideas about opening a stained glass shop. Sometimes I have second thoughts about the training that I've given them over the past. I taught them how to be entrepreneurs. I taught them how to be self-sufficient. I taught them how they don't have to depend on a job for money to make a living, to depend on their own abilities and skills. And at twenty-four years old he realized now that he doesn't want to work for anybody, that he wants to be an entrepreneur and between the partying and making stained glass he's, he's coming around. He's a better flea marketer than I am (laughter). But my second son, Jonathan [ph.], he's the brains of the family. He's the one that's gonna go on and get the Ph.D., and he's the one that wants to be a millionaire and that type of stuff, so. Story_ID: 144942 Speaker 1: Now--leads me to this question that we always ask, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: Wow, that's a serious question. You know, I get to the point where I don't even turn my TV on anymore because I hate hearing bad news, and it seems like everything that I hear comes from our community bad. You never hear about the good in the community. You never hear about what's going on outside of the community unless it's a major event. What I do sometimes is I'm involved in a program called the We Care Role Model Program, and this program is sponsored by the governor, the mayor of Chicago, [Chicago] Board of Education, and the Chicago Police Department. Here recently the Chicago Fire Department is getting involved. I've been involved with this program for about fifteen years, and what we do is we go out to the schools and we try to talk to the kids about, you know, being entrepreneurs, being businessmen, showing them that there are other things out here than drugs and, and gangs and so on. Sometimes we'll separate the boys from the girls and take them off to an auditorium and talk to them, and we talk to them like men and for--I got involved in that about fifteen years ago because I felt sorry for the youth coming up. You know there was almost like there was no hope for them. They were a lost generation I thought. Well one day while teaching this program, I talk, I talked with some first graders and kindergartners, and I had never talked to kindergartners before. I'm not gonna talk to a kindergartner about business and entrepreneurship. A kindergartner don't wanna hear that, wanna know when do I get the milk and cookies. Well, I learned something that day. I'm talking to these kindergartners and I'm telling them about stained glass and what I do and I'm throwing out names of churches and whatever and these kids, kindergartners, sat there and listened to what I had to say like they were adults. They absorbed that information like they were studying for finals and, and when I would come back and ask them a questions they immediately had the answers. There was no such thing as scratching my head waiting, they knew. It then hit me that our generation, the new generation of kids coming up, the community coming up, they're not lost. The new, the kids that are out here now that are growing up they're smarter, way smarter than we ever were. They're, they're intelligent. They know how to say no to drugs. They know how to say no to gangs. These kids are going to school getting their education. They're, they're becoming congressman, senators, governors. They're becoming, they're, they are striving to be presidents of corporations, and I would like to be here in fifty years to see what our community look like. I think we'd be proud of it. Story_ID: 144943 Speaker 1: When you look back on some of the things you've done, you've tried a lot of different things, is there anything that you would do differently? Speaker 2: You know, yeah I would, I would become a pilot (laughter). Speaker 1: There's still time. Speaker 2: There's still time. Oh, I don't know. I can't see that well. I wear glasses now (laughter). But, I always wanted to be a pilot. I always wanted to be that first guy to fly that rocket to the moon. Those were my dreams when I was growing up. But would I do anything differently? No I wouldn't, and the reason why I say that is because when we're growing up and we're growing through the trials and tribulations of life we try to control our destination. We try to control where we work, how much money we make, who we marry, you know, what kind of car we drive, what kind of house we live in. We try to control that, and what happens is we develop stresses and problems, physical, mental problems and I find that we if just go with the flow, go with nature, that it will all work out. I had no idea that when I went to school to become an architectural engineer, a draftsman, although I did not work in that field, I used those same techniques and that same information that I learned then to do what I do today. I had no idea then that I was gonna use those skills and why I was learning them, but they happened. I had no control over them, and they all fell in place, so I wouldn't do anything differently, no. Story_ID: 144944 Speaker 1: So, when you look back on what you have done, what would you consider as your legacy? Speaker 2: Well, I'm hoping my children will say I taught them how to be men, women, real men and women, taught them to be moralistic and self-sufficient. But, in my business legacy, I think I'm one of the people instrumental in bringing this trade, stained glass, back to life, making it truly an industry that it is today and growing to be. It, it's phenomenal what's happening out here in stained glass. Industry--the glass industry has opened back up. There are glassblowing factories everywhere. They're selling glass pieces for thousands and hundreds of thousands of dollars, money that's unheard of. There are stained glass people who are doing stained glass as their livelihood, making a living at it, where before you couldn't make a living at it. It was considered a laborious job. The industry having to do with tools, the manufacturing of tools, selling tools and supplies, phenomenal what's happening. New inventions in regards to this trade popping up--new techniques, new ideas, new tools. Things that I should have put on paper and patent twenty years ago are out here. You have kids going to school studying art who are designing stained glass windows all, and it's happening all over the world, not only in this country. And I think my legacy would be that I was one of the people that helped bring this trade back to, to where it is today because it was truly a lost craft, a lost art in this country when I started. Story_ID: 144945 Speaker 1: Would you have any advice for young people that wanna get involved in this business? Speaker 2: The advice I would have is, go to school, get an education, work for somebody if you must, but start your own business in this industry and it will be profitable. No matter what you do, you can do repairs, restoration, you can make new windows, suncatchers. You can sell tools, supplies, import, export, do small churches, large churches, new construction, antiques, it's wide open. You can sell insurance, you know, in this business. Some people are afraid to touch lead, afraid they're gonna get lead poisoning. Th- th, there are no regulations in this industry. There are no unions in this industry. You can start union. It's phenomenal what you can do in this trade right now that was unheard of thirty years ago. Story_ID: 144946 Speaker 1: And finally, the last question which is similar to legacy, but different. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, I think we all want to be remembered one way or the other. I just want to be remembered as a man that faced the odds, looked them right in the face, challenged them, and succeeded. I never belonged to a gang. I don't wear tattoos, earrings. I never became part of the norm, the, the, the crowd so to speak. I've always been my own person. There were times when I was called crazy for going into this industry, but then those same people that called me crazy they want my product (laughter). They want me to make stuff for them. They wanna buy my product. I just want to be remembered as a average person, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Nothing special. Story_ID: 144947 Speaker 1: Okay so just give us a brief description of the photo, identify the people from left to right (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Well, this photo that you are looking at now, that's a photo of my family with myself to the left, my youngest son, Jonathan [ph.], my wife Jennifer, and the guy in the superman suit is my oldest son, Jack [ph.]. This picture was taken at a nightclub (laughter) believe it or not that I worked part-time for. The name of the club was the Copper Box it was at 119th [Street] and Halsted [Street, Chicago, Illinois]. I was the security there part-time for a while, then I became the manager and went to bartending school and so on. But, anyway, we had an evening that was around Halloween and so we opened the club up for employees' families and to come in and spend some time with us that day. Speaker 1: That's me. I consider myself somewhat of a cook. Trade, the craft I learned from my parents and give me a grill, give me a pot, and that's me cooking fish. Speaker 2: How long ago was this? Speaker 1: This picture was taken oh somewhere around 1980 I think-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and it was at Masonic affair. I think they were punishing me making me cook. Speaker 2: That's my wife, Jennifer, of thirty years, and she's a seventh-degree black belt taekwondo. She's deceased now, passed away in 1999, heart attack. Speaker 1: That's me and my mother [Rose Newman Hampton]. I took my mother out to dinner one evening to celebrate her birthday, and that took place somewhere, oh somewhere in the '80s [1980s] also. Mom has since then passed on. Speaker 2: That's me with the boys, my two sons. Not only are they wore out, I'm wore out (laughter). This was again 1984 maybe. Speaker 1: That's me, my mom, and my sister. My sister's name is Yvette [ph.]. My mother's name was Rose. This, all these pictures took place around the same time, around the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: That's me and my partner from the Cook County Sheriff's Department when I was a deputy sheriff, and she, I think her name was Brenda, it's been so long. She went on to marry a, a mayor of one of the small suburbs in the Chicago [Illinois] area. Speaker 1: What year was this about? Speaker 2: Oh, that was maybe 1980. I started gaining weight then. Speaker 1: That's me and my son, Jack [ph.], and my dog, our dog, Jolene [ph.], Jolene. Jolene was a golden shepherd, and in my opinion the best dog we ever had simply because this dog could do anything, hunt, swim, guard the house, watch dog, best dog a person could ever have. Speaker 2: Such as a dainty name. Speaker 1: Yeah, Jolene. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me and some of my, one of my Masonic brothers, Geno, and a relative in the middle and Geno owns the club, nightclub called Geno's in the Park [Geno's Place] in Calumet Park 124th [Street] and Ashland [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: About what year was that taken? Speaker 2: Oh, this, I was kind of big then. That was, that was maybe five years ago, six years. Speaker 1: That's me at that same club I told you about earlier, the Copper Box, on a night when I had to work. I was kind of exhausted there and I took a moment to sit down and rest, and the photographer snapped my picture. Speaker 2: That's me and my wife and the gentleman by the name of Al J. Williams [ph.], and Al J. Williams is the founder of Modern Freemasonry in the State of Illinois, and this gentleman I met him and he took me under my wing and taught me what it was like to be a Mason. Speaker 1: Year for this? Speaker 2: Oh the year had to be maybe 1990. Speaker 1: That's a picture of me and my sons at a Dallas [Cowboys]-Detroit [Lions] football game with Emmitt Smith. Emmitt Smith right behind him over his left shoulder is my best friend, Jim Salisbury [ph.]. Jim Salisbury and Emmitt Smith grew up together, so Jim was always able to get us tickets down front to any game. Story_ID: 139786 Speaker 1: Okay this picture is a picture of me, my first grandchild, Arianna [ph.], and my daughter's mother-in-law, Mrs. Simmons [ph.]. Speaker 2: Year? Speaker 1: Oh God, 1999? Speaker 2: That's a picture of me at the Alpha's banquet maybe year 2000. Speaker 1: That's a photograph of my sister, Yvette Hampton [ph.], my only sister. Year, she was in high school then. She was Miss Englewood by the way and I would say oh God I can't remember it's been that long. It's been awhile. Speaker 2: That's an old photograph of an old friend of mine. Her name is [HM] Dr. Nelvia Brady. If I'm not mistaken you guys did a story on her. I think she might be the reason why--she is the reason why I'm here. Speaker 1: That's a picture of my sister Yvette, the one you just saw a few minutes ago, Maxwell Street [Market, Chicago, Illinois] with my mother [Rose Newman Hampton] in the background and if you look closely we're in front of that Chevy [Chevrolet] step van that I told you guys about and you can see the sausages hanging in the ceiling there and that was the beginning around the time the Maxwell Street police came into play, there they are hanging. Speaker 2: What year would you say? Speaker 1: Oh that had to be 1960 maybe. Speaker 2: What you have there is a computer-generated photograph of a stained glass window that I'm planning to design and install at this church where we are today, St. Agatha [St. Agatha's Church, Chicago, Illinois], which is 3100 West on Douglas Boulevard. We're gonna do nine of them, and what we're trying to do is make these windows look like they could be anybody. They could black. They could be Jewish. They could be Russian. We don't want them to look like they could be white. We want them to look like whatever you want them to look like. Speaker 1: This was my tire shop [Tires Plus], South Chicago Avenue in Chicago [Illinois]. That article had to do with banks not loaning entrepreneurs money. Speaker 2: And year for this? Speaker 1: Year for this if I'm not mistaken it should be right on there, '91 [1991]. Speaker 2: Upper left hand corner all of these stained glass windows are original antique windows, and they, they are windows that I've repaired or restored over the years for different reasons, different places. These windows could probably be anywhere in the world today. These windows are probably one hundred years old, each one of them. Speaker 1: This is a standard window. You see that a lot. Speaker 2: Oh yeah the tulip yeah. The tulip is in Chicago [Illinois] area is basically from Holland from that had Germany that era, Amsterdam [Netherlands]. A lot of the immigrants that did stained glass were you know from Holland and that tulip is one of the things they brought with them and a lot of the windows you look at have some sort of tulip or flower in them. Speaker 1: Yeah you see a lot of them in bungalows-- Speaker 2: Bungalows yes. Speaker 1: --that, that tulip. This looks like Frank Lloyd Wright. I don't know if it is. Speaker 2: No, it's not a Frank Lloyd Wright, but it is--back in the 1800s they were trying to modernize. They were trying to get away from the traditional. See Frank Lloyd Wright inspired a lot of that kind of--[Louis] Sullivan, Louie [sic, Louis] Sullivan inspired a lot of that kind of work, so people were trying to get away from the traditional and move into modern and that's a pretty good picture. Speaker 1: Okay that article was done by, oh God I can't remember the newspaper. It might have been the [Chicago] Tribune or the, or one of the suburban papers. But, it's a story on me doing stained glass in Blue Island [Illinois], and a photograph of me at my shop in my front window. That was a place you could have seen stuff. Speaker 2: The Economist paper, The Economist, no. Speaker 1: I can't remember the newspaper. I've been in quite a few of them. Speaker 2: The lady next to me her name is Loretta [ph.]. Speaker 1: What year was the shot of you there? Speaker 2: At the top I would say 1994 maybe. Speaker 1: Loretta, she's the lady that taught me what she could about computers (laughter). Everything I did was by hand. The other lady down here in the corner that's Brenda [ph.]. She's my secretary. Brenda started with me almost from the beginning. Now she's a surgical nurse. Put her through, my company supported her and her family to and afford her the ability to go onto school and become a nurse, so that's a good thing. Up in the corner there on the bottom is Mr. Lynch [ph.]. Mr. Lynch is not only a craftsman, but he's a good friend and I shouldn't say this, but that's my drinking buddy (laughter). The other young lady there her name is Delores [ph.]. She--I'm sorry not Delores, Regina [ph.]. Regina also learned the trade, ran her business out of my antique shop, and she also became a nurse and now she teaches nursing over at Chicago State College [sic, Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois]. The young man down there in the bottom is Latino, and he started working with me when he was a little boy, a child. Right now he's about maybe fifteen in that picture. But, what happened was in Blue Island his mother used to make him and his sister come down to my shop to learn how to do stained glass, and they were the only children that I allowed in my shop and to this day they're, they're on their way to college and they learned the, the trade. Speaker 2: Any of you younger when you were-- Speaker 1: Oh God, now this lady over here that's an interesting story. This lady over here with the ponytail, over here on the end here. Speaker 2: A picture of my son Jack [ph.] with his braids in his hair doing what he do making a stained glass window and one, the photograph below is an example of his work. Speaker 1: This is common too. Speaker 2: Oh yeah it is, very common. Speaker 1: In Switzerland when I went to small arms school, and that's me discovering while [white?]chestnuts, a little skinny there. Speaker 2: Those photographs you see there it's an old photograph of my mother when she was maybe thirty years old. My father [Wellington Hampton] next to her when he was about twenty-five. The one on the bottom they're, they're getting older there, so I would say they're in their forties there. The one up by your thumb that's my mother when she came to Chicago, sixteen years old. Speaker 1: From Jackson [Mississippi]. My ex-wife's from Carthage, Mississippi. Speaker 2: Carthage? Yeah, we still own property down there. Speaker 1: (Unclear) Speaker 2: Really? We have Choctaw, we might be related, be careful. Speaker 1: We have Chippewa-- Speaker 2: We have--..