 Story_ID: 655522 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Reuben Kwabena Abesha Keilling Harpole [HistoryMaker Reuben Harpole]. Kwabena means I was born on a Tuesday, I'm a risk taker and I'm an inspirator. Abesha [ph.] means, I'm the connector. Speaker 1: Now how do you spell that? Okay. Speaker 2: A-B-E-S-H-A, I was ordained in Ghana by a chief there. They beat drums for four hours while we co- rode from--a bus from, from Accra [Ghana] to this little small town in Ghana and my birth name, when I was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, was Reuben, named after my father [Reuben Harpole, Sr.], and Keilling Harpole, H-A-R-P-O-L-E. Speaker 1: What's your middle name? It starts with a K? Speaker 2: Keilling, K-E-I-L-L-I-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay, K-E-L-L-I- okay. Now is there a story behind that name, that's an interesting name, I've never seen that before? Speaker 2: It comes from my, my family. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, and sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nine, four, thirty-four [September 4, 1934]. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were born in Milwaukee, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Well, I retired from the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], the Center for Urban Community Development, which I was a co-founder with Dr. Belden Paulson and then I worked for the University of Wisconsin School of Education [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of Education, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for a while working with a high school and a middle school to, had quite a success there, and then after that, Dan Bader [Daniel J. Bader] of the Bader Foundation [Helen Bader Foundation; Bader Philanthropies, Inc., Milwaukee, Wisconsin] spotted me and asked me, what would I do if I had five hundred thousand dollars? I said I knew exactly what I'd do with five hundred thousand dollars. So he hired me, asked me if I was ready to leave the university, I said, sure, and I worked there for about ten years. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Went to Israel, came back to Milwaukee and did a lot of creative things here but I didn't do 'em but I received requests from people, nonprofit organizations that wanted to do something for, to help our children and help the community. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, and, what is today's date? What is today's date? Speaker 2: Oh, today's date is February, what is it, 25th? Speaker 1: First [February 21, 2017]. Speaker 2: Twenty-first, uh-huh. Speaker 1: And the year? Speaker 2: Oh, the year is 2017. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In Milwaukee, Wisconsin, at the Cudahy Towers [Cudahy Tower Apartments] right on Lake Michigan. Story_ID: 655523 Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we're required to ask that only require a short answer, and the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Barbeque. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite what? Speaker 1: Color? Color? Speaker 2: Oh, blue. Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. I love what Dr. Benjamin Elijah Mays [Benjamin Mays] told me when he was ninety-six years old, just before he passed, when I asked him this question. "Dr. Mays, what is the purpose for education?" Because at that time, a lot of students were poo pooing other kids who were studying trying to get good grades and they would deliberately get Cs so they wouldn't be harassed by other students and Dr. Mays told me this. He said, "The purpose for education is to keep the world from cheating you." And then I read it in Ebony magazine by [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett, he was talking about one of the greatest educators in the world. Lerone said that Dr. Mays said that, "If you're ignorant, the world will cheat you, if you're weak, the world will kick you and if you're a coward, the world will keep you running." Speaker 1: Gee whiz, that's something, that's, thank you. Story_ID: 655524 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history. I'm going to ask, ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Mardee Johnson [Mardee Johnson Harpole]. She was born in Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my father was Reuben Keilling Harpole [Reuben Harpole, Sr.], born in Bigelow, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay, now we're going to stick with your mother right now and then we'll go to your father's side. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: But your mother was born in what part of Arkansas? Speaker 2: That I can't remember, it's close to Little Rock. Speaker 1: Okay, and so what do you know and what year was your mother born? Speaker 2: Two thousand-- Speaker 1: In 19-- Speaker 2: No, 2316, 2016. Speaker 1: Oh, wait a minute. What was it now? She was born in-- Speaker 2: Nineteen sixteen [1916]. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixteen [1916], okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace 'em and what are the stories on that side? Speaker 2: My grandfather was from Louisiana, his name was James Wesley Johnson [James Johnson] and her mother was Geneva Jones [Geneva Jones Johnson], of course she married, her grandfather was Johnson, but she was born in Little Rock, Arkansas and then they moved to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] when my mother was still in high school and she went to Lincoln High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and that's where she met my father who was from Kansas City, Kansas. Speaker 1: Now is there a reason why the family moved from-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Just a little to your right. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a reason why your mother's family moved to Milwaukee? Did they have relatives here already or-- Speaker 2: No they didn't. He came here because of economic opportunity and he started working at Wisconsin Grey Iron Foundry, Grey Iron Foundry [Wisconsin Grey Iron Foundry Company], and when we were kids, he was very enterprising. He started, he was selling coal to families that had stoves in their house or furnaces and we would go down to Canal Street, I would go with him 'cause he's my idol, I would go with him in the truck to pick up coal and sell it to the people in the neighborhood, thirty-five cents a basket or either we'd sell 'em a ton of coal and then later, he had a rental bicycle station because young, young people love to ride a bike so he would sell 'em, he would let 'em ride the bike for twenty-five cents an hour or fifty cents for three hours and then I would catch the, pick up the telephone and take orders for tons of coal to various people homes and we'd seek, he would keep coal on the side of our house, 807 West Somers Street, and one time my grandmother asked me to go out to the, to the shed and pick up coal and bring it in so we could heat up our house and when I got out there, there was some guy in there trying to steal the coal and so when I opened the door, I surprised him, it was at night, and he ran out and I ran up the stairs screaming at, for my grandfather and he jumped over the fence and left and I haven't seen him since. Speaker 1: That's quite a story, a story. Speaker 2: Then after that, with the rental, Johnson rental bicycle station, he bought a 1937 Buick, it had seven, it had two seats in it in the front, the passenger and the driver's and passenger sides and then in the middle, between the backseat, he had two other seats, so we had seven car--seven seats in the, in the, in the Buick, 1937 Buick and then he had a wheel on the side of the Buick and then in the back there was a microphone and I could roll the window up between the passenger and the people in the back and then speak to my grandfather and then, because he had all those bikes, during the summer when they'd have parades downtown, my grandfather would dress the young people up in sailor cap and the wheels, different colors and so forth and be about thirty bikes, he had about thirty some bikes, there'd be thirty bikes behind that Buick limousine and we'd be going down Wisconsin Avenue which is the main drag in Milwaukee and, of course, I'd be looking out the window having a good time. Speaker 1: That's something, that's, so, so you participated in the parades and that sort of-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in the parades, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: Drum and bugle corps and so forth. Speaker 1: Now, now your mother finished Lincoln High School, right? Or did she finish or-- Speaker 2: I don't think she finished Lincoln High but she, later got her degree somewhere because she actually went beyond Lincoln High School into a, for working in the office somewhere. Speaker 1: Okay, so she got another degree at a business college or something? Speaker 2: At a business college, right. Story_ID: 655525 Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family. Can you give us your father's, well it's the same as yours, right? Speaker 2: Well, he was raised, we had a family farm in, in Bigelow, Arkansas and, then I don't know when he and his brother moved to Kansas City, Kansas but he went to school in Kansas City, Kansas. Speaker 1: Your father was born in 1913, is that true? Speaker 2: Ah, I, if you saw it on the (unclear)-- Speaker 1: That's what I saw on the census. Speaker 2: That's it, that's true. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. I'm pretty sure it was him. Lived on the North Side of Milwaukee [Wisconsin]-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --Reuben K. Harpole [Reuben Harpole, Sr.]-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --yeah, okay, born in Kansas City-- Speaker 2: No, he's born in Bigelow, Arkansas. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He moved to Kansas City. Speaker 1: Yeah, they had it in the census as, that's why you have to check with people because you don't really know if you read the census, it'll say he was born some place but only the people in the family really know. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well, he, and he went to school in Kansas City and graduated from there-- Speaker 1: Bigelow-- Speaker 2: --'cause I met some of his classmates. Speaker 1: So the family had land in Bigelow and-- Speaker 2: Forty acres. Speaker 1: Forty acres, okay. Speaker 2: And my uncle, he married--the person that married my father's sister, is still there, still on the farm and he had a place where you store the meat. What you call it? Speaker 1: A locker or a freezer or-- Speaker 2: No, it was-- Speaker 1: Smokehouse? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Smokehouse or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, smokehouse, yeah, 'cause one time when we went, when I was eighteen years old, went down there to visit the farm, the farm and they went out, got the bacon food and I'd never eaten so much in my life. They had pork and chicken and everything for breakfast and pancakes and eggs and they got it right from the smokehouse. Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your family acquired the land in Arkansas? Speaker 2: No, not really, just, I had a chance to see my grandfather when he was, when I was about five or six years old and he was, he was kind of ill and still in bed, and a kind of heavyset guy, that's what I remember about him and his name wasn't Harpole then, it was, I think it was Dunbar [ph.] or something like that. Speaker 1: So how did the name Harpole-- Speaker 2: That's the family name, Harpole-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --but my, my grandfather married a lady after his original wife, whose last name was Dunbar, but the Harpoles go way back. In fact, we have Harpoles in, in Washington, Seattle, Washington and Portland, Oregon where my uncle, Uncle Ike [Isaac Harpole, Sr.] lived, my father's brother, and their mother lived up there somewhere. My daughter [Annette Harpole] knows all that history. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so your father he, he went to high school in Kansas City? Speaker 2: Yeah, he graduated from high school in Kansas City and he came to Milwaukee to go to the Wisconsin State College [Wisconsin State College of Milwaukee] which is now Wisconsin, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, of Milwaukee and he went postgraduate to Lincoln High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], that's how he met my mother [Mardee Johnson Harpole]. Speaker 1: Okay, so he was in Lincoln High School doing graduate work, I mean-- Speaker 2: Doing postgraduate work. Speaker 1: Okay. Was he, was he teaching or something or-- Speaker 2: No, he was doing that just before he would go to the University of Wisconsin-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay before, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) to, to the state teachers college but he did that so he was better prepared. They have that now, postgraduate work-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in high schools. Story_ID: 655526 Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met? Speaker 2: They met at Lincoln High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my father [Reuben Harpole, Sr.] would go around, he was very husk- muscular and he would go around and they would, he would make a muscle and they were showing, talking about physical education and then that's how he met my mother [Mardee Johnson Harpole]-- Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. So-- Speaker 2: --'cause she was an undergrad, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, so they, did they get together right after high, I mean, during high school or, or when she was a-- Speaker 2: Well, right after she graduated from high school-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then she had three children, had me, my two sisters [Gloria Harpole Taylor and Mardee Harpole Hughes] and they're both gone, so I'm the only one left in the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother passed. Speaker 1: All right, and you were born in 1934. Speaker 2: Thirty-four [1934]. Story_ID: 655527 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, their talents, their, what they look like, how they walk, how they talk, what they were interested in, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Well, both of them. My father [Reuben Harpole, Sr.] was very sharp, a member of the Masonic, Prince Hall Masonic Temple. My mother [Mardee Johnson Harpole] played the piano and her voice was fantastic, probably one of the greatest voices in the, in the community and she was so beautiful until I, I refused to walk next to her during, going to school because I didn't want the young men to harass me about my mother 'cause when they'd, be talking about your mother and so on. So I would deliberately walk behind her when we were going to school and when she'd drive that 1934 limousine, people would be whistling at her at school so I'd duck my head so they wouldn't see me 'cause we had some folks on, at Ninth Street School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] where I went to elementary school and they could really talk about your mother. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was the day. Speaker 2: Called the, dozens. Speaker 1: Yeah, playing the dozens. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, now what about your-- Speaker 2: In fact, my mother was just as beautiful as Lena Horne and one time, before she passed, Lena Horne came to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and I took my mother down to meet her. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. What kind of personality did your father have? Speaker 2: My father was very brilliant and he can make a lot of folks laugh when he, you know, his friend, around his friends and so forth. So, and he also played the piano a little bit, church functions and so he's active, and in church, and later, he married, my mother took him away from a lady that he had dated in Kansas City [Kansas] and so later years, one Christmas Eve, I was walking into a church and my father said, "Son, I'd like for you to meet my wife." So he married his childhood sweetheart from Kansas City. She had, she was seventeen when they first met and he lived with her for about five years before he died. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so he was married, my mother, and I was eight years old when he left and went to Detroit [Michigan] and when he came back from Detroit, after several years, he ran into this woman that he had met, he had dated when they were in Kansas City. And so I'm still in touch with her daughter that lives here in Milwaukee but-- Speaker 1: So that would be your, your sister, too? Speaker 2: Stepsister. Speaker 1: Stepsister, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's, it's quite a story. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, so your parents split up when you were about eight years old, you said (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was eight. Story_ID: 655528 Speaker 1: Okay, well, before we talk about that, let, let me ask you about your brothers and sister- you, you have two siblings, right? Speaker 2: Two sisters. Speaker 1: Two, two sisters, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Two sisters, all right. Speaker 2: And a-- Speaker 1: And what are they like? What, what are their names and-- Speaker 2: It's Gloria Taylor [Gloria Harpole Taylor], she married a guy named Taylor, Robert Taylor [ph.], and she had two sons and they're both still alive, no, no, one's, one is deceased, Ricardo [Ricardo Taylor] is deceased. Wilbur Dixon [ph.] is still alive and quite a young man. Her first son passed unexpectedly. We did not know he was ill and he fell out on 12th [Street] and Burleigh [Street], here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. They found him, he was already dead, something with liver or something. Wilbur is quite a young man, he's got property, retired from General Electric, he did okay. My sister, we call her Jim, her name was Mardee [Mardee Harpole Hughes], she married a guy by the name of Dock Hughes and they live, now, in, they did live in Indianapolis, Wisconsin [sic.], Indianapolis, Indiana, and they had about six or seven children of their own and a total of about fifty-three or fifty-four grandchildren, great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren. In fact, Dock said, he stopped counting and Dock Jr. [Dock Hughes, Jr.], their son, oldest son, is a sheriff in Indianapolis and his son, Kofi, we named him Kofi, which meant, he's born on Friday, he was a football star-- Speaker 1: That's okay, keep going. Speaker 2: He's in the hall of fame in Indianapolis as a quarterback and he played for the University of Indiana [Bloomington, Indiana] and then he was drafted by the Chicago, the Chicago-- Speaker 1: Bears [Chicago Bears]? Speaker 2: Bears and then got hurt and they let him go, Houston [Houston Texans] hired him for a while and now he's working at an athletic gym like, somewhere just outside of, in Illinois, but just outside of Wisconsin. He was really terrific, Kofi was, and he was creative. Speaker 1: What's his last name? Speaker 2: Kofi Hughes. Speaker 1: Kofi Hughes, okay. Speaker 2: Kofi Hughes, um-hm. Story_ID: 655529 Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: (Pause) Living with my grandfather and grandmother [Harpole's maternal grandmother, Geneva Jones Johnson] and having a very tremendous upbringing. I idolized my grandfather and he had bicycles and he had chicken coop, chicken in the, in the yard and we would sell chicken to the, to the neighbors and every now and then I'd have to go out and kill the chicken and then boil the chicken so we would pull the hair off the chickens and then give it to the neighbors and then the bicycle, my grandfather would fix bikes. He was talented in terms of fixing the bikes and then he purchased about thirty bikes per year from Goodrich [B.F. Goodrich Company]. And then we had a-- Speaker 1: Now this is Grandfather Johnson, right? Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: This is, what's his first name? Speaker 2: James Johnson. Speaker 1: James Johnson, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, at Johnson rental bicycle station and there were only two bicycle stations in, in the city at the time. One was Ben's [Ben's Cycle] on Lincoln Avenue on the South Side of Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and then Johnson on the north side, 807 West Somers Street. We lived right down the street from Wonder Bread and I'd get up in the morning, I could smell that bread, that bread before I get out, got out of bed and we had Mrs. Drenk's Potato Chips around the corner, so it was really quite a, we had quite a home. My grandfather had a large home on 807 West Somers Street and we had, he had roomers, had people living in the basement, and upstairs and while living with my grandfather, there was a lady, she and her husband, husband, they were Irish, and she'd fix oatmeal in the morning and I'd have oatmeal in the morning and strawberry on pumpernickel bread. So, my grandfather made sure that we got to church all the time. So we attended the Holiness church called, Mount Calvary Holy Church of America [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Shirley Caesar's was the--husband [Harold Ivory Williams], was the bishop of that church but not when I was growing up, later, and I met one of her brothers whose name was Julius Caesar and I went over to Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], when I was dating my wife, and I went to O'Donnell Hall where she was staying and I said, "Would you tell Ms. Caan [Mildred Harpole] that [HistoryMaker] Reuben Harpole is here, that, will you tell her to come down." They said, "Well who should we say is calling?" I said, "Well, Julius Caesar." And the whole place exploded and it was the truth because Shirley Caesar had about twelve kids in the family, you know, twelve brothers and sisters. Story_ID: 655530 Speaker 1: Julius Caesar, Shirley Caesar, so, was her father the reverend, I mean, who or-- Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Was her father the pastor? Speaker 2: Who? No, no (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Caesar's, okay. Speaker 2: Shirley Caesar's husband [Harold Ivory Williams] was the bishop of the Mount Calvary Holy Church of America [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for quite a while before he passed. She's still alive. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Bishop Brumfield Johnson was the next--was the pastor, bishop before him. Speaker 1: Was he any relation to your [maternal] grandfather [James Johnson]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather just went to church and prayed all the time. In fact, he was a model for me. My grandfather would pray every morning. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he also, he also would help people get jobs at Wisconsin, Wisconsin Grey Iron Foundry [Wisconsin Grey Iron Foundry Company]. He was a--he drove the, the things where you lift up the (gesture)-- Speaker 1: Forklift? Speaker 2: Forklift, yeah, not the forklift, the cranes, where you pick up the real heavy stuff, yeah, but he had the, he had the respect of his boss, of his supervisors. So if he'd recommend someone to, to work there, they would hire him. Story_ID: 655531 Speaker 1: Where did you start school? What's the name of your first school? Speaker 2: Oh, Ninth Street elementary school [Ninth Street School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then from there I went to Roosevelt Junior High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well tell us, tell us about Ninth Street first, okay. What was that like? Speaker 2: Ninth Street was a tremendous school. My first teacher was Miss, Miss Gordon [ph.] and she's real tall and thin and she used to point her fingers at--so she had a, her fingernails were really sharp and she's pointing the finger, so I would behave myself. Speaker 1: So now how was, when you were at Ninth Street, how was, or what did Milwaukee [Wisconsin] look like? I mean, was your neighborhood all black or was it mixed or, or was the school all black? Speaker 2: Practically all black, practically all black but it was practically all black but there was a white family living in, with my grandfather [Harpole's maternal grandfather, James Johnson]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --up on, on the second floor, sister and Min- Reverend Odell [ph.], he was the minister and she was his wife and they had the Lutherans before but then they joined a Holiness church and that's how they got connected with us. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, okay-- Speaker 2: But the neighborhood, the Milwaukee, we had Bronzeville [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], so called Bronzeville, it wasn't called Bronzeville then, it was just, we're African Americans, the city was very racist and deliberately held the African American community to a certain district and when too many African Americans would move in that district, then the whites would move out to other areas. And so, the district that was strong was from Jones Island [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] to the East Side where the post office was located, to State Street, on to Wisconsin Avenue, African Americans lived on Wisconsin Avenue for a while and then they moved up to State Street and then State Street to Juneau [Avenue] and then Juneau to Walnut and Walnut Street became our street-- Speaker 1: Okay, so this is-- Speaker 2: --at Walnut Street you had the Regal Theatre [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], you had Babe's Restaurant [ph.], you had T Joes, you had the music cafe, you had Larry's Frozen Custard [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], we had Deacon Jones' Chickens [Deacon Jones' Chicken Shack, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. In fact, the white, the Deacon Jones was related to Sonny Stitt out of Chicago [Illinois] and periodically he'd come up to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] to see his auntie, yeah, and we had Black King barbeque which is just fantastic, man, and then we had the area called Haymarket [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], which is where Black King, Ashley [Ashley's Bar-B-Que], Queen, Speed Queen barbeque [Speed Queen Bar-B-Q] and our community would go there in their cars and sit in the area where you'd park the cars and eat the barbeque, it was fantastic. Speaker 1: So, now the black, black Milwaukee is on the North Side of Milwaukee, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And was there a title for the, you said it really wasn't Bronzeville in those days. Speaker 2: No, it was called-- Speaker 1: Well, what was it-- Speaker 2: --the 6th District, the 6th aldermanic district. Speaker 1: The 6th District. Speaker 2: Yeah, it later became the 2nd [2nd District] and then it went back to 6th. Speaker 1: But did people-- Speaker 2: 53206. Speaker 1: Yeah, did people call that, was that the regular name that people called it, called the neighborhood? Speaker 2: They just, they just called it by, they said, who's the alderman, alderman in the 6th District at that time was a guy by the name of Meyers [Fred Meyers] and a black, black lawyer, James Dorsey, used to try to run against him and he never would beat him. And so, when the expressway, they call it urban renew- renewal, it was actually urban removal, when the expressway came through and moved African American families out of that district and just tore down houses and so forth and so blacks began to move north and west-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and when that happened, in 1967, the riots took place. Speaker 1: Okay, well we don't want to gallop too fast through it but the question I want to, before we take a break here, was that, like what did the black community call their community? Did they have a special name for it? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or did they just call it the 6th District? Speaker 2: Yeah, they just, the inner city. Speaker 1: Inner city? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's it. Speaker 1: That's all? Speaker 2: That's all. Speaker 1: All right, okay. All right, we'll pick up--take a break-- Speaker 2: No, 'cause we, we didn't think our, that we would, man, we just, we thought well of ourselves. We had all kinds of, people knew my grandfather 'cause he--coal and chicken and, and he had a grocery store also and then C.L. Johnson [Clarence L. Johnson], I'll call him the black, the black father of the African American community and Mrs. Bernice Lindsay was the mother of the African American community-- Speaker 1: Okay well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and the reason why they were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well we have to pause here a second-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --that's why I'm trying to get you to pause (laughter). Story_ID: 655532 Speaker 1: Now, just, what we were trying to get at the last time was what they called, what black people called the neighborhood-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and you said they called it the Central-- Speaker 2: Central City [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: --Central City, okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah, because on the East Side was the Italians, on the South Side was the Germans and the Poles and the Poles didn't allow, they used to have fights with the Italians 'cause they didn't want them marrying their folks. The whole situation was about who were you allowed to date and marry during that period of time and so they didn't want their daughters to marry black, black folks. One guy got in my cab when I was driving cab for a while and said, "Look, just drive," said, "I just want to talk with you." He says, "You know why I don't want my daughter going to an integrated school? Because she might like the basketball player and end up marrying him and I know my community, he wouldn't stand a chance with a job 'cause, and she wouldn't be able to live like I'm--." He was an accountant, taking care of her now. Then another guy got in my cab from Wauwatosa [Wisconsin], that's where Father Groppi [James Groppi] used to march for open housing. He says, "We don't want to mongrelize our race." That's why we don't want to live with African Americans. That was a real- realization for me to know why people discriminated. Speaker 1: Okay, but that's the way it was when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. So-- Speaker 2: All the way to the time when I was driving cab. Story_ID: 655533 Speaker 1: Now we are talking about Ninth--now what were you interested in when you were at Ninth Street elementary school [Ninth Street School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]? What, what kind of a little kid were you and what were you, what did you like to do? Speaker 2: Well, my father [Reuben Harpole, Sr.] bought me a saxophone so I started practicing on my saxophone. I took lessons from a couple of great people and I was interested in track. I was pretty fast and I played a little basketball but not much. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and you helped your [maternal] grandfather [James Johnson] a lot, you were saying, right? Speaker 2: I always went with, to collect the, to pick up the, the coal, go down to Canal Street. Speaker 1: Now, and you said earlier that your father--your mother [Mardee Johnson Harpole] got a job as a secretary? She got a, she, she-- Speaker 2: No, she got a job as helping with, in a dentist's office. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a dental assistant? Speaker 2: Assistant, yeah. Story_ID: 655534 Speaker 1: Do you remember what happened when your parents split up? Speaker 2: Yup (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You were eight years old, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to Detroit [Michigan] to live with his auntie and he had a cousin that was in Detroit, name was Smith [ph.]. He had a drugstore in Detroit and the reason why his name was Smith and not Harpole because Harpole was in Mississippi and he was a minister, itinerant minister going around to different towns preaching and then something happened where he got into a little trouble with the whites and he changed his name so they wouldn't, couldn't catch him. Speaker 1: Okay, so he got in trouble in, in-- Speaker 2: And that's how his son, who was a pharmacist, he started a pharmacy and was named Smith in Detroit. Speaker 1: Okay, but you said his, the son's, the Smith's, the pharmacist's father got in trouble in Mississippi? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, then he changed his name and-- Speaker 2: Not necessarily in, yeah in Mississippi, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, then moved to Detroit? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now did your father [Reuben Harpole, Sr.] ever come back to see you (unclear) (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He came, yeah he came back, not to see us but he came back and got an apartment, a room, and after about fifty years met this, his former girlfriend. She had been, she had been married about three times and they got back-- Speaker 1: So it was fifty years when-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and they got married about, after about fifty years. Speaker 1: That's remarkable. Speaker 2: And he introduced her to me as we were walking into a store on Center Street, one Christmas Eve, that was a shock, but then he lived for about four years and then he read the Bible and put his Bible down, got in the bed, went to sleep and never woke up. Speaker 1: So this is in the late '80s [1980s], early '90s [1990s], what? Speaker 2: The dates, I've lost the dates. Speaker 1: But you were grown, you were a grown man-- Speaker 2: I was grown-- Speaker 1: --working, when you saw him? Speaker 2: --grown and had kids already. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, yeah, okay, but any, he didn't come back to visit or anything like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, he lived with me for a little while. Speaker 1: I mean, when you were growing up, I'm talking about you growing up? Speaker 2: No, no he didn't. Speaker 1: Did you ever see, did you just-- Speaker 2: No, never did. Speaker 1: When he left, how long was it before you saw him again? Speaker 2: Maybe twenty years. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, that's a long time. Speaker 2: Yeah, and there was a couple of ladies that were really crazy about him. I would see him with them periodically. Speaker 1: So you think that's-- Speaker 2: About two of 'em. Speaker 1: --that's the cause of their break up, he had too many girlfriends or something? Speaker 2: I guess, yeah. My mother [Mardee Johnson Harpole] wouldn't take it, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did your mother ever remarry? Speaker 2: Yes she did, twice. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she married a guy by the name of Jones [ph.], another guy named White [ph.] and that was it. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And she just passed a couple years ago. She was almost a hundred. She would have been a hundred this year, ninety-nine. Speaker 1: Okay, so most of your upbringing was, I mean, your [maternal] grandfather [James Johnson]-- Speaker 2: Grandfather was-- Speaker 1: --was, he was the one. Speaker 2: That's it. In fact, he was going to support me, help me to become a doctor, a medical doctor and I was waiting for that but he passed when I was twelve years old. Speaker 1: Okay, now you were in, were you in junior high school then [at Roosevelt Junior High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 655535 Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your junior high school, you were telling-- Speaker 2: Roosevelt. Speaker 1: Roosevelt, okay. Speaker 2: Roosevelt Junior High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Okay, and is that on, in the same neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yup, in fact Roosevelt is still there, right on 8th [Street] and Walnut Street. There's an interesting story there that later, that became into the, was printed in the Milwaukee Sentinel newspaper [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel]. The story was, in front of Roosevelt Junior High School was a huge rock and there was a copper metal plate that was, said, "Dedicated to Increase Allen Lapham," and it was by this Old Settlers' Club of Milwaukee [Wisconsin], yeah Milwaukee. Allen Lapham, I didn't know it and neither did the people growing up along Walnut Street know this because that was our street. C.L. Johnson [Clarence L. Johnson], who I call a father to African American (unclear), had petitioned the downtown YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] to help a YMCA for African Americans and it was named the Booker T. Washington YMCA because C.L. Johnson had graduated from Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and we found out, the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] moved that rock to place, take it up to UWM which was miles away from Walnut Street. So when we, we asked, I asked my former dean, "Why did they move the rock?" He said, "We thought that it was going to be destroyed by revitalization with the expressway coming through." Speaker 1: Ur- urban renewal? Speaker 2: Urban renewal. And so, I found the rock on Maryland Avenue, across the street from Hartford elementary school [Hartford Avenue School; Hartford University School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and was in an alley and branches was over the rock so you couldn't see Increase Allen Lapham's name. So when the dean says it, the reason why they wanted to put it up at UWM because they had named an office for that, Lapham, called Lapham Hall. Increase Allen Lapham was the first known scientist out of Milwaukee, he's a weatherman and lived on 5th [Street] and Walnut and Walnut Street, we had taken it, it was our street. The Jewish community had some stores and so forth, they had Brooks- Brookmeyer [ph.], so and so and so forth and VJ grocery store [VJ's Food Mart] but a lot of African American businesses, Band Box business [Band Box Cleaners and Laundry], King's Clothing business [ph.], Galilee Baptist Church [Greater Galilee Missionary Baptist Church, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and on that rock, that rock, we used to sit around that rock and old guys and ministers used to debate and argue about philosophical things and about religion and gospel things and I used to sit there just to listen to these old guys argue. One guy that used to wear his cap all the way down on his head and smoke a pipe, they called him Aristot- Aristotle and Increase Allen Lapham had laid out the school district, had laid out Forest Home Cemetery [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], he was a weatherman, brilliant. Speaker 1: This is, this is a white guy? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. Story_ID: 655536 Speaker 1: Born, but he was born on 5th [Street] and Walnut. And theater, the theater that we all grew up around was called the Regal Theatre [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], right on the corner of 7th [Street], actually 8th [Street], between 7th and 8th on Walnut Street and I didn't know this until a guy by the name of Bill Vick [William Albert Vick], V-I-C-K, wrote his Ph- wrote his master degree thesis on Walnut Street and the businesses that were there, pretty--black businesses there. We found out that the Regal Theatre was owned, was bought and owned by a Jewish guy by the name of Margoles [Sidney Margoles], and attorney Dorsey, Jim Dorsey [James Dorsey], and that was, and in that theater was one of a great disc jockeys whose name was O.C. White. O.C. White was fantastic on WAWA Radio [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and he used to play all the gospels, you know, all of blues and rhythm and blues. Speaker 2: So was he, was he like the emcee at the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the emcee. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So they would bring in the acts, the recording artists to the Regal, in the, in the-- Speaker 1: No, they'd bring it to Thelma's Back Door [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and the Flame restaurant [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Flame supper club. Speaker 2: But they didn't have live acts at the Regal, the, the-- Speaker 1: Yeah they did. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And that was Billy Wallace and another guy out of Detroit [Michigan] and he's now, he's still great now but I can't think of his name right now, he was a singer, had a real high pitch voice and everybody in the neighborhood, I saw Jesse Owens there. Jesse Owens came to speak to the young people about harms of sexual relationships and how you get hurt with, with the different diseases and so forth. Speaker 2: Oh, venereal diseases, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was twelve years old at the time. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, and that was something because I loved the, loved track myself. So it was great seeing him. Story_ID: 655537 Speaker 1: Then, we had the black policeman, Felmers Chaney [Felmers O. Chaney], who just passed. Speaker 2: What, what is his name? Speaker 1: Felmers Chaney. Speaker 2: Felmers Chaney, okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, Felmers Chaney. Speaker 2: Now I-- Speaker 1: He was a, he was a sergeant and he was smarter than, he was smarter than the police chief but he never could get an advancement. He'd take the test and never would advance. Then you had Albert Wright [ph.], Cal Moody [Calvin C. Moody] and Chaney had tremendous respect in the community. In fact, when Jim Brown would bring his group to, to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], O.C., O.C. White would be the one bringing the, you know, having all of the jazz or blues people come into Milwaukee, he was the promoter, you know, in addition to being a disc jockey. We'd have it at the, the theater downtown, be five or six thousand people in it, Chaney would control that whole theater by himself, just walk the aisles, somebody would be messing up, he'd point his fingers and they respected him so they'd pay attention, they'd move on it and the lady that took care of the tickets, when you'd buy a ticket, she ended up becoming a principal at a school, of two schools in Milwaukee. So that theater was like the hub of the African American community. We'd see the movies and so forth there and the jams and so forth. Billy Wallace got his start there, great pianist. Story_ID: 655538 Speaker 1: Now, were you a good student in school? Speaker 2: I was fair. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Wasn't good, I was fair (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay wer- so were you running track in junior high school [Roosevelt Junior High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't do that. I was a member of the Holiness church, remember I mentioned that, Mount Calvary Holy Church [Mount Calvary Holy Church of America, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and they didn't, they didn't believe in that competition. So the only time I could run would be in the neighborhood or Reservoir Park [Kilbourn Reservoir Park, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]-- Speaker 1: So did you-- Speaker 2: --against dudes that thought they were fast. Speaker 1: Okay, so I take it you spent a lot of time in church? Speaker 2: I did, sometime go to sleep in the backseat of the church. Speaker 1: So, about how many days a week would you be in church? Speaker 2: Sometimes, two or three. Speaker 1: Well, that's not as bad as I thought 'cause I, you know, sometimes the Holiness churches you're there every night, you know. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. Speaker 1: So, two or three nights a week. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And then Sunday, would you be there all day on Sunday? Speaker 2: Mostly, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: For a while and then I started going to another church, Reverend Morris' [ph.] church. Story_ID: 655539 Speaker 1: Okay, now, well let me just, so your [maternal] grandfather [James Johnson] passed away when you were twelve right (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, and I really hated that. Speaker 1: --and it had to be a tremendous-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: It had to be a tremendous blow on the family when--? Speaker 2: It was a blow on family and on me because he had, I was thinking about going to medical school, so I never did get to high school to graduate and never did, he was going to pay for the whole thing. Speaker 1: So this is, yeah, you know, so, what happened to the fam- I mean, how did the family survive, you know-- Speaker 2: Oh we survived because my mother [Mardee Johnson Harpole] was very instrumental, my grandmother [Geneva Jones Johnson] was tremendous managing and my mother, before my father [Reuben Harpole, Sr.] left, my mother told me this, and I had never known, I didn't know this. My mother told me that she, my father would work and she would save ten cents out of every dollar he made. And so when the expressway came and took our home, she had saved about four hundred dollars and she used that to buy a, buy three houses on North Avenue and the house is still there but two of the other houses were torn down. One guy set fire to one of them, you know, but she was able to survive because she knew how to manage money. Story_ID: 655540 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, tell us about high school. Now, where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to high school, North Division High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And while there, first, my first year there, I flunked before six weeks and that shook me up a little bit so then I started studying and so I didn't completely fail. I caught up and then I really got into periods of, of chemistry so I learned the periodic, periodic chart of all the different, you know, hydrogen, oxygen and so forth. Speaker 1: Elements, yeah. Speaker 2: And when I figured out a system for being able to solve problems, it was when I learned the importance of valences and I learned that while going into my own bedroom and studying by myself and thinking, I figured out how to determine what the valences was. Then when I learned the valences, I could solve problems and I started soaring in, in chemistry and then in my biology class, I was doing well. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In my English classes, I wasn't that hot but I had a very tough teacher by the name of Ms. Borne [ph.], before I left Roosevelt [Roosevelt Junior High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and Mrs. Borne stood, stood for no nonsense and I ended up learning, learning all about Caesar [Julius Caesar] and Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] from her. She's about three or four hundred pounds and some of the guys that were calling themselves tough, they would try to challenge her and she said, "You better sit down 'cause I can handle you." (Laughter) And a strange thing happened. When I got married [to Mildred Harpole], I got an apartment on 2nd Street and one day I was walking along, looked up and she lived in an apartment just south of my apartment, so that was good. My sister was the only one to get a real high score out of her, sister Gloria [Gloria Harpole Taylor]. She's very, she's smarter than everybody in the family, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, were you still thinking about becoming a doctor when you were in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah I was. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now-- Speaker 2: But my grandfather [Harpole's maternal grandfather, James Johnson] passed, yeah, that did it. Speaker 1: Yeah, but I mean you could still be a, didn't you think you could still be a doctor even though-- Speaker 2: It took me by, what, I, at that time I got angry at God for taking him and since that time, I've forgiven, I've asked forgiveness for that but it really messed my mind up. I was only twelve years old. Speaker 1: So did you-- Speaker 2: So I ended up taking a chemistry course, I took all courses in chemistry, organic chemistry. I started, in organic, in inorganic chemistry but when I got into organic chemistry, that, that was a little bit too tough for me. Speaker 1: Okay, were you distracted by, you know, other things, you know, after you, I mean-- Speaker 2: No. Story_ID: 655541 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your [maternal] grandfather [James Johnson] seemed to be such a big influence. Without him in your life, were you distracted by stuff in the neighborhood and-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay. Speaker 2: Unh-uh. No, I actually, I became the man of the family. I became the man of the family. So I supervised my sisters [Gloria Harpole Taylor and Mardee Harpole Hughes] even though they, they didn't pay attention to me. Speaker 1: So did you have a, several, I guess you worked, right? Did you have a job? Speaker 2: Yeah, I always could find a job. I'd clean somebody's house or wash the windows or something. I didn't, I got a job working with Stark General Cleaners [Stark's General Cleaners, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and we'd go in the stores, and I worked all the way through high school [North Division High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], that's, he, Stark--Walter Starks [ph.] was the one that kind of straightened me out on a lot of different things. One time I was trying to talk about certain people, he said, "Man, don't talk with me about other folks." He said, "I--it takes me eight hours a day to worry about my own business, I can't worry about somebody else's business." So that straightened me out of that. And then, he started a fund in the bank for me 'cause he, I was going, he was going to turn his whole business over to me at, at, you know, by saving the money and my mother [Mardee Johnson Harpole], not understanding what was going on, ran into, she thought he was stealing money from me and she argued with him and I tried to tell her, "Don't do that," you know, "I'm--he's saving the money for, so I can take over." 'Cause sometimes he would turn the business over to me and I would, he'd go on a vacation for two weeks and I would control the whole business, you know, and-- Speaker 1: This is a dry cleaners, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and my mother didn't understand that so she thought he was, she, he's stealing, so he gave me the money back and then, a lot of, and that blew my chance. I'd probably still have the business now 'cause he had a lot of customers--we had General--Goodyear [Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company], computers were just coming in. At a time he had a firm that was, they'd sell those machines for five and ten thousand dollars so we were cleaning up the offices for that. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so he had a cleaning business, okay, I see-- Speaker 2: Yeah, clean-- Speaker 1: --you were cleaning offices, okay. Speaker 2: --cleaning offices, yeah. Speaker 1: I see, I thought it was a dry cleaners at first. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So, all right, it was a cleaning business, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Janitorial service. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was good at it. I could almost dance with the mop (laughter). Speaker 1: All right, so, so when you were, now did you get a chance to do any activities in high school like play sports or anything like that or-- Speaker 2: No, remember I tell you the church. Speaker 1: You had church. Speaker 2: I couldn't do it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I couldn't--they didn't believe in that kind of thing, they thought it was the devil. Speaker 1: All right, now did you run for any class offices or-- Speaker 2: None of that, I just, I would challenge the guys who thought they were fast. So that's good. I still, I still remember them too (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So was the man that ran the cleaners it was really like a, he was like a mentor to you? Speaker 2: Big time, yeah. Story_ID: 655542 Speaker 1: What about at, at, at North Division High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], were any, any of the teachers special there, besides the math teacher (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, very, yeah, yeah. I've forgotten the names of them but they had me into a, they did a movie and I was Mr. North Sider. They put a young lady with me and I did this whole set with myself and this other young lady and I had the movie, I had what they had made for a while and I showed it, I showed it to someone that was, at Marquette's [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] journalism school and then they kept it for a long period of time so I don't know what happened to it, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a movie made by the school board? Speaker 2: By the, no, by the school-- Speaker 1: By the school? Speaker 2: --North Division School-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and I was Mr. North Sider. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: North Division School. We'd call ourselves the Blue Devils and one of them was Kathleen Turner [Kathleen Turner Knight]. Kathleen Turner married one of the Knights, you know, Gladys Knight and the Pips? She married a Pip [HistoryMaker Merald "Bubba" Knight, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They're still married and there's another lady, Brown [ph.], that married the other, one of the other Pips so there were three brothers, I guess. So I used to run into them periodic on 4th [Street] and North Avenue, up the street. Speaker 1: Okay, now, so when, so you're in high school during the '40s [1940s], during the war [World War II, WWII], right? Speaker 2: No, '50 [1950]. Speaker 1: The '50s [1950s], '50s [1950s]. Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s], yeah, there was war, the Korean War. Speaker 1: Yeah, Korean War's going on, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, some of the people I knew got killed. Some of the people I knew got killed in the war. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, Korean was really (unclear) (background noise). Speaker 2: It was vicious. Speaker 1: You graduated from high school in what year was it? Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953]. Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953], okay, all right. That's right then (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and then I was, I was drafted into the [U.S.] Army in '56 [1956], December of '56 [1956]. Story_ID: 655543 Speaker 1: Were you working basically doing what you were doing before, you know, with the cleaning service [Stark's General Cleaners, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] before the war [Korean War], I mean before you were drafted (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I had a good job, American--American Can Company. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I was working two jobs, American Can Company and the Milwaukee post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So you, you were doing those jobs and helping to support the family or were you, or did you move out on your own? Speaker 2: Yup, that's to support the family-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, that was enough. Well, I didn't have a, I didn't have to support the family then, my mother [Mardee Johnson Harpole] was taking care of everything and my sisters. My sister, Mardee [Mardee Harpole Hughes] was married to Dock Hughes who's a master sergeant in the [U.S.] Army and they were, they were doing okay with their kids. Speaker 1: Okay, so you got-- Speaker 2: Then-- Speaker 1: Well, go ahead. Speaker 2: I was thinking. I worked at the American Can and the post office 'til I got married, so I went in the Army, '56 [1956] and February 14th of 1957, I was at Fort Sam Houston, Texas, going through basic training and I got a telephone call from my wife, she was at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and so over the loud speaker near the barracks they said, "Harpole [HistoryMaker Reuben Harpole]," you know, the cat's trying to be rough, you know, I said, "What?" He said, "Telephone." I said, "Who the heck knows I'm down here in, in San Antonio, Texas?" So I picked up the phone, it was my wife, future wife, and my buddy who had gone into medicine also could, I was supposed to--he's, I was supposed to go in with him at Howard University, so he was in medical school at Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], he had told me, he said, "Man, I'll look after Mildred [Mildred Harpole] for you." You know. So I answered the phone, so I asked her, she says, I said, "How'd you get my number?" And this is what she said to me, "What you gonna do?" And so I proposed to her, February 14th, '57 [1957] and then we got married, August 29th, 1959, after I'd gotten out of the Army. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So she had to wait for me all that time, all that time. Story_ID: 655544 Speaker 1: So well tell us about the Korean--now you, in the Korean War, you, you started playing the saxophone again, right? Speaker 2: Well, when I got there to Korea, guys were shooting themselves in the foot because they didn't want to go out and bivouac and go out in the, in the field and then all it had would be a, you know, the thing you pull over yourself to sleep and it'd be cold out there. So I saw what they were doing and I say, hey, then I ran into a guy by the name of Harold Lee [ph.] who had graduated from Bishop College [Marshall, Texas] in Texas in music for four, he spent four years studying music, he was a trumpet player. And so, he sat me down and told me, talked about everything he had learned in the four years and I was motivated because I knew I wasn't going to go out there in the field. So I got a saxophone from some place and learned my chords and my scales and my head opened up and I started playing, I joined the band. The guy that was playing the trombone in the band had been part of a big band out in New York and so he allowed me, he allowed me to join the band and I did that and then I ran into a guy named Lee Tucker from Cincinnati [Ohio] who had been with the Jazz Crusaders [sic. Modern Jazz Disciples] and Lee could play the bass, man, and then another guy who had been the bass player for Abbey Lincoln joined us and then a guy named Shipp [ph.], whose fingers had a thirteen key expansion in his fingers from Port Arthur, Texas and so we all got together and started playing and things I didn't know the guys would tell me about it and old Lee Tucker sometimes would get behind my back while we're playing, he said, "F minor, G--G7." And then finally we got a trombone player with us and then I could play a third or seventh part and it'd be nice harmony, you know, but it was really something but I was motivated because I was, I wasn't going to go out, I wasn't going out in the bivouac. I wasn't going to do it. And then I ended up becoming close to the Korean people. I learned how to say, annyeonghase mika [sic.], hello, how you doing, you know, and they kind of adopted, adopted me and they had a little ceremony where they'd be beating the drums and going around in circles or something and then they asked me to join 'em and so forth. So it was, it's really something, really connected with a lot of folks. Story_ID: 655545 Speaker 1: What were race relations like in the [U.S.] Army then. I know that's when they were trying to desegregate and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, like I said, we were the, we were entertaining so, we're always kind of famous and we got along with everybody. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact, right at the, one guy says, "You a Harpole?" He said, he said, "We had a Harpole that was our training officer in Arkansas." I said, I said, "That was a cousin, my cousin." And then somebody told me I had another Harpole that was a female from England or something. So, that (unclear) was kind of part of my, my father's first cousin [Ellsworth Harpole] was on the undefeated University of Minnesota football team [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] as a guard. So one time I ran into a real estate guy, he said, "Hey, you have a cousin in Minneapolis [Minnesota]?" He's from, from Minneapolis. I said, "Yeah, that was my, my cousin." Speaker 1: Now this is when Minn- Minnesota Golden Gophers went to the Rose Bowl is that the year, I mean, is that what we're talking about? Speaker 2: I don't know exact--it might, it's 1935 so I don't know what, what they did. Speaker 1: This is the Minnesota team or the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Minnesota. Speaker 1: Yeah, Minnesota, yeah. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I know they had the Golden Gophers of Minnesota, they had a good team for a while, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh he's, he was a bad dude because in Cleveland [Ohio], he ran, in fact in Virginia, he ran a home for boys, you know, it was, be messing up. He's tougher, he was a tough dude. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his daughter ended up becoming a lawyer and the other daughter was a minister and a clarinet player and Cynthia's [ph.] in New York right now, not New York, but Washington, D.C. She was in the, she was in [U.S.] Foreign Service at Johannesburg, South Africa for a while. Story_ID: 655546 Speaker 1: Okay, so now you were in the [U.S.] Army until 1959? Is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah, '59 [1959]. Speaker 1: Okay, and so when you, when you got out you came right back to Milwaukee [Wisconsin]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And now had your wife [Mildred Harpole] finished Howard University [Washington, D.C.] by then? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she graduated from Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and Howard, lawyer from Howard. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And she hated, always hated Milwaukee because they mistreated her when she was here, you know. One guy, there's a book company was hired--was looking for people and sat--had her come down there for an appointment, he sat--and she sat out there for two hours. He found out she was black, he wouldn't, he wouldn't interview her and she finally got a job with Gimbels-Schuster [Gimbel Brothers and Ed. Schuster and Company] selling, but that was way beneath, beneath her talent. She later went on and got her master's [degree] in reading at Cardinal Stritch College [Cardinal Stritch University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and ended up teaching and then working in television and later became principal of a school, Harambee [Harambee Community School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. It was tremendous. Speaker 1: Okay, so you all met, you didn't meet her in high school [North Division High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], did you? You met her-- Speaker 2: No, not high school, I was going to MATC and she was going to Marquette and my buddies, the one that became a doctor, and we were in the same chemistry class, came and said, "Hey man, I've got a young lady I'd like for you to meet." I said, "I already have a girlfriend." Speaker 1: So after high school, you went to MATC for, that's, Milwaukee Area Technical College [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and studied chemistry, that's before you were drafted into the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, into the Korean War. Speaker 2: Not before, it was, yeah-- Speaker 1: Into the Army, rather. Speaker 2: Yeah, after I got out of high school, I kept-- Speaker 1: Oh, all right, all right. Speaker 2: --taking a course here and there, yeah. In fact, you, I can't think of the names but a couple of teachers followed me and kind of pushed me into college 'cause they knew what I would have been. I was one point away from a scholarship from high school and they, they felt bad about that and they followed me and kind of encouraged me to go onto MATC. So I took some courses there to start, get started. Story_ID: 655547 Speaker 1: So did you, did, did you, when you got out of the [U.S.] Army, did you go back to college immediately and try to finish or what, what? Speaker 2: No, not, what happened was chaos was taking place here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and we had a kid, had couple of kids and there's children, somebody was, kept, took a BB gun and kept knocking out the windows at Fulton Middle School [Robert Fulton Middle School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] which was about a couple blocks from where we lived and I said to myself, "Wow, if I had some kids and they want to go to school, I can't have them go to school like that." So it caused me to start thinking about what can I do to help our community. So I got involved with the Urban League [Milwaukee Urban League, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and the Urban League trained me in terms of how to work with the neighborhood and--and so forth. It was about thirteen different professors from the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], were also teaching us different aspects of community development, you know. Then, Frank P. Zeidler said, I said, "Frank,"-- Speaker 1: Now this is, this is Frank Zeidler, he's the-- Speaker 2: Former mayor. Speaker 1: --former mayor. He was the last Socialist mayor-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --of Milwaukee, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and he ran for, for president as a Socialist, too. Speaker 1: Yeah, and Milwaukee's had three Socialist mayors. I was reading this-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know earlier this week. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Three Socialist mayors-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --the rest of them were Democrats and, but three of them were actually Socialists-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and Frank Zeidler was the last Socialist and he was in office from '48 [1948] until-- Speaker 2: Sixty [1960]. Speaker 1: --sixty [1960], okay, all right. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So he's been the mayor when you came back? Speaker 2: Yeah, '59 [1959] I got married, '59 [1959], yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said he lived across the street from you? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Twenty-one--2921 North 2nd [Street]. I lived at 2958 North 2nd-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --apartment seven, but he lived in a house and then I, I joined the 13th Ward Community Council which he was the chairman of. And so I learned a lot of stuff from him. Speaker 1: All right, well tell us about how you met him and how you, and what you, what the relationship was like. Speaker 2: I just told you. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Thirteenth Ward Community Council, he was chairman of that, and that was the district that we were in and I wanted to join so I learned about the neighborhood and so forth. So I became a member of the 13th Ward Community Council and Frank P. Zeidler was the chairperson there. So we'd see each other once a month along with the other people who were there, George Walker [ph.] and a few others--Walker was from Chicago [Illinois]. In fact he and--with a lot of sports guys, he used to have a banquet in Chicago with a lot of sports guys. He's really very familiar with Chicago and Chicago loved him but he passed, you know. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So-- Speaker 2: So from there, I asked Frank one time, I said, "Frank, who would--?" Because, when the state removed all those homes, black folks had to find a place to live, they kind of coming in--they started coming into the northern area and the whites who were there, there was a church called St. Elizabeth [St. Elizabeth's Catholic Church, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], families, one thousand families per month started moving out of that church 'cause they felt that African Americans were moving in. And so, chaos was taking place, sometimes the people would turn around and say, "Hey, why don't you go to your own church?" They told us that once. And one time, the priest would not give my wife [Mildred Harpole] Communion, you know. Speaker 1: This is a Catholic church? Speaker 2: Catholic church, and she had been Catholic all her life, see, and, so then when that chaos was taking place, I asked Frank, I said, "Frank, who do you know over at the university [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] that could really help us out?" He said a guy named Bud Bloomberg [Warner Bloomberg, Jr.], and I had heard of a Bud Bloomberg, he's a brilliant guy. So I went over to see Bud I said, he said, "I don't have time because I'm, I'm going to California, I'm going to take a job in California." So he said, "There's a young professor that's coming here, his name is Belden Paulson." He said, "Go over and see him, maybe he'd be able to help you." So I went over to Belden Paulson's house and sat down and talked with him a little bit. I didn't know too much about him, I just went over there because Bud asked me to do it. So, Belden said, "Look, I have to go to Brazil for a research project." Said, "They never had a research project on, go down there for a research project." Said, "When I come back, we'll get together and we'll talk." So he did and I later found out he had been on, 'This is Your Life,' you know the program that was on TV because what he had done was, had taken a lot of people who had been abandoned by the war [World War II, WWII] in Italy and he helped them to form another group and when he was on, 'This is Your Life' program, he talked about it, people sent, fifty cents, dollar, whatever, raised ninety thousand dollars on that program and they bought this, an island in Sardinia, just outside of Italy and then went over there with a movie actor, John Murray [sic. Don Murray], and they created a community for these people who had lost their way and so he, I didn't know all of this until many years later. Story_ID: 655548 Speaker 1: 'This is Your Life' was a popular TV show where they would bring on someone and they'd have the friends of the people whose lives they touched-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --testify as to what they did-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right. Speaker 1: --hosted by Ralph Edwards, yeah. Speaker 2: That's it, that's who it was. That was it. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: 'This is Your Life.' Speaker 2: Yeah, so, if you look up Belden Paulson and clearly you'll see all of that. Speaker 1: Now how do you spell his first name, now? Speaker 2: B-E-L-D-E-N. Speaker 1: Belden-- Speaker 2: Paulson. Speaker 1: --Paulson. Speaker 2: P-A-U-R-S-O-N [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Speaker 2: And he wrote a book ['The Searchers: Conflict and Communism in an Italian Town'] about the, a book with the Communist mayor in Italy. He's considered like a star in Italy 'cause he helped so many people, he and that movie actor-- Speaker 1: All right, so-- Speaker 2: --John Murray [sic. Don Murray]. Speaker 1: All right, so what did you all come up with? Speaker 2: Well, we started walking around the community and there used to be a restaurant in the community, there are almost all the teachers who would gather around, it was called Turan's [ph.] on 5th [Street] and, 5th and Locust [Street], Turan's restaurant and we walked the neighborhood and talked with people and then in 19--let's see, early 1980, we decided we wanted to do a survey to find out what did the people in the neighborhood want. So we worked with a guy named Jonathan Schlesinger and created a, a questionnaire and we asked the parents of children between twelve and twenty-one, what do you want for your children? And this is what they told us. We'd like for them to be able to read, you know, so they could take care of their lives. So we, in 1985, we started a program at the University of Wisconsin-Extension [University of Wisconsin-Extension Milwaukee County, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] where Belden was hired, the professor, called reading demonstration project and we took the kids from that questionnaire that we had found, we found forty two kids in that questionnaire and we had volunteers from all over the city who would come and pick the kids up in the morning and bring them down to UW--UW-Extension which was at 6--929 North 6th Street. They've torn the building down since then now and every morning they'd pick those kids up and bring them down there and there was a lady who was married to a doctor and she said, "I'll try to recruit the wives of the doctors that I know about." And so she did that and so it was my wife [Mildred Harpole] and several other doctors' wives who were teachers in that program and we had forty-two kids and out of that, then I had gotten, we're in the Cudahy Towers [Cudahy Tower Apartments, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] here, this is called Cudahy Towers, I knew Richard Cudahy who was the brother to the guy [Patrick Cudahy] that owns this place and I said, "Dick, can you help me out?" I says, "We need, we had to raise the money to feed the kids at the museum, at the lib- at the restaurant in the museum." Which is across the street from 929 North 6th. So I got some money from him, some money from a couple other people and so we'd have the reading program during the day and then around noon time, 11:30, quarter to twelve, we'd go across the street to eat. So the kids didn't want to miss that. So, people from all over the city would pick the kids up and bring them down for them to eat, those kids, so one of the young ladies I run into every now and then, she's now a full nurse, master, nurse practitioner in Boston, Massachusetts, and a few of the other young people, one of the gang leaders that I had, he, I had to go and walk--talk, talk about him, talk to the people about it, him going to jail and so forth. He ended up getting married and working at AC Spark Plugs [AC Spark Plug Division] so he was able to take care of his family and a few of the other kids took off and I don't know what happened to them, you know, but out of that, a lot of different things happened. Story_ID: 655549 Speaker 1: We ended up running a program called, Central City Teacher Community Project. We had been working with a lot of neighborhood folks and they were like, they, they knew the community and they could talk with the parents. So we decided that the teacher needed to know the community and we worked together with something called, CESA 19 [Cooperative Educational Service Agency]. This was different school districts, together with the Milwaukee public school district [Milwaukee Public Schools] and we'd talk with the School of Education at UWM [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of Education, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and got the professors involved with us and so we raised enough money to pay for the tuition of the teachers that are in the program so they could get some credits towards, so some of them could become teach- principals at some point. So, we ran that for about two or three years and the last year we had 235 teachers and administrators in the program and we brought some of the brightest brains in the education field in the country to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] 'cause we had enough money to take care of it and this is what we assigned the teachers to do. We wanted them to go into the neighborhood and get to know ten families, really get to know 'em and let the families get to know them and then they'd come back to, well we're operating out of Fulton Middle School [Robert Fulton Middle School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], that's where they were shooting those BB guns, then discuss what was going--what happened as a result so they could learn the community--learn who they were work--they were teaching, you know, in the fall and that program, it ended up being terrific and the professors learned and the stud- and the teachers learned and as a result of that, things just happened. Story_ID: 655550 Speaker 1: Now you started working with Belden Paulson at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] in 1966, right? Is that not--about right? Speaker 2: That's about it. I can't--actually '67 [1967], '66 [1966], yeah. Speaker 1: So you're actually hired by the, right, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause that, here's what I was doing. I was the advertising manager of the Milwaukee Star newspaper. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And as a result of that, I was always in the community. I was in charge of advertising and also circulation. So I had about a hundred boys working for me, you know and then a group of ladies came to me one time and said, "Where can we find a place so that we can teach the young people how to act?" And out of that program, a lady by the name of Ferne Caulker-Bronson [HistoryMaker Ferne Yangyeitie Caulker] started the Ko-Thi dance troupe [Ko-Thi Dance Company]. Oh man, man, they were fantastic, they still are, they just recently performed, yeah, and she ended up becoming a dance instructor at the University of Wisconsin. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, I'm just trying to get the chronology so we get it in order so everybody know what happened first. Okay, you were at the Milwaukee Star before you went to UWM? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: And when you, you went to, UWM it was in, it was '66 [1966]? Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]. Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, 1967, okay, all right. Speaker 2: What happened was, the owners of the Milwaukee Star said, "Look, you're spending more time at that university so, so I'm not going to pay you." So, I had to work part time, I worked part time at the university for a while, '67 [1967], so I could, because the owner of the Star, kicked me out. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: When I was at the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service], the personnel manager knew I was working in the community and helping young people and so forth so I could take my card and scratch it and check out and then when I could finish, I could check back in. So he gave me a lot of room--gave me a lot of room, room and space. Story_ID: 655551 Speaker 1: Now were you, were you participating in the housing marches with Father Groppi [James Groppi] then (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nope, unh-uh, didn't do that. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't, you didn't do that at all? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, I did other stuff. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Like the teachers community marches. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, all right. Speaker 2: We had twenty-five, twenty-five different tutorial centers spread out in the community and I helped with, worked with Manpower [Manpower, Inc.; ManpowerGroup Solutions, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and got desks so you could flip to the typewriter and we got one of their instructors to teach the kids how to type in forty, in six weeks, forty, forty some words a minute in six weeks and then as a result of this, kids got jobs at Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company and different places around, that really helped them. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So while people were marching, others were doing other stuff. Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't do a lot of marches? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You didn't do any marches. Speaker 2: But I was in touch with Father Groppi, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so-- Speaker 2: And, and also the other, other priest, one or two priests we did, take the kids up camping just to get them out of the city and so forth. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you have a philosophy about this, right, that I read that your philosophy is that you'd rather do something than protest about it or rather actually do some kind of (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --if you can, right? I mean, don't let me tell it, now you tell, I want you to tell what, well what is your philosophy? Speaker 2: I told you, one, about Dr. John- Benjamin Elijah Mays [Benjamin Mays], right? The other one is that, you know what ego is? An old lady told me once, question the ego, easing God out or eliminating God out, that's what an ego is. Then, there's another one, it says, "Haste make waste" so if you, you have what it takes to become all that you were capable of becoming. Dr. John- Dr. George Washington Carver used to recite a poem to every student that would come into his classroom and I happened to hear that, that poem in Tuskegee [Alabama] when I was down there in, they have a historical aspect of it and they played a tape, a tape of him and he says, "You have what all the greatest men before you have had. You have two eyes, two hands, two arms, two legs and a brain to use it if you will be wise. So start again from the top and say I can." So those kinds of things kept in the back of my mind and then working with Dr. Mensah [Anthony Mensah] on the Rites of Passage and the Covised education. Well, Covised is cooperative survival self-education where you can gather up talent and brains from others while you're, you're listening and participating yourself. Story_ID: 655552 Speaker 1: All right, so, so in '67 [1967], you're working like, now how long did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, see, did you, what happened in '67 [1967] of July 30 and 31 of 1967, is when the civil disturbance took place in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Okay, now what precipitated that? What happened? Speaker 2: Young people were downtown near the Attic theatre, the Attic club [The Attic, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and ran into some problem and they started knocking out windows all the way up 3rd Street, which is now Dr. Martin Luther King Drive and they put two or three days just, the mayor [Henry Maier] shut the whole city down. It was the first, only city in the United States that had martial law in that period of time and I had a speaking engagement at the University of Illinois and I couldn't leave the house. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so what happened next? So, so you got a, basically an urban rebellion going on or a riot as some people would call it. So-- Speaker 2: Well I learned after it was all over that the mayor deliberately did not call it a riot because then the insurance companies would not have paid. He called it a civil disturbance. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then the police chief [Harold Breier] had his, his command post right across the street from America's Black Holocaust Museum [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], the old Gimbels-Schuster's garage [Gimbel Brothers and Ed. Schuster and Company]. Speaker 1: Okay, it wasn't a holocaust museum then, you're talking at all. Speaker 2: Yeah it was. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, it wasn't the museum yet, you know, but it was, I'm just making that clear for everybody. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a boxing, boxing gym. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. So what did you do in '67 [1967] when that happened? What role did you play? Speaker 2: I had to sit home. For three days I couldn't leave the house. So what I had started doing during that period of time is finding tutorial centers for the kids. We had it on Walnut Street, we had it at Mount Moriah Baptist Church [Mount Moriah Missionary Baptist Church, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] near Calvary Baptist Church [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and we had counselors, we're working with the professor of reading so he applied, some people were getting their master's degree in reading to supervise the neighborhood folks in terms of how to teach reading 'cause that's the key. Kids can't read, they can't achieve. Story_ID: 655553 Speaker 1: Okay, now did the tutorial project lead to you, identifying scholarships for, for young people? Speaker 2: No that was just, I, I had a knack, people had different knacks but I had a knack for discovering what was available for the community and I found out that the department of public education [Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction] had an office at 101 West Pleasant Street, which is right off of Walnut Street [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and there was a lady in there that runs, a number of ladies I used to work with a Lady Campo [ph.], I worked with her for years and we got scholarships for young people all over the place. Got them into colleges all over the United States. One time we, kids call, the mother called me and said, her kid was having problems at the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi] 'cause students that were part of the Masonic group down there decided to jump on him and fight, you know, and so I would go and call Lady Campo and she'd call the president or something of the university and straightened stuff up and it was all in my head. I usually have telephone numbers just so I could tell the president, you call 227-4466 and you get information and even right now for instance, you know the historical black colleges [HBCU] where they had marches, runs for that? Well, there's a website for scholarships for black students at all of the black colleges in the United States, www.blackexcel, B-L-A-C-K-E-X-C-E-L, dot org [www.blackexcel.org]. In there, there's all the money necessary to help a young person go from undergrad through grad school and they don't have to worry about money. Story_ID: 655554 Speaker 1: All right, now, so, the '60s [1960s], there is a big housing crisis in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] in the '60s [1960s], right, with, we mentioned Father Groppi [James Groppi] and, Groppi, and [HistoryMaker] Vel Phillips and some of the other people working on-- Speaker 2: What it was- Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --the mayor [Henry Maier] refused to sign an open housing order until all nineteen districts around Milwaukee would have open housing essentially. So he used that as excuses for not signing the bill that the first black mayor our--the first black alderman, Vel Phillips, had proposed. Vel Phillips worked with Father Groppi. So when the city refused to sign the bill, the ruling to have open housing in Milwaukee, and right after, after that riot in July, in July, 31st, 1967, they started marching to Wauwatosa [Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Now, why, why Wauwatosa? What's the importance of Wauwatosa? Speaker 2: Because that was the most segregated community, it's a wealthy type of community and they met with problems, then they marched to the South Side and then, when I went over to go to meet with the, one of the congressmen, people from the congressman's office on the South Side, I was going across the 16th Street Viaduct [16th Street Bridge], they screamed out and they saw me and they said, "Here come Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin]." (Laughter) And-- Speaker 1: Did you look anything like Rap Brown then? Speaker 2: No (laughter). I was black so, you know, and so we went over and we met these people, a couple of doctors and that, and later, years later, the 16th Street viaduct is now named the Father Groppi viaduct [James E. Groppi Unity Bridge]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So this was, this made like national news. Speaker 2: Yeah, it did. Speaker 1: Yeah, this made national news. Speaker 2: And [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, when he'd come over, he, a huge crowd would come around and so he was very close to folks here. There was a lady, Thompson [ph.], I can't think of her first name right now, but she's very close to Dick Gregory. So all, all she had to do was call him and he'd be there in a minute. Story_ID: 655555 Speaker 1: Now you had something to do with Oprah Winfrey going to high school here, right? Speaker 2: Not high school, but go to, yeah, to go to Nicolet High School [Glendale, Wisconsin], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I think I mentioned that to you earlier? Speaker 1: Yeah, but it wasn't on camera so I'm-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --so, it wasn't on camera, though, so that's why I'm asking you now-- Speaker 2: Oh, oh, okay. Speaker 1: --to talk about it, a little bit now. Is it about time for it, about what year was that that she was, was that in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: She was, she was thirteen or fourteen years old and Betty Bostrom, whose husband used to make chairs for airplanes and she came to me and said, "Look, I have enough money to pay a nonresident fee for students to Nicolet High School." Nicolet High School was like fifteen years ahead of all the schools in the Milwaukee [Wisconsin] area in terms of being, having great teachers and so forth. So, I'm trying to think of his name, wrote that book, that you wrote [sic.], 'Why I Failed' [sic. 'Why We Lose']. Speaker 1: Oh, Jake Beason [Jake Patton Beason]. Speaker 2: Yeah, Jake Bea- Jake Beason called me up and said, "Look, I've got a young man here named Walter Jenkins [ph.] who needs a good teacher. Can you help get him into a good school where he can have a good teacher?" And I said, oh yeah. So Mrs. Bostrom said, "Look, I've got some money from stocks, enough to take care of four students." Said, "If you find me four students, we'll get them into Nicolet." So I told Jake Beason, "I've got a school for Walter Jenkins." And then he mentioned Oprah Winfrey. So Oprah Winfrey's teacher had told him that Oprah was pretty sharp, so that Oprah Winfrey, Walter Jenkins and Darryl Lindsey [ph.]. Darryl has his own insurance, detective agency now and Walter Jenkins ended up working for General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], running one of their companies and Oprah Winfrey went off and became a star. Speaker 1: Now, now where was Oprah Winfrey living then? Was she living in-- Speaker 2: On, Oprah Winfrey lived across the street from Lee Street elementary school [Lee Elementary School] on 12--on 9th [Street] and North Avenue. Speaker 1: Okay, here in Milwaukee, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause one time I had to go by and check on her because they were worried about her, she wasn't at school, and I had to go by and check to see why she wasn't--she didn't show up. Story_ID: 655556 Speaker 1: Now you get a lot of, now, now, you're referred to sometimes as a connector, the mayor, you know, I mean, this is because of all these connections you're able to make. Speaker 2: Yup. Speaker 1: Right, so-- Speaker 2: Yup, people would come to me and say, "Look, I've got about ten or twelve thousand dollars, can you help me spend it?" Another lady said she had fifty thousand dollars and then one time we were working with, I was working with a guy by the name of James, Joe White. Joe White lived in the Fox Point-Bayside School District and that's, we had about thirty people that was, Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] didn't know this, we had about thirty people protecting her. You know, if she'd get in her apartment, they'd quickly take her into a home, to their homes or whatever, you know, in the Fox Point-Bayside School District and Joe White periodically would have an ice cream social and invite all kinds of people to attend that. He was a, he was a dean at School of Architecture [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of Architecture and Urban Planning, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for a while. So it was just, I couldn't do anything but people wanted to help me to accomplish the things we were trying to do. One time I had about three hundred volunteers from different high schools around, working with the, I'm trying to think of the name of the school [Garfield Elementary School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], elementary school on 4th [Street] and, 4th and Garfield [Avenue]. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And one of the tremendous projects that we had was called summer prep at Campion High School in Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin. Our governor's brother [Gregory Lucey] was a Jesuit priest that was in charge of that school. I took a hundred, I took 105 boys out there and the school actually, during the summer, would have a lot of the basketball, basketball coaches and basketball players teaching students from Chicago [Illinois] and all around, Minnesota, skills of basketball and the 105 boys I had were from the Central City [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], from the ghetto, you know, and they learned also, and-- Speaker 1: It had to be exciting for them to go there and meet the-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: --basketball players and-- Speaker 2: Oh, very exciting, very exciting and in fact for eating, the food would be laid out on a table and all they had to do, get their own food. Speaker 1: Oh, they liked that. Speaker 2: And then we had bicycles all around but we had ninety acres of land and they had bicycles so they could ride all around the place and they had, we had the hill at Marquette [Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--where the Mississippi River and the Wisconsin River merged, that hill was there and so I had to raise ninety thousand dollars per year for that summer 'cause we, we took the kids out there in July. Speaker 1: Who did you get the money, I mean, who donated the money? Speaker 2: Well, our secretary gave it, gave me my first seven dollars. Wrote a check out for seven dollars and then I would get money from different foundations. The Schroeder Foundation [Walter Schroeder Foundation, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] was a Schroeder Hotel [Hilton Milwaukee City Center, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] at one time, Schroeder and to the Quarles and Brady Founda- Quarles and Brady law firm [Quarles and Brady LLP] who were managing the Brady Foundation, the Schroeder Hotel--the Schroeder Foundation. Then the Greater Milwaukee Foundation [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], which I showed you the book on the Greater Milwaukee Foundation, I could call the various people there and then we had a lot of volunteer folks helping out. Then Allen Bradley [Allen Bradley Company; Rockwell Automation, Inc.] one time gave me twenty thousand dollars for that summer program. So, because I was in advertising, I knew a lot of people around, Gimbels-Schuster [Gimbel Brothers and Ed. Schuster and Company] around and different ones would hear about and talk, talk with their other friends and so forth and so all of a sudden, before the summer would start, I'd have the ninety thousand dollars to pay the teachers. We had teachers from the Milwaukee Public Schools to go out and work with the Jesuits. The Jesuits prided themselves on being the greatest teachers in the world, in the world, you know. And then, we had summer prep at Marquette--at Campion High School in Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin and we had college prep which is still going on at Marquette University High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. We started that, that one in 1958 and--1968 and it's still going on. We've averaged fifty something students per year and the kids are stars, doing all kinds of stuff. My great nephew participated and he's now in China handling the stuff for, for, what's that little sports with the V? Speaker 1: In China? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: In China? Speaker 2: It's an American firm but my grand nephew is running, is in charge of it for China. Speaker 1: Oh, Nike [Nike, Inc.]. Speaker 2: Nike, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, that's a swoosh, that's not a V. Speaker 2: Yeah, what is that? Speaker 1: It's a swoosh, they call it, that, that symbol, like a checkmark or something-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: It's a swoosh, yeah, yeah. You said a V, I had to think, I said, "Oh I know what he's talking about" (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, Nike swoosh, okay, so, yeah. Story_ID: 655557 Speaker 1: Then, one of the students that graduated from Campion High School in Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin was twelve year old David Artis. David Artis graduated from, well was chosen, well in '72 [1972] when we had the gasoline crisis in the United States, the school had to close because they had just converted to coal and so with that crisis in, in oil, they couldn't heat the school. So a school in California asked for about thirty or forty of those students. So David Artis went out to that and then he ended up getting a scholarship from Banc Card of America, a scholarship in English 'cause he was so good. Then he went to Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut], graduated from Yale and went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], got his Ph.D. at Stanford and then spent a year at Oxford, England [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] and when he got back, Yale and the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] were fighting over him. Michigan gave him a ten year contract and tenure and that's where he is now. Then, Ronnye Purvis ended up going into medical school [University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin] and he's running a medical clinic [The Purvis Clinic] with staff, the whole bit, in Meridian, Mississippi and, and a few other kids got construction companies, lawyers, accountants, doing quite well and what I learned from this is that our kid, our children can learn, all they need is a caring teacher. The stuff about them being stupid is wrong. In fact there's a book that will tell you all about it. The book is called, the 'Magical Child' by Joseph Pearce, Chicago press [University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Illinois]. They said a child's mind, the 'Magical Child' by Joseph Pearce, they said a child's mind from seven months in the mother's womb is the most powerful on the earth, it can learn anything. You put 'em on a playground with kids speaking a foreign language, they'll learn the foreign language without a teacher. Speaker 2: So, now you were taking education courses in, when you were at UWM [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], too, right, 'cause you, you graduated in '78 [1978]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --right, with a B.S. in education. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So you're taking courses as you're doing these programs? Speaker 1: Right, well no, I, no. Speaker 2: No? Speaker 1: Those programs are run by teachers who already, had already graduated, had taken courses, yeah. Speaker 2: Oh I know that but I was, as you were working with the program-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: --at the UWM, you were taking courses, too? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in education? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So, so you read some of those books in class, I guess, and you graduated in '78 [1978], right, from UWM? Speaker 1: About '77 [1977], '79 [1979], somewhere in there, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. So you were honored last year as a distinguished alumnus-- Speaker 1: Oh yeah. Speaker 2: Right, okay. Speaker 1: And then, by all nine, universities, got awarded, I was awarded for educational contribution. That was really something. Story_ID: 655558 Speaker 1: Now you have a story about Sonya Robinson, too, the, Miss Black America, right? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: You were telling us about that, yeah. Speaker 2: Well, she, she played the violin and she was a student at Nicolet [Nicolet High School, Glendale, Wisconsin] also and when she won the Miss Black America in a, in New York [New York] and her mother had to go with her up there 'cause she's, you know, kind of young, she came back and she, she ended up becoming a friend of Wynton Marsalis and they didn't get married but they were really close and then she worked for, because of her position, a beer firm out of La Crosse, Wisconsin tried to use her in an ad but the guy that was in charge of Miss Black America, out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], wanted the beer company to pay him twenty-six thousand dollars and she said, he said, no, no. Well, they used her in another ad, didn't use her in the, in the original ad but they used her in another ad and then she went on her own. So I don't know where she is now. I wish I did know. I don't know where she is now. She's a great person. Speaker 1: But she was one of the students in the program that-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Was she in your program, she was in your, one of your programs? Speaker 2: She was Miss, Miss America. I worked with Elise Stoney [ph.] who sponsored the Miss America program in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and she, Elise Stoney worked with the guy who founded it out of Philadelphia, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So we'd, we'd have about twenty-five or thirty what, young ladies and Marie Gaines who was, also had worked with Sears Roebucks [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] and they had a charm school, she took three hundred student--young ladies through that program and Maureen Johnson [ph.] who later became an alderman in the Milwaukee public school--Milwaukee City Hall [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], who just recently passed, was a part of that group that they used to teach kids at Milwaukee Public Schools, in terms of how to dress, how to speak, how to put on makeup and things like that. Story_ID: 655559 Speaker 1: All total, how many different kind--different programs did you, were you a part of or-- Speaker 2: Many (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or are you a part of? Speaker 2: Many, many, so many. In fact, I ended up recommended by Senator Proxmire [William Proxmire] as the outstanding minority, minority promoter in the city [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and they, and I was given that by, at the, my age is showing now. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What do you call it, the, where you go down the, have the, the university [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], it has the, has the state work with you on business? I worked with a lot of businesses, helping them get contracts, so, and the-- Speaker 1: Okay, chamber of commerce or-- Speaker 2: No, for the federal government. Speaker 1: Oh, [U.S.] Small Business Administration? Speaker 2: Administration, Small Business Administration, that's where I got the award from. I was the first one to ever get it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause I worked with Central Manufacturing company [Central Manufacturing Corporation], Catherine Brown [ph.] and plastic injection molding, gate--got contracts and stuff. In fact, Catherine Brown, the Small Business Administration lied. They had, what, something called section 8 [8(a) Business Development Program] and they claimed they were going to give it to him, section 8 and help him to grow his business and instead they helped him kill his business. They had him going to Washington [D.C.], paying, he spent about twenty-three thousand dollars traveling back, up to, back and forth and just meeting with these bureaucrats and then nothing happened. And so, since then, Senator Nelson [Gaylord Nelson], held a hearing at a federal building here and found, and caught the group out of, out of Chicago [Illinois] with about four lies and then Cather- had to, had to leave his business and that was horrible 'cause it's a plastic injection molding company located very close to where he had his now and they're in, they're growing fulltime and had they really done what they were supposed to do. The one guy, I wish I could find that, I wish I could find that letter he sent me. He was working with the [U.S.] Department of Labor, said that, he wrote me a letter apologizing for over the years. He said, "I know what you're trying to do," he says, "but, when my administrators found out that I was trying to help you." They cut his salary and almost fired him. He had to go to another place. He put that all in a letter, sent it to me. Irv Palmer had helped design the Columbia spaceship [Space Shuttle Columbia]. He did the cone part and he had a company called Central Manufacturing and they cut and take a, they cut the steel and all that stuff and he was hiring people right out of jail. Said, "Look, all, all I want you to do is if you listen, I'll tell you what to do." He said, "You got a job." He didn't say you got a record so I won't hire you. Then, I got a friend of mine 'cause I was in advertising to make a brochure for him, had his picture on there 'cause he was proud of owning this manufacturing company and some of his white friends told him, "Man, are you crazy? What you doing, putting your picture on there?" Said, "You're not going to get any jobs." So he had to take his picture off and put another on it--advertising a different way without having his picture on the paper to say that he was the owner. Then he had some people who came in there, they saw what he was doing and then they joined him, put a little money in and then stole money from him. Then, Caterpillar [Caterpillar Inc.] told us, said "Look, we're going to give you a five year contract but you're going to need some steel. We'll help you get the steel." So they got about $3 million worth of steel and then they gave the contract to some other--one of their friends. Bankrupted him, he had to sell his condo, which was up the street here, had his house, which is in Mequon [Wisconsin], he's now in Florida but he was smart so they didn't, they didn't really kill him, they tried to. Speaker 1: Well see, gee, so-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: I'm just saying, well, I mean, these are some, these are rough stories. Story_ID: 655560 Speaker 1: Now th- this is out of the [U.S.] Small Business Administration loans and stuff in the '70s [1970s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Seventies [1970s] and '80s [1980s], earl- I guess, '70s [1970s], mo- mostly, right? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Am I Right? Are these taking place during the 1970s when-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] had the black capitalism program. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, right. Speaker 1: That's what I'm thinking, yeah. Speaker 2: And they had section 8 [8(a) Business Development Program] and they were supposed to help folks with section 8. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: But, in our state, when Gary George took over as senator of the position of Monroe Swan at the state level, he asked, he said, "Reub [HistoryMaker Reuben Harpole] what should I do when I get up in the state election?" I said, "Economic development, man." So he got a law passed that said that 5 percent of the state's purchasing should go to minority contracts. It's still in session. It took several years, several years before they reached that 5 percent and I helped a lot of young people 'cause I had a, I was on the radio program for a while, WAWA--not WAWA, 1290 [WZTI Radio, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and Willie played football, Willie Davis [HistoryMaker Willie D. Davis], played football for the Green Bay Packers. Speaker 1: Packers, yeah, great defensive end, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he owned the station so we had a program on there, in terms of business development and I used to tell him on the phone, over the radio, where to go to apply for stuff. So that's why they said that I was promoting business development. Speaker 1: Now were the athletes here 'cause you've had like a number of high profile athletes here at one time or another. I know, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar started his career in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. [HistoryMaker] Oscar Robertson-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --ended his career here-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but, and there've been others over the years. Have they, have they been helpful? [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron was here at one time. Speaker 2: Yeah, and one of them, I'm trying to think of now, whose (unclear), two of the one owned the, Wendy's, Wendy's franchise, there's several, a couple of them are still here, yeah. [HistoryMaker] Wayne Embry, that's who I was trying to think. Speaker 1: Wayne Embry, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, he lives right up the street. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact he has a million dollar apartment right up the street but he's also here and Toronto [Canada] 'cause he's still managing Toronto [Toronto Raptors] and then he has one up in Ohio somewhere. Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a teammate of Oscar Robertson-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --teammate of his on the Bucks [Milwaukee Bucks], here. In fact I think he got the owner to bring Oscar to Milwaukee-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and then he became general manager-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --then general manager of Cleveland [Cleveland Cavaliers]-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and executive at NBA [National Basketball Association]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. So he's, he's still here in Milwaukee. Speaker 2: Yeah, he's up the street. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: And Big O comes back every now and then. His buddy just passed who had gone to school with him, you know, lived here-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --was an artist. Story_ID: 655561 Speaker 1: All right, what--now you were involved, in the '80s [1980s], you got involved with the, the black holocaust museum with [HistoryMaker] James Cameron, right? Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988], right. Speaker 1: Yeah, well tell us about that. Speaker 2: Well, the chairman of the board of America's Black Holocaust Museum [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] wasn't functioning and so I used to talk with Dr. Cameron constantly 'cause he was, he had his own business. He cleaned rugs and things like that, things, stuff, I used to do with Walter Stark [ph.] and-- Speaker 1: And wait a minute, before we get started on anything, just tell us what America's Black Holocaust Museum is and who is James Cameron. Speaker 2: America's Black Holocaust is a museum called, bad fruit. It tells about the lynchings that took place in the South, mostly, of black folks who were slaves, had been brought over here from Africa to pick cotton in the South and Mr. Cameron was fifteen or sixteen years old when he was with two of his buddies and they caught themselves going to rob a couple that was making love and they held them up and then after Dr. Cameron saw that, he was a customer of his 'cause Cameron used to shine shoes in this little town in Marion, Indiana and this guy used to--was very nice to Mr. Cameron when he'd give 'em a tip for shining his shoes and he saw that was his friend, he told the guys that he was with, he said, "Man, I don't want any part of this, I'm going home." So he said he got halfway home and he could hear the gunfire. They had shot and killed this young man [Claude Deeter] but they didn't kill the girl [Mary Ball], they killed the young man and then a crowd gathered and started looking for him and see, he, he didn't tell his mother [Vera Carter Burden] and father what had happened, he just went and got into bed and then all of a sudden, there was a bang, doors were, somebody banged on the door, he got scared. It was the police and a group of people and they pulled him out. He said, "I didn't do anything, I didn't do anything." But they took him to jail. And then, they were about ready to kill him, they took the, his buddies out and they killed one before they got to, to the tree to hang 'em. It was about twenty-five thousand people had gathered 'cause they heard there was, be a lynching going on. So somebody in the audience screamed out, "Let that kid go, he didn't do anything." He said, he doesn't know who it was that, that called out. And so, he was working, he left, he went and served time in Anderson, Indiana and when they, he kept going up for parole and then finally they decided to give him parole and they sent him up to Detroit [Michigan] and he had, I think he worked for General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] for a while in Detroit. Then he came back to Milwaukee [Wisconsin], he said, he went over to, he had this, he had this firm where he was cleaning rugs and houses and so forth, just like I was doing with John--Stark General Cleaners [Stark's General Cleaners, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and paid his wife's [Virginia Hamilton] way and his way to Africa, no, yeah, to, to Europe, to Africa and to Europe, and then he went over to, where he saw the Jewish museum [Yad Vashem, Jerusalem] where, in Israel, where, in terms of the Holocaust that had taken place when. So he told his wife, "Honey, we need to tell about the holocaust that took place among us." And so when he came back, that was his, his whole mission, was to tell the story that had not been told about the lynchings that took place in the South, of us. So, because two of his buddies had been killed. In fact, that's the most famous picture in the, in the world about lynchings and those were, Abe--Tom [Thomas Shipp] and Abe [Abram Smith]. Story_ID: 655562 Speaker 1: Now we know who James Ca- Cameron [HistoryMaker James Cameron] is and what happened. So in '88 [1988], the--now the museum, he started the museum when, in eighty-- Speaker 2: Eight [1988]. Speaker 1: --eighty-eight [1988]. Speaker 2: Eighty-eight [1988]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Actually Juneteenth day in '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Once he did that, he had a, he had a chairman and the chairman wasn't helping him to put--so when I found out what was going on, I knew a guy by the name of Dan Bader [Daniel J. Bader] who was, had a foundation called the Bader Foundation [Helen Bader Foundation; Bader Philanthropies, Inc., Milwaukee, Wisconsin], named after his mother, Helen Bader [Helen Daniels Bader], and so I took Dan over to, to meet Dr. Cameron and it was raining that day. So after he finished meeting Dr. Cameron and Dr. Cameron told, told him the story, we were standing outside the door and the rain was pouring down on, so Dan said to me, "I'm going to see if I have about eight or nine or thirteen thousand dollars that I can give this man to help him with his museum." He said, "But when I come back here, I don't want to see all this dirt on the floor." So he went back, we didn't hear for him, hear from him for a while and when we did hear from him, he had sent a fifty thousand dollar check. Speaker 1: Fifty thousand, so that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I, I brought another guy by the name of, what was his, Stein [ph.], Stein, who owned a series of drugstores. So, he came in and started talking with Dr. Cameron. So he gave him $100 before he left to, left to, the office. And then after that, different ones started helping out. I just hung around and helped him, brought in different, different people to meet him. I brought another guy in and he gave, actually, $100,000, to help get going with the, with the, and then all of a sudden, the broadcasters, BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation], broadcast corporations of England came over and I asked them, I said, "What, what do you, television from England interested, why are you interested in the holocaust museum here in, in Milwaukee [Wisconsin]?" Here is what he told me, "Liverpool [England]." Just one word. That's the largest port for transporting slaves in the world and they spent three months in Milwaukee and in Indiana, Marion, Indiana, going into nursing home, talking with old people who had, who had been around when that happened and then they broadcast it in England. Then we had crews that came in from Germany, from Newfoundland-- Speaker 1: Newfoundland, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, and from all over the, all over the world. Camera crews came in to film Dr. Cameron and then finally, the big thing for me was when the brother [Willie Deeter] of the young man [Claude Deeter] that was shot came to America's Black Holocaust Museum [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and he saw the, the little film that we have, we have a film that we show, Cameron talking, then the brother at the end of the film stood up and hugged Mr. Cameron and said, "I forgive you." That's the most powerful thing. Speaker 1: So this is the brother of the-- Speaker 2: The one that was shot. Speaker 1: --young white guy that was shot in Marion, Indiana-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --in nineteen thirty-- Speaker 2: Something. Speaker 1: --one [1931], I think it was, '31 [sic. 1930], I think. Speaker 2: Something, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is, yeah. Speaker 2: So that was a powerful, it was a powerful day. I happened to be there. And then, another person sent in a piece of artwork that was worth thousands of dollars, and so we have that and it was from Boston, Boston, Massachusetts. Speaker 1: Yeah, now there's been like the museum, I was in the museum a couple times and he had displays, he had photographs of the lynching-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: --and some of the artifacts-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --from lynchings around the country-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and, yeah. Speaker 2: One lady sent in part of the rope that had lynched her brother 'cause--at her grandfather's. So she sent it to Cameron. A lady that wrote the story that was in the New York magazine, man, that's when ABC sent a crew out here and James--his first book, he had a black publisher from Boston, Massachusetts I think it was, that tied his hand, said that, he wanted X number of dollars for any movies that might be making and all that and this, I mean, he, he just messed them all--I tried to get on the phone, he said, "I'm not talking to you." You know. He tricked him into it. Story_ID: 655563 Speaker 1: Oh, so he had a bad contract with a publisher in Boston [Massachusetts]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --that was-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So this is a black publisher, too (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. So that, that's all over now because we got a lawyer, got him out of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause he was on 'Nightline,' on ABC, Ted Koppel's show, when he first opened up and I remember there was a big fundraiser that Lisa Bonet, I think, whose mother's Jewish or the father's black and Lenny Kravitz, whose mother was black, Roxie Roker, whose father [Sy Kravitz] was Jewish, they did a fundraiser here, you know, for the black holocaust museum [America's Black Holocaust Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], and-- Speaker 2: (Unclear), it's fantastic, man, and see he was brilliant. You ever hear of Walter White? Speaker 1: Yes, of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Well [HistoryMaker] James Cameron and Walter White, whenever there'd be a lynching, they would go around and research it. A couple of times, they had just barely get away from the, from the town themselves and whenever a Kl Klux Klan group [KKK] would be marching or whatever, Mr. Cameron would meet 'em and challenge 'em right there, then they're here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], right on the steps of the federal building [Milwaukee Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse] and I was there (unclear). Another time on national television, people were doing it somewhere and the camera focused on it. He was a brilliant guy. He learned the comp- he learned to type at eighty something years old. Speaker 1: Now you said, you said, you were telling me off camera that the sheriff in Marion, Indiana-- Speaker 2: That was his cousin, yeah. Speaker 1: --had allowed the lynching-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --was a member of the Klan? Speaker 2: Klan, yeah, right, right, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, that was back in 18--1931? Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty [1930], yeah. Speaker 1: So that's, at any rate-- Speaker 2: And the sheriff's the one that went to Anderson [Indiana] and say, "I'm going to show you what happened to your, your friend." And drove him back through the crowd so he could see his friends [Thomas Shipp and Abram Smith] hanging. That was horrible. Then when the guys came into the, to jail looking for him, they said, "Where is, we want James Cameron." And said the other prisoners that were in town, they got scared and said, "There he is over there." Speaker 1: Yeah, he told the story to us when we interviewed him and, yeah. Mr. Cameron passed away a couple years ago, right, is maybe five years ago? Speaker 2: Yeah, about five years ago [sic.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, and-- Speaker 2: I got-- Speaker 1: --the museum is now a virtual museum online, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, right. Speaker 1: And there are plans for a new physical museum in an elementary school, right? Speaker 2: 4th Street, not 4th Street, what's going to happen, they're going to take this school [Garfield Elementary School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], convert it to apartments and the first floor's going to be Dr. Cameron, that was in the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel so you could get a copy of that and you can see pictures of it. And we had Virgil Cameron, his son, has the plan, how it's going to be laid out. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And on the 25th of this month, we're having a founders day at the central, at the library on 7th [Street] and Wisconsin Avenue [Central Library, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Right, 'cause I know several people I know from Chicago [Illinois] were involved with the museum, Taki Rattan [ph.] and Tony Courtney [Anthony Courtney] and Zakiya Courtney-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Tony Courtney's here. Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right. I met him in Chicago years ago, he was in Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's (Unclear) cousin-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --and his wife was, was the head of the museum for a while. In fact, she went to, went to Washington [D.C.] when the congressmen apologized to Mr. Cameron for doing that, for not passing a law against lynching. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then about twenty-four congressmen that didn't sign it, did not sign it. Story_ID: 655564 Speaker 1: Now I'm--now you mentioned Ferne Caulker [HistoryMaker Ferne Yangyeitie Caulker] before. Now you're, you're a supporter of the Ko-Thi Dance Company, too, right? Speaker 2: Oh, I was on the first board. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How did you meet Ferne? Speaker 2: I told you. I was working for the Milwaukee Star and these, about ten ladies came in there and said, "Where can I find a spot?" Said, "We want to teach young people about dancing." And so forth. And so there was a lady named Rosemary Holley and she's still alive. She says, "You can use that church." So it was a United Church of Christ on 4th [Street] and Meinecke [Avenue], and that's where we started working with those kids, young kids. Rosemary's still around. Her brother was a fantastic swimmer and diver. He used to do double jump, nice, over the high dive board, and he was supposed to go to the Olympics but he got hit by a car, when he was sixteen years old, but he could out swim everybody in the neighborhood and at the Regal Theatre [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], I told you about, he was an artist and he drew the, drew the picture of that so you can see him, his name was Sylvester Sims. If you look up Sylvester Sims you'll see him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he used to lift about three or four hundred pounds over his head, strong dude. Speaker 1: Now you were involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], too, I mean, you're a life member of the NAACP? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean, when did you join? Did you join a long time ago or did-- Speaker 2: A long time ago. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, so you're a life member? Speaker 2: Yeah I'm still a member of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And you're a member of the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union] as well, right? Speaker 2: I was, yeah, but I haven't paid my fees in quite a while (laughter). Story_ID: 655565 Speaker 1: You've been a part, a part of Dr. Mensah's Rites of Passage program. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Tell us how-- Speaker 2: How that hap- started? Speaker 1: Yeah, what is Dr. Mensah's full name? I know his last name is Mensah-- Speaker 2: Anthony Joseph Kojo--Kojo Mensah [Anthony Mensah]. Speaker 1: And he's from-- Speaker 2: Ghana, yeah. Speaker 1: Ghana, West Africa, right. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you said he was a mathematician, right, that came here? Speaker 2: No, he's got a degree in education. Speaker 1: Okay, education degree, all right. So, tell us about, you know, your involvement with Mensah Rites of Passage program. Speaker 2: Well, remember I mentioned about college prep-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --which was at Campion High School [Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin]? Well, Dr. Mensah ran summer prep which was at Marquette University High School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]--school, still going on now, and he was a tremendous educator. Speaker 1: Do we need to pause for a minute? Speaker 2: If you can look, if you can look up his, if you can look up his, his name at the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, you know, through your computer, 1977. What he did was, when he first came over to the United States and he was, they hired him as a teacher and he didn't know anything about base- from African, he knew about soccer but not baseball. The principal asked him to supervise baseball. He didn't know what he was doing and kids were making fun of him and throwing stuff at him. And so he, he decided what he wanted to do was go by their homes to see who they are and what did they do in their different, different rooms and so forth and he came back and that's what started him to set up in his classroom a kitchen, dining room, attic and so forth in, in his classroom. That was the beginning of Covised education. Speaker 1: What did you call it? Speaker 2: It's called Covised, C-O-V-I-S-E-D, cooperative survival of self-education, and he's got a, he has a mathematical principle for making that happen and also psychology behind the different aspects of it and his daughter [ph.] still has, has it on a video on, taped, (Unclear) knows how to do it too. Speaker 1: This is (Unclear) O'Connor [ph.] in Chicago [Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, and so, now what, what is the Rites of Passage program that Dr. Mensah started? Speaker 2: Oh in 1976, I was in California at the Fontainebleau Hotel [ph.] with the Eta Phi Beta Sorority [Eta Phi Beta Sorority, Inc.] and the men of the Eta Phi Beta Sorority, the husbands and boyfriends of the, of the wives are members of the Eta Phi Beta Sorority which is a women's organization, they're called the SHADs which, literally, shadows. And so they, they got rid of the shadow and said, we're SHADs and they were talking about their sons and how much, how many problems they were having with their sons. So when I got back to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] at UW-Extension [University of Wisconsin-Extension Milwaukee County], 929 North 6th [Street], I said, hey, 'cause I had been working with Dr. Mensah in a lot of different things, I said, "Hey, Dr. Mensah, what do they do in Africa to help their young men?" And I later found out, the young women also, to become men and women and so he says, "Yeah. When they get to be about ten or eleven year old, we take them from the family and put them with their uncle, you know, so teach them how to be a man in, in their society." And then he says, "We also have something called the rites of passage which was taken away from us when the British came and colonized us." He says, "Give me a few weeks, I'm going to go look it up." And he found out, he went and looked it up and in about a few weeks, he said, "Now I know what it is." So in 1980, we had the first class on the rites of passage at the UWM-Extension at 929 North 6th Street and we had about eight or nine people in the class and he taught it for the first time and then after that, we've taken a thousand people through. Speaker 1: Wow, so did you go through it yourself, this rites of passage? Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I did as a senior and in fact (Unclear) was part of that group and [HistoryMaker] Paul Hill of Cleveland, Ohio was a part of that group, who's the national president of that. Speaker 1: Right, we've interviewed Paul Hill for The HistoryMakers too, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so I was a senior, on at the last stage, I went through it, yeah. Speaker 1: Now Pat Hill that we interviewed from Chicago [Illinois] who is the head of the African American patrolmen's associat- [Afro American Patrolmen's League; African American Police League]-- Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: Pat Hill, Pa- [HistoryMaker] Patricia Hill. Speaker 2: Oh, Patricia Hill. Speaker 1: She, she went through it. There are other member--other people we've interviewed that have been through the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, quite a bit, yeah. Speaker 1: --this project so. Story_ID: 655566 Speaker 1: What does it, what did you learn from the rites of passage program? Speaker 2: Who I am and why I do certain things. It tells me all about me, not the physical me, the real me, inside of me. I know why I do certain things, like Abesha, the connector. I connect people all over time, all the time. One time when I was about seventeen, sixteen or seventeen years old, maybe a little younger, I was lying in bed and I heard a voice, said, "Get up." I got up, I lived at 2200 North 8th Street [Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. So I walked out the door, started going north and when I got to a building, it says, "Go knock on the door." I knocked on the door, said, "Go in." Nobody said anything, I opened the door, I walked in, walked up the stairs, there was a lady about eighty, ninety years old, stuck in the bathtub, in the, in the, on the toilet and her wheelchair was out the door. So I lifted her off the, off the toilet and I put her back in, on her wheelchair and left and I haven't heard from her since. So I had a buddy that lived not too far from her, I said, "Who, did you know this lady that lived at--?" He said, "Oh yeah, she's a very spiritual lady." Said, "Everybody know her." I didn't know her but that happened and was, it hit, it was, got me, got me out of bed in my home. Speaker 1: That's a powerful experience. Speaker 2: And then, huh? Speaker 1: That's a powerful experience. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it's fantastic, and things like that has happened for years, different things, like when I needed that money, that ninety thousand dollars a year, it would come. One time we tried to, tried to have a, who did I bring up? A group out of Chicago [Illinois] at the auditorium downtown and I wanted these teachers that were in the college prep program to help me. There were thirty, about thirty-two, they wouldn't help. So I brought this, I can't think of the name, I wish I did, you'd know him if I can think of the name, but they were similar, they, appeared the same audience as Elvis Presley and Elvis Presley was next door so I only had about a thousand people with me and he had eleven thousand and even though that project failed, I still got the money and I don't know from where but there was one guy, his name was Gardner Friedlander, his, his wife [Jean Friedlander] had been the president of the Fox Point-Bayside School District and Gardner was a pilot and a couple of times, well at least once, he flew both of us, flew us up to Campion High School [Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin] so we could be with the kid and then we broke those young people up. We had 105 boys, we broke 'em up into units of twenty each and they had to set their own rules and laws and so forth and then if they violated it, they'd get punished, they punished themselves. So that was really something. Speaker 1: Okay, so, I know Dr. Mensah [Anthony Mensah] passed away a few years ago as well. Are you still involved in the program or is it still going on? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it's called the Asentu Rites of Passage organization [Asentu Rites of Passage Institute, Inc., Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. We've got a whole team. One of our major, main, one of our main people is in Florida right now, no, not Florida, but St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands] and he's been back, going to Africa, to Cuba, all around. He's really a, he's really a master. He's a master, well the people at Asentu Rites of Passage are masters of rites of passage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All originals and all. Speaker 1: All right, so you're concern for the black community in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] has spread out into a, to a concern for the larger African community outside, even outside of Milwaukee. Story_ID: 655567 Speaker 1: Now you retired officially from UWM [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] in '97 [1997], I think, right? Is that it? Nineteen-ninety-seven [1997]? Speaker 2: Ninety-nine [1999], or something like that. Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999], okay, all right. Speaker 2: And then, that's when I worked for the Helen Bader Foundation [Bader Philanthropies, Inc., Milwaukee, Wisconsin], no, yeah, and then-- Speaker 1: The Bader Foundation? Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I, then from there, I retired in 2010. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And when you retired from UWM, you set up a scholarship fund, right? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: With you and your wife [Mildred Harpole] is that true? Speaker 2: Yeah, that's about, I had a, I had a newspaper that showed that. First, a couple of things happened before Dr. Mensah [Anthony Mensah] passed. They had a huge ceremony for me at UWM and, for my retirement, from there, and it was a big thing. They have never had that large a crowd before and then Dr. Mensah had arranged to appoint me the paramount chief of all Milwaukee [Wisconsin]. I had a spear, I had a kente cloth outfit on, the elders of the community were there to make it happen. O.C. (Unclear) [ph.]--O.C. Mensah [ph.] went back to Ghana, Accra, lived outside of Accra. He was there from the Africology department, you know, and a lot of that's in the newspapers, right now. That was powerful. I had rings and all this so, on. Speaker 1: How many trips have you made to Africa? Speaker 2: Huh? About three. Speaker 1: Three. Speaker 2: Yeah, two or three. Speaker 1: Okay, always to Ghana or do you go-- Speaker 2: Yeah, always to Ghana. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now you and your wife did set up a scholarship fund, right, at UWM? Speaker 2: It's under my name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's from that big event that I had at, in fact, I got it upstairs so if, we can go upstairs, give you a copy of it. Speaker 1: Well that's all right, I read it, about the Harpole scholarship fund [Reuben K. Harpole, Jr. Scholarship fund], right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, status, and-- Speaker 2: Trying to get for young men, encouraging young men to teach in the elementary school and I visited one of them and he's doing fantastic. He's at Riverside [Riverside University High School, Milwaukee, Wisconsin] and the other one is back down to Atlanta, Georgia 'cause his kid is, his own son is fifteen and he wanted to be close to him and he was teaching at a housing project here and all of his young people graduated from college--from high school. So, that's tremendous. His name was Finch [ph.]. Story_ID: 655568 Speaker 1: So tell us about the Bader Foundation [Helen Bader Foundation; Bader Philanthropies, Inc., Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. Now, how did you--you had known the Baders for a long time, right? Speaker 2: (Nods head). Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: The Bader Foundation, Dan Bader [Daniel J. Bader], David Bader [David M. Bader], Alfred Bader and his wife, it's now called the Bader philanthropy foundation because the father joined the sons. Before that, it was the sons managing the money of the mother, Helen Bader [Helen Daniels Bader], who passed and she used her $150 million to start the foundation but now that the philanthropy, Helen, the philanthropy foundation has organized, it's much larger because Alfred Bader had more, more money and Bader, Dan Bader, heart was in the right place and I walked into the office one time and I asked him, "What are you doing for the African American community?" It kind of shook up the office a little bit and later he called me and asked me and says, when he heard I was about ready to retire, he says, "How would you like to work for, for the Bader Foundation?" I said, "Well, I got this job at the University of Wisconsin School of Education [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of Education, Milwaukee, Wisconsin]." Said, "Give me a little time before I say, yes, you know, let me finish this first." That's when I was working with the high school and the middle school. And so finally when they took me on, he let me use, let me work with young people. And so I knew about Sankofa. Have you ever heard of that? Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, it means, "It's not taboo to return and fetch it, go back and get what's missing and move forward." So I started applying that to the first situation and later he let me have about five hundred dollars to start, start with and then later, I was working with this group called the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] in Racine, Wisconsin, called Gamma Tau chapter of the Boule [Gamma Tau Boule] and we started a program there called, Homework First [Homework Comes First] 'cause we were talking over the phone and the brother said, "You know, what? If these kids would learn how to do their homework," said, "they'll be all right." So we said, "Okay, let's try it." So we went over to, we tried a couple of schools and they turned us down and so we went to one school and the lady looked up and saw the doctor that had delivered all her kids in, in that group and said, "Hey, what you guys want?" And she said, we said, "We want to try something." So we gave 'em, gave the teachers in the third and fourth grade, gave them fifty bucks per semester, be $100 a year, and then we told them, said, "Look, let these kids do their homework" and said, "If they do their homework, you can give them little presents and gifts to motivate them, to do their homework," and say, "Look, what we would like for you to do is to put a sign up in your room with all the kids in your classroom's name on there and the days in which you give 'em homework and so we'll come by and check to see if the kids are doing the homework." So they did that. You know like in Sunday schools, that's how you do it. And we'd go behind 'em, we'd check a kid, say, "How come you didn't do your homework?" Says, "Oh the cat, the cat did something to it." And lied, lying. I said, "Look, come on outside." We wouldn't insult them in front of the classes. We'd say, "Hey, what's wrong with you?" They said, "What do you mean?" "You didn't do your homework." "How you know?" "I can see it on the board you didn't do your homework. What do you want to become when you grow up?" "I want to be a basketball player, football player, I want to be a police--." "You think if I'm the coach, I want a dummy on my team?" "No." "Well you go in back and don't let me come back and catch you not doing your homework." You know. The next time we come back in, he said, "Oh Mr. Harpole [HistoryMaker Reuben Harpole], we done the homework today." So, we did that program for a number of years and really helped the teachers out. Then we, at the end of the semester, we gave the teachers, we bought pizzas for the whole fam- they could invite the whole family and then we could celebrate the kids doing their homework and sometimes we'd have two and three hundred parents there and then every now and then we'd take the teachers out for a dinner or something but that was, that program was (unclear). And then I got, the one that started in Milwaukee [Wisconsin], I said to Dan, I said, "Look, I'd like to try this." He said, "We'll have to buy the pizza for the kids, for the family, for the school." He said, "Look, I'll let you have twenty thousand, try twenty thousand." So I had about twelve schools and I could, that I first started with. And then, later, we moved up, I had forty-two schools and six thousand kids and about three to four hundred teachers in that program called, Homework (unclear). Story_ID: 655569 Speaker 1: Then, the school system [Milwaukee Public Schools] asked us to pay for part of a coordinator out of the public schools. So we paid about eighty thousand dollars to have, for a coordinator to help keep up, going on with the, with the classes. And then, I couldn't get the principal, the superintendent or the board members to check it out. I had one board member, actually, that was a coach. That's what I call the kids, the people, the adults who were really good, coaches 'cause they weren't tutors and they weren't mentors, they were just coaches, they're just encouraging the kids to do their homework. So, when the school system seemed like they weren't interested, the foundation said, "Why are we paying those, paying about $1 million a year?" Said, "Why are we paying all this money and these folks aren't interested?" So they cut it [Homework Comes First]. Man, that was horrible. So now they don't have it and here's the latest thing about the Bader Foundation [Helen Bader Foundation; Bader Philanthropies, Inc., Milwaukee, Wisconsin]. The father [Alfred Bader] had told me years ago, he said, "My heart is black." And his business was chemistry on 30th [Street] and North Avenue, it was right in the heart of the black community where he made his millions [through Aldrich Chemical Company]. So recently, what he's doing now is moving his office of international office from Water Street to Martin Luther King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King Drive], right in the heart of the black community and he had hired a black firm, the Phelps firm [JCP Construction, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], they graduated from Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] in engineering and he's in charge in, in charge in their firm to build his international office right, it's going to be fantastic, in the Haram- Harambee [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] area and they--he's giving them enough money to make, to make it happen. Story_ID: 655570 Speaker 1: You retired from Bader Foundation [Helen Bader Foundation; Bader Philanthropies, Inc., Milwaukee, Wisconsin] in 2010, I think it was? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, had about six strokes. Speaker 1: You--did you? Speaker 2: I had about six strokes, and so, I was, at one period of time for eleven days I didn't know where I was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I think they did that, it saved my life. Speaker 1: How old were you then when you retired? Speaker 2: I've forgotten that. Speaker 1: Oh, you forgot? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in the seventies. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, so you-- Speaker 2: They named the street after me on 2nd Street. Speaker 1: Right, right. There's a video online about that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, really? Speaker 1: --the street naming, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, there's a lot of information if-- Speaker 2: I told 'em man, I said, "Man I'm not dead." He said, "Yeah, but you're seventy years old." Speaker 1: So are you, you're really retired now? I mean, are you still-- Speaker 2: Well, I still do stuff. Speaker 1: Yeah, I figured you probably did. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You still-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I plan, I still work with the Rites of Passage program. Speaker 1: Well tell us about-- Speaker 2: Like you put-- Speaker 1: --now, you and your wife [Mildred Harpole] have like a partnership on a lot of projects, right? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You and your wife-- Speaker 2: Well, we talk about it, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was principal of Harambee Community School [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] for years and her students, her students are outstanding all over the country. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a community in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] called Harambee? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And it's a, I mean, how did that come about? Speaker 2: That's, we named it that-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because of the students and we went down to the, an area about Walnut Street and it went from Walnut Street to Capitol Drive and from the expressway to about Holton Street and from 6th [Street] or 7th Street to Holton Street, years ago, the Germans used to live west of Holton Street and the Poles, and the Italians lived east of it and years ago they used to fight going back and forth but when the expressway came through, they moved folks up into that areas. So that's what we've been doing. We started out Harambee, helped start a clinic, the Isaac Coggs health clinic [Isaac Coggs Heritage Health Center, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], excuse me, and my wife, when the foundation came to visit Milwaukee to find out about this clinic that's going to be set up there, the Isaac Coggs health clinic, she had to testify for it and they had their board members there. She was so good they gave $5 million and it's still going. Speaker 1: Okay, and Harambee means a pull in-- Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Harambee means pull together in Kiswahili. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's from Jomo Kenyatta-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yes sir. Speaker 2: --Kenya, where he had to organize all the tribes so that they would fight the British and get 'em and they got 'em. Speaker 1: Yeah, let's pull together (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they'd just go, "Harambee." Story_ID: 655571 Speaker 1: Now tell us, we always ask this question. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: My biggest hope is that the black community understands that it's important for the children to read and for them to get busy and making sure that they do that. Now, what, what caused me to, to think about that. Two things was, I read about Frederick Douglass, and by the way, I met some of his family who used to live in Chicago [Illinois]. I don't know if you knew Betty Washington. Did you? Speaker 1: No, I met, I met one of his relatives once, yeah, in Chicago. Speaker 2: Yeah, Betty Washington. Speaker 1: They said they were related to Booker T. [Booker T. Washington] and Frederick Douglass. Speaker 2: Yeah, is that right, okay. Anyway, Betty died here in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] but she came here from Colorado and was a reporter and she went to school with my wife [Mildred Harpole], see. Anyway, when the slave owner was teaching Frederick Douglass how to read, the slave owner heard about it and he pulled his wife into the office, his room, his office, and he started cursing her out. Said, "What are you doing teaching that nigger, how to read?" He says, "We'll never be able to enslave him. So if he knows how to read, we can't, we can't fool 'em." You know, and that kept, that stuck in my mind and then what else stuck in my mind was Dr. Elijah Benjamin Mays [sic. Benjamin Mays] and after he told me that I actually visited his home in South Carolina, Greenville, South Carolina, he's in a log cabin there. So I know that we have genius in our family. I knew, I knew them when I was growing up and going to school. Walter Stanford [ph.] at nine years old could play classical music. Lawrence [ph.] could play jazz. Willie Pickens is fantastic. Duncan Green [ph.] is the greatest alto player in the world right now. He was in the front four pages in the Downbeat magazine, right off, lived five or six doors down from me and I watched them but in school, they would flunk it, I said, because they were acting like the people that were teaching 'em. So my hope is that, and did you see that movie about, 'Hidden Numbers' [sic.]? Speaker 1: Right, 'Hidden Figures,' right. Speaker 2: Yes, my hope is that, you know, instead of being beaten down by a system that says you're no good, that's a lie 'cause you are, you're great. Story_ID: 655572 Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit, bit about your children. You, you have children, right? Speaker 2: My daughter is brilliant. My son [John Harpole] was in the top 1 percent of the world in brains. He's in the financing now in New York [New York]. My daughter, at five years old, was in [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory's program. In fact, look her name up, Annette Harpole, she was on the, at five, she was on the Green Sheet which was the Journal [Milwaukee Journal Sentinel] and they talked about her going to appear in the children's program at Bill Cosby, Cosby, Cosby sat her in his lap and he, he tried to confuse her about Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and she corrected him on, on the national television. Speaker 1: Oh, the Cosby TV show ['The Cosby Show'] that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: --(unclear) the kids, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was years ago, man. So, and she just got married so she lives in Racine [Wisconsin], works with Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company and my son's in New York and he travels all over the world, just got back from Washington [D.C.] but he was in California a while 'cause the kids, his wife is going to be president, first African American and first woman president of the school at a place that my wife [Mildred Harpole] told you about in California [Pomona College, Claremont, California] and if you look her name up, Gabrielle Starr [G. Gabrielle Starr], she--Guggenheim award out of Chicago [Illinois], out of New York. Story_ID: 655573 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. When you look back at your life and all the things that you've done and accomplished, is there anything that you would differently if you could go back and change things? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd, I'd concentrate on study. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then I would make sure I'd gather wealth so I can really be important, not important, but do something to help the community. Speaker 1: Okay, it seemed like you've done a lot. Speaker 2: I'm influenced but when I think about it, I could have done more. Speaker 1: Well, that leads me to my last question which is, sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: That I loved the community-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --loved people. Speaker 1: (Pause) Okay, well, thank you very much...