 Story_ID: 269219 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is [HistoryMaker] Paul Brock. Ma'am, could you give us your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: I am Frances Louise Dancy Hooks, F-R-A-N-C-E-S, L-O-U-I-S-E, D-A-N-C-Y, H-O-O-K-S [HistoryMaker Frances Hooks]. Speaker 1: Now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Two, twenty-three, twenty-seven [February 23, 1927], Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Retired. I was a teacher. Speaker 1: Okay, secondary education or, or-- Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting story. I taught everything from first grade to twelfth grade. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: This day, July the what, I don't even know, July 13, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: The Hilton Hotel in, I think they say Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Story_ID: 269220 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always have to ask and they only require a short answer, and the first one is, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, springtime. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: I can't say it on public TV. Speaker 1: Okay, it's an exclamation? Speaker 2: Yeah, an exclamation point. Story_ID: 269221 Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Andrew Dancy] side but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Georgia Harriet Graves Dancy. Speaker 1: Okay, and how do you spell, well we know how to spell Dancy, but the other part? Speaker 2: Georgia, G-E-O-R-G-I-A, Harriet, H-A-R-R-I-E-T, G-R-A-V-E-S, D-A-N-C-Y. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: My mother was born one, thirty-one [January 31], I don't know what year it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One, thirty-one [January 31], 1902, I think that's right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and where was she born? Speaker 2: Memphis, Tennessee. Speaker 1: All right. Now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: My mother's father was reputed, was from Sedalia, Missouri. His name was Samuel H. Graves [ph.] and from what we can understand, he was white. In fact I have a letter from, still in my possession, from his mother and aunt. My mother's mother is from Memphis--Jackson, Tennessee but her roots are Huntsville, Alabama off the Jacobs plantation. Story_ID: 269222 Speaker 1: Your husband, [HistoryMaker] Reverend Benjamin Hooks, has roots that go back to Huntsville [Alabama]-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --to, to the Jacobs plantation as well? Speaker 2: To the Jacobs plantation. Speaker 1: So, both of, but both of you've had roots-- Speaker 2: Both of our ancestors come from the same general area. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But we don't look alike. Speaker 1: Okay, so are there any stories about the Jacobs plantation that were passed down through your family? Speaker 2: No, none whatsoever. Speaker 1: Okay, so, we assume that they were slaves on the, that plantation during slavery? Speaker 2: Right, that's, that's our assumption. Benny's sister died in August and there is a monument to some part of the Hunt-Phelan Home in Memphis [Tennessee] that has something to do with the Jacobs family and we keep saying, well, one day we're going to research and find out if we really can but, you know, we haven't done it yet. Too late, we don't have any children. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, are there any stories passed down from your ancestors on your mother's [Georgia Graves Dancy] side at all about, about slavery and its aftermath, Reconstruction, or-- Speaker 2: The only real story that, that stays in our mind is that my mother's father was a Samuel Graves [ph.] from Sedalia, Missouri and he was reputed to be a white man married to my grandmother who was half white, half black and my grandmother was pregnant with her last child when my grandfather worked as a waiter in the Peabody Hotel [Memphis, Tennessee] in Memphis and he was serving tables and a white man called him a nigger and he broke a bottle over this man's head and they had to get him out of town on the first train running that night. So my grandmother and my aunt, my mother's baby sister, never really saw her father because he had had to leave Memphis on the last train smoking and he went to Portland, Oregon and lived and ironically my brother, who is now deceased, was in the [U.S.] Army and he traced it and went and met this Samuel Graves and at first he tried to act as if he didn't know anything about anybody from Memphis, Tennessee but before the conversation ended and my brother left, he had started trembling and he had married a white woman and had some white children by that time and my brother did, you know, make him remember that he had left his wife and an unborn baby girl in Memphis, Tennessee. So, but to know something about Sam Graves' family, the only thing that we have is a letter that his mother and his aunt sent to my mother when my mother was born in Memphis, Tennessee and I still treasure that letter, mother--it's got a postage stamp of three cents on it and when it was sent to little Ms. Georgia Graves. So that's basically all I know about my mom's father's side on my mom's mother's side. Speaker 1: You say, so her mother was half black and half white? Speaker 2: Yeah. They come off the Jacobs plantation, then they're in Huntsville and they all, well, my mom could get on the streetcar and pre-desegregation days and ride up front, on the streetcar, and nobody ever questioned it and that's how close to the other side she was but all of her sisters were high yellows and could go either way except one, the boy that was born looked like an old Indian [Native American]. He was red, brown with the straightest, straightest hair and real sharp nose and their brother, all the rest of the kids were girls and they all had blond hair, you know, light skin and everything, but on my mom's side, that's as far back as I can go. Story_ID: 269223 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Georgia Graves Dancy] talk about growing up in, in Memphis [Tennessee]? Speaker 2: My mom's mother, after her husband, Mr. Sielaff [ph.], I'm sorry, Sam Graves [ph.] did not come back, you know, after having broken this bottle over this man's head, my grandmother later married Mr. Sielaff and he came from, around the Jackson, Tennessee area and he was, they say he was white, German, and Mr. Sielaff and my grandmother moved to Xenia, Ohio and from Xenia, Ohio they ended up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]. And so my mother and her sisters lived with them and they moved to, and my mom went to school in Philadelphia. In fact, she was in her last year at Girls High [Philadelphia High School for Girls, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in Philly when the sister, my grandmother's sister lived with my grandmother and it's such a terrible thing to say but my grandmother's sister did not like my grandmother's baby child, my mother's baby sister because she was born, kind of myrina-like color but she had red nappy hair. Speaker 1: Now what, how would you spell myrina and-- Speaker 2: Well that's a, that's an old southern phrase. Speaker 1: I know it is. Speaker 2: I don't know how you would even spell myrina. Speaker 1: I've heard it and so even though we might not be able to spell it, well-- Speaker 2: M-Y-R-I-N-A, myrina, I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, and what does it really mean? Speaker 2: Well, to my best knowledge, I would say that, myrina was halfway between black and half white, that's-- Speaker 1: Between black and half white? So, darker than half white but-- Speaker 2: Not brown but kind of a reddish brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You knew that they weren't pure white but you knew they weren't pure black either. It's crazy 'cause you are more of that complexion. My aunt would have been more his complexion. Speaker 1: Okay, our cameraman is, is of Scandinavian descent. We want to point out-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --and, and of course-- Speaker 2: Myrina, that's what they always said, myrina, just what that really goes back to, I don't know. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard it before too. I've heard it many times. I just want to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, well then I'm not alone. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean it's, it's something that's said quite a bit-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a black, it's a black thing basically. Speaker 1: Do you think it's really something that we started or do you think it's something that's started by-- Speaker 2: I think we started it trying to I.D., you know-- Speaker 1: Okay, the different colors. Speaker 2: --the different colors that we ended up being. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. (Background noise) So, so you had your grandmother, went from Xenia to Philadelphia? Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's where she and Mr. Sielaff lived and they ended up having a boy, Louis Sielaff [ph.], and my mom was in her senior year at Girls High when she had to take the baby girl, Juanita [ph.], down to Memphis and Juanita was the one that my grandmother's sister did not like because Juanita was born with nappy hair. It wasn't like the traditional smooth hair that you could comb and it would stay in place. And so my grandmother put my mother and this baby girl on the train and sent them down to Memphis and that's how my mom got to Memphis and she lived with my grandmother's sister in Memphis until she married my daddy [Andrew Dancy]. And my aunt, Juanita, the baby girl, lived with my mother and my father. It's kind of convoluted but it's, it's like families were and my mom went on to finish high school in Memphis and the only school for blacks, high school for blacks, she finished there in '23 [1923] and I still have her graduation program from high school, Korchect High School [sic. Kortrecht High School, Memphis, Tennessee], and she immediately got a job teaching school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She was really smart. Speaker 1: So she could get a job teaching school right out of high school at least. Speaker 2: Right out of high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a real brilliant woman. Speaker 1: Okay, and she graduated from which, what high school was it? Speaker 2: Korchect-- Speaker 1: Korchect. Speaker 2: K-O-R-C-H-E-C-T, Korchect [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the only school for blacks, high school for blacks in the City of Memphis. Story_ID: 269224 Speaker 1: Can you give me your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Andrew Jackson Dancy. Most black folk tried to take after Andrew Jackson and for what I don't know. Speaker 1: Were a lot of people named Andrew Jackson? Speaker 2: I've run across an awful lot when I taught school, Andrew Jackson. Andrew Jackson what? Brown Andrew Jackson. I don't know why he made such an impression on black folks. Speaker 1: I guess, well he was from Tennessee. He was from Tennessee. Speaker 2: My daddy was from Mississippi-- Speaker 1: He was from Mississippi? Speaker 2: From Canton, Mississippi. Speaker 1: From Canton, okay, and what year was he born? Speaker 2: Shoot, 1890 something. I'll say 1891. I'm not really sure when daddy was born. Speaker 1: Okay, so he's at least ten years older than your-- Speaker 2: Than my mother [Georgia Graves Dancy]? Speaker 1: --mother or almost ten years older? Speaker 2: No, and I've got the Bible with his date of birth in it. It must, daddy must have been about six years older than mother. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: Not too much older than my mother. Speaker 1: So say, 1895 or so? Speaker 2: When I get back home, I can tell you. When I get back home I can look it up in the Bible. Speaker 1: Okay, but sounds like it's about 1895. If she's 1902, and he's about 1895, 1896-- Speaker 2: It's a shame I don't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Maybe I never really knew. Speaker 1: Okay, now, now do you know about the ancestors on your father's side? Speaker 2: That's an interesting story because in Canton, Mississippi, my daddy actually finished high school which was like, you know, for a black person to finish high school in Canton, Mississippi meant that they had to have something other than just a name and my father's mother died in childbirth and my father had a sister and a brother and he was reared by his grandmother. Her name was Jemima Jackson and she was one of the prettiest women you would find anywhere. Tall, six feet something, tall, erect, I, what I would call an African princess and Big Momma, we called her Grandmama. Grandmama lived in a house. I have a picture of that house. I'd love to show you sometimes. You know how they say who lived in, a little shotgun something, well my grandmother's house had, we went down there two times. It had a bedroom, kitchen, living room, bedroom and you walked up the center steps and there was a big stove in the center of the house but it had two rooms on this side and two rooms on that side and the kitchen was behind what grandma would call the guest bedroom. And there was no bathroom so you had to go down the steps on the back and go down the hill to go to the bathroom but it was a nice house and it sat at 126 Hickory Alley [Hickory Street] in Canton, Mississippi and they owned all the land running all the way back to where eventually a highway, I don't know how much money they got but I know my daddy got some, a pitiful amount of money from selling them, his brother and sister selling the, the land but then they put a highway through it. I think they eked them out of their money, out of the land, but we went down there two times. Story_ID: 269225 Speaker 1: I'll jump up and tell you that when my dad [Andrew Dancy] and mom [Georgia Graves Dancy] married, they lived the first year and a half in the house with my mother's aunt and in that time, my father was a bellhop at the Gayoso [House] Hotel [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: At which hotel? Speaker 1: Gayoso, G-A-Y-O-S-O, Gayoso Hotel, he was a bellhop there. Having graduated from high school, I have a letter where this man, he worked in the shoe store in Canton [Mississippi] and this white man wrote a letter and said, I am sorry to lose Andrew J. Dancy, one of the best colored boys I have ever known and I still have that letter here. My daddy was a grown man, he was still a boy, in Canton, Mississippi. And so, daddy was very frugal and undoubtedly had to have been some money somewhere in that family. I don't know where it came from or anything but in, I'm born in '27 [1927] and in 1929, my father and mother moved us into a three bedroom brick house with a basement, an attic, living room, dining room, breakfast room, kitchen, front bedroom, middle bedroom, bathroom, back bedroom and back porch. Now, a lot of people say we were rich. I don't remember having been rich but I remember my father had in his values in the right place as a bellhop at the Gayoso Hotel. My father saved and undoubtedly had to have had, had to have had some money from Mississippi too but he had a home built, the ground dug and the house built when most by, this is '29 [1929] and that's right when the crash came and my daddy's house was built and people say, you all, you all had to have something. Your daddy was just a--I said my daddy was a bellhop. My mother never worked another day after I was born. My father took care of us and from what I know and what I know of people nowadays, I have one of the smartest daddies that ever walked the face of this earth and a good man too. His values were in place and it's so ironic that we never owned a car. The first car in our family was when I started teaching school and a car costs sixteen hundred dollars. My daddy gave me a thousand dollars cash on that house, on that car, and I had to pay the $647 and it took me a year to pay that off but that's how frugal my father was. My mother was, she never worked after I was born, after any of us were born but she made all of our clothing. And so, you know, she'd cut corners wherever possible and she was a good manager and daddy was an excellent provider. Speaker 2: Now is there a story about how they met? Speaker 1: We still have the love letters that my daddy wrote to my mom. Mother was teaching school and here she is, she's this pretty girl that's come down from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and everybody's looking at this good looking woman who was shapely and everything and all the men and the women liked her and mother got a job teaching school but my, my godmother who became her best friend and mother hung out together and daddy, they met my father at the Hotel Men's Improvement Club [Memphis, Tennessee] where mother and godmother and some other ladies had gone to, to enjoy an evening and that's where daddy met mother and she says-- Speaker 2: The Hotel Men's Improvement Club? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. It was a black men's club and you had to go up some stairs. In fact, I went there a couple of times, never stayed that long but they said that when my father saw my mother, he thought she was the prettiest thing he had ever seen and said he could never take his eyes off her. I have these love letters that daddy wrote to mother. My mom would go back, having been reared in Philadelphia, basically, she would go back, she would go back to Philadelphia and these love letters tell of how much he missed her. They weren't even married but how much he missed her and how he'd long to see her and just to hold her hand. There was no sex or anything involved. You know, these love letters are like wow, did people really live like that? And so, they, they met at church, at Avery Chapel African Methodist Episcopal Church [Memphis, Tennessee] which is, was our home church and daddy came from a staunch A.M.E. family background and my mom came from an A.M.E. background also. So that's where they really met and then socially you, you mixed your social activities with your church activities. Story_ID: 269226 Speaker 1: What were your parents' [Georgia Graves Dancy and Andrew Dancy] personalities like? And who do you think you take after? Speaker 2: They say I'm more like my mom. My daddy was quiet. We never, we were never whipped by my father. He never put his hands on us. He didn't think men should hit girls. My mother was a Yankee and she spoke her peace. She could, mother could talk back to your, tell you off in a half second. She was a fireball but she knew never to tangle with daddy. I remember one time daddy would bring his earnings home from being a bellman at the [Gayoso House] Hotel [Memphis, Tennessee] and one time mother took some of his change. She didn't know he had already counted it and she took a few quarters and dimes of his money and I remember daddy saying, "G, have you been in my money?" "No." "G, don't stand there and tell that you know what." He wouldn't curse or anything and he said, "G, why won't you tell me the truth? I had counted my money over there and such and such is missing." Mother said, "You just didn't count it right" and he didn't, my sister [Anita Dancy] and I were standing in the doorway, we were hearing these fireworks go off but I never heard them really have a serious argument or anything. Daddy was kind of passive. He was really passive and mother ran the house and I just think I have one of the best growing ups that any child could ever have. Speaker 1: Well which one do you think you take the most after? Speaker 2: Ask Benny [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin] Hooks. I, I think I'm more like my mother 'cause I'm the oldest child and a lot of responsibilities are put on me. So I was the spokesperson. Story_ID: 269227 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Or did you have? Speaker 2: I had a sister [Anita Dancy] who died in October, no, last of October and I had a brother [Andrew Dancy, Jr.] who died in '99 [1999] and that was it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They both died of cancer. Story_ID: 269228 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: I have one of my mom [Georgia Graves Dancy]. Mother would take us to town [Memphis, Tennessee] and we were going off to camp. We were among those kids privileged to go to summer camp with the Episcopal church and she had bought us some panties from Woolworths [F.W. Woolworth Company] and we were going down Main Street and I lost my little bag of panties. My mother never really whipped us. She whipped us but this time walking down Main Street she said, "Where's your bag, Frances [HistoryMaker Frances Hooks]?" I couldn't find it and I started tearing up. She said, "Just come here" and she pinched me, took and twisted my arm around and "You better not cry." She just twisted my little arm around because she said, "Did you know that costs money and money doesn't grow on trees?" And she twisted and I was crying. "No, you better not cry. Nobody had better see you cry." That's the kind of mother I had. Now at home, down--she'd tell you to go down in the basement and get a piece of wood and she would whip you. I was twenty-one when I got my last whipping. I went out with Ben [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin] Hooks and I stayed out past twelve o'clock. When I got home, I got a whipping. I had finished college. Speaker 1: So that was really engrained in her? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: That she truly believed in that. Speaker 2: You did not disobey the rules and regulations because you were a respected young lady and you did not do, that was not acceptable, past society. Yeah, Georgia was a toughie but not my daddy [Andrew Dancy], never touched us. He'd call you in and ask you, did you do such and such a thing, and you'd say, "Yes sir" or "no sir." You didn't lie to daddy but he never touched us. Story_ID: 269229 Speaker 1: Now you grew up the whole time in Memphis [Tennessee], right? Speaker 2: Yes sir. Speaker 1: Did you live in the same neighborhood the whole time? Speaker 2: We lived in the same house from the time I was two years old until I married. Speaker 1: Okay, well what was the neighborhood like? Can you describe the house and the neighborhood and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it's still there. My old house is still there. Well, they called it Strivers Row because on the corner of the hou- on the corner of our street, Edith Street, Dr. J.E. Walker [Joseph Edison Walker] who was the first black millionaire in the South, had a big brick house on this corner and on the opposite corner, the founder of the Church of God in Christ, Bishop [Charles Harrison] Mason, had a home and down our street, I can go down and even today call out the people who lived on our street. The first house was a man who worked for the hotel. In those days, hotel workers were upwardly mobile because they brought tips and things home and, you know, they did better than other people who worked in other professions but the first man, Mr. Gordon [ph.], worked for the hotel. The second man was a doctor, a dentist. The next one was the president of LeMoyne College [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis Tennessee] who was white at that time and the next one was a postal worker. The next one was a bishop in the Church of God in Christ. The next one was a doctor, a dentist. The next one was a school principal. The next one was our house and my daddy [Andrew Dancy] was a bellman, the [Gayoso House] Hotel [Memphis, Tennessee]. The next one, the man was a painter, a house builder. The next one was a postal worker. The next one was a postal worker. The next one is a postal worker. The next one was a white man and a black woman lived. The next one was a postal worker on my side of the street and on both sides of the street was pretty much the same, postal, or hotel employees, or railroad workers and then up at the, beginning of the street, the president of LeMoyne College, no, professor from LeMoyne College, Dr. Kanye [ph.]-- Story_ID: 269601 Speaker 1: We were talking about the people in the neighborhood [in Memphis, Tennessee], who lived there and you were saying that the president of LeMoyne [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee], a white man, lived on your block. Speaker 2: Yeah, we had lots of white faculty and then the president was Dr. Hollis [F.] Price, the first black president, and I know he lived on the, he lived the third house on our street. He had a son [Hollis F. Price, Jr.] who kind of grew up with us. So, what people called Edith Street was like Strivers Row. Speaker 1: So, it, it had another name, though? Speaker 2: No, it was Edith Street-- Speaker 1: Edith Street, okay. Speaker 2: --but just, just a, you know, rather than saying, I don't think the word "bourgie" came into play in those days but people who were upwardly, who were striving toward upward mobility, basically. You know, we had doctors and we had, we didn't have any lawyers so there were no lawyers and, but hotel workers, people who had an income coming in, just let me say it like that. And there were only, my sister [Anita Dancy], my brother [Andrew Dancy, Jr.] and I and then next door for a time, lived two boys and across the street from us were three children, one up at the corner, two, three up at the corner, the Flags [ph.] had two boys, Margaret [ph.] in the next house and then down to the DeWalts [ph.], three children. So there were only about eight or nine kids on our street and we belonged to everybody on the street. You couldn't do anything that you didn't get reprimanded by anybody because people, you know, they, they respected one another and we, the children just belonged. You just didn't do anything. We didn't play with other children, you played right down Edith Street. Story_ID: 269602 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Memphis, Tennessee]? Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells. There was an alley that separated our street, the back of our house, then an alley and then McLemore [Avenue] and McLemore was where white people lived and in one of the houses that was just almost behind our house, there were some white kids, two white kids that lived there the DeWalts [ph.] on Edith [Street]. In fact, when we all, when we went off to college, it was my sister [Anita Dancy], Billie [ph.] and I, three girls from Edith Street went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] together. When the sights and sounds were sitting on the porch, you took a bath and it's, after six when the sun went down, you sat on the porch and you, maybe you played high spy or something with the grown folks sitting out watching you. You didn't, and you didn't really play with other children, you played right there with--nothing exciting happened on our street. When a car came down the street, you said, I know what that is. You'd try to I.D. a car 'cause there weren't that many cars that came down our street. We didn't do much of anything. Speaker 1: Were people still using horse, horses a lot? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Or just, just-- Speaker 2: You rode the streetcar. Speaker 1: Streetcar. Speaker 2: Yeah, my brother's [Andrew Dancy, Jr.] godmother and her husband had a car and the lady next door to her had a car. Mr. Franklin [ph.] owned a car. Mr. Camel [ph.], who owned the cleaners, had a car. The DeWalts had a car. McCoy's [ph.] had a car. That's just about all the cars that were on our street. Speaker 1: Okay, most of the houses, frame houses? Speaker 2: Frame, frame, frame, brick, brick, frame, frame, frame, frame, brick. There were a few brick houses. Most of them were frame. They're still standing except for one. Everything is still like it was, just the people aren't there. The different set of people that are living there now and we've, we've even had people to put up a fence 'cause they have these children that don't know how to stay in their own yard. We were not allowed on the front of the house until the sun went down. You played in your backyard and nobody, no crossing the street and playing out front. You just didn't do that. Story_ID: 269603 Speaker 1: What was your personality like as a little kid growing up? What did you like to do and-- Speaker 2: I was a tomboy. I liked to climb trees and be Tarzan, "Ah!" swinging from one end to the other. I was playing marbles. I have the ugliest knees right now 'cause I loved, I was a typical tomboy. I didn't want to be a girl. I used to try to kiss my elbow every day so I could turn to a boy, you know. Speaker 1: Really? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. And my sister [Anita Dancy] was the dainty one. She was a little redhead, with green, grey eyes and everybody's cutie and I wanted to be a boy. I didn't want to be a girl 'cause boys could climb trees and swing and do everything and that was me, and then along comes my brother [Andrew Dancy, Jr.]. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you spent a lot of time outdoors doing-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --active things? Speaker 2: I used to, I hated cooking and I would tell my sister, I will do all the dusting and sweeping and mopping or whatever if you just go in the kitchen with mother [Georgia Graves Dancy]. I do not, I never really liked the kitchen. I still don't care too much for cooking. I do what I have to but I'm not the world's best cook. I didn't get Benny [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin] Hooks by being a good cook either. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you like the movies since you mentioned Tarzan? Did you? Speaker 2: We didn't go to movie until, on Saturday. Once we finished listening to the Metropolitan Opera, we could then go to the Saturday matinee. Speaker 1: So your mother made you listen to the Metropolitan Opera-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: --on the radio? Speaker 2: Every Sat- oh, yes. We had to take music. You see, my mother had come from a different background, you know. I don't know what it was like. I know that it must have been difficult growing up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] but being exposed to the kinds of things that they were exposed to, she brought some of that "culture" to the South with her and we had to listen to the Metropolitan Opera and my sister studied music in college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. I never really cared for it but I listened 'cause I knew I could go to see the cowboy shows. Once that Metropolitan Opera ended, we could go to the movie. Speaker 1: Did you have to know the names of the operas and that sort of thing or did she make you learn those? Speaker 2: Uh-uh, we had to take music and I never was good at even piano. Speaker 1: Okay, so when you went to the show, the show was segregated, right, or was it? Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes. It was two blocks from our house and she knew what time we left to go to the movie and she knew what time the movie ended and we had to be back by a certain time. Speaker 1: Okay, was, was the radio a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Yes and no. It wasn't that much. You had to practice piano and we had to take piano lessons and mother would have impromptu spelling bees with you. And then a retired teacher, being an ex-teacher, not a retired, an ex-teacher, she would have like lessons, you know, and don't put a verb in the wrong place 'cause you had to sit down and write that and put it in a sentence and tell why you did it that way and why it should be this way (laughter). She was a stickler but she was, you know, she's one of the best mama's anybody could have. Story_ID: 269604 Speaker 1: Tell us about school. Now, what grade school did you go to? Speaker 2: I started in private school in Catholic church school. I went kindergarten, first and second and I was in the third grade when my mom [Georgia Graves Dancy] decided that I had to live with people, so she took me out of private school and sent me to public school. She said-- Speaker 1: Now, do you know the name of the first school? What was it? Speaker 2: St. Anthony [of Padua School, Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: St. Anthony, okay. Speaker 2: St. Anthony was the Catholic school that, that whatever you called in the black community, leaders went to, that was where I went and then I went to LaRose Elementary School [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Is that L-A-- Speaker 2: L-A-R-O-S-E. Speaker 1: With a capital "R", okay. Speaker 2: Capital R-O-S-E, LaRose. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And I got into many a fight. I was a real tomboy. Speaker 1: So you would fight? Did you pick the fights or did you-- Speaker 2: No, people, you know, because, people thought we thought we were better than and different from and in many ways we might have been better off. My mother used to come over and she was president, founder of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and having taught school, she would come over to the school and she knew the teachers and all, so I walked the straight and narrow path and a lot of the kids thought I, thought I was better than, more than or whatever than, and so, and I was a fighter and if they picked on me, they were going to get it. And so, I used to fight and my sister [Anita Dancy] was, she finally came to public school and a girl called her "yellow" and, said she had, well Teetie [ph.], and she had Teetie crying and I tore into her and she had a fountain pen and missed my temple about that much, then she was going to kill me and I nearly got killed when I got home 'cause if you got a whipping at school, you got a whipping when you got home. And my mother having taught, the teachers knew my mother and they would just call Georgia and tell her, they had to get Frances [HistoryMaker Frances Hooks] today and I'd get another one at home. I was just a bad girl, I know, I was a tomboy. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: A toughie. Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school? Speaker 2: Spelling was my, well I liked spelling better than I did it, and I tended to like English till I got home and they, and it was so funny, my mom would take us to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in the summers and I think I was telling this guy from Norway this, that when we'd go to Philly to where my grandmother lived the kids, we'd play with these white kids, and they said, they would tease us about our rural accent and when we'd get back to Memphis [Tennessee] and go to school, they'd say we, our classmates would say, we're trying to sound white and so we couldn't win for losing but at home, don't you mispronounce and don't you put a verb in the wrong place 'cause you'd get, get a backing so, you know, you lived in that world of what was and what maybe somebody else wanted it to be but I had a good bringing up. I have no complaints. Speaker 1: Now, were there any special teachers in grade school? Speaker 2: Miss Raines [ph.] and Miss Goldsby [ph.]. Miss Raines rescued me from being a, coming from the Catholic School into the public school, she took me under her arm, under her wing and then Miss Goldsby taught me penmanship and she would let me do the writing on the board because my penmanship was better than anybody else's in the class and those were my two favorite teachers. Speaker 1: Did you read a lot when you were growing up? Speaker 2: I read a lot, mother required it. Didn't really care about it. I don't think I was the smartest child growing up. My sister, I think, was smart, far smarter than I am but I was very verbal and, you know, I could read something and give you a smart-butt answer. I guess we had a good upbringing. My mother tried to expose us to, we didn't have a library in our neighborhood and we didn't have a car so it was very seldom that we got to the library but we had books, books at home, in the attic. My mother had books and so we had to read from that. Speaker 1: So she had books that she already had? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You know, from teaching, I guess she'd just bring a book home and here, there and yonder and read. Story_ID: 269605 Speaker 1: What about high school? Where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. There were only two high schools when I went to high school. One in South Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee] and one in North Memphis [Memphis, Tennessee]. The other was Manassas High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Did you know about Manassas? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: That was our rival. Speaker 1: Yeah, Manassas. That's where [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes went to school. Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah. We called this, the other side of town. Booker Washington was my school. Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was Booker T. Washington like? Speaker 2: Fabulous. It's a wonderful high school and I graduated in '44 [1944] and '43 [1943] is when the [U.S.] Army started taking our folk to the service and my sister [Anita Dancy], who was a year behind me, was able to go to summer school and graduate in 1944 with me. She would have graduated in '45 [1945] but she graduated in '44 [1944] and so in high school I was class president in ninth or tenth grade and I was going to be a doctor and I have a picture, that when they first introduced aeronautics to the public school system in Memphis [Tennessee], I thought about maybe flying an airplane. So we went to this class to learn about aeronautics, new word, we hadn't heard of it before and I took all the science classes 'cause I was going to be a doctor. That was my ambition. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it didn't turn out that way. Story_ID: 269606 Speaker 1: So your senior year [at Booker T. Washington High School, Memphis, Tennessee], where, what had you decided to do in terms of school? Where were you going to go to school? Speaker 2: Well, we all wanted, my sister [Anita Dancy] and my girlfriend that lived across the street from us, Billie [ph.], the three of us wanted to go to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and that's where we ended up going, all three of us, caught the train to Howard University in Washington [D.C.]. My sister graduated with me in '44 [1944] instead of '45 [1945] so the three of us went to Howard. In fact, Joe Atkins [ph.], H.D. Whalum [ph.], Curl Young [ph.] -- Speaker 1: Now, now was Howard before, now, you went to Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] at one point? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I started out at Howard University. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was in 1944, fall of '44 [1944]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there was so much prejudice on Howard's campus and with my sister being a redhead and me being brown, they did not want to, the people that I went to school with, did not want to believe that we were sisters. Did we have the same father or did we have different mothers and there was always a question about were we really sis- true sisters? That's how deep it ran in those days and so I really developed a terribly inferiority complex. Speaker 1: Well, was Howard really that, was that that color stratified? Speaker 2: Yes sir, yes sir. Speaker 1: In 1944? Speaker 2: You couldn't even belong to AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha] Sorority if you were as dark as me. My sister belonged to AKA but Gwen Featherstern [ph.] was a beautiful black woman at Howard University and I joined Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority], I was in the pledge club, at Delta. They were not, the Delta's were not as prejudiced as the AKA's. So I developed this inferiority complex which affected my ability to perform academically and when my first semester's grades went home, my mother [Georgia Graves Dancy] says, uh-uh, I know you can do better than that but I wasn't doing better. So being A.M.E.'s [African Methodist Episcopal], too, and my mother, my father [Andrew Dancy] had wanted us to go to Wilberforce in the beginning, so my mom and dad said, well, we're going to put you over at Wilberforce. So, they got me into Wilberforce and that's where I spent my second and third year. Then the church and state split at Wilberforce so that's when I went to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee]. So I did three colleges in four-- Speaker 1: You did a tour. Speaker 2: Yeah, I did three colleges (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a tour. Story_ID: 269607 Speaker 1: Did you meet any exciting instructors or--at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: My science professor is Dr.--I can't recall his name now, was trying to think of, he had, I can't recall his name, but he, he was very kind and there were a lot of foreign students in the science department who had been exposed to much more than I had from, coming from Memphis, Tennessee and our unique, inadequate science department of [Booker T. Washington] High School [Washington, D.C.], so I met my first love that I was going to marry was the vice president's [sic. president] son from Monrovia, Liberia, Alvin Barclay [ph.]. Speaker 1: Barclay, right. Speaker 2: In fact, Alvin gave me his father's ring and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, his father was Edwin Barclay-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --I believe, yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: We went over to, well after Ben [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] and I married, we went to Monrovia and he was practicing medicine there and at first, it's so funny, he wouldn't have anything to do with me and then finally, I went over to the clinic where he was practicing and it was at Kennedy, John F. Kennedy Clinic [John F. Kennedy Medical Center, Monrovia, Liberia], and I went to him and said, hi Edwin, Alvin, and because I went to him, he lowered his barrier and there was nothing that we wanted or could even think of that we wanted for, while we were in Monrovia, that he didn't provide for having been the vice president's son. But he was so mad with me for not having stuck by him at Howard University that he wasn't going to have anything to do with me. If I hadn't "humbled" myself to go and speak to him, I would have stayed in Monrovia and never seen, never had any contact with him but he finally, he met my husband and we got along fine. He took us to dinner and then when we got ready to leave, he took us to the airport and it was, he was really nice but at Howard he was the person that I met and I thought I liked, really liked. In fact, we had talked about maybe, in those days you didn't have sex ahead of time. We talked about maybe getting married and when my mom [Georgia Graves Dancy] came up and he met my mother, and he said, my sister [Anita Dancy], nor my mother would be welcome 'cause they were too light, I said, no, brother, this will never work but he said my mother, nor my sister would be accepted in Monrovia. So that put the clamp on that relationship but it was an interesting, I learned a lot. Speaker 1: Now was, do you remember, a lot of people mention Howard Thurman, you know, who were there at that time? Speaker 2: Dr. Thurman? Speaker 1: Yeah, the-- Speaker 2: Just vaguely. Speaker 1: --theologian-- Speaker 2: Just vaguely. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Don't really know him. Speaker 1: Okay. Some people had, I think he invites students to his home to discuss issues and things like that. Speaker 2: No, not the lowly freshman. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know about [William] Leo Hansberry, the Africanist when you were there? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No. Very limited. I'm trying to think of what hall we lived in, freshmen dorm. It, it was an experience that I kind of pushed from my mind, really, 'cause it wasn't-- Speaker 1: Okay, the social, yeah it sounds like a social-- Speaker 2: It was, it was a trying time for someone who had come from an environment that I came from and to have to be faced with people that are constantly asking, are you whole sisters? Do you have the same father? Do you have a different mother? How come you're this and--you know, my, my ego just went to the sub-basement and I don't think, I think that affected me. Story_ID: 269608 Speaker 1: How did you like Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and who were some of the teachers there? I know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ms. Chauke [ph.], Ruth Chauke was one of the sweetest dorm mothers you could ever meet and I can't remember the professors, Ms. Chauke and, oh God, I can't even remember. Speaker 1: Was Hallie Q. Brown still around? Speaker 2: Hallie Q. Brown, yeah, but not in terms of having anything directly to do with us just, Ms. Hallie Q. Brown. You know, I can't even recall any of the teachers. I really can't. That's a shame but if I saw their names, I probably would. I'm trying to think. Speaker 1: We were talking off-camera before we started the interview about [HistoryMaker] Hannah Stith who we interviewed, who in Fort Wayne [Indiana], who was there when the split took place. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm trying to think if the girl was from Columbus [Ohio]. You see like, Ohio, was like a thousand miles away from Memphis, Tennessee and you just, most of the kids came from Columbus, Cincinnati [Ohio], Cleveland [Ohio], they came from those areas that were areas that I had never, you're going back forty years now that was like, I'm trying to think. There was a boy that was my bestest friend from Cincinnati and I can't even recall his name. I'm getting Alzheimer's, I can't remember. Speaker 1: I think, Ray Haysbert [HistoryMaker Raymond Haysbert, Sr.] was there and I don't know if you remember him. Do you remember him? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was that him-- Speaker 2: I remember Ray Haysbert. Speaker 1: --'cause he's from Cincinnati? He was from Cincinnati, I know. Speaker 2: That's right, Haysbert, but I'm trying to, Ruth Chauke and I'm trying to think of this, and you said that name, God darn. There's this other boy's name that, daddy was a part of the faculty. Don't ask me all these questions 'cause you're trying to put my mind to-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: God dog. I can see a face and I can't put a name. Oh, come on [HistoryMaker] Frances [Hooks]. Doc, you're just trying to carry me back too far in time. I've had to put other things in my mind so that's-- Speaker 1: That, but how did it, I mean, were the students going into shock when the school had to close down because of the split and reorganize? Speaker 2: Well, I left right in the beginning of the split, you know, when, being an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] and my, [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Samuel Billy] Kyles, and I was going with Frank Madison Reid, I don't, you never heard of Frank Reid? His daddy was a bishop in the A.M.E. church and Frank's daddy was one of the trustees, or he was on campus a lot and Frank Jr.'s daddy had forewarned us as to what was happening with the university and the state and so my parents [Georgia Graves Dancy and Andrew Dancy], being A.M.E.'s, knew about it and that's when they set the wheels for me to go to Fisk [University] in Nashville [Tennessee]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to Wilberforce for two years? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Hallie Q. Brown Cottage [Homewood Cottage]. Speaker 1: Okay. Hallie Q. Brown Cottage, okay, all right. Speaker 2: I started out in Shorter Hall and then moved to Hallie Q. Cottage, so, something happened. Story_ID: 269609 Speaker 1: What about Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]? Now, what was that like? How did it compare to the other two when you're-- Speaker 2: I didn't--well Fisk was a different school. I didn't live on campus, I lived with a Mrs. Moore. I couldn't get in the dormitory. It was too late to get in and so I lived with a Mrs. T. Clay Moore who was, had owned a funeral home in Nashville [Tennessee] and was very well-respected in the Nashville community and she kept a couple of students at her house on Tremont Street and I lived with her and her daughter had been at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] when we were there. So she had come back and so I was, you know, I had some old, old time relationships from Howard University to Fisk 'cause her daughter, see I was a half semester behind, by having changed all these schools, gone to all these different schools. I lost a half year but I lived with the Moores and enjoyed it and enjoyed life at Fisk. It was, Edna West, whose father was a part of Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee], was head of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority and Edna turned out to be a real good friend, someone supportive of the transfer, Delta, and opened some doors and, you know, made, helped me make friends and things at Fisk. I had pleasant memories of the opportunity to be there. Story_ID: 268037 Speaker 1: We had you at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], Charles Spurgeon Johnson was the president, I guess? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Arnold Bon Thompson [sic. Arna Bontemps], the librarian, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh shoot, what do you know about Fisk University (laughter)? Speaker 1: Oh, just little tidbits. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Fisk was a good school. It was good to me. It let me graduate and I came back home to teach. Speaker 1: Now did you have--who were some of the professors there that you, in education? Do you remember any of them? Were any of them special? Speaker 2: You know you're asking me questions that nobody has asked me in thirty, forty years, son. I can't even remember one person. What is the doctor's name that, the Englishman? Speaker 1: Oh, an Englishman. Speaker 2: At Fisk. Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: God-dogit, he came down. Speaker 1: Well, that's a good description, though. There was an English, actually, an Englishman who was a doctor there who was a professor of-- Speaker 2: No, this is a white guy who taught English at Fisk and-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was everybody's friend. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay, and he was particularly fond of my best girlfriend and her fiance, and I can't recall his name. Ms. Johnson [ph.] was one of my teachers in phys ed [physical education]. You're trying to make me go back over stuff that I had put out of my last mind, son, and my brain won't hold but so much and all those things that are passed up, forgot 'em. I can't even think. Ms. Johnson I can remember. What is that doctor's name? Ask me something else, maybe I'll come back to remember some of it. Speaker 1: Now had you met [HistoryMaker Reverend] Benjamin Hooks by then? Or had you? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, so, so when you, you graduated with an education degree, right? Speaker 2: Physical education, science. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And I came back to Memphis [Tennessee] in 1949. Story_ID: 268038 Speaker 1: I could not be hired, which is an interesting sideline. My sister [Anita Dancy], having finished in '48 [1948], at that time, there was a white woman at the board of education that passed on, or hired, all blacks and this woman would not hire--Margaret Williamson [ph.], I remember her name, she would not hire my sister and then when I finished [at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], she wouldn't hire me. She said we didn't need to work where we lived and having gone to the schools that we've gone to, we really didn't need to work so she would not hire either one of us. Speaker 2: So, I mean, that's, so they would call paternalism or maternalism in this case, maybe, but, you know, she thought that she was entitled to, to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, my sister went and taught at Mound Bayou, Mississippi. She made the decision as to who got hired to teach in the Memphis [Tennessee] public schools and most of them were people who graduated from LeMoyne [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] or Rust [College, Holly Springs, Mississippi] or the local, well there was only Rust and Tennessee [Agricultural and Industrial] State [College; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Lane [College, Jackson, Tennessee], I guess? Speaker 1: And Lane but for my sister have, to have finished Howard University [Washington, D.C.], for me to have finished Fisk University, for us to live on Edith Street, we couldn't need to teach. She would not hire either of us. Speaker 2: She thought it was in her purvey to make that kind of decision for you. Speaker 1: She made the decision. She didn't thought it, her did it, her made the decision, so she wouldn't hire us and my sister went and taught at Mound Bayou, Mississippi and I went to the county and got a job in the county teaching school in Shelby County [Tennessee]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Prejudice runs deep. Story_ID: 268039 Speaker 1: What was your situation like in Shelby County [Tennessee]? Was it a large school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started out in a two-teacher, Rosenwald School. Never heard of 'em, have you? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You heard of Rosenwald Schools? Speaker 1: Tell us what they are. Speaker 2: A Rosenwald School is a two-teachers school, established by a Jewish man, Mr. [Julius] Rosenwald, and it provided an educational opportunities building for blacks, particularly Mississippi, Tennessee, Arkansas, and the buildings were like two rooms, one on this side and one on that side and the steps, you walked up the center step and you were in like a hallway and there was a big potbelly stove in the hallway, you took to the right and that was a classroom, you took to the left and that was a classroom, and if you wanted to go to the bathroom, you went down some back stairs and went down the hill to the outhouse. If you wanted a drink of water, you went all the way down, past the restroom, to the pump, and you got your water from there. So, there were two of us teaching in that school. I taught grades one, two, three, four in one grade. The other teacher taught grade five, six, seven, eight in the other grade and at the end of the semester, we would change so that we followed the same group of students a whole year. I taught there for almost two years and it was truly a learning experience and one that I'll never, never, ever be able to repay the community, or the board of education, for exposing me to because I learned to work with first graders, second graders, third graders, fourth graders, all in the same room, kids learning and teaching each other. I'd take my first--my fourth graders, after I taught the first graders and put them down with the first graders, the second graders would go down and work with the first graders. The third graders would go and work with the second grade. It helped children, it re-enforced learning and then the next semester I'd run over to the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth and I did the same thing and the other teacher went to the other grade but it was probably the best of my teaching experience, you know. Speaker 1: That's interesting. I never heard it described like that-- Speaker 2: Is that right. Speaker 1: --where the teach, you know, 'cause we, I think those of us who are used to, you know, modern schools, a lot of classrooms, find it, you know, difficult to believe that someone could teach one, you know-- Speaker 2: Teach four grades at one time. Speaker 1: --yeah, all grades in one classroom. Speaker 2: Yeah, you had the first graders right over here, okay, this is your work. Second graders, and then each one learned from the other and there was, you know like grow it and by the time they reached the fourth grade, they knew everything, could repeat what the first and second and third graders. It was a good time. Good learning experience. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you ever encounter, I think the James Jeanes Fund, the Jeanes supervisors or any of them come around to? Speaker 2: Never heard of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, the James T. Jeanes Fund used to send people around to try to, I guess, boost the rural schools and you might have been in too good a shape for that, in that school for them to come around. Speaker 2: Well, we were a nice looking school, sat on a hill, we just didn't have a bathroom. I learned how to go to the bathroom in a jar. You know, I couldn't go down the hill 'cause there was snakes down that hill and so, uh-uh, I learned how to take care of business right in the, when the kids went home, you didn't go to the bathroom from morning until time, after the kids went home, then you could go to the bathroom, but, it was, it was really, you know, it was an opportunity for growing, to expose you to another way. You see, God does things in his own way and so I enjoyed it. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there for about a-- Speaker 2: A year and a half. Story_ID: 268040 Speaker 1: Then I married [HistoryMaker Reverend] Benjamin Hooks. Speaker 2: Now where did you meet him? Speaker 1: Well, we, our families have known one another all our lives but we were, we didn't run around in the same social sets particularly 'cause they lived too many blocks from us but it's ironic, his sister, Mildred [Hooks Gillis], the only one that's living, and I went to Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] together. We graduated from [Booker T. Washington] High School [Memphis, Tennessee]. She graduated a semester ahead of me because she took advantage of the [U.S.] Army training program which she would have been right, would have finished in '44 [1944] with me but instead she finished in the fall of '43 [1943] but we went to Wilberforce together and the families have known one another. Like I say, his mama [Bessie White Hooks] comes from Jacobs plantation, mine [Gertrude Graves Dancy] comes from, so the families have known one another, we just didn't run in the same social sets. His mother was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], I'm an A.M.E. but they belonged to two different churches. Speaker 2: Now, his father [Robert Britton Hooks] was a photographer. Speaker 1: Photographer. They had the only photo shop in Memphis [Tennessee] for blacks. So, I've known them all my life and they've known me but we just didn't socialize and Benny was considered older. You know, he's an old man. Speaker 2: Okay, so, well, I mean, you knew him but how did you all become, you know, close? Speaker 1: Well, he loves to tell this story. When I came home from college, I was helping my mom's friend at the fairground. You had black fair and white fair and I'm out for cotton picking because I'm teaching in the county [Shelby County, Tennessee] and you get out for cotton picking time, cotton picking, cotton chopping, and that's when the black fair takes place. You never heard of it have you? Speaker 2: Yeah, now, I know there's a big, Memphis is the heart of the mid-South and there's something called the Mid-South Fair-- Speaker 1: That's it. Speaker 2: --and that's the, is that the-- Speaker 1: That's the big white fair. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And then you had the Tri-State Fair, which was the black fair. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, and I'm out for cotton picking season and my mom's friend has a booth out there and Ms. Aretta [ph.], she owned a grocery, I mean a drugstore, and she said, Frances [HistoryMaker Frances Hooks], you aren't doing anything, why don't you come out and help me. So I went out to the fairground to help her at her booth and Benny Hooks comes by, oh, and he asked me to go out with him when I got off and I said, he's the new lawyer in town, you know, mister big in town, all the girls are after him and whatnot but I wasn't really interested. And so, Ms. Aretta said, "Why don't you go on out with him?" I said, "No ma'am." So, she said, "Well call you mother and ask her if it's all right." I'm a college graduate, teaching school and so I called mother and I said, "Ma, Ben Hooks wants me to go out when Ms. Aretta closes up, is it all right?" She says, "As long as you're in by twelve, it's okay." And so, I went out with him that evening. I didn't think I liked him and I don't know, it was just something, we, we did all right. We went to dinner at the black place where, bourgie place, that the upwardly mobile blacks went and I couldn't eat all my food and I don't like the breast of chicken, I don't like white meat and so he could eat mine and his and-- Speaker 2: And he did, did he? Speaker 1: I gave him that white part of that chicken. Anyhow, he came back the next day and he came back with the girl that he was going out with, or supposedly seeing. He tells everybody that I tried to run over him with an ice cart, ice cream cart and I said, boy, I wasn't even thinking about you but that's what he likes to tell people that I tried to run over him 'cause he was with this girl that had this long flowing hair and I was jealous and I said, please, that's not true but that's how we got together, from the fairground and we started going out and my sister [Anita Dancy] got married in September and we've been going together about nine months or so and he wanted to get married and my mother said, "Oh, no. I got to know more about--." She already knew, 'cause they, his mother and my mother knew there were, there had to have been some kind of it coming off the Jacobs plantation but they never talked about it. The Whites, they never said one earthly word about any relationship or whatnot. So when Ben and I declared that we were going to get married, they just said, okay, and accepted it, and-- Speaker 2: But you're saying earlier, you, there's a remote possibility that you could be some kind of distant cousin or something. Speaker 1: They both came up same darn plantation, they both have White as their names, the Whites entered their--there is some contact or some relationship I know. You know when you're a slave on a plantation, you take the last name but, how did the Whites get in there, how did this one get from Huntsville [Alabama] to Memphis and this and there is some, some, but nobody's ever pursued it particularly since Ben and I married. And so I married him in March, 1951 and my sister had married nine months before me. Story_ID: 268041 Speaker 1: Now there's a story I read that's worth recounting, I guess, about a special feature of your wedding that was your husband's [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] idea and you all were to sing a duet down the aisle? Speaker 2: That was at our twenty-fifth, 'I Love You Dearly.' Speaker 1: Oh, that's a twenty-fifth. That wasn't at the first, all right. Speaker 2: No, that was at our twenty-fifth that he wanted to sing and I said, no, no, never mess me up with him. No, I have a decent voice but he has a loud voice and, no, I wouldn't sing with him. We married in Avery Chapel [African Methodist Episcopal Church, Memphis, Tennessee] which is a, was a beautiful little black church and on our honeymoon, you could write this down for posterity, he had some wine and he couldn't even drive to Hot Springs [Arkansas]. I had to end up on my own honeymoon driving the rest of the way to Hot Springs where we spent our honeymoon. Did you know that [HistoryMaker] Paul [Brock]? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No. Speaker 2: I talked about him like a yard dog. Here I am, on my honeymoon, and my husband is knocked out. I guess we're going to have to stay in Little Rock [Arkansas] 'cause, but we had, in those days, they were, there were no, there was no, there was only one black hotel in Hot Springs and that was fully occupied so there was this lady that kept people who came in so we lived with, we stayed with, in a home, a private home, on our honeymoon, March, 1951. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, so you continued to live in Memphis [Tennessee]? Speaker 2: We lived in Memphis and the first two years of my married life I lived with his mother [Bessie White Hooks], his father [Robert Britton Hooks], his three sisters, his two brothers and their wives and six nieces and nephews. Speaker 1: They were all in the same house? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. It was like an old mansion that Benny had bought for his family and he and I had the third floor and the rest of the family had the first and second floor. It was, what they call the Goldsmith mansion. It was a gorgeous old home that had Italian hardwood that the more you touched that hardwood, the shinier it got. It was, some of it was gorgeous wood I've ever seen in my life but me having grown up in a three-bedroom house, with nobody but mother [Georgia Graves Dancy] and father [Andrew Dancy] and to have to go and live with sixteen people, was quite an experience. I never cooked the whole two years that we lived there. His mother did all the cooking. I was like Miss Anne. I went to work and came home and dinner was ready. And then the next year and a half, we lived with my mother and father. Nobody was in the house except my mom and dad because my brother [Andrew Dancy, Jr.] was in medical school by that time and my mom did most of the cooking then and then we finally bought a house and I had to start cooking and that's why I tell you I don't like cooking to this day. Speaker 1: Now where was that? Where did you get your house? Speaker 2: On Parkway. That's where Negroes were moving to. In fact, Ben and I broke the, the housing barrier. We got the first house sold to blacks on Parkway. Speaker 1: When was that? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty--nineteen fifty-six [1956], '56 [1956] or '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: Okay, so Parkway was a neighborhood that-- Speaker 2: South Parkway East-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that was where the upwardly mobile blacks moved and the doctors, the lawyers, the Indian chiefs. That was the beginning of the migration into, you know, bigger yards, bigger houses. The house that we bought wasn't as large as the house I came out of, that I grew up in but it was ours, so. But Dr. [Joseph Edison] Walker, the man who owned Universal Life Insurance Company [Memphis, Tennessee] lived two doors from me on Parkway. After Benny broke the color barrier, or the housing barrier, then doctors, lawyers and Indian chiefs moved in on Parkway. Speaker 1: So, well, I guess in the '50s [1950s], there was, there was quite a bit of housing tension in Memphis I've heard. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, there was. There was not the, the upwardly mobile opportunity until, let's see, Benny and [Archie Walter] A.W. [Willis, Jr.] and Chew [C.] Sawyer had Mutual Federal Loan and Savings Association [sic. Mutual Federal Savings and Loan, Memphis, Tennessee], that was the first black savings association in the South. Speaker 1: A.W.-- Speaker 2: A.W. Willis. Speaker 1: Willis, right. Speaker 2: And they were able to provide opportunities for blacks to make loans to get houses. So, the Glenview area was where the most tension, was where blacks could, made the imprint, were able to buy into, and so from Glenview [Avenue] to Parkway, that's where, it was all the same neighborhood that we were able to, where we bought that house. Then blacks started moving in. Story_ID: 268042 Speaker 1: I've read it's like quite a battle there but the thing that I found surprising was that the black people could vote in Memphis [Tennessee] even in those days. Speaker 2: Oh, we used to vote. Mr. [E.H.] Crump made sure that blacks went to the polls. He gave 'em watermelon and, you know, his Negroes, and he provided for, a piece of watermelon there when they went to vote. Speaker 1: A piece of watermelon? Speaker 2: Yeah, he used to give out watermelon, have watermelon available when you went to vote. Speaker 1: This is, Boss Crump, they called him-- Speaker 2: That's what they called him, Boss Crump. Speaker 1: --who, who was the mayor of Memphis for many, many years and I think a lot of people think it's surprising that in the '50s [1950s], you know, on the verge of all the voting rights marching in the South, that black people in Memphis could vote and were actually urged to vote and rewarded for voting. Speaker 2: Encouraged to vote with a piece of watermelon. Yes, sir. Yeah, we ain't no backwater town. Speaker 1: Yeah, so a lot of it's, now could blacks vote in Nashville [Tennessee] in those days? Speaker 2: I'm not really sure about Nashville. I, I really don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, but you had like segregated facilities in, in Memphis? Speaker 2: In, in Nashville, the seat of educational opportunity, I don't think blacks were as upwardly mobile as we were in Memphis. We had a good white father. Speaker 1: So, I know, we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Russell [B.] Sugarmon and-- Speaker 2: Russ, you did? Speaker 1: Yes we did, right. He was part of-- Speaker 2: You know about Russ? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Russ' heritage? Speaker 1: Yes, but tell us what you know about it. He told us but-- Speaker 2: Russ' mom [Lessye Sugarmon] was of, like South Pacific, she was, she was not black and his father [Russell Sugarmon, Sr.] was a mixture of something. Speaker 1: I think Chinese and something else. Speaker 2: His mother was Chinese or something. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And his father was a mixture of something or the other but, you know, have you, they were, they lived around the corner from us. They lived right in front of LeMoyne College [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee], that's where their home, house is but we all ran in the same little circle. Russ' sister, Weldon [Sugarmon], lives in St. Louis [Missouri], beautiful girl, she looks more Oriental than Russ does. Russ got a little bit of mixture, more so than Weldon did. Speaker 1: Let's see, then we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Miriam DeCosta-Willis too who was a, he married-- Speaker 2: That was Russ' wife. Speaker 1: Right, right, who ended up marrying [Archie Walter] A.W. Willis [Jr.], I think, later on. Speaker 2: Yes, they were all in the same law office together. It was all under my nose and I didn't even know it. That was, that was really a heartbreaker, really a heartbreaker. You just don't imagine people doing things like that. Speaker 1: There's a lot of struggle, though, around, I guess, public accommodations and housing and that sort of thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Those days and the lawyers, those lawyers were-- Speaker 2: Oh, the lawyers worked hard. Speaker 1: --the leaders. Speaker 2: Yeah, Benny [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks], A.W. and Russell were in the same, their law offices were in the same building as the Mutual Federal Loan and Savings Association [sic. Mutual Federal Savings and Loan, Memphis, Tennessee], was housed. Story_ID: 268043 Speaker 1: Now is there a watershed event that, that kind of marks the, the breakdown of segregation in Memphis [Tennessee] that you can tell us about? Speaker 2: Unh-uh, not really, in the event that marked the breakdown, except Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], going back beyond Martin. Speaker 1: Now did you, when did you first meet Dr. King? Speaker 2: When Benny [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] was active with the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], he was the treasurer of SCLC and he used to go, and Martin and Ralph [Abernathy] and them would come to the house whenever they had a meeting and Martin had preached at our church and I'd fix dinner for them. I don't remember what years they were but they'd been to the house. I'd fix my southern food for them. Speaker 1: Now to a lot of people, that would be a big deal and, but in those days that you, I mean, when you first met Dr. King, did you think-- Speaker 2: You didn't, you didn't think, no, no. I didn't think anything of he, Coretta [Scott King], Ralph, Juanita [Abernathy] or any of them, you know, we just, just folks, fighting for a common cause. I used to get mad with Benny running down to Alabama, leaving his livelihood, going down there to do something and you're needed at home, but I never stood in his way 'cause he dearly loved and respected, you know, the movement, the SCLC. Martin was just, he was just an ordinary person. He didn't act pompous or, I think and sometimes, I was just trying to think of a time that might be misconstrued as being pompous or arrogant or something. I cannot think of a single time that I was in his company or he was anywhere around our young people that he acted anything but like Martin. He didn't have that arrogancy that he maybe could have had but didn't have. Speaker 1: All right, most everybody says that, too, you know. I haven't heard anything contrary to that. Speaker 2: No, no, I don't remember a single, a single time. Speaker 1: Now I have heard people say that, that some of the other reverends and personages in SCLC were not as humble as Dr. King and-- Speaker 2: Well, they were all fighting for their own little turf, you know, and Martin was the leader and, and when you understand personalities, they all wanted to be recognized for who they were and what their contributions were or their contribution was toward the success of the movement and each, night shadows were, you know, he came from something and was somebody before, but when you put him in the boat with Martin, or who his shadow were, you know, and you take a Ben Hooks, he, he was Mr. Lawyer and sitting as a judge who had to be very careful because of his legal contact and who is he compared to a Martin King and if Benny hadn't known who he was and had a need to keep him in his place, he might have had a complex too but, you know, these people were all, these preachers were all somebody in their own right, in their own little community but put together in the stair step, Martin was still here and everybody else was trying to get there but Hosea [Williams] and all of them, they were good guys, they meant well and once you understand who you are and whose you are, you don't worry about what other people think of you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At least that's the way I try to live. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm not promising you that, that holds true all the time but that's the way I try to live. Story_ID: 269239 Speaker 1: In my mind, [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] was a normal, nice person. He wasn't arrogant or, in fact I think my daughter [Patricia Hooks] was, she was a young teenager and she stood in awe of him. He said, "Come over here, little girl," and she spruced up and smiled her little self and leaned over and looked at him and Patti-Pat was taken back with him, she often tells it. She had a chance to know Dr. King. But he was a good guy and Ralph [Abernathy] was, they were like the inseparable twins. Hosea [Williams] and, did you know [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr.] Wyatt Tee Walker? Speaker 2: Yeah, from New York [New York], right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Wyatt worked with, with Martin. So we knew 'em all. Speaker 2: Okay, now, of course, you know, doc--everybody knows Dr. King was killed in Memphis [Tennessee] and-- Speaker 1: Yes, and you want to know what happened that day? Benny [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] called me and told me to rush home. I was teaching school and he told me to get to the store because there's going to be trouble and I went to the grocery store, that time they had white checkers, and we're in this line getting our groceries and this woman behind the counter said, "I'm glad that nigger's dead" and I left all my groceries in that store, walked out of that store 'cause I think I would have jumped over that counter and tried to beat her, you know, but that was a very, very memorable time and you just wanted to beat somebody but they had curfews and it was kind of rough 'cause I didn't have the groceries that I needed and Benny was on the bench at that time. You had to have a pass to get out. You couldn't go in the street without a pass. Speaker 2: Did, were there any theories in the black community of Memphis of, of, you know, why or who killed Dr. King? Speaker 1: Not really, not that I know of. I, I do remember, I can't say it, I'm sorry, I won't say it. Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: Someone sent some photos to our house and wanted us to look at them and I said, no, no, no, you're not looking at 'em 'cause you're a judge. I'm not looking at them because I don't need any further headaches and don't really know what they were. Speaker 2: Is this part of the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation]-- Speaker 1: We don't really know-- Speaker 2: You don't know who sent them (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They came anonymously. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so we said, no, I said no. Speaker 2: So you'd rather not even be in it? Speaker 1: Hey, why get into something that you can't win. Speaker 2: We know of in history showing J. Edgar Hoover made Dr. King a project-- Speaker 1: Tell me about it. Speaker 2: --to, I mean, he sought the demise of Dr. King-- Speaker 1: He did. Speaker 2: --vigorously and-- Speaker 1: Yup, and did everything he could to make sure he was destroyed but so goes life. Speaker 2: Okay, well, any other reflections from that period of time, you know, when Dr. King was killed? Speaker 1: None, other than the one that Benny tells all the time about, before Martin was killed, the night before when he spoke down at the temple, I regret to this day that I did not go to Mason Temple [Church of God in Christ, Memphis, Tennessee] to hear him speak and I had gone to a wake and Benny went on to hear Martin speak. So, I've always regretted that I didn't take myself down to Mason Temple that night but I didn't, so, that's history, in that corner of regrets. Speaker 2: Okay, and, and let's see, before we leave that, just, did, how did, how did Dr. King's death affect the community in Memphis? In particular-- Speaker 1: Oh, it was very tense, very tense. You know, you went to work and you came home. You didn't go out and, and we had to be very uptight, for lack of a better word, because Benny was on the bench downtown and I would be fearful of his getting in and out, to and fro, from the office in one piece 'cause most people knew, you know, that he was affiliated with Martin's movement and being a preacher also. So, it was a very tense period, very tense. Story_ID: 269240 Speaker 1: So in 1968, I mean, Memphis [Tennessee] was, is the heart of the mid-South but it was, wasn't like in some ways a lot of the places in the South, right? Speaker 2: Hmpf. Speaker 1: In terms of the fact that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In what other ways wasn't it? Speaker 1: Well, the fact that, that your husband [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] could be a judge, you know, in the town. Speaker 2: That was a real, real breakthrough and it was because of the governor [Frank G. Clement] in Nashville [Tennessee] and he and, Benny had been head of the black American Legion and this guy had been head of the white American Legion and they met, overcoming problems and he liked him and he liked him and both were lawyers and he was still the governor of Tennessee and when a vacancy occurred, he liked Benny enough to, you know, ask him to serve. That's how that contact came about. Speaker 1: Now did you, did your family catch a lot of flak-- Speaker 2: Flak? Speaker 1: --from white people because he was a black judge? I mean, for the, you know-- Speaker 2: Not really. Got more flak, I remember I had to have security police protection in Memphis. Someone threatened to kill me and the police department sent policemen out to guard me and-- Speaker 1: Did they threaten to kill you as a result of something that Benjamin Hooks did or something that you did? Speaker 2: I, nothing I had done that I know of by my association, affiliation with him perhaps and I wondered, you know, who in the world could hate me or know me that well to want to, so, they sent these cops, you couldn't even, I couldn't even go to the bathroom without cops standing outside the door. I couldn't go to my club meetings. I couldn't do anything. And they were at school with me, where I taught, they're standing outside the classroom and all and I said, firecrackers. So the police chief was a fellow that I had worked on a committee with so I called him one day and I said, do you have any idea who this is that's threatening my life or whatnot? And I said, are they black or white? And he said, I understand they're black. I said, well you take your officers back 'cause if there's somebody black, I can handle them. I don't need any police. You know, you couldn't do anything. They had to, when I went to club meeting, they were outside the door. Went to the store, wherever I went, there were these cops. So I told them, I said, you take these rascals and send them back to take care of somebody else, I don't need them 'cause if it's somebody black, I can handle them myself. And that was my stint with security and even when we came to NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I never did like the security. I mean, I just, you know, I'm me, I don't want to be bothered but during that time, it was, like, tense. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But you made it through. Story_ID: 269241 Speaker 1: Are there any stories from the days when your husband [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] was head of the FC--well, you know, worked for the FCC [Federal Communications Commission]? Speaker 2: There was one he talks about in his book how, but when he would go to these meetings and things with the FCC, basically white folks, their view of us and I'll never forget, and this is stuck in my mind, and I went to this affair and I am the only black person, really obvious black person, and so there are a lot of the station owners and whatnot, you know, and their little petite wives and sat around and they, they don't pay any attention to me, you know, and I'm really like, "Um-hm, okay," I'm really standing by myself. So, some of, this was so funny. This broadcaster, owner of a station, came with my husband to a group of white women and says, "Sweetheart, I want you to meet Commissioner Hooks and his wife" and these same ladies that hadn't been standing that far from me that never even looked my way and that was that, they immediately, "Oh, ho, ho" and got so nice and polite and I said, "Um," the same everywhere. This was in Washington, D.C. This wasn't down South and when Benny was on the, as the first black [criminal court] judge [in Tennessee], and we went to the judges meeting, they didn't have any, the heat, the first black judge, they ain't seen no black judges down there and we went to these meetings and I'm the only obvious black, they would totally ignore me and finally I'd go up to them and, you know, say something to one of them and they would act, they were courteous but distant. You could tell they weren't eager to be a friend or to make conversation then, so I learned how to make it on my own, just ignore the rest of them, do what has to be done, answer the questions that have to be answered and those that I don't, I leave them alone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's been an uphill battle. Story_ID: 269242 Speaker 1: How long have you been a member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]? Speaker 2: Since I can remember. A long, long, and my daddy [Andrew Dancy] was a card carrying member. I've always been a member but actively involved, not, not as active as I could have, maybe should have been until he [Hooks' husband, HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] went to the NAACP. Speaker 1: Okay, until he became the-- Speaker 2: Just you know, like most, most black folks, card carrying member, I can produce my card if it need be but just really involved, no, [HistoryMaker] Maxine [Smith], I left that to Maxine and then-- Speaker 1: Okay, Maxine-- Speaker 2: Smith. Speaker 1: Smith, okay. Now-- Speaker 2: 'Cause I taught school and that was a different ballgame. Speaker 1: Okay, well you want to tell us some stories from school, about school? Speaker 2: Well, I could only tell you that when we had the Black Mondays when the NAACP was advocating, or the Memphis [Tennessee] branch of NAACP, was advocating that our kids observe Black Mondays and not go to school on Mondays. As a teacher, I couldn't, I rode the crest of wanting to be supportive of this effort because they were trying to change the board of education's policy and-- Speaker 1: Now what were they trying to change it to and what did Black Monday consist of? Speaker 2: Where, where blacks did not go to school, to let them see, because the funding of how much money a school system gets depends on the school attendance, you know, and if a kid doesn't go to school, that affects the state's appropriation. And while I agreed with the principle of what they were doing, I knew how desperately the kids I taught, or worked with, needed to be in school. And so there was that dichotomy of wanting to support it, do it over here and on the other hand, I wanted to make sure these little rascals stayed in school and got their education and so I was caught between a rock and a hard place, but I weathered it and I, I think I was right to insist that my kids stay in school and when they had free period, they could go out and do whatever they had to do but academically, get in there and get your education. Story_ID: 269243 Speaker 1: Tell us about the WIN [Women in the NAACP] program with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and how did it, you started this about 1980 and the-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --it implies, before, before you start, I just want to say that it implies that the NAACP did not have a place for the women who were members until then. I mean, what, what-- Speaker 2: No, women were always a part of the NAACP but many years ago, as I understood later on, that they had had women attempting to organize within the structure of the NAACP but being in a chauvinist society, women did not have the leadership roles that they now have or had, they did not have those roles back then. Speaker 1: Now way back at the beginning, they had some positions, so-- Speaker 2: They, Mary White Ovington, Mary White Ovington was a white woman who was the first executive director but down through the years, you know how black men eventually got the ups and ups and they had the top positions but I saw, and I don't really know how, and God just spoke to me and I saw a need for women to be more involved on a, not just for membership in the organization but to do more things within the community or a broader community. So, along with a lady who's dead now, Earleen Bolden, and some other folk within the structure of the organization, we sat down and we talked about how women could be more active in the NAACP and it isn't [HistoryMaker] Frances Hooks, it was a collective effort to come up with women in NAACP, WIN, we will win, we are the it, and our effort, our emphasis was on emergency relief and I would, Dan Quayle's wife [Marilyn Quayle] had worked with emergency relief at the White House [Washington, D.C.] and so I met with her and we talked about and worked on efforts to relieve hurricane disasters and do what we could in South Carolina and down in, oh God, where was that? Down in the islands, it wasn't Trinidad [Trinidad and Tobago]. Where was that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands]. Speaker 2: It wasn't St. Thomas. What's the other, it was hard hit by a hurricane. Speaker 1: Haiti or-- Speaker 2: It wasn't Haiti. Speaker 1: It wasn't Haiti-- Speaker 2: It was, it had to have been Trinidad and what's the other-- Speaker 1: The Bahamas? Speaker 2: St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands]. Speaker 1: St. Croix, okay, all right. Speaker 2: St. Croix and so what we did was ask women from all over the country to organize, you had to be a member of the NAACP first, which brought women in and did not, it didn't present a picture or a confrontation with the branch structure because you had to first be a member which increased the membership of the branch and like men were very active in the NAACP, we brought their wives in to be a part of WIN and so, does that make sense to you? And so, we had a major emphasis on trying to help young people get educational opportunities, provide scholarships, we worked, we had clinics to talk about abortion, to talk about health needs and whatnot and to provide, as I said, that the major thing was emergency relief. So, when South Carolina experienced that devastation, we were able to go in and take food, clothing and we were among the first to go into South Carolina and where they, the [American] Red Cross said that they had been to all the areas, you know, and covered all the bases and got into all the people, well firecrackers, we knew they hadn't 'cause us leading back and behind, and so we went back there as NAACP women and pointed out to the Red Cross that these are the folks you left out of making sure that they had been taken care of. So, they eventually put a black on the board of the American Red Cross but I think it was basically our being bold enough and confrontational enough to go in and make a big stew of what wasn't happening, back, and I remember waiting in mud and water and going in people's houses up to my knees where these people had never been seen by the Red Cross or anybody else and we took relief supplies to them. Story_ID: 269244 Speaker 1: They, one of the WIN [Women in the NAACP] members from Mississippi was able to get the Air National Guard to actually fly shoes and when we went overseas, the, the goods, the plane had gotten there before we got off the plane, off of our plane and it was so funny some of the people who worked in the airport were trying to go through our stuff to take, get something for themselves and we were running through that airport telling, [HistoryMaker] Paul [Brock], were you with us. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Ah, no, I wasn't. Speaker 1: "Don't you touch that, leave that alone, that's not yours." We're down there trying to reprimand these people about taking our stuff that we're going to take and I saw a part of that country that I had never even witnessed how people lived way back and it ain't what you see, you know, as a tourist when you go in those back countries, it was, it was an eye opener but we were able to provide emergency relief for those people and that was one of the goals of WIN. In order to raise money for the organization and for WIN, we sponsored, when I was working with it, we sponsored a fashion show at the convention and I think the delight of it was, not only did we have, not professional models but I, I would ask the women within the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], will you model and it was so delightful because it, to know that they were going to model, they would tell their friends about it and that would help us sell tickets to our event which helped us raise money for the national organization but it was an opportunity for people to come together and just, you know, a fat person, a skinny person, you know, we weren't concerned with you being, looking like a professional model, we just wanted you to see the clothes and see the people out on stage and it helped develop personalities and whatnot. We had health fairs. We, we tried to cover the bases that would involve women and I think it's still successful. I missed the last two national meetings. Speaker 2: Okay, so there's a national meeting for WIN aside from the-- Speaker 1: Well, it's, it's always on Sunday. It's the first day of the convention and Benny [Hooks' husband, HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] has, we have church on Sunday and so we usually catch a plane right after church service and I miss the WIN program. I guess I could leave him and be here for it, be wherever it is, in time for it, but since he's been, not been in the best of health, I don't go off and leave him unless I have to. Speaker 2: Okay, so the program's still going on? Speaker 1: Oh, it's going on, yes, yes. Speaker 2: Going strong. Speaker 1: And I understand that the new executive director's wife [Tawana Tibbs] is interested in it so that's a plus and then she'll be able to, you know, steer it, give it some guidance under. I haven't met her but I understand she's a very bright lady-- Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: --and, so, I have a good feeling about, and it was hard to get WIN accepted 'cause the men thought that it was going to be something different from the NAACP but we had men who are members of WIN, too. I wouldn't leave them out. Story_ID: 269245 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: As a retired school teacher, one of the things that I see happening that I would like to see changed is the educational opportunity, the correcting of children, the ability to actually reprimand a child when it does wrong but that isn't happening anymore because children don't listen to their parents, their parents don't listen to themselves and children are just, children are basically the guardians of their, their parents and it's, it's such a mixed up situation now that instead of parents realizing who they are and what their position is, they've relegated the television to be the guard, the monitor for their children. And so, children don't really have any, I mean very few families now have any rules and regulations for their children as I see it. I mean, I look at my own great-grandchildren and they can say things back to their mother that I would have had my mouth smacked in three times, you know, and you didn't say, "Uh-huh," "uh-uh," "nah," you answered like a normal person but it's so different now. What do I wish for them? I wish that we could go back, not go all the way back, but go part of the way back and have parents realize that in an integrated society, your kids don't have to be as lackadaisical, and that's not a good word, but they don't have to be, well my impression of black children brought up in my time was that we listened to our mothers and our fathers and we didn't say or do things. We didn't say, "Uh-huh," "uh-uh," we answered questions. These kids nowadays, if they don't want to respond to you, they don't. They ignore you and the TV is their teacher. It's, it's just in my opinion, it's, I don't know what it's coming to. Well, I guess mothers and fathers don't real- they're too busy making a living that they don't have time to rear their children. That's not a good thing to say but it's true. Speaker 1: Yeah, so do you think there's any balance that can be struck here to-- Speaker 2: If I knew the answer to that, doctor (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) between the kind of, 'cause you-- Speaker 2: --I'd go and take [President George Walker] Bush's job. Speaker 1: Yeah, you said, when you were raised, they were really strict to the point that you, you received your last-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --I guess, spanking when you were twenty-one years old. Speaker 2: That's right because there were certain rules and regulations that you followed. I don't know if people are rebelling or have rebelled against the system to the extent that they want to do what they want to do, when they want to do it, I don't know. Story_ID: 269246 Speaker 1: Well, when you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, is there any major thing that you would do differently? Speaker 2: I'd still marry Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks]. What would I do differently? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): She'd call you with a speech. Speaker 2: I really don't think, given the environment that I was in, that I would change anything 'cause I couldn't change the majority, the majority's opinion and their attitudes. I think I would have fallen in love with myself earlier and I probably-- Speaker 1: What do you mean by that? Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I would have had more faith and trust in my ability to get the job done or to do what needed to be done. You never had the situation where you looked in the mirror and say, I said, I wish I could be this or I wish I looked like this or I wish this were like that, something or the other? You never done that? Speaker 1: I guess everybody's done some of that. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. So, if I could have had the same degree of faith in myself that I now have some time ago, maybe I would have gone on to be the doctor that I always wanted to be. I think that's the one thing I would have changed. Story_ID: 269247 Speaker 1: Well, when you look back on everything you've done so far, is there, what would you consider this at juncture to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Shoot, that I was able to stay with Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] all this time (laughter). I, I don't know that I was, I was a pretty good caretaker. I took four children in, I took my husband's brothers, four of my husband's children in and reared them and legally adopted the baby girl but I provided substitute motherhood for four children. So, one, the oldest went through college, my daughter through high school and college, her two brothers, as far as they wanted to go which was like sophomores in college to have been able to do that in the face of having to work. I think it was a major accomplishment and to take care of Ben Hooks and be there for him and to be a preacher's wife for, come March, will be fifty years which is something that I ran from, I didn't want to be a preacher's wife, to have been able to stay with, in the ministerial field as a preacher's wife all this time. I think, that has been, it's been a challenge 'cause I'm just me and I'm atypical of a preacher's wife. Story_ID: 269248 Speaker 1: What do you think of the comments of, recent controversial comments of Bill Cosby about the black community? Speaker 2: What specifically in his comment are you referring to? Speaker 1: Well, I don't have it in front of me but I think he criticized the behavior of, of black people in the inner city and what, and suggested there's some things that they could do for themselves that they're not doing. Speaker 2: I concur totally with Bill Cosby, that there are a lot of things we could be doing for ourselves and we don't have to depend on another ethnic group or other ethnic groups that if we would just look and see what, but we know, we basically know what the problems are but sitting down and trying to resolve them, if we could ever come together, a methodology to resolve, I think we could but I, I agree with him, totally. I didn't find any of his comments confrontational. I found them to be, speak on brother, tell it, and let somebody listen and pay attention. I don't think it was out of place at all. Speaker 1: Now some people thought that it just spoke to his comments on the reaction to them. The whole thing kind of spoke to this growing chasm between black people that have jobs and means and those who don't. Speaker 2: That could or could not be true but it's not. If you really face the reality of what he's saying is true and a lot of your people have tried to get above and beyond who they were and where they came from and they want to mix something without it being real. If you forget the bridge that brought you across and get on over there and forget that they're, that bridge is still there, if you tear that bridge down, now how am I ever going to get over to see you? I just believe that Bill Cosby was right on the mark. I, I don't disagree with him not one minute. You might not like it, lump it if you don't like it but try to straighten up and let's fly right. That's the way I see it. Now, you might see it differently, that's your opportunity. Story_ID: 269249 Speaker 1: I did read though that at one of your wedding anniversaries you all sang this song. Try, try to sing it-- Speaker 2: At our twenty-fifth wedding anniversary, Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] said, "We're going to sing 'I Love You Truly.'" I said, "No, no, no we're not" and he came down and started it. I have a decent voice, I don't have a solo voice. I can mix into a choir and take your part and my part too but Benny Hooks decided, 'I Love You Truly' (singing) and I said, oh, boy, I do love you truly but I'd like to whip you for trying to do this song. And he had the people snickering and everybody just laughing 'cause that was Benny but it was among friends, so it wasn't bad. We'll, we'll never get a spot, be ousted, do even amateur night. Story_ID: 269250 Speaker 1: You know, I wanted to tell you a little bit about a program that I had in Memphis [Tennessee]. When I taught school, it was called, there were two of them, one was the People Power Project, which came about as, after [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] was killed and there was this chasm between the black and white community. One of, I had a white, a Jewish friend who is my best friend in the whole world who came out to my high school and asked if I had a student prepared to go to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Then I told this white man that I had one academically prepared but not one prepared for the racism. And so we started talking and his, he and his family had owned the chief jewelry store in town and, of course, by this time I'm just looking at a person, I'm not really looking at white, black, green or purple, and so I just set up with him. And so, in our, our conversation got to a point where he asked if I would come out to his house and meet some of his friends and I said, sure, Miss Big, Bad, Brave, well, I had eaten dinner with white folks in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] 'cause my uncle [Joseph H. Rainey, Jr.] had been a judge there but I had never eaten dinner with whites in the South and I couldn't quite bring myself to say, you know, I ain't gonna eat with these white folks, and eat no dinner but I, I didn't go for dinner but they called me and said, are you coming? And I said, oh, I'll be there for dessert. I just did not want to, I really didn't want to be bothered but I went on anyway and I made some wonderful friends at that juncture and Mr. Dreyfus [ph.] and I started what we called, a Memphis Volunteer Placement Program and this involved bringing, basically white folks into an all-black school, it was pre-desegregation, to work with and I would assign these people to work with a black student who was graduating from high school. Through that effort, black kids got a chance to go to Harvard, Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], Mount Holyoke [College, South Hadley, Massachusetts], white schools that I had only heard of because their "mentor" saw in them something that they could help, could help me help this kid get into a college different from LeMoyne [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis Tennessee] or Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. And so it opened up a world of doors for us. The program was adopted by the Memphis Rotary [Rotary Club of Memphis] and, but at first when I, when it first started by this Jewish guy and whites and Jews, or WASPs [White Anglo-Saxon Protestants] and Jews, had their little problem going on but this, this guy and I worked with the, the lily white group of women and the National Conference, National Council of Jewish Women [NCJW] and they came in and, like if you were a high school student graduating later, I had a list of things that they would ask the kids as to what they wanted to do, but if it was going to school, where do you want to go? What are your grades? And they started working with them at the beginning of their senior year and they had an opportunity to see the growth and they would point out schools and help me get black kids into these prestigious, eastern schools that they had gone to or somebody in their family had gone to which was a really, indeed a break for, for my kids. And so, it has grown and as I said, the Memphis Rotary has taken that program over now. Story_ID: 269251 Speaker 1: And then another program that I started, it was, Memphis Volunteer Placement Program, was a, the thing is an outgrowth of the confrontation with the police and the [Reverend Dr.] Martin [Luther King, Jr.] ki- being killed, the dialog, black kids and white kids by these volunteers coming in, they're white, and we're talking and so one of them, this woman, Dot Bailey [ph.] and I decided that we should get some white kids and black kids to interact. And so, we formed a group and the vice, well this man, Mr. [James W.] Moore was our mayor's [Henry Loeb] head honcho, or whatever, and he had a daughter and son and they became a part of the group and we called it, the People Power Project and we enlisted kids, white kids and black kids, to dialog, to get to know one another and the problem came when the, the Jewish kids wanted to join the group, the blacks and the whites became cohesive against the Jewish kids and we had to literally slap 'em in place to have them understand that you are not to segregate yourselves or you cannot discriminate against any group but it was a learning opportunity for all of the three, the blacks, the whites and the Jews to come together and they just had a reunion, those kids, after all these years, just had a reunion back in Memphis, Tennessee at my house, in June. It was the most rewarding, it was just so rewarding, so they're coming back in, they said they'd be back for, when my husband [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] and I have our, the fiftieth church anniversary [Greater Middle Baptist Church, Memphis, Tennessee] because we did have some meetings at the church, at my church, and we had some at the white church, and then we ended up having some at the synagogue so that these, these black and white kids have become a cohesive unit, they still correspond with one another after all these years and it's this, twenty years, thirty years ago and so those two programs I'm really proud of. They said, had I been anybody other than [HistoryMaker] Frances Hooks, that I could have masterminded the program but I had to go with Benny to Washington [D.C.] and then from there to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] so I left it and it kind of lingered until the [Memphis] Rotary [Rotary Club of Memphis] picked up a part of the program and, 'cause they thought it was a good program but they didn't have anybody dedicated to doing it but those are the two things that I feel very proud about, my kids, 'cause I love children. Story_ID: 269252 Speaker 1: Is there anything else before we ask our last question? Speaker 2: No, I thought you're through. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Did you ask about the judge in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] 'cause, had she talked about that? Speaker 2: The judge in Philadelphia? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The uncle? Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: Oh, your uncle. You mentioned him but you didn't say who he was. Speaker 2: He was a judge, Joseph H. Rainey [Jr.]. His grandfather was the representative from South Carolina, Congressman [Joseph H.] Rainey. You knew that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, I didn't. Speaker 2: You know the black congress folk, Joseph P. Rainey [sic.]. Speaker 1: Yes, right, right, Joseph P. Rainey, right. Speaker 2: His grandson was married to my mother's [Georgia Graves Dancy] sister and he was a magistrate judge in Philadelphia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's a part of that thing when I say that we, black kids coming up from the South and the white kids said, and laughing at us and we were sounding southern and then when we get back to Memphis [Tennessee], the black kids saying, y'all trying to sound white and you couldn't win for losing, whichever way you went but my first opportunity to have dinner with white folks was in Philadelphia and my aunt, was her prissy self, wanted to make sure we knew how to handle a knife and a fork and of course my mother, being the oldest of all the children said, "What do you think, they're animals? I've taught them how to use a knife and a fork." And so we sat at the table at our first sitting down with white people was when I was young in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania at my aunt's house. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was a real experience but it was more of an experience to hear my mother and her sister arguing about whether we three love-like children from Tennessee knew how to hold a fork well enough to sit down with some other people. It was, I've had an interesting life though, really. Story_ID: 269253 Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I don't care (unclear). I would like to be remembered as a person who tried to serve the community and to give as much of myself that was worth giving to the up going, ongoing and up building of my community and my family. Story_ID: 269254 Speaker 1: It's my father, Andrew Jackson Dancy born in Canton, Mississippi, moved to Memphis [Tennessee] at age seventeen and a good man, married my mom, Georgia Harriet Graves in 1926 and she was a school teacher and between them they reared three children, [HistoryMaker] Frances [Hooks], Anita [Dancy] and Andrew the Third [sic. Andrew Dancy, Jr.]...