 Story_ID: 251142 Speaker 1: This [The] HistoryMakers video oral history interview is being conducted by [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, and the videographer is Mr. Scott Stearns. And the date is December 3rd; the year is 2004. The location of this interview with a distinguished historian of science and medicine, and African American life and history is in the Department of [the] History of Science at Harvard University, 1 Oxford Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Madam Professor, would you give me your full name and spell your name for me? Speaker 2: Evelynn Maxine Hammonds. Evelynn, it's spelled E-V-E-L-Y-N-N, Maxine, M-A-X-I-N-E, Hammonds, H-A-M-M-O-N-D-S. Speaker 1: Would you share your year of birth and location of birth with us? Speaker 2: January 2nd, 1953, Atlanta, Georgia. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation, profession, how do you describe yourself in terms of--? Speaker 2: University professor, that's what I would say (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Story_ID: 251143 Speaker 1: Before we get into looking at your family history, and-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --your childhood years-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --educational experiences, we have four or five kind of human-interest questions to kind of warm up-- Speaker 2: Okay Speaker 1: --and also give those who will watch this tape a little sense of your personality. Speaker 2: Okay (laughter). Speaker 1: So, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, oh my goodness, probably chicken. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Vacation destination, your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My, my, I'm gonna have to wipe my nose, can I just do that? Speaker 1: No problem. Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination, Cape Cod [Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 251144 Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite saying or phrase that you use frequently with friends or colleagues? Speaker 2: I don't know if I have a phrase that I use with friends and colleagues, but I think there is one that stays in my mind a lot and comes to bear on all kinds of situations; I think, sort of, keep your eyes on the prize. Story_ID: 251145 Speaker 1: We want to go into your family history and-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --and your early, your early years of your life-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --as a context for really understanding and looking at your achievements, the path of your professional decisions, and your life's work. And we'd like to start by talking about your mother. Would you give the mother's name? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Evelyn Baker Hammonds. Speaker 1: And when and where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born November 5th, 1930 in Covington, Georgia. Speaker 1: What do you know about her growing up years? Did she--has she talked to you about her life? Speaker 2: Yes, well, both my parents came from Covington, Georgia. My father, William Emmett Hammonds, Jr., May 6th, 1924, also grew up in Covington. Covington is a small town, about thirty-two miles southwest of Atlanta [Georgia]. It's a mill town. There was a cotton mill there. In many respects, a typical southern town. And the stories that both my parents tell about it is that it was a very, sort of, strong African American community. Lot of people connected to one another by, you know, family. And that I think the stories--the way they tell the stories, they both had childhoods that seemed to my sister [Kathy Hammonds-Slaughter] and I to be fairly idyllic. You know, that they had lots of family and relatives around them. They would tell us stories about Sunday dinners and family reunions, and always long, long stories about good food (laughter). Church was at the center of their lives. And I think--so I think that's what we mostly got a sense of a very, sort of stable and connected African American community, where children were expected to know their place; adults were to be respected. And then in the background, the, you know, segregation and the intense segregation that was part of southern life at the time. And they didn't really talk so much about that specifically. For example, my mother was really fond of telling us about going to Saturday movies to watch--she loves cowboy movies, she and my aunt [Cathryn Baker]. But they didn't talk about having to go through the back door. But, on the other hand, when we were small children, we were not allowed to go to the movies until they were integrated. So, they wouldn't let us go through the back door, but she remembered fondly going to the movies herself. And going on shopping trips to the center of town with her great-grandmother [Harriet Benton Baker]. And all of these sounded just like, just wonderful stories of, you know, life in a small town. And, as I said, church was a very much a part of their lives and on both sides of their--maternal and paternal grandparents [Hattie Hendrix Baker and Joel Baker] were very involved in their respective churches. So, a lot of the activities that my mother would talk about, you know, revolved around the church (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 251146 Speaker 1: --Give me your father's name. Speaker 2: William Emmett Hammonds [Jr.]. Speaker 1: Now if I heard you earlier, there's a six days' difference--six years (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --six years' difference in their ages? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you know when they first met and how they met? Speaker 2: Well, my father--they grew up in the same town so their families knew each other all the time. My father being a bit older than my mother [Evelyn Baker Hammonds], they didn't really sort of--seems to me that they didn't really pay that much attention to one another as children. But, they started dating when my father came back from the war [World War II, WWII]. And they both went to Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], and they were at Morris Brown at the same time, and that's when they started going out. Speaker 1: What do you know about their elementary and middle, high school education in Covington [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well I don't know much. They went to a school called the Washington Street School [Covington, Georgia], which is actually, has a--alumni association that's still functioning. My father and my cousins and my mother's sister [Cathryn Baker] are all very involved in this alumni association. Because all these kids in this community went to this school, and many of them feel that it was a really great education, in many respects. Not that they had wonderful facilities; they didn't talk about that so much. But they had incredible teachers, and that's also a source of lots of stories on a Sunday afternoon, at Sunday dinner after church, my parents and my cousins would talk about these fierce teachers they had. And just tell stories like, for example, my mother would say she couldn't remember any kids in their class who didn't know how to read or kids who couldn't spell, or kids who couldn't do a basic arithmetic. And so, when she became a teacher, and she would read these stories about how African American kids were, some people thought, inherently unable to do those kinds of basic skills, my parents and their family, they said they just didn't understand that because they didn't know of children like that. At least that's what they--that's what they remember. Speaker 1: When did your mother and father leave Covington for Atlanta [Georgia]? Speaker 2: Well my mother left so--probably 1949 and '50 [1950] is when my mother started college, and my father was back from the war and with the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] was able to then go to college. Speaker 1: In Atlanta? Speaker 2: Yes, at Morris Brown College in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Did he work in Covington before he went into the [U.S. military] service? Speaker 2: He--yes, he did, but I'm not sure what he did, what kinds of jobs he did, doesn't talk about that much. He mostly talks about the war and then coming back and going to college. Speaker 1: Any stories about his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Excuse me, one second. Speaker 1: --war experience that stand out in your mind that he told you that you kind of remember? Speaker 2: He was stationed in India. He was a truck driver. Like many African American men, they worked on those supply lines. And he hates Indian food; he thought it was terrible. And he was extremely shaken by the poverty he saw. And those are some of the--he talked a lot about that. Other than that, he doesn't--he never really spoke much about his experiences in the war. But I'll tell you an interesting story. He and I together went to see the movie 'A Soldier's Story.' And so it's a story of--about World War II and the barracks and the sort of relationships among the men and everything. And my father, he got very teary as we watched this movie. And as we left, he said, "It was very much like that, it's just very much like that." And that was--but he never really talked much about it, other than those stories of being in India. And he talked a lot about being on the ship going over and coming back, and the stories of how much he enjoyed being on the ship. But that's about it. Story_ID: 251147 Speaker 1: Would you give me the names of your maternal grandparents and what you remember about your maternal grandparents? Speaker 2: My maternal grandparents, let's see. My grandfather, Willie Baker, and he and my grandmother, Myrtis Hill [Myrtis Washington Baker]; they were divorced when my mother [Evelyn Baker Hammonds] was very small. My grandfather left Covington [Georgia], I'm not sure when. But he--I think my parents--my mother was a teenager, and he went to Detroit [Michigan], and he worked in the automobile factories. So he worked for General Motors for a long time. And so my experience with my grandfather is him coming home every summer with a new car (laughter). And showing up and taking us for a ride in a big, spanking new, General Motors car of some sort. So that's--but other than that we didn't see him very much. Speaker 1: Your maternal grandmother, what did she do, her name and what did she do? Speaker 2: Her name was Myrtis Hill, and she wasn't really a part of my mother's life by the time we were--my sister and I were born. So I don't really know much about her. Speaker 1: Before we go to your paternal grandparents, you have one sibling? Speaker 2: One sibling, a sister. Speaker 1: Her name? Speaker 2: Kathy, do you want her middle name, Kathy Renee Hammonds[-Slaughter], and her married name is Slaughter. Speaker 1: And where is she today? Speaker 2: She lives in Evanston, Illinois. And she is married and has two daughters. Speaker 1: Are you older or younger? Speaker 2: I'm older; she's four years younger. Speaker 1: Tell me the names of your paternal grandparents, and what do you remember about them? Speaker 2: My maternal grandparents, my-- Speaker 1: Paternal, I'm sorry (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Paternal, sorry. My paternal grandparents--my paternal grandfather was William Emmett Hammonds, Sr., that was my father's father. And my grandmother was Millie Ann [Banks] Hammonds. And my paternal grandfather died when my father [William Hammonds, Jr.] was young, I think about nine or ten. So, don't know very much about him. And my paternal grandmother was known as Ma Hammonds. Because my father had, let's see, I think my father had four brothers and a sister, and he was the youngest. And so there were lots of cousins around, and she was just known as Ma Hammonds, and sort of the--what I remember of her is her sitting on her front porch looking out over the porch and telling us kids to behave (laughter), so. Speaker 1: Are there any--what about great-grandparents, are there any great grandparents that you know about? Speaker 2: Yes. On my mother's side, my great-grand--my great-grandfather, Joe Baker [sic. Joel Baker], was a very, sort of important figure in my life as a child. My sister and I often spent summers in Covington. And my great-grandfather, Papa Joe we called him, was very tall, very dark man, wore overalls, and raised chickens and had a beautiful garden. And we just loved following him around doing chores. And he was not--he didn't talk very much, but he had really a sort of incredible presence that made you just sort of want to hang out with him, and we just followed him around. Whatever he was doing, we wanted to do. So that's how I knew him. His wife, Hattie Baker, apparently was a great force of nature. She died when my mother was in college [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia]. But the stories about Hattie Baker are quite legend. She was a very strong, staunch church goer. Stern, strict, but you know, very caring but it was that kind of tough love kind of person from what everybody says about her. On my maternal grandmother's mother, Rena [Spearman] Washington, worked as a domestic in Westchester County, New York in Rye [New York], for a family that lived in Rye. And she was sort of a distant, sort of grandmotherly kind of figure, but she had four or five sisters who lived--who remained in Covington. And so they were sort of the big extended family and all of her sisters, particularly her sister Julia [ph.] was a kind of person where all the kids congregated at her house, and she just opened the doors of the house at lunch time and say, "Come--everybody come in and eat," and just serve up sandwiches and food to everybody. And again, we all had to go to church all the time. So, they are--all of those who are of my great-grandparents' generations are people who I just sort of saw as just the wisdom figures in our family, who kept everything together. They supported everybody in a number of ways. Story_ID: 251148 Speaker 1: Are there any stories, songs or legends or traditions that you recall that have been passed down from your great-grandparents to your grandparents to your parents [Evelyn Baker Hammonds and William Hammonds, Jr.] to you, are there any special stories or things that--? Speaker 2: No. You know, my family, neither side, I don't think there were anything--there are any real traditions like that, that one might think about as traditions. Sunday dinner is probably the closest to something like a tradition that was passed down. That everybody was expected to be home for Sunday dinner, and Sunday dinner was a big incredible meal of the week. But other than that, the--on both sides of the family there are always family reunions every summer for a time until that, my great-grandparents' generation started dying. But other than that, no-- Story_ID: 251149 Speaker 1: Tell me, what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: (Laughter) The sights are of clapboard houses with big front porches with swings, and front yards that don't have grass, but are dirt, but are swept neatly clean. Lots of green plants around. Smells, I think would be chicken frying (laughter). What else, sounds. Sounds, I think, a sound that permeates my life: sounds of people singing in church. Story_ID: 251150 Speaker 1: Well, I see your father [William Hammonds, Jr.] finishes World War II [WWII] in the late '40s [1940s], gets the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], and he goes to Morris Brown [College] in Atlanta [Georgia]. Your mother [Evelyn Baker Hammonds] goes to Atlanta at the same time. Where did--did she pursue education at that point? Speaker 2: Yes. She's a--she majored in elementary education at Morris Brown. And my father studied chemistry and math, wanted to be an engineer. Speaker 1: So about three to four years later you were born? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. What are your earliest memories of growing up in Atlanta? How far back can you remember in your childhood? Speaker 2: My parents had a little apartment in a housing complex called High Point [ph.]. I think it's in the southeastern section of Atlanta. And I can remember, it was right across the street from the elementary school [Collier Heights Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]. So my earliest memories are of that little apartment and coming out the door and seeing the school across the street. And let's see, I can't remember very much about inside the apartment, but I can remember a Christmas where I had my first train. The train--when I got up, the train was going around the tree. So those are my memories of High Point. And when I was four--no when I was six, so it's right after my sister [Kathy Hammonds-Slaughter] was born, my parents got their first house, and they moved to Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia] in the northwest section of Atlanta. Speaker 1: Did you ask for the train for Christmas or was that your parent's idea, to give you a train? Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know, but I was very excited about it. Speaker 1: You know, why I'm asking you that? Speaker 2: No, I don't. I was very excited about it. Why are you asking me about it? Speaker 1: You went into engineering. Physics, and-- Speaker 2: I went into engineering, yes, yes. I don't know. It may have been my father's idea, but I really liked trains. So he may have just picked up on that. Story_ID: 251151 Speaker 1: How do you remember your family life as a youngster of six, seven, eight, nine, ten? What was life like--you went from the apartment to the house. What was your family life like? Speaker 2: You know, I remember my family life as being very, very structured. That we just had, you know, our daily routines were just the same all the time. So, breakfast together, if my--depending on my father's [William Hammonds, Jr.] work schedule. But breakfast and typically similar kinds of things all the time. Oatmeal, when we were kids. Grits, all the time. Preparing for school, school activities in the afternoon. Dinner at home with--my mother [Evelyn Baker Hammonds] cooked dinner and fresh vegetables and cornbread every single day. And then on the weekends shopping. We had a ritual, my sister [Kathy Hammonds-Slaughter] and I would go do the grocery shopping with my father on Friday afternoons after school, and then Saturday shopping and taking care of chores. And then Sunday day church, Sunday school and church, and then Sunday dinner. And that was our lives. And, that routine never changed. We often went to Covington [Georgia] on Sundays and would go to church in Covington and go to Sunday dinner with our family. Speaker 1: How did you travel between Atlanta [Georgia] and Covington? Speaker 2: A car, my father's car. Speaker 1: How long did it take? Speaker 2: It seemed like it took forever (laughter). It's a very short ride now. It seemed like it would--it felt like it took a couple of hours, but I'm sure it didn't. The other thing we--I can remember about it was that we really couldn't stop. So if we had to use the bathroom, you either just had to hold it, or you might have to have an accident in the car. And we never really understood why couldn't stop, my sister and I, but. And sometimes when I was going to stay for the summer, one of--my cousin would come and get me and we'd go to Covington on the bus. So, I remember those bus rides to Covington. Speaker 1: As you entered elementary school [Collier Heights Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], grades one, two, three-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --your parents were both teaching? Speaker 2: No, my father was never a teacher. My father worked at the post office his whole life. Speaker 1: But he majored in? Speaker 2: Chemistry and mathematics. Speaker 1: A postal worker, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: What about your mother, was she-- Speaker 2: My mother was an elementary school teacher. Speaker 1: While you were in elementary school? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Where did she teach? Speaker 2: She taught first in--for a--in a private nursery school, Gate City nursery school [Gate City Day Nursery Association, Atlanta, Georgia]. And then she began to teach in Atlanta public school system about the time that I started school. So, she taught first at--I'm not sure where her first school she taught. But she taught for a long time at a school called Capitol Avenue School [Atlanta, Georgia] in the southeast section of Atlanta, near where the Atlanta stadium [Turner Field, Atlanta, Georgia] is now. Speaker 1: How did your father feel about the fact that he majored in chemistry, but had to take employment in the post office? Speaker 2: I think it was the big disappointment of my father's life. At the time, the only school, engineering school in Georgia was Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], which didn't admit African Americans. My father, the only way he could've become an engineer was to leave Georgia. There was engineering at Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], there was engineering at North Carolina A& T [Agricultural and Technical College of North Carolina; North Caroline Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], and other places. But he would've had to have left Georgia, and I think it was difficult for him to leave his mother who depended on the support of all of her children to get by. And so I think he had some regrets about that, and he really wanted to be an engineer. Speaker 1: How long did he work in the post office? Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, my whole life. Twenty-something, maybe even thirty-something years I'm pretty sure. He retired in '82 [1982] or so, something like that. So a long time. Story_ID: 251152 Speaker 1: What elementary school did you first attend? Speaker 2: Collier Heights Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Um-hm. And tell me about the teachers and about the curriculum, what do you remember about those elementary school years, and were there any particular teachers that influenced you in any particular way? Speaker 2: The first teacher that I can remember that was incredibly important to me was Ernestine Mann [ph.], fourth grade. She was a Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate. She was a wonderful, wonderful teacher. She was just gifted. She was a very gifted teacher. And I can--I remember her so, so specifically in part because that was a difficult year for me. I had a hard time sitting still in class after I finished my work. So, I would finish really quickly. A lot of times I would finish quickly, because I had read many of the assignments out of the books that we were using. I had them at home, because my mother [Evelyn Baker Hammonds] brought them home, and I would read them to keep occupied at home. So a lot of times I had already read the material or done the material, and so I'd come to school, and I'd be really bored. So, then I'd decide I needed to tickle somebody or throw spit balls or do something else to distract somebody else. And Mrs. Mann was very, very patient with me and really helped me to learn how to just sort of control all of that energy that I had that was just bursting out. Giving me lots of projects and things like that to do. And she just had the most incredible speaking voice. At the end of every day, fifteen minutes before school ended, she would read us a chapter from a biography of a famous African American. So I can still remember her reading, you know, about Harriet Tubman and Booker T. Washington, and George Washington Carver, and everybody. And no matter who in that class was upset or acting out or doing anything, by that time of the day, everybody would just sit in rapt attention listening to her read to us. It was--she was just incredible. And so I really consider her to be one of the best teachers I've ever had. Speaker 1: Grades five and six, did you stay there through it? Speaker 2: Yes, I stayed there through grade seven. Speaker 1: Seven? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were there any other teachers that came after? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were all wonderful teachers. I think Mrs. Mann just stood out. I think our--my sixth grade teacher Mrs.--I think her name was Dabney [ph.], that might be right. But I remember her for--she made us learn a lot of poems, a lot of Langston Hughes that we had to recite. Story_ID: 251153 Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject in the middle, upper elementary grades, do you recall what you-- Speaker 2: I liked everything. I absolutely liked everything. I think I probably like history the most, but I did well in everything. I enjoyed everything. There wasn't anything that stood out, I think, at that time. I did have a special interest in science that my parents [Evelyn Baker Hammonds and William Hammonds, Jr.] cultivated. So I would, you know, I had a lot of science kits at home. I had a chemistry set; I had a microscope; I had astronomy stuff. I always had those kinds of things. And I was always-- Speaker 1: Did the school [Collier Heights Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] curriculum and activities support what your parents were giving you? Speaker 2: To some extent, but a lot of it was extra on my parents' part because I was interested in it and my dad was interested in it. So there was a lot of things that we would do together. Chemistry experiments and things like that. Speaker 1: At that point then, grades six, seven, with the parental exposure to science, mathematics and so on, did you have any notion or idea then about what you wanted to do with your life or where you saw yourself as an adult? I mean, I know you had all the science, but-- Speaker 2: Um-hm, right. Speaker 1: --did you, did you make any decisions at that point? Speaker 2: Now, my sister [Kathy Hammonds-Slaughter] tells a story that I told her when I was ten that I was gonna be an astronaut. Now, I don't remember this. But she said that's what I used to say all the time. So I guess I was thinking about it. And--but I think mostly, at that point, I just liked it. And I--it was probably the hardest thing that I had to do. In other words, I had to work to understand it. Everything else came--very, very easy to me. Speaker 1: You had to work to understand what? Speaker 2: The science. The science thing. So, I mean, I would get it. But, it presented a challenge to me; that's why I liked it so much. It didn't just come as easily as reading, history, or doing English or something like that, so. Speaker 1: What'd you like about history? Speaker 2: I liked trying to understand the world that I was in. And, I think, by the time I was in the sixth or seventh grade, and the struggles around integration of the public schools were beginning to heat up in Atlanta [Georgia], and just I liked it. I also liked history just from--African American history just from Mrs. [Ernestine] Mann's [ph.] class from her reading about all those famous people to us. So, I think--but mostly, I think, it was trying to understand the world around me. And that was important to me. My parents' friends talk about that I was a kid who asked a lot of questions all the time. Story_ID: 428421 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evelynn M.] Hammonds, tell me about your junior high school experience. What do you remember about that? Speaker 2: I went to two high--I went to a number--one junior high school and two, maybe three different high schools. And that had everything to do with what was going on in Atlanta [Georgia] at the time. So I went to junior high school for eighth grade, Central Junior High [School, Atlanta, Georgia]. And what I remember most about Central was that it was in downtown Atlanta. So I had to take a couple of buses from my house in Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia] to downtown every day to this school, where--it was outside of the neighborhood, so it's the first time I'd been to school outside of my neighborhood. So, that was quite interesting to me. And I think the most--the other thing that was--struck me about that year was my math teacher was really quite wonderful, and I had a really great time in her classes. So she was also a Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] graduate. So, I have a lot of teachers in my life who were Spelman graduates. Speaker 1: Are either one of those teachers every talk about Spelman in class or to you privately? Speaker 2: They didn't have to, that was all around me. I mean, I had Spelman graduates living next door. I mean, most--a lot of my elementary school teachers had gone to Spelman and Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and my mother [Evelyn Baker Hammonds] was in Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority [AKA]. So there were--so it wasn't--it was in the air. Story_ID: 428422 Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood that you lived in when you were in high school; what was that neighborhood like (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. The high school. Well, you know, the northwest section of Atlanta [Georgia], Collier Heights [Atlanta, Georgia] was, you know, sort of mixed-income neighborhood, everything from people who, you know, probably had very little means, but--and worked many, many jobs. And then, there were a lot of middle class African Americans there. So, two of our neighbors were--on one side of the house, worked at the post office, and the other side, worked at the post office, across the street was a high school counselor. Next to them was a journalist. Next to them was a banker. A number of teachers up and down the street. Very few people worked in I would say sort of industrial kinds of jobs. There were social workers, teachers, lawyers, dentists, doctors. That was the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Were any of these individuals, beyond your parents [Evelyn Baker Hammonds and William Hammonds, Jr.], had any special meaning in your life at that time, names of the fathers and mothers of your friends who influential in your life at all? Speaker 2: Well, it seemed to me all of our neighbors were the kind of people who knew all the kids in the neighborhood and, you know, were sort of kept an eye out watching you and noticing the kinds of things that you were interested in. So, people often gave me books. They knew I liked to read, and they often gave me books. And I was always struck by that. People would stop by the house and said, "Oh yeah, here's a book I thought that--" I was called Maxine, because my mother's name was Evelyn, I was called [HistoryMaker] Evelynn [M. Hammonds] at school, but in the neighborhood I was called Maxine, and at home I was called Maxine. So people would stop by and say, "Here's a book I thought she'd really like," and, and that was--that was what people did. You know, or if people--there was something on television or something that people thought would be interesting, they'd just, you know, let you know, things like that. Story_ID: 428423 Speaker 1: Coming you back to your high school years-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --and your courses and studies (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: --what other types of extracurricular, out of school activities were you involved in during high school years? Speaker 2: You know, in high school, I was--the sort of biggest activity that I did was work on the high school newspaper, and that was at the last high school I attended. But let me back up. So I went to Central Junior High [School, Atlanta, Georgia] for one year in eighth grade. And then the following year I started ninth grade at [Charles Lincoln] Harper High School [Atlanta, Georgia] which was in my neighborhood [Collier Heights, Atlanta, Georgia]. It was an all-black high school. But that--in the middle of that year was when the sort of second sort of round of busing took place in Atlanta [Georgia] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was that? Speaker 2: That had to have been '67 (1967). And so then I was--went to [Daniel McLaughlin] Therrell High School [Atlanta, Georgia] which was in southwest Atlanta which was an all-white high school, and we were bused to that school. So there were about, I don't think more than sixty or seventy black students in Therrell High School, and that was traumatic. That was traumatic. Number one, it was traumatic, because I think just being in school with white kids, not knowing what to expect. It was a very hostile atmosphere for the most part. The teachers were, for by and large, I cannot remember a single teacher that year at Therrell High School who was kind, I would say. I take that back, one, one--that was my science teacher. But other than that, they were just cruel, and the cruelties--just day-by-day kinds of incidents. For example, in geography class, I was the only kid--black kid in that class, and I made a 100 on the exam. So the teacher passed out the exam, and I was sitting there, and I was--"Wow, I made a perfect score." And he called me to the front of the room, and I thought he was gonna congratulate me for making a perfect score. And he turned--and he said, "Face the class." And he said to the class, "If she can make an A on this exam, what is wrong with you people?" And I, you know, I'll never forget it as long as I live. In my math class, I was the only ninth grader in the eleventh grade math class, 'cause I was advanced in math. If I had a question, the teacher would stop talking. She would call the roll. So she would stop whatever she was doing and start going from the A's and Bs and asking each student if they had a question. She'd get to me, she would skip me, and then ask every other student if they had a question, and then ask me what my question was. And she did that to me every single day. And it was just, you know, was--and there were two of us, I think, in the honors classes and two of us who made the honor society in ninth grade. Speaker 1: Were you in honors classes in every subject, or just in science or math, or? Speaker 2: Every subject. Speaker 1: Every subject? Speaker 2: Every subject, yes. And that, that year that--that school [HistoryMaker] Deborah Prothrow-Stith and I were in that class together, in that school together. It was very difficult. And it was--I think it was very shocking to us. I mean, in '68 [1968], so the spring of '68 [1968] was when, April, was when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. was killed, and we were at school that day. We had to go to school the following day, he was killed in the evening. We had to go to school the following day. And they thought--they treated us as if we were gonna riot. And so those are, those are-- Speaker 1: How do you remember that day afterwards? Speaker 2: I remember it as--as almost so painful I could--I didn't know if I could survive. I remember at some point going to the payphone and calling my mother [Evelyn Baker Hammonds] and saying, "I can't do this; you have to come and get me." And my mom didn't drive, but my father [William Hammonds, Jr.]--she got in touch with my father. My father came and got me. I just felt I couldn't stay there. The kinds of things--the white kids were making all kinds of jokes and really horrible kinds of jokes, and nobody intervened. And that, that was one of the things that I--it was the first time in my life where I experienced teachers who sort of abdicated their responsibility in the classroom to stop students from hurting each other. And those--that--and I was only there for half a year, but I remember it as one of the most difficult six months that I ever experienced in school. And so the--at the end of that year, my parents moved to southwest Atlanta to Cascade Heights [Atlanta, Georgia] is what the neighborhood is called. And so I went to a different high school, so that's my third one that I graduated from, Southwest High [School, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Did you have advanced placement courses in high school (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: We didn't have advanced placement; we just had honors. So I took all of the honors classes that I could take. Story_ID: 428424 Speaker 1: At this point, your junior, senior year in [Southwest] High School [Atlanta, Georgia], did you know of or did you know Dr. Benjamin Mays? Speaker 2: He was in the neighborhood (laughter). I didn't know him personally, but he lived right, you know, I don't know, less than half a mile away from where my parents [Evelyn Baker Hammonds and William Hammonds, Jr.] lived in the neighborhood. So, at that time, let's see in the neighborhood in Cascade Heights [Atlanta, Georgia], so who lived in that neighborhood. Maynard Jackson lives in that neighborhood, [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young, Benjamin Mays, Hank Aaron, all kinds of people like that. Speaker 1: You say you didn't know Dr. Mays? Speaker 2: Didn't know him to--didn't know him personally, but knew who he was and knew him if he walked--if I saw him around to say hello. Speaker 1: I guess he was present at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] at that point (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: Yes, to say, you know, my parents told me who he was; "That's Dr. Mays, you say hello." Speaker 1: Did you know Maynard Jackson or any of the others? Speaker 2: I knew Andrew Young a little. His daughter [Andrea Young] was in, right behind me in high school. So. Speaker 1: Who were some of the black women of Atlanta [Georgia] that, outside of education, that you knew of? Speaker 2: Outside of education; it's hard to think about that. Speaker 1: I mean, it still wasn't a time, of course, when black women were moving into politics, although that came perhaps in the next decade, but of course Atlanta was different. I was just addressing what other black women were out there in the community that you might remember. Speaker 2: No, nobody comes to mind, except probably, you know, Coretta Scott King was a figure in the community. They didn't live in our community, but [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.'s brother's family lived in our neighborhood. So she was sort of a, you know, public--a black female public figure that was known to us. Yes. Story_ID: 428425 Speaker 1: Upon your graduating from [Southwest] High School [Atlanta, Georgia], where were you in your thinking about what you wanted to be and what your career--did you have a plan? You talked about astronaut, but where were you at that point, where were you--? Speaker 2: Right, (laughter), right, right. Well, I was really torn between science and something like journalism. And so, when I finished high school I really wanted to come north and go to one of the liberal arts colleges here. I really wanted to go to Barnard [College, New York, New York]. My mother's sister lived in New York City [New York, New York] and my--as I said my great-grandmother [Rena Spearman Washington] was working as a domestic in Westchester County [New York], so I had come to New York several times. And I just thought Barnard was like the greatest place in the world, and that's where I wanted to go to school. But my parents [Evelyn Baker Hammonds and William Hammonds, Jr.] did not want me to leave home. So I went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Speaker 1: Was that a big fight? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a huge fight, and I lost (laughter). And the only--but--and so the only thing I wanted to do at Spelman was--at the time they had--they still have this, called the dual-degree program. It's an engineering program that joined with Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]. So you spent two and a half years at Spelman, two and a half years at Georgia Tech, and you end up with two undergraduate degrees. Speaker 1: You've answered my question. Speaker 2: Yes, so that's the program that I went to. And the director of that program, Charles Meredith, was a chemist. Lived around the corner who I used to babysit for. He was the director of that program. And so I got a full scholarship to do that, and that's how I moved into focusing on--more on engineering and science and physics. Speaker 1: How many other Spelman women were in this new program? Speaker 2: In my class, there were just four of us. And we were the second class of the program. The class ahead of us, I think there were maybe five or six. No, there were only three, I think probably only three women in the class before us. But it was very new, in 1971 it just begun. So, we were just the second class. And out of the four of us in my class, I think I said there were four, I was the only one who finished the program. The other three--when it was time to transfer to Georgia Tech, they hated Georgia Tech--we all hated Georgia Tech. But I was at that point I'm like, you know, these people aren't gonna run me out of here. So I stayed, and they all went back and finished their degrees at Spelman. Speaker 1: Did you live at home while you were in this program? Speaker 2: I lived off and on at home. In part of the year, I typically lived at home and then in the springtime I often lived on campus. So, that just had to do with the demographics of school in terms of the dorms being filled up in the fall, and those of us who lived in the city couldn't get a room on campus, and so then I would get a room in the springtime. So lived off and on. Speaker 1: What was your--what was your most difficult problem or issues as you moved through this program? Were there any times when you had obstacles? Speaker 2: Chemistry was a huge obstacle (laughter). I took--started out taking chemistry from Henry Cecil McBay at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Famous, famous chemistry teacher; the best in the world. I mean, the thing about McBay was, he was so passionate about it. He'd get so caught up in what he was doing, and he's going--you know, you just had to try to keep up with him. And he'd just fill up the boards with equations and everything. I just, I could not keep up. I was completely overwhelmed. I did really well in physics, but chemistry was my nemesis at the time. And that was--and I was--just couldn't--I couldn't figure out what--why it was just so, so hard for me. I eventually sort of got better at it, but it was my sort of first set of bad grades I got was in chemistry. Speaker 1: How about physics? Speaker 2: Physics was fine. Speaker 1: Who was your-- Speaker 2: My physics teacher at--pretty much most of the time in the--'cause it was a small physics department which was actually at Morehouse, not at Spelman. So I was taking all my physics classes at Morehouse and that was [HistoryMaker] Carl Spight. So he is just--he was an extraordinary teacher, an incredible role model, an absolutely brilliant scientist. That's--I fell in love with physics studying with Carl Spight. Speaker 1: I knew him well when I was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. We'll talk about him later. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah he was great. Story_ID: 428426 Speaker 1: Extracurricular activities when you were at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], what did you do besides your sciences and your math? Were you in a sorority? Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, no, by that-- Speaker 1: You mentioned your mother [Evelyn Baker Hammonds] was an AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]? Speaker 2: --no, I had a fleeting moment of wanting to be a Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority], 'cause most of my friends were Deltas, but my mother was--my mother said she wasn't gonna have any Deltas in her house. So that was the end of that. I didn't really participate in many extracurricular activities, in part because I was living at home part of the time when I was at Spelman. In part, because I was a science major, and I had a lot of labs. And so I didn't really get involved in very much. I did a little bit on the school newspaper, 'cause that was something I liked doing. But that was about it. Speaker 1: Did you write for the paper or did you edit? Speaker 2: I wrote for the paper for a little while and worked on the paper. So, you know, wrote and edited and did a little bit of that, but not for very long. Mostly concentrated on my work. Story_ID: 428427 Speaker 1: So you graduated in 1976? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, between 1976 and 1980, after you finished your undergraduate work, what did you do with those four years? Speaker 2: That's when I came to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, okay. You finished MIT in? Speaker 2: Eighty [1980]. Speaker 1: How do you remember coming from Boston [sic.] to Cambridge [Massachusetts] and-- Speaker 2: Oh my goodness (laughter) (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 1: --how did that feel like? Speaker 2: I--well, I need to back up. Two, two important things happened when I was studying physics at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I was--spent two summers working in--at Bell Labs [Nokia Bell Labs] in New Jersey in a summer program--summer research program for women and minorities. That was partly--largely started by the African American members of the technical staff at Bell Laboratories who wanted to set up a program to get more African Americans and Latinos and women into science. And so, the program was great. We went to--we spent the entire summer in New Jersey. The first year we were in the dorms at Rutgers [The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey] and then we all were assigned to various labs and the pro--you know, we had a mentor and did our work. There were group activities for us and tours, and things like that, and it was my first exposure to the world of big science. It had a profound effect on me, and I really wanted to do well. So the first thing I ever published was part of--I was on a publication out of the work I did during my summer there. And I went back for a second summer. And that's how I learned about MIT, because it was there, that one weekend one of the other students there was from Wellesley College [Wellesley, Massachusetts] who was an economics major who is now a professor at Pomona [College, Claremont, California], and she was a student at Wellesley. And she said, "Well, let's go up to Boston {Massachusetts]." So we came up to Boston, and we were--came into town from Wellesley, and I saw MIT for the first time, and I just thought, "I have to go to school here." Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Her name was Cecilia Conrad. And I couldn't believe it. The bus stops right--the bus stops right in front of 77 Massachusetts Avenue, those big columns. We walked up the stairs and walked down the infinite corridor, and there were all these people who just seemed--I'd never seen people (laughter) like them before, really. And that's when I decided I--that's when I first saw MIT. And then because of the Society of Physics Students, [HistoryMaker] Shirley [Ann] Jackson and Ron McNair [Ronald McNair], came down, talked to us at Spelman, and Shirley was the first black women I ever met who was a physicist. And I--and she went to MIT. So that's how I pretty much decided, that's the only place I wanted to go, was MIT. Story_ID: 428428 Speaker 1: So how was it when you got here, at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? What was it like? Speaker 2: I thought I had died and gone to heaven; it was great. I mean, I felt--I always had felt a little odd at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], particularly as I got more serious about my science, about studying science. You know, I mean, to put it bluntly, I was a nerd and that was--it's difficult to be a nerd, you know, I mean in--socially. Speaker 1: And to be in science (simultaneous) (unclear). Speaker 2: And to be in science. You know, and so, you know, if I go to a party and you know, people would say what, you know, what do, what's your major? If I say physics, nobody wanted to talk to me. And if I wanted to talk about physics to anybody, nobody wanted to talk about physics except my other friends who were in physics and in the engineering program. And so, the only way would have fun at parties is to say I was an English major, and people say, "Oh, cool," and hang out. So, to go to MIT was a place where it was okay to be a nerd. And that's what I liked about it. And there were four African American students in my entering class in physics. And we all we--three of us knew each other from--because we all had been the Bell Labs [Nokia Bell Labs] program. So that was very comfortable. We knew--and there were other students around who--in other engineering programs, some of whom we also--had also been in the Bell Labs program. So we had a little group of people that we already knew, and that was nice. The physics department, itself, at MIT? That was extraordinarily difficult. For the most part, people kept thinking I was [HistoryMaker] Shirley [Ann] Jackson. So they'd say, "How you doing, Shirley?" And I'd say, "Fine," (laughter). There were a lot of people there, faculty, who still believed that African Americans simply could not do science, should not be at a place like MIT doing science; that none of us met the paper criteria for admission. And we had to deal with those attitudes. And I would say I had--the only other African American woman in my class dropped out after the first year. She said it shouldn't have to be this hard. We shouldn't have to deal with this kind of atmosphere. And it, you know, again, it wasn't welcoming, it wasn't warm, it wasn't--it was not a good place, at all. And you know, the only things we had before us were the fact that Shirley Jackson and Ron McNair [Ronald McNair] and that whole--Bill Quivers [William W. Quivers] who teaches physics at Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts]--they had managed to get through, and they were a big support to us, because it was very hard. And then my second year there, [HistoryMaker] Carl Spight had a visiting professorship, so he was there that year. So that was great, 'cause I had Carl around. And of course people like Jim Young [James Edward Young] in the physics department and the dean, whose name escapes--in the graduate school, Turner, [Calvin Campbell] John Turner and Clarence [G.] Williams and those people were, oh, enormously supportive and tried to do everything they could to help us. But--and of course, now I understand the fights they had to try to change the atmosphere for us. But, yeah, it was difficult, and the only thing that I think kept me going was that I loved the work. It was--I was just completely fascinated by it. Speaker 1: What was the topic of your master's thesis? Speaker 2: It was a study, a x-ray scattering study of xenon physiadsorbed on graphite. So, it was a study of melting in two-dimensional systems. Story_ID: 428429 Speaker 1: You finish MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], master's degree, and then you went to work? Speaker 2: Yes. Well, what happened to me at MIT is that I finished the first part of my Ph.D. experiments, then I decided to take a master's [degree]. Because, I reached a point where I was wondering if I could do it, wondering if that was the right path for me. That was a very difficult decision for me to stop doing physics. So, I pretty much took a leave of absence that turned into, you know, not going back. But--and so I worked as a software engineer, as I knew how to program. Speaker 1: And very well. Speaker 2: I worked at Polaroid first. Then I worked for a small startup company called Software Arts which was--first started out in Central Square [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and then moved out to Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts], and then from there to Digital Equipment Corporation [Maynard, Massachusetts]. And it was when I--during my time at Digital, that I decided this corporate kind of world is not for me, and that's when I began to think about coming back to school. Speaker 1: So you spent about five years in the corporate sector (simultaneous) in the industry? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So when you made that decision, what was the next step, where were you--where did you go? Speaker 2: Well, I was, as I said, I was working as a software engineer, doing very well. But, you know, it wasn't engaging enough for me. I mean, it was something I could do. It was lucrative, but it wasn't terribly interesting. And so I had also, during that time, become interested in the whole question of--remember we talked earlier about--I was saying, my other interest in history, trying to understand the world around me. And one of the things I had come to want to understand, desperately, was why there were so few African Americans in American science and engineering. That question just became a burning question for me, which meant I really I wanted to understand, what is this world of science? I never for a second believed that it was because African Americans didn't have talent or interest. I grew up around people who were interested in science my whole life. They didn't have the opportunities to pursue it, like my father [William Hammonds, Jr.] for example, and my father had friends who he had gone to school with, with similar interests. But, you know--and I didn't think simple racism was the only answer. I mean, I think it had a lot more to do with how--I think it had--there were other factors, in terms of how African Americans were systematically disenfranchised in American science, and I wanted to answer those questions. And, of course, I wanted to answer them not just as a black person, but as a black woman. And so I was really also becoming interested in questions about women in science, because that was an arena that was opening up, and a lot of women had begun to ask questions about that. And I got involved with a study group that was here in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. A number of people who were professors, women professors in the sciences, who were beginning to ask very hard questions about why science was so inhospitable to women. And it's-- Speaker 1: Do you have any hypotheses at that point beyond the racism factor? Were there things you began to think about? Speaker 2: I had really began to do some reading in the history of science to try to understand how science worked. And that's pretty much how I was led to study the history of science. Story_ID: 428430 Speaker 1: You looked at the history of science in terms of how it impacted and developed concepts of race and gender, did you? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I began--almost immediately, that was what I wanted to study, but when I was I--came into this department [Department of the History of Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] of course, the study of women and gender was certainly not the central thing that people cared about. Though it grew over time, over the time that I was here [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a student. But I think, I tried to understand that specific question inside of the larger question of, you know, the context that shapes scientific knowledge and how scientific knowledge is shaped institutionally and by the practitioners. Not just trying to understand one great idea to the next great idea in science, which some people do in my field. But that's not what I was ever interested in. Speaker 1: Your sister [Kathy Hammonds-Slaughter], I think, wrote a recommendation to The HistoryMakers that you should be interviewed. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: And I'm quoting her now out of context, but she said, the direction you were moving in intellectually, quote, "is the study of herself," end quote. Speaker 2: Ah. Speaker 1: What did she mean by that? Speaker 2: She meant that I was trying to explain the world that I was in and what I saw as an African American woman. And I wanted to understand my story, what I saw trying to become a scientist, trying to do science. And I wanted to understand. I knew what--that some of things that I faced and I dealt with didn't just happen to me. And so--and I also am deeply committed to having more African Americans study science. So I want to understand it better to bring more people in, and I also wanted to understand my own history within it. Story_ID: 251164 Speaker 1: So you're ready to leave [the corporate sector] in 1985, and what did you do, how did you approach it? Speaker 2: I entered the doctoral program in history of science at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And--in part, because I found that it was in the history of science that I could learn about the development and evolution of scientific institutions, in particular in the United States. And also just the development and evolution of science, itself, as a set of--as a knowledge--as knowledge and as a set of particular practices. And so, I felt that that would be the place where I could learn about what happened to African Americans and how particular patterns of exclusion--in terms of how science evolved, scientific institutions evolved in the United States--led to the fact there were so few African Americans in science in the modern period. So that's--so, it fit right in with my interest in history, and it brought my interest in history and my actual deep passion about science together. And so, after--as soon as I entered the program I realized it was absolutely perfect for me. That it just brought all of my interests together. Speaker 1: Okay. You're in the program, Ph.D. history of science, but what was the specific research focus towards your thesis? Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: What dimensions did you look at? Speaker 2: All right. So I really would have wanted to do a dissertation that touched on some aspects of the history of African Americans in science or race in science and those kinds of things. At the time, there wasn't very much precedent for doing such a project, particularly in this department [Department of the History of Science], but certainly in the field largely. There wasn't a lot of interest in race in the history of science; wasn't a lot of interest in African Americans in the history of science. There was one full-length biography of an African American scientist ['Black Apollo of Science: The Life of Ernest Everett Just'] and that was written by Kenneth [R.] Manning, who was also a graduate of the department here at Harvard. And so, some people suggested that if I started on a project like that it would be one that would be considered marginal. Wouldn't make an impact on the field necessarily, wouldn't necessarily provide me with a good career trajectory. And so, I decided to do a project where I could look at the ways in which scientific knowledge was translated into practice. So, my dissertation and first book ['Childhood's Deadly Scourge: The Campaign to Control Diphtheria in New York City, 1880-1930'] is the history of the control of diphtheria in New York City [New York, New York] from 1880 to 1930. Now diphtheria is the first infectious disease that was brought under control by advances in bacteriology. And so here's a new kind of science, new kind of scientific knowledge about what a disease is and how it's transmitted. And then that knowledge is then put to use in a very complex urban environment of New York City, various immigrant groups, complicated politics with Tammany Hall and--but also the influence of numerous progressive reformers. So it's a very complex environment in which this new knowledge about how a very devastating childhood disease was brought under control. So, it allowed me to think about, in a larger sense, the kinds of questions I was interested in. And so what happens with a particular kind of scientific knowledge when it's translated into clinical practice or to public health practice, and how does those--do those different contexts change that knowledge or--and how does it also--sort of, you know, feedback loops that occur. So that's why I picked up that project. And at the same time, toward the end of my classroom studies, the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] epidemic emerged. And so lots of people were then, all of a sudden, interested in the history of disease again, which had not been--you know, there were lots of interesting studies of disease, but it just exploded after the AIDS epidemic emerged. And so, in the end, it turned out to be, you know, a quite timely kind of project. But for me, it wasn't so much I was interested in diphtheria, I was interested really in this sort of translation of scientific knowledge into practice. So that's why I chose that topic. Story_ID: 251165 Speaker 1: What was that experience like, being an African American woman, here in this department working, for the Ph.D.? What was that experience like as a student? Speaker 2: As a student when--I was also a little bit older, as a graduate student, than some of the students in my classes. You know, it was--it wasn't as difficult as, as I was saying, as some of my undergraduate experiences had been, certainly at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia]. It wasn't as difficult as my experience had been at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And I think that's just sort of the nature of the work, a lot of the work you do as a historian is pretty solitary. You spend a lot of time in the archives by yourself, just working through various papers. I think the key issue was that I felt keenly aware of how I was sort of outside of some kinds of social networks and professional networks and profession--how other students were--they knew which meetings to go to, which conferences to go to and-- Speaker 1: Had Kenneth [R.] Manning preceded you? Speaker 2: Yes, Kenneth Manning had preceded me by about fifteen years, maybe, that long. Speaker 1: So was he helpful in any way? Speaker 2: Oh, he was extremely helpful. You know, sort of behind the scenes. He was always--once we met, he was always someone I could go to talk to about the work, about some of the dynamics of the department. He knew of my interest of wanting to work on African Americans and race in science, and he also advised me, just do this project, get yourself established then you can do this other project, and it'll all be fine. And so he was a huge supporter of mine, but just, but also just a model and it was great to have someone like him who completely recognized what it meant to do this kind of work. In the field of history of science, there are very, very few African Americans. And so knowing Ken was very important to me. So, in a sense, being a bit older, I think my focus here, my time here in this department as a graduate student, I was pretty focused on just learning a lot of history. Learning how to think about science in a different way. And I think some of the kinds of social things that would have bothered me, and did bother me as a graduate student at MIT when I was younger, didn't really bother me as much here because I really had a much clearer sense of what I wanted to do, where I wanted to go. And I don't mean to minimize it, I don't mean to say it was fun--it wasn't fun at all. And I think anytime as an African American woman when you are in a situation where you're the only one, there's nobody else around and the kinds of things that happen--you know, people either ignoring you or making all kinds of assumptions about you or ascribing certain stereotypes to you and those kinds of things--happened every day. But, I just don't think they bothered me as much at that point. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Who was the lead professor here in the Department of the History of Science [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that chaired your dissertation committee? Speaker 1: Barbara [Gutman] Rosenkrantz chaired my dissertation committee. She is a historian of medicine in public health. But also a key person on my committee was Everett Mendelsohn, who's a historian of biology. And so my work--so that's why my work sort of falls a little bit in between medicine, history of medicine in public health and history of biology, and Everett was also the person who really knew the most about the history of American science. So, those were the two primary people that I studied with. And also a third person, Peter Buck, whose works on American technology. And then for my examination committee, I took a field in African American history and I did that with Nathan [I.] Huggins, who was in the chair of the Department of African American Studies [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And that experience of doing my exams with him was just life changing. He was just an extraordinary historian, an extraordinary man. Had gone through things I can't imagine being here at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but he was a real inspiration. He really, really focused on, you know, you have to know this work in a very deep way. And he was a real inspiration for me. And I was a teaching assistant for him. So that was great. Speaker 2: Great. You started the program here in 1985, you received the doctorate in 1993. I'm assuming that in the early '90s [1990s] you probably got finished on your course work and-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --did you have any, in addition to being a graduate assistant, did you do any teaching during this time? Speaker 1: Yeah. The--the teaching I did was as a graduate student, I taught with--I taught in a course that Nathan Huggins and Barbara Rosenkrantz taught called the Changing Concept of Race in America. And I also taught with Ruth Hubbard in the biology department on a course called Biology and Women's Issues. Story_ID: 251166 Speaker 1: So how did you feel in 1993 when you received this doctorate [from Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I was pretty happy about it. And it seemed like it had taken a while, a long time. Also during that time, I spent a year away, no, two years away at Hampshire College [Amherst, Massachusetts] in western Massachusetts and--as a five-college minority dissertation fellow. And Hampshire College is a wonderful place because it's a place where people were very interested and committed to teaching and develop--thinking about new ways to teach. And I learned a lot there. I taught a course on African American feminism with Fran White [E. Frances White] who is now a dean at NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. And those are the--those, you know--the Hampshire time was wonderful for learning how to teach. Back to your question, finishing my degree was, well, it was just one of those great days of my life. And at the time when I received my diploma, I had already begun teaching at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. So, actually getting the job at MIT, which I got right during my sort of--I was sort of revising my dissertation when I got the job. And so, that was a very--that was a very interesting moment, because I had not imagined going back to MIT. So I was having a number of interviews around the country. And colleagues at MIT, including Ken Manning [Kenneth R. Manning], said, you know, send us your resume, and I did, and they called me. And I was actually to go--gave a job talk at MIT, it was in January, I think and then I was to go to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] the next week and give a job talk. And the people at MIT offered me a job that very day that I gave the talk, about nine o'clock that night. So (laughter), that was a quite astonishing, astonishing thing. Speaker 1: Your dissertation was published? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And the title of the book? Speaker 2: The title of the book is called 'Childhood's Deadly Scourge: A Social History of Diphtheria in New York City, 1880-1930' [sic.]. Speaker 1: And that was published by whom? Speaker 2: Johns Hopkins University Press [Baltimore, Maryland]. Speaker 1: Do you know what year? Speaker 2: I think, it's 2000 [sic. 1999], yeah I think that's right, yeah. Speaker 1: Is that your first book? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It was your first book (unclear) okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Speaker 1: You were a scholar at the Max Planck Institute [for the History of Science, Berlin, Germany]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --within history of science. Where did that fall in the chronology of your work? I'm not quite clear. Speaker 2: Oh, okay-- Speaker 1: Did it--coming kind of later or what? Speaker 2: Yes, it came later. The Max Planck Institute for the History of Science in Berlin [Germany] has--they run a number of programs and conferences every year on various topics. And I was invited because I had begun work on my new project, on the history of race in science and medicine in the United States. And so I was invited to present my work to the fellows there. Speaker 1: This while you were at MIT? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: While you were at MIT? Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: And what year was that, do you recall? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't recall what year, it must be around 2000, 2001, something like that. Speaker 1: So you went to MIT then as an associate professor? Speaker 2: Assistant professor. Speaker 1: Assistant professor? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you left as an associate professor? Speaker 2: I left as almost full professor, because I was sort of being promoted to full professor while I was trying to decide if I was going to stay. Story_ID: 251167 Speaker 1: In addition to research that you were doing at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a professor, assistant, associate professor, you also were the founding director of the MIT Center for the Study of Diversity in Science, Technology, and Medicine? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Tell us about that center, and how you started it, and what you accomplished? Speaker 2: Okay, okay. All right. As I said, my second project that I'm still working on is a book project on the history of race in science and medicine in the United States. And I wanted this history of race to be a really detailed look at how race was used by American scientists--that is biologists, but also anthropologists, also physicians--to explain human variation. Then, the American context is a very complicated issue. And what I had realized since no one in the history of science had written a book like--precisely like this. Lots of people have written histories of the idea of race starting as far back as the 16th century, some people have started back even further, and they talk about the ways in which scientists had laid claim to ideas about race and also informed ideas about race. And, but no one had tried to do what I hoped to do is really focus completely on the American context and to look broadly at the history of race and look at the ways in which studies of racial differences in medicine were influenced by studies of race in biology, which were also shaped by studies of race in anthropology. Because, for my view, all these things had come together, and I wanted to explore that. But, I looked around and not many people in the history of science were very--still, at that point when I began this project--very interested in studies of race. And while on the other hand, in African American history, people worked on--had done very sophisticated studies of race, but had never looked at race in terms of science or technology or medicine. At the same time, by the time I started this project, Ken Manning's [Kenneth R. Manning] book ['Black Apollo of Science: The Life of Ernest Everett Just'] was still the only, I think, you know, one of the few sort of full-length biographies of African American science that people in my field thought were, you know, credible books. And I thought, there are all these people who need biographies done of them, all these African American scientists and other scientists of color. There are--there's a need for all kinds of detailed studies about the intersection of race and technology and technological development in the United States. There needed to be much more detailed studies of race in medicine. And so I could envision this sort of entire research program that needed to be addressed. And that's how I came to think about the project that I proposed that was funded for this center. To be a place where research on race in science, technology and medicine could all be done under one umbrella. And that it would be some--a place for undergraduate students who wanted to do research projects on African Americans in particular fields or other scientists of color, you know, building, you know, building up a database of information of all these biographies that needed to be done, to look at that analyses of the numbers and participation of African Americans and other people of color in American science and engineering. So, for me, it needed a research--it needed a place to do all that and that's--and there wasn't one. So it was just one of those moments when I said, well there isn't one, so I was asked by John [Silvanus] Wilson who at the time was in the foundation relations office at MIT. He just called me up one day and he said, well, the president of MIT, Charles [M.] Vest, was going down to the [Andrew W.] Mellon Foundation for a talk about various things and he said, "Do you have any ideas?" And I said, "Do I have--I have lots of ideas." Speaker 1: Because I was gonna ask you how you got it funded (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Laughter) I have lots of ideas. And so I wrote up this idea, and Chuck Vest initially presented it to the Mellon Foundation, and then I was asked to come down and present it in more detail. And they provided initial funding for the project, and then--for the establishment of this center. And then the Ford Foundation provided money to work specifically on issues of women of color in science, as well. So that's how it--that's how it came about. And one of the first things I did was sort of run a set of research workshops to bring young scholars who were interested in topics of race in the history medicine, so we had a research workshop for them, and the history of technology and one on the history of science. And, in all three cases, to bring people in from these fields to say, "Why have these fields been so slow to try to understand these sets of questions?" And then, the young scholars, to get to know each other, to begin to share their work, to begin to have a place where they could support each other in doing more of this work-- Story_ID: 251168 Speaker 1: --Now, you got your Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] appointment in 2002, so you ran the Center [for the Study of Diversity in Science, Technology, and Medicine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] for how many years (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Oh, probably a year and a half, two years. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And when you left MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and came to Harvard, did any of that work--did you bring any of that with you or-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: --is the study still going on? Speaker 2: No, the-well, that's a complicated story. The grant from the [Andrew W.] Mellon Foundation was an institutional grant, so it was to MIT. And what they suggested to MIT was that they find someone else to be the director if I was going to leave. I was a little bit stunned at that response, because as far as I knew, there wasn't anybody else who was trying to do this except for me. And, you know, I think part of it was a little bit of politics between sort of what the Mellon Foundation saw as being important in the MIT context and how different Harvard is in that respect. And that I would be doing history of science and I have a joint appointment in African American studies and so that it would take me some time to get myself established here. But I think the biggest disappointment about it is that I think their--the failure on the part of Mellon Foundation to recognize the uniqueness of the center--thinking there was just gonna be somebody else out there who could do it and I think the failure on the part of some people at MIT, not at the top of MIT, not Chuck Vest [Charles M. Vest] and not the Provost, Bob Brown [Robert A. Brown]. But certainly people in the science, technology and society program--and I really don't have any trouble saying any of this on camera--who I think had no idea what I was doing, why I was doing it, why it was important in the world, and that was part of the reason why I wanted to leave (laughter) MIT and that department. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're answering my next question. Speaker 2: Right, right. That's, in part, because they really didn't understand it until they came to some of the research workshops, and they were surprised. "Well, these are very interesting intellectual questions," of which I had been talking about for years and many other people knew that I'd been doing that work and working on these projects for years and had been impressed by them. And so, but the people at MIT were a bit behind the times in that regard. And so, what they've done is sort of re-packaged the grant, and it really is gonna be a project that just sort of one person works on and it doesn't have its sort of broad umbrella of things I was trying to accomplish. Speaker 1: Are there other reasons why you decided to leave MIT and take the appointment here, any other reasons? I'm asking, is that the primary (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: That was the primary--that's really the primary reason. I really felt that the people in my department at MIT and certainly the dean of the School of Humanities, Arts and Social Sciences, they simply did not understand my work and what I wanted to do and, I felt, devalued it. And I felt to stay there would diminish my creativity and my intellectual energy, when you've got to constant try to convince somebody that what you're doing is important. And I didn't want to be in a place where that was what I had to spend too much energy doing. So I actually was going--so I--you know, it's sort of--Harvard is a funny thing, to say I applied for a job at Harvard, but when I was invited to--when I was being considered for this job here at Harvard, I was also being considered for a job at Brown [University, Providence, Rhode Island]. So I was gonna leave MIT anyway. Because it was really important to me to be somewhere where people saw this as vitally important work and that I got support for it. And to come here--to return to Harvard, particularly in the [Department of the] History of Science, where they weren't very supportive of my doing a dissertation on this work--they are now completely excited about it. They see its implications and the possibilities and the potential influence that it will have. Everybody's totally excited. People completely supportive. It's like coming back to a very different place. And so I have absolutely no regrets, because, as I said, the key thing for me is to get the work done and also to be in a place where people value it, and that's what is the case here. My disappointment about MIT is that the, the president, I felt I had a lot of support at the top of the institution. But my colleagues, the day-to-day people I interacted with, I didn't feel that kind of support. And so, ultimately, it wasn't a place where I felt I could do my best work. And I think I will do my best work here. Story_ID: 251169 Speaker 1: So, you've been here [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], let's see, three years? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what have you accomplished in the three years that you've been here? Speaker 2: (Laughter) What have I have accomplished? Speaker 1: What are the highlights of those three years? Speaker 2: That's, well, that's a hard question. It feels like a very short time. And I think outside of my work, I think I've been trying to learn this institution. It's a complex institution. I think--so I think I have been spending time trying to get oriented and trying to reconnect to the issues that I'm interested in with a whole new cast of characters. In terms of my own work, I think my work has--my teaching. I think the best thing I've gotten out of coming in the last--just in this first period of time, is a much, much more stimulating teaching experience. I have students who really are interested in this work. I have many more students in my classes then I ever had at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. They're thoughtful and interesting students, and so I think that has been the most rewarding thing that has happened so far. And it's actually--it helped my thinking about my work and what I'm trying to do. Speaker 1: What courses have you been teaching here? What are you teaching now (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've taught Introduction to African American Studies. We've--I taught that first with Michael [C.] Dawson who's in the--in the government department, and we really tried to reshape that course after--we had a daunting job after Cornel West left, who taught that course for a number of years and really built it up to a huge enrollment, and the enrollment had declined since he left. So we had to really rebuild that course, and that's the project that he and I took on. And, so we taught it last year, and I think we've started--the numbers are coming up. And I taught it again this fall. And, you know, it gives me an opportunity to do one of the things that I care about, is throw in some science and get students who are taking a broad sort of survey of African American--the African American experience in the U.S. to realize that science actually has something just to do with that. I've taught both an undergraduate and a graduate course on race in science. And so those are completely connected to my larger project. And that was something that I couldn't do at MIT either, because I just didn't have a constituency of students who were interested in those things. And I also teach Medical Technologies in Historical Perspective, so. Speaker 1: Did you come with tenure or did--have you received it since you've been here? Speaker 2: I came with tenure. Speaker 1: You came with tenure? Speaker 2: And, what--the process at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is that you are--you really go through yet another tenure. I had tenure at MIT, I was the first African American woman to get tenure through the ranks at MIT. So, I had tenure, but at Harvard the process is almost like a second tenure review. So, it's a very sort of long, almost a year long process and-- Speaker 1: And you received that tenure when? Speaker 2: When I first came. Speaker 1: Okay, and you were then fourth or fifth African American woman to receive-- Speaker 2: Fourth. Speaker 1: --fourth to receive tenure-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --in the college of arts and sciences? Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Story_ID: 251170 Speaker 1: Well, of course, in addition to your teaching assignments each semester, you're--have ongoing research and all of that is aimed at publication. And tell me about the publication that you're working on now and you hope to finish soon? Speaker 2: I'm working on the book, 'The Logic of Difference: A History of Race in Science and Medicine in the United States [1850-1990].' And this book goes from about 1850 up until the present. I keep changing the end date because things have unfolded as I've been working on this project. And it really begins with looking at the ways in which African Americans actually come to stand for the study of race in American science and medicine. And by that I mean, my book starts in 1850, and it looks at the ways in which African Americans and whites were compared in terms of their bodies and in terms of disease. And so you have this--what you see in the medical literature, and then also begins to go into the anthropological literature--these constant comparisons of whites--between whites and blacks. So--do African Americans, are there--is their anatomy the same? Do they have the same--actual same body parts, or do they have some extra parts or missing parts? The comparison of cranial capacity. Things like--and physicians and anthropologists begin to ask questions about, why does the Negro have flat feet? And there are all these studies of the Negro ear and the Negro eye, and the Negro everything. And so, I argue that that sort of lays a ground work in American science and medicine for really keeping a focus on the notion that African Americans are biologically different in fundamental ways from white. Why do African Americans have higher rates of certain diseases than do white? And it starts in 1850s at a moment when, retrospectively, people may think well, you know, medical science and anthropology were in their infancy. They didn't quite know, you know, the answers to a number of questions, and that's all true. On the other hand, what I chart in my book is the way in which even as medical theory and practice and anthropological theory and practice, and biological theory and practice change over time, these questions about the biological differences between whites and blacks and this whole sense that the Negro--as the term was used from, up until the late 20th century--was different is something that keeps coming up no matter what kinds of technologies and new changes in theory emerge. So, by the time you have the study of the discovery of blood groups, the first thing American biologists say, "Well, you must be able to use these to determine a racial--to explain racial differences. Maybe all black people have--all the Negros have certain blood groups, and all the whites must have another kind of blood group." It didn't turn out that way. Or the discovery of hormones: maybe African Americans will have different levels of hormones, I should keep saying the Negro would have different levels of hormones than whites, and that will explain levels of energy or intelligence. Or African Americans have different lung capacity called the vital capacity than whites. And there is just sort of this constant comparison. I'm very interested in how that makes the notion of race something that is biologically real, as well as keeping in mind that in these same moments there are all these sociopolitical debates about race here in America. And how do those social-political debates affect or influence the scientific debates about physical and bodily difference? Do the two--I mean, some people would argue, well, those debates sort of--the sociopolitical debates infect the scientific debates. Scientific debates are supposed to be objective. I don't believe in that model. I think that the science and the sociopolitical debates really influence each other. And so, scientists offer a natural account of racial differences that then can be used to explain social differences. I think a perfect example is IQ [intelligence quotient]. IQ is something psychologists begin to measure in the early 1900s. And, of course, people expected to find that African Americans would have lower IQs then whites for all kinds of reasons and that question is of course one that just doesn't seem to ever go away no matter how more refined our analyses of intelligence become. That lingering sense that there's something there, perhaps even now in the genes, that explain the social order that we have in the U.S. where African Americans, by certain kinds of measures, are always on the bottom-- Story_ID: 251171 Speaker 1: --In the early 20th century part of the book ['The Logic of Difference: A History of Race in Science and Medicine in the United States, 1850-1990,' Evelynn Hammonds], I focus on the ways in which a number of African American physicians, anatomists, and anthropologists and also biologists begin to enter this debate with white American scientists and offer their own critiques of the kind of work on racial differences that had been so prevalent in American science and medicine up until that time. So I look at W. Montague Cobb [William Montague Cobb] who's a physical anthropologist and anatomist, and (unclear) I look at Julian Herman Lewis who's also a physician and anthropologist at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], [W.E.B.] Dubois, of course, who wrote a series of studies called "The Atlanta University Studies." And one volume of that is 'The Health and Physique of the American Negro,' where he looks at anthropological and medical theories and mortality statistics and all of these. And others who--and so, what happens to those critiques made by these African American intellectuals? Do they become part of the discussion about the validity of racial differences in the larger context? Unfortunately, no, (laughter) they don't. But I'm very interested in sort of bringing back their work, in particular the work of Julian Lewis who wrote 'The Biology of the Negro' in the 1930s, which is a compendium of all these studies that had argued about, you know, bodily differences, disease differences and the explanations offered for those differences. So--and so I wanted to show this sort of position taken by this group of African American scientists and social scientists at this particular moment. And then it moves to the--then the book moves to the post World War II [WWII] period and look at again, what's the status of race in science. And it becomes more complicated as American science has--becomes more complicated at that particular moment in time and I try to look at some of the changing ideas about race at that moment, excuse me, through a set a studies of various diseases: hypertension, the history of hypertension; history of sexually transmitted diseases. And begin to also look at the ways in which changing ideas about disease are set against notions of the influence of the environment. And American social scientists and biomedical scientists have tended to put more focus on the influence of the environment over the--over something called innate differences, I think for obvious reasons. And so I want--I sort of trace that debate through the 1970s or so. And when I began my book I thought I was ending it around 1990, because at the--much of what was in the--some of the histories that had been written about race and science had argued that, in the post-World War II period, after the excesses of Nazism and the atrocities the Nazis committed under the rubric of them being the superior race, that many scientists wanted to distance themselves from doing this kind of work. And I think that's absolutely true, but it doesn't mean that questions about race and racial differences really went away. They still persisted. And now, all of a sudden, it's come back with the sequencing of the human genome and the ways in which human genetics and molecular genetics are coming together again. So the fact that we can begin to look at the genetic bases of various diseases brings us back to questions about are the differences we see in diseases which many physicians had argued were racial, are they now genetic. And can you use--can--is race something that you can use to explain genetic variation? And what you have right now is an incredibly contentious debate going on between human geneticists, population geneticists, genetic epidemiologists, people in public health, anthropologists, who are all just sort of arguing about, what does race mean when we talk about biology? So my book was gonna end, but this new debate happened, so I am desperately trying to characterize this current moment and link it back to what I know about the past in order to bring the project to a close (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's fascinating, yeah. Story_ID: 251172 Speaker 1: Did you ever have an opportunity to know and meet and talk with Dr. William Montague Cobb? Speaker 2: I didn't get to know him or meet him, but I've read almost everything he's ever written. And he was an absolutely fascinating person, being trained in anatomy and physical anthropology, and being a physician, and teaching at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and being the editor of the Journal of the National Medical Association for so long, and involved in medical policy. Speaker 1: How have you found his work useful to you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His work is useful because he's wri--he wrote a number of articles, beginning in the '30s [1930s], on--looking at the physical constitution of the Negro. And so his articles are again part of that position taken, I think, by many African Americans scientists who were skeptical of all these articles arguing that African Americans are biologically different. And he was the kind of person, like [W.E.B.] Du Bois, who said, no, if you do this carefully you'll see that these differences either are far and less significant than white authors maintain or that there are no differences at all, or that the differences can be explained by environment, by diet, by poverty rather than by something inherent that we would call racial or fundamental biological difference. And so, he is an absolute--you know, he was relentless about this and wrote a great deal about it. And because he was trained in physical anthropology, he crosses that boundary between anthropology and medicine that I'm interested in. And he's also prolific; he's also very well connected in the anthropology. So he's an important figure to look at in terms of these questions. Speaker 1: He was always a model for me and a good friend, and we did several things together. Speaker 2: I really wish I had known him. I mean, he was just, just a-- Speaker 1: I can tell you, I can tell you some interesting things about him later, when we can talk, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: All right, all right-- Story_ID: 251173 Speaker 1: Your president, Harvard University's [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] president-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --Dr. Lawrence Summers several weeks ago in a talk before a group of economists here at Harvard University-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and I'm paraphrasing now, made a statement to the effect that there were differences between men and woman which accounted for the low achievement, lack of performance, lack of interest and productivity of woman in math, science and engineering. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was your first reaction when this statement of the university president became public? What was your first reaction? Speaker 2: My absolutely first reaction was I couldn't believe he said this. I couldn't believe he said it to this particular audience, which was a meeting on women in science and engineering and had it among its attendees a number of people who had done social science research on these kinds of questions for a very long time. I couldn't believe he had misread his audience, and I couldn't believe that he didn't realize that saying these things was going to produce a huge firestorm. Because the question, just as I was just talking about the question of innate differences between whites and blacks that have so been preoccupied American since the middle of the 19th century, the whole question of innate differences between men and women have been equally as contentious and difficult to resolve. But most of the best social scientific literature at this point in time argues that whatever innate differences there are between men and women are small, and they certainly cannot account for women's achievement in science and engineering. That discrimination, cultural barriers, factors like women coming out of graduate programs and trying to get tenure at the same moment that the biological clock is ticking and so raising children--having and raising children at the same time you're trying to get tenure in science and engineering, where, when you're young, the fast track is a very steep track. You know, you've got to get--do your best work and establish yourself when you're young. And so, that--so the childcare and childbearing issue is a very big one for women. But he was willing to suggest that there was a way to discount those factors and go back to the question of innate differences. And that's the resulting firestorm-- Story_ID: 251174 Speaker 1: So I was pretty disappointed in him [Lawrence Summers] for taking such a stand which I think was fundamentally uninformed or misinformed. And he knows I think that (laughter). And-- Speaker 2: You met with him within recent days (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I've met with him as part--I've met with him in the days following his statement, as part--I'm a member of the standing [Joint] Committee on the Status of Women here at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which is a committee that's under the auspices of the dean's office, and it's composed of women in the Faculty of Arts and Sciences who are concerned about women's issues. And we sent President Summers a letter right away after he made his statements chastising him quite seriously for doing so. And then he met with us as a group, and then I meet with him again soon to continue talking about how he might rectify the situation that he has produced. Speaker 2: What are you going to recommend? Can he do that do you think or what can he do? Speaker 1: He's gonna have to--he claims to be, and I am willing to believe him at this point in time, that he does not--that he does support hiring and tenuring more women here at Harvard. The other thing is a backdrop to, partly, why it created such a stir here at Harvard is that the number of offers to women for tenured positions has gone down since he arrived. And he doesn't think it's a trend. Some of us--some of us think it's a trend. And so it just means you have to re-double your efforts if you really care about having more tenured women on the faculty, and in particular in science and engineering. So he says he's committed to that and now he's going to have to demonstrate his commitment, particularly after making these statements which hit specifically hard on women in science. Because that has been one of the reasons used to explain women's low--relatively lower participation in science and engineering and, quote-unquote, lower achievement. This business of innate differences has been a reason evoked since the turn of the 20th century. And I think many people have spent a long time trying to disabuse people of that idea. Others have spent time trying to prove it. And I think the proof is not significant. And even if it were, I go back to--I always go back to Frederick Douglass' statements he made in a speech, I think it's in the 1850s, and it's called 'The Claims of the Negro, Ethnologically Considered.' And in this, he's making a response to anthropologists and physicians of that moment who were saying, "The Negro is the lowest person on the scale of humans in terms of civilization," and that, "The negro is closer to the animals than he is to the highest levels of civilization as exhibited by whites." And at the end of it, Fredrick Douglass said, "Okay, suppose these scientists are right, suppose that's true, suppose there's some--that this sort of biological issue that they're trying to explain is absolutely right. What does that have to do with justice, and what does that have to do with citizenship? The Negro has been here, the Negro has contributed to the development of America and has given his labor and his life, and you know, in terms of what we believe in this country, isn't that enough? Do we have to resort to these kinds of biological explanations?" right. And so, I am still of that mind, you know. I think that there are clearly serious barriers to the advancement of women in science and engineering, and even if there is some genetic or innate component to what we see in terms of mathematical ability, I don't think it's significant, I don't think there's any reason to believe it's significant, and I think that--but the barriers to advancement are significant. And those are the things we have to address-- Story_ID: 251175 Speaker 1: What advice do you have, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Evelynn M.] Hammonds, for young elementary, middle and high school African American students who are interested in science and math or have some talent in that area, what is your advice and have you gone out and spoken to our young black students? What advice do you have for them to keep moving ahead in these fields? Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I do, and I spend most of my time talking to undergraduates, right, at this point in my life. And one of the things that I try to emphasize is to get students to focus on what they're interested in. To focus on the creative aspect of science. We've got a--we've had a lot of programs to bring minority students into science and engineering over the years. There are K [kindergarten] through 12 programs, there're programs for undergraduates, there're certain kinds of programs for graduate students-- Speaker 1: I directed one for five years. Speaker 2: --yes and I--but I think, you know, one of the things that I'm struck by in some of those programs is--it's certainly what I see among some undergraduates--there are ways in which they provide scholarship funds for those students to go, summer jobs and those kinds of things, lab internships. But when I talk to those students, they can't tell me why they care about science. They can't tell me what it is that's interesting to them. What it is they would like to do. What would they like to create in the world that requires a background and a deep knowledge of science to do, and mathematics? And I think if we bring more African American students into science and engineering classrooms, and they don't--and we don't support and nurture a sense of creativity, I don't think we're gonna produce many more. I don't think we're gonna produce many more who become creative and innovative scientists and engineers. Because, I think, we're not focusing on that that is the key. That's the key here. And so I say to students, I'm like, "You're a chemical engineering student--tell me why. Why do you like chemical engineering? What's interesting about it? What can you do with it? What can you make? How will it change the world? Why do you like it?" Those kinds of questions, and I was doing this once to some undergraduates, African American and Latino undergraduates, at [University of California] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] and my colleagues were telling me later that the students were just completely flabbergasted by those questions and said no one had asked them those questions. That's the question--that's what--I want African Americans and other people of color to do science because they want to do something, not to be scientists like white scientists, I think they want to bring your whole self to it. I talk about Wynton Marsalis being able to play classical trumpet and jazz, and he's creative in both realms. He doesn't, you know, he's a master of his instrument, and he's a master of the music, and I want to see those students become masters of the tools that it takes to be a creative and innovative scientist. That's what I want to see. And I think that means you've got to get those students into places where they can be creative. And I think much of our focus in these programs have been just on getting them through, make sure they know the basics, those kinds of things, which are not unimportant. But I think they missed the bigger picture, which is the creative aspects of science. So I would like to see people focus more on using science and technology and their technical training to solve problems that affect the people they care about and the communities that they care about rather than, you know, sort of this rote kind of way of you learn the stuff, because you're gonna get a job with a big company and make, you know, money. But no, I'm interested in producing Bill Gates and Edwin Landses [Edwin H. Land] and all the people who were the innovators of American science and engineering. I want more of those. I'm not really that--I mean, sure, more and more people should have a sort of basic technical and scientific background, but I don't think that's the real bar and the real goal. I think it's more the creativity and that's what I want to see. Story_ID: 251176 Speaker 1: Let's take [HistoryMaker] Evelynn [M.] Hammonds out of the classroom-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --out of the library-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right. Speaker 1: --out of your office-- Speaker 2: And where else would I be (laughter)? Speaker 1: What do you do for relaxation? What's the other part of your life (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The other part of my life. Speaker 1: --what are the fun things that you do? Speaker 2: I spend time with my family. I spend--I like to cook. It's probably evident (laughter). I like to cook. I like jazz, so I like music. And I don't get to do as much of those things as I would like. I like to travel, and I travel a lot for my work, but it's not the same kind of traveling to see the world. Those are probably the main things that I do outside of my work. I work a lot, as you might imagine (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm sure you have to get up (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: Right, so (laughter)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When do you-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So going home and making sort of a, you know, sort of a, you know, complicated meal, or something, is something I like to do. Speaker 1: What are some of the most memorable trips that you've made or travels that you've made in connection with your profession and your work? Speaker 2: Right. I think one of the ones more recently was my first trip to Africa. And I went to a conference, a women's conference in Johannesburg [South Africa] and that was, I think, '98 [1998]. And it was an international women's conference, and I certainly talked about women entering scientific and technical fields. It was--as for many African Americans, your first time in Africa is just such a overwhelming emotional experience, right. And even though most African Americans don't come from South Africa, it's still, to just see the--to see part of the continent is just an incredible experience. And I think the thing that I was most struck by there was to see Soweto [Johannesburg, South Africa]. I don't know what I thought, watching television or whatever I'd ever seen of that part, but I sort of thought Soweto was sort of like Harlem [New York, New York] is to New York City [New York, New York]. Just a small section, as opposed to seeing how large it is. And just sort of, you know, the class differences within it, you know. From Winnie [Madikizela-]Mandela's house to absolute shanties. And so what--I was so struck by the, sort of, never being in a place where African Americans [sic. Africans] were the overwhelming majority, yet subjugated. And that was just so striking to me. And I was also able on that trip to go to Cape Town [South Africa] and to sort of look out. Cape Town is so beautiful, but then you see Robben Island [South Africa] and you know what happened there. And you know the horror behind this beautiful, incredibly beautiful, landscape. So that was--I couldn't stop thinking about it. I also, you know, went and saw on the sort of safari out to see the animals and all that, and that was also equally as, just, moving. Seeing animals in a zoo, and they're depressed is nothing compared to seeing them in the wild in their own--and the sort of intelligence that comes from them. And so, I was just as, you know, I am not saying anything any other African Americans haven't experienced, but I think people should--I think all African Americans should go. It's just a--I don't know, it just sort of touches a sort of deep sense of identity that I don't think anything--going anywhere else actually does. Story_ID: 251177 Speaker 1: But why is the history of science and the history of medicine important? Speaker 2: Well, I think they're important, because I think, if done with rigor and precision, historical study of the past can illuminate the present and illuminate important aspects of the present that contemporaries perhaps don't want to face or acknowledge. I think the study of history within science and within medicine, but also because I also do my connection to African American history, is important, in part, because I think in America there are so many ways in which we are encouraged to forget the past. For example, the past election. To take this moment as if we now live in a world in the U.S. where race doesn't matter the way it used to. And I think the only way you can hold that view is if don't have a historical sensibility or you'd have very little historical knowledge. And so it allows us in the current moment to just, you know, sort of blame the victim. To say to African Americans who aren't achieving, well, you know, it's just your individual fault. You know, there's nothing to stop you now. I think, again, that the only way you can make those kinds of arguments is if you have no knowledge or appreciation of history and how history shapes the present. And that's why it's important. Particularly science and medicine, the history of science is important because science and technology and medicine are the key areas that will shape who we are and how we live in the 21st century-- Story_ID: 251178 Speaker 1: Is there anything that else you would like to add to this story of your life and your work to date that I haven't asked you about or things that you want to bring in that you may have left out earlier? Speaker 2: Well, I don't think I answered the question about what I do in my leisure time very well. So I wanted to add that I enjoy the movies very much and that I also read a lot of African American women writers, fiction writers and poets. That's something that has been a part of my life for a very long time. Began with my mother [Evelyn Baker Hammonds], my mother and my sister [Kathy Hammonds-Slaughter] and I, when we were kids, began to read black women writers and read them together for many years, so that's a very important part of what I do in my downtime. And also, I didn't say anything about, you know, what I considered to be a large part of what I call my political work, and that is work with different groups of African American feminists on various topics. And I was a part of the group of women who signed the ad in support of Anita Hill when Clarence Thomas was being confirmed after she was being vilified in the press. A subgroup of that group also wrote a statement about the gender politics of the Million Man March later, and so those are issues that I work with, kinds of things I've worked with, with African American feminists. And also I continue to write and participate in discussions about the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] epidemic in African American communities, particularly with respect to African American women. I first wrote about that in Radical America, it's a journal here in Cambridge [Massachusetts]. And I've also published articles about it in a couple of anthologies about women in AIDS. So those are the things I do. Story_ID: 251179 Speaker 1: Winding down, how do you feel about the way that you have lived your life? Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, oh my goodness. The way that I've lived my life. Ah, gee, I don't know how to answer that question. I think I've been inspired by people that I admire in all parts of my life. The first person that just came to mind, I don't know why I was just thinking of her, people like Johnnetta [B.] Cole, my colleagues and friends, [HistoryMaker] Beverly [Guy-]Sheftall and [HistoryMaker] Evelyn [Brooks] Higginbotham and Kim [Kimberle Williams] Crenshaw, and Cathy [J.] Cohen. I just started listing all my, like, friends and colleagues, and who I think have been models and supporters of living--trying to live a life where you change the world where you are. You try to change the world where you are. I've wanted--and I guess that probably even goes back to my family, but also the teachers I had growing up in Atlanta [Georgia] and I just have felt very much that a sense of--a deep sense of ethic of service that one should try to do your work and try to do your work really well, and I think having work that you care about and are passionate about is really important. On the other hand, I think you can't just be about yourself that--so I've tried in my life to do things that I think that I can do, and I try to do them well. But I also try to make sure that I leave the places where I am better for other African American women who come behind me. So that's, that's what I've tried to do. I have no idea how I've done it. I mean whether or not I've done it well or--but that's what I try to do. Speaker 1: What do you still want to do, what are some of the things you want to do in the rest of your life that you haven't yet been able to get to? Speaker 2: Right. Well, I have so many projects that I want to--so many things I want to write about. So, I want to write more. That's just a commitment of mine to write more. I would like to see the academy change. And when I hosted--was one of the conveners of a conference Black Women in the Academy[: Defending Our Name, 1894-1994] at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in 1994, and the two thousand or so people were there--the thing I've been most struck by are the young women there who have just this sort of incredible ability and capacity to do intellectual work. And I want the academy to be a place where those young women will thrive. And so, I think the next commit--I mean what I'm committed to doing is, both my own work, but also changing the academy in ways that will bring--make it a place where African Americans will not have to go through some of the same kinds of things that I went through. So I think I'm--that's, you know, that means I do some administration kinds of things or outside of, you know, being simply a professor that may be what I do in the future. Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've already done that you think you might like to have done differently? Speaker 2: Everything. Speaker 1: Everything? Speaker 2: Everything. You know, I'm the kind of person--I think of myself as the kind of person, I think, I figure out--I always say to myself, "I wish I had figured that out like a year before." I always feel I'm a year behind myself, or more than a year. So, yeah, almost everything. I would've wanted to do things with more, I think a sense of--no, I should put it this way, that's probably not right, the road I was just about to go down. I wish up to this point in my life that I'd had more fun. I think, I spent a lot of my time in sort of what I would call struggle mode, you know, trying to get through some things, push this and push that and through that. I wish it had been more fun. I wish that I could say that I am sort of free of sort of these kinds of struggles that I've talked about with you and just been able to enjoy more. Speaker 1: I think that will happen. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: I think that will happen because you recognize it. Speaker 2: (Laughter) I hope so. Speaker 1: You put it out there, so it will happen (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I hope so. Yeah. Story_ID: 251180 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today, or African American world, what are your concerns? Speaker 2: My concerns are that with the--my concerns were heightened in November 2004 with the ascendency of the Republican Party to dominance in national politics and the influence that will have on politics in local--everywhere in the United States and the world. And my concern is that African Americans will forget that the, I think, deep agenda of those people, I think, antithetical to the positive progress of black Americans. And so, that worries me. And I would like to see a more, somehow that we could galvanize our energy to begin to think again about how we can move all African Americans forward. There are still serious problems that we have, and more and more African Americans over the course of my generation--the things I've been able to do and the places I've been able to go are places my parents' [Evelyn Baker Hammonds and William Hammonds, Jr.] generation could barely imagine. And I think many of them would never have imagined that the most powerful African American woman in political history now is secretary of state [Condoleezza Rice]. Those are incredibly positive things. But I think at the same time, the deep divides in the community, where the poorest people are, is becoming more and more invisible to many African Americans, as well as to other people. So, I think--this year, I taught the history of the Civil Rights Movement. And I kept thinking as I talked to the students that I kept talking about moments of great hope, like the March on Washington or moments of great hope with the passage of the Voting Rights Act [of 1965], but then all those moments of hope were followed by a kind of disillusionment. I think we are at a moment of disillusionment, and I think I'd like to see us fight back for a moment where we can feel more hopeful about our progress as people. Story_ID: 251181 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) How do I--I always said, I want to die at my desk over my books. Gee, I guess I'd like to be remembered as a good teacher...