 Story_ID: 419293 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines, I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, Scott Stearns is the videographer. Can you please state your name and spell it for me, please? Speaker 2: I am [HistoryMaker] Joe Hendricks and my, to spell my name is-- Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) J-O-E. Speaker 1: Spell your last name. Speaker 2: H-E-N-D-R-I-C-K-S, Hendricks. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: The third month, twenty-second day, 1927 [March 22, 1927]. Speaker 1: So, today's your birthday, eighty years old. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Wonderful, blessing, and where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in a place called Greene County in Alabama, they call, Boligee, the name of the place was, the city, they did it. Speaker 1: How do you spell it? Speaker 2: B-O-L-I-G-E-E. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is the location of this interview? Speaker 2: This (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where are we now? Speaker 2: We are at 2601 Avenue I, Ensley, and we are sitting here, this is wh- (cough) this is where we are located now. Speaker 1: Okay, in Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: In Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date? Speaker 2: Is March 22nd-- Speaker 1: Okay (laughter), 2007. Speaker 2: Two thousand and seven [2007]. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 419294 Speaker 1: Before we begin, I'm going to ask you what I call, People magazine-ish type questions, okay? Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Color, oh, I'm trying to understand which one-- Speaker 1: What color do you like? Do you like blue, black, green, red? What's your favorite color? Speaker 2: Well, black is, is my favorite color, what I mostly wear. Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you like to eat? What's your favorite food? Speaker 2: Well I like vegetable and, and more than anything else but I like fish for meat and those kind of thing. Speaker 1: All right, now tell me, which time of the year is your favorite? Speaker 2: Summertime (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, when you go on vacation, where do you like to go the most? Speaker 2: Most time I go north for vacation-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --because I've always lived in the South and I feel like that's something a little different. Speaker 1: All right, do you have a saying, a favorite saying or phrase or bible verse? Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, I usually use, "Oh give thanks to the Lord, for He is good," and I feel that that's the worry because it's not about us, it's all about Him, that's the way I feel. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there's nothing that has to do with greater than He. Story_ID: 419295 Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your mother and her side of the family. Now you can go back--how far back on your mother's side can you talk to me about? Your grandmother or your great-grandmother? Speaker 2: I can't go too far. I didn't prepare for that (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, that's okay. Do you know your grandparents on your mother's side? Speaker 2: Grandparents, oh yeah, Julia Perry. Speaker 1: And what was your grandfather, who was your grandfather? Speaker 2: Joe Perry. Speaker 1: Do your remember them? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: Do you remember them? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about your grandparents. Speaker 2: Well, that's, my grandparents on there, is the cause of my name-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and it was kind of difficult. When I was six, about six and a half years old, I didn't have a name because they had, in the rural area, you didn't--were no hospital. They were using midwife they call them. A lady would come out and do whatever was to be done. So, they hadn't given me a name as, as pretty close to the time we can go to school. So my grandmother called me, she said, have, my mother was named Bettie [Bettie Perry Hendricks], she said, "Did they ever give you a name?" I say, "No, they didn't." She said, "If they didn't give you a name, it's almost time you go to school, you go there and play and come back and tell me what you want to be named." So I did. And when I came back I said, after my grandma--my granddaddy used to kind of take up time with me so I said I wanted to be named Joe [HistoryMaker Joe Hendricks], which was my grandparents, on my mother's side, her parents. So, he said, "Go tell Bettie what you told me," so I did, and I started to go play again, she said, "Come back." Said, "Now the first thing you get home, you tell Louis [Louis Hendricks, Sr.] what you want, what you have told us." So my daddy said, "Well, you're right." Say, "I should have did something about this before now. I say, I'm going next week and turn your name in." They had to go to a place they called Eutaw [Alabama] and a notary public would make the report and send it to Montgomery [Alabama]. So that's how it happened (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's how you got your name. Well, what were they calling you before they officially named you Joe? Speaker 2: Bro. Speaker 1: Bro. Speaker 2: Brother, Bro. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Everyone was calling me Bro and my oldest brothers and sisters, some of them never did stop. Speaker 1: Okay, what else do you remember about Julia and Joe, about your grandparents? Speaker 2: Well my grandparents were, one thing, we now, I guess I picked him, when we go there, he would take you in his lap and bounce you on his knee and just keep up, take a lot of time up with you. So, we liked that and he would always take up time to do that and, and that's what made me want to be named after him, I guess. Story_ID: 419296 Speaker 1: Did your [maternal] grandparents [Julia Perry and Joe Perry] own a farm? Speaker 2: Yes, they were farmers. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember anything about either one of them being in slavery? Speaker 2: No, not on my mother's [Bettie Perry Hendricks] side, that was on my daddy's [Louis Hendricks, Sr.] side. Speaker 1: Okay, did they own their own land? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: They were sharecroppers? Speaker 2: Sharecroppers and they started sharecropping and then they would rent you a certain amount of land for each year for a certain, for some kind of price, whatever price they would come up with, and then you had to, you know, pay that price first before you go starting on something for yourself. Speaker 1: All right, okay, and they were also in Greene County [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: Boligee [Alabama] (laughter). Speaker 1: Boligee, (laughter) okay, Boligee, Alabama. Story_ID: 419297 Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your mother. Her name was Bettie [Bettie Perry Hendricks]? Speaker 2: Bettie. Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me about your mother. Speaker 2: Well she was Bettie Perry, then she married my daddy which was Hendricks [Louis Hendricks, Sr.]. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And she were really concerned about her grandchildren. Speaker 1: Well let's talk about her before she got married. Did she share any stories about her growing up? Speaker 2: Not too much-- Speaker 1: Not-- Speaker 2: --I don't know, she never did talk about her childhood too much. Speaker 1: All right. Do you know how much education she had? Speaker 2: Very little. Speaker 1: Okay, and what did she do? Was she, what type of work did she do? Speaker 2: She was just a housewife and farm. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Very--there really wasn't anything to do much for a job then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He made it all, whatever goes on the ground, or whatever be in that area-- Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: --out of the ground, whatever you want to put in it. Speaker 1: Did she have brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: I don't remember her brother or sister. I don't think so. Story_ID: 419298 Speaker 1: Now let's talk about your dad. Tell me your father's name. Speaker 2: Louis Hendricks [Louis Hendricks, Sr.]. Speaker 1: And it's L-O-U-I-S? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, and who are his parents? Speaker 2: Jim Hendricks and Marthie [Martha Hendricks]-- Speaker 1: Marth--? Speaker 2: Marthie. Speaker 1: Marthie. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: How do you spell Marthie? Speaker 2: Um, don't know that, come here Jan [Jan Hendricks Fuller]. Speaker 1: Marthie. Speaker 2: Hendricks. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you know about their parents at all or your, or Jim Hendricks? Speaker 2: He was Jim Hendricks. I never did, I didn't remember. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Before I didn't--only something that you picked up was Jim and then they, but I never did know anything too much about them, his wife, but he, they explained about he were slave and he was a person who would drive the chair or whatever they called it, for the man who was owned the slave. So he, this way he would, this was his job to do, get him where he wanted to go and take him wherever he wanted to go. Speaker 1: He was a slave in Alabama or in Georgia or where? Speaker 2: Alabama. Speaker 1: In Alabama, okay, and Marthie Hendricks, you don't know much about her, you say? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't anything or what. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So now tell me about your dad. Speaker 2: My daddy were a farmer all, other than when they, with a sawmill where they make lumber and that was all that I know he have ever done. Speaker 1: So he was a farmer, okay. Well tell me about him. What type of father was he? Speaker 2: Well he was, he was one of the best, I thought, you know. He was very concerned about his family. He did what he could and the matter of being there for you. He was there for us in the best matter that he knew to do. So that's, that's what I think o- of him. Story_ID: 419299 Speaker 1: I wanted you to give me more information about your grandfather, Jim Hendricks, and your grandmother, Martha Hendricks, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, but they were, they, they--Martha, my daddy's [Louis Hendricks, Sr.] mother, were the person who told us about what happened to her parents. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And then she would explain it to us what happened to her and her parents. Speaker 1: Okay, well tell me about that. Speaker 2: And she said, when she were twenty- twelve, between, somewhere in the area of eight to seventeen or something like that, twelve, he didn't know how old he was, really, and I think she put it between ten and fifteen years old, they came and sold her parents and sent her daddy to Georgia and her mother to Virginia. So they separated her in this matter. Then, the slave seller kept the children and then when they sold the daddy of her, he went to Georgia. The slave buyer and he had to sign an agreement that he couldn't go to Virginia, even the State of Virginia, 'cause that's where his wife was and that's the way it, he explained it to us and she said to us that she wanted to talk to her grandchildren about what had happened to her life before she died and she felt that it wouldn't be long for this to happen. So she wanted to talk to us about it so these are the things that she talked about, about her parents. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, but Martha herself was a slave? Speaker 2: Yeah, for a short while, you know, not as long as daddy was but she was a slave. And then she, they made a slave of her and she said to us, "My job was milking the cow. Every morning I would go milk the cow and when I get to the point and sometime I would get to the point my hands would look like freezer burned me and if I could stop and stay too long, then he made me continue," and then he would work them all day and you'd have to be ready the next morning. But one thing she did make mention of, when it got cold, "It was very hard for me, and I still have problems with that, he didn't buy us shoes and I had to go to the pen and milk the cow without shoes and maintain to stay there until he said leave. So, I wanted to tell you all before I pass on." Story_ID: 419300 Speaker 1: All right. So now Jim Hendricks was also a slave? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, okay. Now tell me about him. You said that he, he drove the, the wagon for the, the overseer. Speaker 2: Well, they had him, a person, that would drive the, they called it chair-- Speaker 1: Oh, chair, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) wagon, whatever it was, and he would do the driving for them but he had a way of, he could keep beat with his horses' feet and as he drive them, he would sing along with the driving of the beat and they liked him for that reason. So that would, he end up with that job most of the time and so that taken some of the pressure off the work for him, he said (laughter). Speaker 1: Did, and so he can sing really well? Speaker 2: Yes, that's what he did, which he said. Speaker 1: So they used to like to hear him sing? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Did he sing outside of, you know, driving the wagon? Did he sing other times or was that the only time that he sang? Speaker 2: No, that's the only time he would do singing that I knew of but this was one of the thing that the slave master wanted. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So he kept doing that because of that. That was his job. Story_ID: 419301 Speaker 1: Now we're going to come down to, to your dad, Louis Hendricks [Louis Hendricks, Sr.], and you said that he was a farmer and we- we're still in Boligee [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, and what did they raise? Speaker 2: We raised peanuts, vegetable, corn, whatever, whatever we eat, they, it had to be, had to come from the ground, what we had to eat. And also we had to, they used cotton for, to pay the bills with when they sell that, for, to maintain the land, to have something to farm with, on. Speaker 1: So were your parents sharecroppers or did they own their land? Speaker 2: Sharecroppers. Speaker 1: Also, okay, all right. And how much education did your dad have? Speaker 2: Not too much. Speaker 1: Not too much, okay, all right. Speaker 2: That's all I know. I never did know exactly. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, okay. Story_ID: 419302 Speaker 1: Tell me about your brothers and sisters. How many did you have? Speaker 2: We was nine boys and four girls. When we went to table, he was fifteen people at table, at eating. So we had a long table (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) It was a lot of mouths to feed. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about your brothers and sisters. Tell me, tell me their names and then tell me where you fall in the progression. Speaker 2: Bro John [John Hendricks], was older brother, Millie [Millie Hendricks] was the next age sister, Mary [Mary Hendricks] was the next, was next to Millie and Louis [Louis Hendricks, Jr.] was next, he was one of my brothers, and Elias [Elias Hendricks]-- Speaker 1: What is the name? Speaker 2: Elias, E-L-I-A-S. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Elias. Speaker 1: What? He was next. Perry [Perry Hendricks] was next and then Joe [HistoryMaker Joe Hendricks], Lincoln [Lincoln Hendricks], Jim [Jim Hendricks], Pittero [Theodore Hendricks] and Mealings [Mealings Hendricks]. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, what's the last name? Speaker 1: Mealing, no, I've got that, yeah, wait-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Otelia [Otelia Hendricks]. Speaker 1: Otelia. Speaker 2: Otelia. Speaker 1: Was for Mea 'cause he the baby. Story_ID: 419303 Speaker 1: So tell me what days were like where you lived-- Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) with your family? Speaker 2: It was nice, I thought, you know, in the matter of this because that's all I knew where I was living and where I was younger 'cause I had no experience. You didn't have a wide spread at life. He was pretty well just whatever you do, you would stay with that because there wasn't any opportunity there to look at after, that reason. So we had to stick with whatever you could survive on. Speaker 1: Besides working, what did you and your brothers and sisters do for entertainment? How did you entertain yourselves? Speaker 2: Most time we would entertain ourselves with just whatever we'd done and we had, we never had much of entertaining where I lived (laughter) because my daddy [Louis Hendricks, Sr.] was the deacon of the church and he had kind of strict rules about anything when you go to, like going to parties and all that. We didn't, we didn't participate in that. I've never tried to dance because this was his rule and-- Speaker 1: Did you play games at home? Speaker 2: We played game, I played basketball and all this kind of stuff but, and all kinds of game like that. We played ball and that's about as far as we went but very little entertaining. Story_ID: 419304 Speaker 1: You were born in '27 [1927] and in 1929 began the Depression [Great Depression]. Was that something that concerned you at all? You hear people talk about the depressions but most of the people who were self-sufficient on farms really didn't understand that there were people who were starving. Was there a time that you thought during the, well thinking about the years of the Depression, was that something that concerned your family? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell me why? Speaker 2: Because of what you, your needs was limit, very little. Sometime you had the same thing. Now you see my mother [Bettie Perry Hendricks] come to the table on Sunday morning she could cook maybe biscuits or something and have a big breakfast and then she would be so proud sometime when she start cooking and waste her coffee on herself because she'd start thanking the Lord for what she had and she get overwhelmed into what she was doing. But it's a very, very nice going because they kept us in line with duty, a responsibility and we knew that outside of this room and not go there but we stayed with whatever was there and we worked it out because it was nothing but the farm to deal with. So we had to work it out with that. Speaker 1: Okay, was there ever a time during those years that you would say that you went without anything? Speaker 2: Very little, very little, sometimes it was just enough to keep you going. Story_ID: 419305 Speaker 1: Tell me about church. You say your, your, your mother [Bettie Perry Hendricks] and your father [Louis Hendricks, Sr.] went to church? Speaker 2: All of us, the whole house had to go to church. Speaker 1: Okay, you say your father was a deacon, is that right? Speaker 2: Was a deacon. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And all of us had to go to church and all of us had to participate after we got a certain age with the church, that was one of the demanding points of us and he didn't allow us to do a lot of things that they do now, for us partying and drinking and, I've never had a drink, a strong drink. I drank milk, water, orange juice and that's about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I've had, I used to do sodas but I put a stop to that now. Speaker 1: Okay, so you all participated in church. How did you participate besides just going to church? Speaker 2: Well I've always sang in the choir after I got large enough and still, we still, I still sing with the group. Speaker 1: Oh do you? Speaker 2: Um-hm, we still have the original, the group that did for the mass meeting every Monday night. We sang with that, for the mass meeting for Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and (unclear) when we was going every Monday night that we, and we still have the group going. Now, we name it after the guy who played after he passed. Now it's M- Carlton Reese Memorial Choir. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And we raised money for children's scholarship. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: All the money is to go for scholarship for children. Speaker 1: All right. We're going to talk about that a little later. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay, so we're still talking about you as a young boy-- Story_ID: 419306 Speaker 1: What's your earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, to be fair about it, it's--my earliest childhood memory was when my [maternal] grandmother [Julia Perry] said to me that it's, you are six and a half year old now and it's almost time for you to go to school, go give yourself a name. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's what you remember, that's your first memory, okay, great. Story_ID: 419307 Speaker 1: Now you go to school at six and a half, where's your school? Speaker 2: It's Jane Wood [sic. Jones Wood School, Tishabee, Alabama]-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: The school was named Jane Wood. Speaker 1: Jane Wood? Speaker 2: Elementary. Speaker 1: And tell me about the school. Speaker 2: I've--it didn't go any farther than eighth grade. Speaker 1: How many, do you remember how many rooms it had? Speaker 2: I think it had about six rooms, something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: A cut off like and what they call them, and that's, that about all, you know. Story_ID: 419308 Speaker 1: We're talking about school and you were telling me about your school, Jane Wood School [sic. Jones Wood School, Tishabee, Alabama] and it went to, from the first to the eighth grade. Tell me about school. How did you enjoy going to school? Speaker 2: Well I enjoyed it because that was all, you know. Everything was limit. The only way that a kid could go to school, at that time, in the neighborhood where I was, they would have to raise money on Sunday and pick five or six children, five boys, maybe five girls, and then they would make--raise money on Sunday to send these people, these five to school. Education wasn't really a thing that you could get a lot out of then because of this. If you didn't have enough teachers, sometime an eighth grade student would be the teacher because there were nothing else to deal with. And sometime I have, I have experience, spell the word, (unclear) word, skip it and go on, nobody can pronounce it and you didn't get the books that you really needed to, stood out anyway too much. They would limit and give 'em to us as black people a different book and you just get what you could and these are the really ways that a lot of time we didn't get what we should have gotten in school-- Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: --because of that, the limitation of whatever we had to go through but that was all there. So you had to deal with what was there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And very few people then could go to college. Parents weren't able to send people to college. It's like they tell me about hospital, when it was no such thing. That's why my name was not turned in because of the midwife and no one has a record of you. I've got a birth certificate after I retired which most people get it when they start but these are the conditions of what was there and that, and when there was all you could get and you just have to take that and make the best of it (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Story_ID: 419309 Speaker 1: Besides going to school, tell me about your chores on the farm, what you had to do on the farm [in Greene County, Alabama]. Speaker 2: We made syrup. Speaker 1: You made what? Speaker 2: Syrup. Speaker 1: Syrup. Speaker 2: What you eat, syrup, what you eat. We did a lot of that in most years and we raised everything we eat. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And whatever was, was raised, you eat and if you didn't raise it, you have nothing to eat. So that was the point. Now, while we was, how we lived. Speaker 1: Did you play athletics? Were you athletic? Speaker 2: I did basketball when I, in school. Speaker 1: What about running? Speaker 2: Well I couldn't, I couldn't, I can really do that basically. My teacher would tell me let a person get two, get a block ahead and then go to catch him and I'd go catch him, this person. Story_ID: 419310 Speaker 1: So did you go to the eighth grade [at Jones Wood School, Tishabee, Alabama]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and what happened after the eighth grade? Speaker 2: Nothing. Speaker 1: Did you go to work or did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, went to work. Speaker 1: --continue to stay on the farm (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nothing as far as school is concerned. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, what happened in your life after that? Speaker 2: After that, I came to Birmingham [Alabama] and went to this Jim Dandy [Western Grain Company; Jim Dandy Company] and started work with grits, meal and those kind of thing. They were making that. So I went to work there. Speaker 1: Okay, and you moved to Birmingham? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, who did you live with in Birmingham? Speaker 2: I first lived with my aunt, which was my daddy's [Louis Hendricks, Sr.] sister. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Otelia [Telia Hendricks]. Speaker 1: Okay, and you went to work at Jim Dandy? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What, what type of work did you do? Speaker 2: They had, we had to put it into the bag that they ship it out in and then we would have to go to a stack toward this house and pull the feed out of the stack and bring it to the machine to put in for to make the product. And then when that is done, then they had a machine that it would dump a certain amount and then you had to operate that to get, you know, this meal out to the public. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that's what we done, you know. We would lift in hundreds and there was no tow mode or these thing that they have now. You had to do it by hand, everything, lift all your harness, carry 'em where they need to be going, need to go, by the end and you had a little thing you put 'em on sometime, we'd finally got that in check, bring it back jack- get, pull it down and carry it to where it need to go. Speaker 1: Okay, so they made grits and meal. Speaker 2: Dog food-- Speaker 1: Dog food. Speaker 2: --grits, meal, all, everything that eats pretty well like cow, hogs and all them people had food for all of that, just pretty well. Speaker 1: Okay, and how long did you work at Jim Dandy? Speaker 2: Thirty-eight years. Speaker 1: Okay, now you changed positions, did you not? Speaker 2: Yeah, I moved up to the pack operator for, you know, bagging. You had a table like that you would bag and I'd put in the sack and they sell and then you had a machine that dumps it into the bag. Story_ID: 419311 Speaker 1: Now, let's see, what year are we in when you finished the eighth grade, let me see, when you started school [Jones Wood School, Tishabee, Alabama], it would have been 1933 and then you went, so we're looking at 1941 after the eighth grade is when you come to Birmingham [Alabama], is that right? Okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now, during your years at Jim Dandy [Western Grain Company; Jim Dandy Company], you changed positions and the union comes in, is that right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about your involvement in that? Speaker 2: In the union? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Well, I started off in, with the committee which you represent whatever happens in the plant if the foreman, and they, individual has a problem. Then the committee comes in and helps solve the problem, try to find the location of what had really happened. So that's was our, my job. Then I moved from that to chairman or trustee which you have to be responsible for what goes out the union and you have to check to see what's rightly done. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hand down, hand down. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, so what else, what else did you do? Speaker 1: Fortunately, I got ahead, made, that position and then I got into a problem with the company when I started with the Civil Rights Movement and this kind of stuff. So I ended up with a problem. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell them all about what you did with the union. You traveled, your problems. Speaker 1: And the union will let you travel to different meetings, what was set up by the head people of the union and hard, and the hard part of it was in Washington [D.C.], you know the head people. Then we would go to the meeting after I got into this part of being a committee, a head committee, and those kind of thing. Story_ID: 419312 Speaker 1: So, I'm having a little problem and then some man out of, a white guy, came to me, he said to me, "I watched you having problem on your job and he say, I watched you work and I watched you, I heard you talk," he said, "Now, when you have another problem, call me." So I did. When he called, I called him and he sent me an arbitrator. The company [Western Grain Company; Jim Dandy Company] had set me up for, to fire me. Then he got the guy who worked on the line with me, we would, he, we would get an S&H Green Stamp [Sperry and Hutchinson Company]. You remember that? Speaker 2: Um. Speaker 1: Okay. Every quarter, they would give us some, S&H Green Stamps. So this guy came to me one day, knowing me, he said, "I'm hungry, will you give me three or four dollars for these stamps? I need something to eat." I said, "Okay. Here it is." He said, "Put 'em over there, I'll get 'em when I get off." The company had given him those stamps to bring to me and they had marked 'em and when I cashed them, they called me to the office. We've been looking for these stamps and you are the one that stole them. So they put me in the street for ten months. I couldn't get a job, couldn't ask for 'em everywhere I go, you left your job for stealing, I can't hire you. And this man out of Washington [D.C.], this white guy, I thought about him, I called. He said, "I'll have your arbitrator there, to handle your case." He said, "First thing I'm going to have him to call you when he get there." So he did. He called me when I got, when he got here. He said, "Well, I want you in my office, no one else but you." So he did. And when I got there, I told him I said--told him what happened. I said, "This guy is working with the company and he had me set up to the point that he was hungry and I did respond to what he had, what he asked me to do. So that's what happened." And he, this arbitrator came in, I said, "Arbitrator, can I sit with you first (unclear)," and he said, "Yes, you can." He said, "You know more about it than me anyway." So this guy told me he said, "Now I got, I have some stamps, I don't know how many, my wife counted them, but you don't know and I don't know," he said, "but take all of them." So I did and when I cashed 'em, in two weeks' time, I was in the office, fired. I think I was off ten months and then after the ten months it was proven that it was set up with the company. So, what he ruled on the case, he put me back to work and they was really giving me a problem on the job because I was working with the civil right thing and all this stuff and-- Speaker 2: Is that the reason why they set you up? Speaker 1: That's some of the reason. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the other part of the reason was I was the person that if you was wrong, if you were the company wrong, man wrong, I would stay with it and try to prove what's wrong, regardless of who it was and they knew me from that. I had gotten to the plant where I could walk in that door and do this and lock the plant because of what I had been doing, and-- Speaker 2: Did you, were all the people that you worked with black? Speaker 1: All of the people-- Speaker 2: All of the workers (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that were, that was workers, was black. The white people was foremens. Speaker 2: So this is actually a black guy that set you up? Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: But I guess about time of the, of the thing that some people goes with whatever they're ask to do regardless of how wrong it is. I think this was the case. Story_ID: 419313 Speaker 1: You're still working there [Western Grain Company; Jim Dandy Company] during the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Tell me about what's going on in Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 2: During the Civil Rights Movement, I was fired for that once and me and the president was into it about that. Speaker 1: The president of-- Speaker 2: Of the plant. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, he fired me and we, and I was trying to explain to him what had happened. I didn't know anything about it but we got into a debate on it. So I said to him, I said, "Now, you are worried about this one thing," I said, "but your foreman killed his wife and have you had him in the office?" He said, "Yes." I said, "But he's still working." I said, "Mr. McCall [ph.], do you think killing a person is less crime than riding a bus?" Well he haven't answered me yet. So, I got out of it from that, he didn't give me an answer and so he finally said, "Go on back there and go on back to work," but I didn't get no answer to my question so he put me back to work instead, so-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --I went on back to work because of that, I guess. Story_ID: 419314 Speaker 1: When did you begin to work with the Civil Rights Movement? What year was it? Do you remember? Speaker 2: Well, I was pretty well with it as soon as it started but I don't know exactly what year. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I haven't looked that up but I worked with it the whole time. I was a guard for Reverend Shuttlesworth's [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] house. I was part of the guard when they bombed his house and we, I used to go out on the weekend, that was my shift, Saturday night, Sunday night and be on guard. Sometime those people would come out there with their sort of Amish coat throwed over and they say a thing like, "I want him to pray for us, can we go in the building." No. And all those kind of things. Speaker 1: Well tell me about some of the other things. You said, all those kind of things. Yeah, I don't know what they all are, so, would you please give me some more examples? Speaker 2: Some of the things was that they would stop you going to guard duty after they find out what you was and get your tag number then they would stop you sometime going to guard duty. They stopped me one night, eight policemen on a dark railroad track and said to me, "Pull over" and guard, pulled the car in front of me and sat there. And they finally said, "If we get rid of them--if them movement folk get in and they come back and we the police--what we gonna look like. Let's take a vote on it." So they did. So they came back and say, "Well you can go but you better not be caught in the street no more tonight." I went about eight blocks, out of the way, turned and went back across, five or six blocks and come in the back to duty but these are the thing that was there and if you gonna work with it, you've got to work with what's there (laughter). It wasn't no good feeling but, you know, that's the way it was. Speaker 1: Were you on duty when Fred Shuttlesworth's house was bombed? Speaker 2: I wasn't there that night but I was on duty. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact I stayed on duty the whole time and some weekends I had two old ladies, I did, just me and them, 'cause a lot of people like to go downtown and do a little, get with the party stuff and go where they are going, you know, but I could always depend on them and we'd go to guard duty. We had a, those push wheel, like that one out there next door to his house what we could see everything and it's what we would be in that little place to guard so we could see the outside of the house but that's the way it was, so-- Speaker 1: So did you have any other confrontations? Did anybody ever come to the house while you were on duty? Speaker 2: To the house? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Um-hm. I was--yeah, I had that kind of stuff, you know. I've had people, I've had policemen pull up down there two or three cars and watch me cutting my grass and I've had people who called me at night, "What you all want?" "I want the same thing other people want, that's all, nothing, I'm not looking for anything extra. What, what, why you calling?" "Well, we tired of you all's mess," and we'd get into that conversation, now move on from that stuff and I went through all this good stuff. Speaker 1: But I was asking you, while you were guarding the Shuttlesworth home, did anybody ever come there to do something wrong while you were there or ask questions or-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, tell me about some of them. Speaker 2: They, they come some nights pretending you want him to pray for 'em, anything that can give them an excuse for. Speaker 1: Oh, at his house? Speaker 2: At his house. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, and they, we would really humbly appreciate you leaving now, and leave now. We don't have no one visiting at night. Story_ID: 419315 Speaker 1: Anything else happen? Speaker 2: They--another thing happened to us what was difficult and I found out that a guy name Guy Carawan which was a white guy, about his size, I thought about it when he walked in, he came to our church and to service 'cause he would sing with us on Monday night. So this day, the police would find out he was there, they came in and didn't say, "I beg your pardon." "I don't have--." They just came in and grabbed him and caught him and just caught onto the man and just pushed him down on the seat and took him to jail. Speaker 1: So they came into the church? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The police did? Speaker 2: Um. Speaker 1: And they just grabbed this man-- Speaker 2: And took him to jail. Speaker 1: And took him to jail. Tell me why. Speaker 2: It happened to be the wrong preacher that day so when we got ready to leave, he said, what we gonna do? So this Billups [Charles Billups] say, you know, Billups, he know what we gonna do. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Charles Billups. Speaker 2: He said, we're going to the jail where they carried him. So we did. Speaker 1: Why did they arrest him? Speaker 2: 'Cause he's in black con- at a black church. See the, the law of Alabama read 'cause I one with--carried to court. I wasn't supposed to (unclear) people who take me to court. I would have spoke for the group who take me to court. It read that no black and white can be seated or congregated in no public building in the State of Alabama. That was the law. So he was congregating with a black congregation. So this was the law, so he took him to jail. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So when we got in church, all of us went to, all of us took off to the jailhouse. Everybody saw us, turn around and follow us to the jail. Mr. Connor [Bull Connor] was there on his horse but we had to go into the jail. He blocked the street with his water hose. Speaker 1: You said, he, who's he? Speaker 2: Mr. Bull Connor, who was a big mayor [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Authority (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: He blocked the street and set water hoses. Every person there fell on their knees and started praying and I found out what speaking in tongue was that day (laughter). That's the only time I ever found about speaking in tongue. When one man said, "Lord have mercy," and they say, "Come on Jesus," and everybody was saying something different at one time. And I've never seen nothing like that. That water, Mr. Connor said, "Put the water on them." They caught the water hose, honestly, in both hands and shook it out there and they dropped it. The third man did that and he dropped on the ground. He pulled his horse rein and went on back downtown and we went on to the jail but it's some good experience out there but it come rough sometime (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, I want to put on the rec- for the record that your daughter, Jan [Jan Hendricks Fuller]-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Fuller. Speaker 1: --Fuller, is observing the interview-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what happened when you get down to the jail? Speaker 2: When they couldn't turn the water hose on, he left, then we continued going where we was going. So, something happened, I don't know exactly what it was but they couldn't handle what they been doing. Speaker 1: I think it was a divine intervention? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay. So, do you get him out of jail? Do you bail him out? What happens to the man who-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we got him out. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was a really nice man to- too and he would get up there with us on Monday night and sang right along with us. Speaker 1: So, needless to say, did he come back again? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Did he continue to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --fight the cause? Speaker 2: Yeah, well every time he come to town, he's going to be out there with us, that's the way he was, operating (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so he didn't live in Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Not all the time. Speaker 1: --time. Speaker 2: Sometime he, he finally came here to live-- Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: --afterwards. Story_ID: 419316 Speaker 1: Okay, well, now tell me about Monday nights. Speaker 2: Monday nights. Speaker 1: Um-hm, about the meetings you had every Monday night. Where were they held? Speaker 2: At different churches. We had several churches we would use, not the same church and where we would allow this to happen, we had certain churches that would allow us to have a meeting and we, they shifted from one church to another. Speaker 1: Tell me who was at the meetings and what you talked about? Speaker 2: They talked about plans for the next week, what we going to do next week, where we going to go sit in the stores who have, who don't allow us, the same opportunity and those kind of things, different things and riding the bus and I went to catch the bus, my sister lived in Bessemer [Alabama], which was the longest bus ride, route it is. So I got, I came to get on the bus and he said, there was white people there, "You go in the side door but drop your money in the thing." So I put my money in there but by the time I got to the side door, he pulled off and went to Bessemer and I never did get my money. I had to wait 'til the next bus came and catch me a bus, that somebody would allow me to ride so all these old crazy things happened. Speaker 1: So did you have to pay again? Speaker 2: Yeah. He knows nothing about what the other guy did so if I was going to Bessemer, I got to pay again. So all those kind of things happened. Speaker 1: Were you involved in, in any of the sit-ins? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the first person who went to jail. Speaker 1: Okay, well (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And was fired when I got back to work [at Western Grain Company; Jim Dandy Company]. That's what I was talking about (laughter). Story_ID: 419317 Speaker 1: You were going to tell me about you being the first person to go to jail for a sit-in. Tell me what happened. You said you were the first person that went to jail, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the first crowd that went. What we planned and what had been planned by Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] and them, that this was D-Day, that's what we named it. Speaker 1: D-Day. Speaker 2: D-Day that we going to go get on the bus and ride while we going to ride. So, we got on the bus and went on up front, the other side of the board. It had black this way on the board and white this way on the board and they stick it on the seat so you couldn't pass the board. And we went past the board so they took us to jail. And when they took us to jail, that's when I, that's when I got fired and several other people got fired for riding plus what they, plus going to jail. And when they got, when they had this thing, we protested and everybody that protested went to jail, even some of their children, and they had some of those children out there in the Fair Park [Birmingham, Alabama] washing them down with their hose like they were cattle and we went to town, they had dogs on us, turned the dogs loose on us and all this kind of stuff but when we got out of that, nobody didn't get hung too bad. One, one kid got bit pretty bad by the dog but those kind of thing where they take an action to do and if you got, when I got back to work, I didn't have no job, they say. Speaker 1: Okay, the union couldn't help you with your job? Speaker 2: Who? Speaker 1: The union. Speaker 2: Yes, that's why I was talking to this president and that's why I was talking to this president about, we got in a debate after I got back and the debate was you riding the bus and what is your reason for going out there riding the bus and what you think you is. I said, "I was riding the bus and I paid what it cost to ride it and I felt that I should choose some of the thing that I wanted if I was going to be the person who paid." So that was the reason. I said, "I didn't have anything against no one but I just picked me a seat." "Well, you're fired." And so, I had to deal with that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did you- So did you, did you lose your job [at Western Grain Company; Jim Dandy Company]? Speaker 2: For a while. Speaker 1: For a while. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, and then you were able to get it back? Speaker 2: I was able to get it back. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, we got on a debate and his question was, what I was supposed to do and what I wasn't supposed to do and every time he come out with something, I said, "Mr. President I'm confused. So we commented on, I rode a bus, I know that but everybody was on the bus was people and we just riding the bus and I paid for riding," I said, "what was the problem? And they charged me the same thing they did to other people," you know, we talked on that term and he's talking over here and I'm talking over here. So I finally asked him, I said, "Mr. President, I'm confused and every time you say something, I get deeply confused." He said, "What you so confused about?" I said, "What I'm really confused about is my foreman killed his wife and was, and was arrested for murder. Do you think that riding a bus is less crime than killing someone? Could you answer that?" Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell that story. Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: It's okay (laughter). Speaker 2: (Laughter) So we dealt with that for a while and then he released me on that, at that point 'cause he said--he never did answer. Story_ID: 419318 Speaker 1: Tell me about Anniston [Alabama]. Speaker 2: Anniston. Speaker 1: Um-hm, there was an incident there. Speaker 2: I went to Reverend Shuttlesworth's [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] house 'cause I was on what they call carpool, like Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and them come to town, we would pick them up and whoever was brought into town and we had a what we would call and all of us get our cars, sometime as high as ten, twelve cars, if it was a busload and house these people 'cause we felt that they couldn't be running around in the street with them knowing what they're here for. We could take them direct to where they want to go and then we knew why they, about their addresses so we had this carpool for that person. So I went to Reverend Shuttlesworth's house, I said, "Reverend, we know in Anniston--," and I said, "I'm in and out of Anniston, they pretty regular." I said, "They kind of rough on people about this kind of stuff and I'm, I would bet ratting on, those people are held hostage there or something, I can't get out of there." "Why don't you get some car and go over and see?" So we did. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: When I got, when we got there, about twenty car with the KKK [Ku Klux Klan] on 'em pulled up, I had a flat and they ran me out of the service station when I went in to have my flat fixed. So I went up the street and stopped, put my spare on. They came and stood there while I put my spare on so I called the people to me and said, "Since you all select me for spokesman, let me say something to you all. Why don't you all take this instruction," I said, "I've been on carpool longer than you all and you all select me for spoke. I think it's time for me to say something here." So I set up a condition, "All you go to the bus station and this will pull these KKK cars behind 'em and charge to the car, then I'll take my car and go where the people is and see can I get 'em and the reason I'm telling you this, bus station is a familiar place, I don't know exactly where it is but you can ask most anyone where is the bus station. So I can join you all at the bus station, if necessary." So that's what we done. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Continue? You don't think I'm saying anything too much now. Speaker 1: No, you're not. Speaker 2: Okay. So this is what happened. When I got ready to go, they said, they said to me, oh, they said to me, "Where are you going?" I said, "I'm going to see can I get the people released." "If you go up there, and don't make it back, what we gonna say when we get back to Birmingham [Alabama]?" "I don't know." "But if you go there and, and don't get 'em and they take you in also, and we never see you again, what, what," I said, "I'm not going up there for that purpose. I understand what you all saying, I understand what these people are like," I said, "but you all selected me for the spokesman, let me do it." I said "I'm not going to send you all, I'm going myself," so I did. Story_ID: 419319 Speaker 1: So we got there and the sheriff and the police stopped me outside of the building. "Where you going?" I said, "I'm here, I, because I'm interested in trying to get these people to Birmingham [Alabama] and I'd like to talk to someone." "I ain't got nothing to talk about." I said, "Well, all's I know I didn't make an appointment with you but I'm here for that purpose and I'd like to talk to someone." I said, "Normally because I have a chance to talk to no one but you because you did, you are the officer that have the law under control that you are the person that I have to respect because you're the law." I said, "But I'm asking you if I could go in and talk to 'em or would you, could I talk to you and you, me and you could work out something?" So he, we, we did. So he finally said, "Somebody ought to do something." I said, "Officer, you're right, somebody should do something." I said, "But, ain't no one can do nothing about this but you." I said, "You stopped me before I could get inside to talk to the people in there and when you said, stop, you're the law and I stopped." I said, "The only somebody that can do something about this is you. You are the person that's in charge." Speaker 2: So did he let you in to talk to any of the people? Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Okay. Were you able to get them out to take them to Birmingham? Speaker 1: Well we got 'em out finally. So he said to me, finally. I said, "Officer, don't you answer me now." I said, "Think about it and then give me an answer." So he did. When he came back, he said, "I'll tell you what, I'm going to go over here and I'm going to get with the other policemen and we're going to take a vote." I said, "I appreciate that." So he did. Speaker 2: Who are they voting on? Speaker 1: Whether they're going to let me get 'em out of there or not. Speaker 2: Oh, I see, okay. Speaker 1: So, he finally came back. He said, "Well they said you can get 'em under one circumstance." I said, "What's that?" "If you take 'em, you take 'em on your own and don't call us and don't expect us to do nothing but we'll let you have 'em but don't expect us to have anything to do with whatever happens to you." Story_ID: 419320 Speaker 1: I'm not sure I'm real clear why they were, why were they arrested? Speaker 2: They weren't really arrested. They burnt the bus, they bombed the bus and the people what was left was out there with nowhere, no way to get, finish where they were going. Speaker 1: Okay, see I didn't understand that part. Speaker 2: They come, they was coming to Birmingham [Alabama]. Speaker 1: Okay, they were on their way to Birmingham and the bus was bombed? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now whatever happened, they burned a bomb, I know it was burned up 'cause it was down in a museum for a while. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, but there were white people on that bus also, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And that was the big, was the big problem. So, see, if you had been there you'd have been in trouble with me. My friend, Farr [ph.], you know him, they can't get in my car. The tension over there, a lot of tension was over there. If you look at four--a lot of cars. When you look at those car like they were, as many as it was, it was a lot of tension. So then when I got into that, the white ladies had no other ride. So my best friend, whose car was there, I said, "Get in that car and get in my car." Speaker 1: The white women? You told them to get in your car? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they got in my car and the other two guys, I said, "Hurry, we've got to take, you can't leave them and take the others." So we did. We got everybody away from there and got to Birmingham. Speaker 1: Okay, so the, the women were actually a part of the movement? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They were, okay, all right. Speaker 2: That's why they came here for (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For-- Speaker 2: --to be a part. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But when we got 'em back, when we got alone with them then, he made his little speech. "If you take 'em, you take 'em on your own. Don't expect us to help you at all." Speaker 1: Because you knew you were going to take the white people also? Speaker 2: Everybody. Speaker 1: Everybody. Speaker 2: Everyone. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Everyone was there for the same purpose. Speaker 1: So tell me, the police knew that you were going to take everybody, including the white women, why were you, you know, why was there some hesitation about taking the white women? Speaker 2: Tension. Speaker 1: The tension? Speaker 2: Um. See, these things are different. All, the whole thing is tension over there. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You have white women riding in the black cars. Tell her about that, about the white women riding with the black man. Explain that. Speaker 2: Yeah. See, white ladies, it, if they respect that they look at. You don't have a business in the car probably going down, wherever he want to take you, that's the first thing. And this is the way they felt because they weren't looking after what is best to do. They looking at what wish to do, that's the reason. And we have to deal with whatever is out there to be dealt with. Somebody got to have to do what should be done in order to get it done. Speaker 1: Okay, so what happened when you get back to Birmingham? Speaker 2: When I got back to Birmingham I had another problem. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What is--they going to stay. Who going to house these people? That was the problem. Everybody can't face them. Speaker 1: So what did you wind up doing? Speaker 2: Get back in the car you in, the two cars you in, get back in 'em. The Farrs know where I live, as well as I do. Tell 'em take you to my house. All four women came to my house. Speaker 1: Were you afraid that-- Speaker 2: And I told my wife [Lola Haynes Hendricks] to go fix them something to eat and get some clothes for 'em. She did. She took 'em whatever they needed, they got the clothes and mailed 'em back to Birmingham. Story_ID: 419321 Speaker 1: You're talking about your wife now. Tell me your wife's name? Speaker 2: Lola [Lola Haynes Hendricks]. Speaker 1: Lola, and tell me about her involvement in the movement. Speaker 2: Lola was very much up, and she did, she did all the preparation that I would expect anybody to do. She worked, she did, she's the first--she integrated the office white people worked. She's the first black lady ever went into an office while it was white when they, she had read that no black and white can be seated or congregated in no public building in the State of Alabama, that's what they, that's what it read, that was the law. So, this was where white sat in, where white people worked. Speaker 1: Well, what building, what, were did she work? Speaker 2: Social Security building [Social Security Administration, Southeastern Program Service Center, Birmingham, Alabama] on 3rd, on 3rd Avenue [sic.]. Speaker 1: Okay, so she was the first black to work in the Social, Social Security-- Speaker 2: First black ever went into-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she could handle it. And it was so devastating that when they opened the EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission], they moved her from the Social Security building to head EEOC. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She could handle (laughter) it but when you go looking at what is and what isn't, what I, and this, and really we got a problem still with that. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: With, in a lot of ways now, what I want to do-- Speaker 1: But-- Speaker 2: And what I should do. Speaker 1: Sure. Speaker 2: So these are, these are the lead ways to destruction of success. What I want to do? That builds me to give me a lead way to selfishness, what I want to do but what I should do has meaning of success. Speaker 1: Tell me more about, about Lola's involvement in the movement, in the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: She was secretary. Speaker 1: Secretary to-- Speaker 2: For the movement, whatever, bookkeeping was there, she handled it and whatever was done that needed, free of charge. Story_ID: 419322 Speaker 1: What was the organization name here in Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights. Speaker 1: Okay, and did you, your wife [Lola Haynes Hendricks] ever have any, I know you have had some confrontation with Bull Connor, did your wife ever have any confrontation with him? Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. I don't know if she did. I really don't know. Speaker 1: Do you have, did you have any personal encounter with him? Speaker 2: Yeah he was over there, he was over there that day when we went to jail and told you about we were speaking in tongue (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, okay. Speaker 2: He pulled his horse rein and said, "Joe [HistoryMaker Joe Hendricks], you can't do that, you can't do it, I'm going back downtown." Speaker 1: So that was your only confrontation with him personally? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Well tell me about another time? Speaker 2: We had created one night down there, downtown and he came down there in a tank and leaped down there with, with whatever they did, we tried to do it that night and that night and everybody's acting crazy (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) What do you mean? Okay, you have, you have to explain to me what that means. I'm not, I don't know what that means. Speaker 2: Whatever they contact us with that night, we, we contact them with the same thing. Speaker 1: Such as? Speaker 2: Yeah. Whatever they done, if it's crazy, we did some crazy things too (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell 'em what it is. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Tell them what it is that they did. Speaker 2: What did they do? Speaker 1: They came out there with and started with sticks and bricks and all of these different things. So some of those guys got them some sticks and some bricks and started with, started with whatever they had done, everybody was acting crazy. So. Speaker 2: And so what happened? What was the result of-- Speaker 1: So the next time he brought a crowd of dogs and put the dogs on us. Story_ID: 419323 Speaker 1: Now tell me about your first encounter with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Speaker 2: Well, my first encounter was, after he come, he seed we was in trouble, so he came here. Speaker 1: You were in trouble how? What was going on? Speaker 2: Well we was here trying to get the, move these barriers out of the way 'cause Birmingham [Alabama] really was, is the place that really, the laws was changed. All of the laws that was moved off the books, more or less, other than Rosa Parks, was in Birmingham. And like I said, it read that no black and white can be seated, we seated now, and when we stand, they say that's congregating. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: So you can't be in no public building where there's a white operator, a white sit in is there in this building working. If you go into that building and ask for a job or go in there and do what they have done, you're in violation of the whole state law. Speaker 1: I see. So that's why blacks could not work with whites-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --in, in the government building? Speaker 2: We, we could go in, we could go into the city hall and clean the bathroom at night but the only thing you could do in the daytime in the city hall was pay your bill. Speaker 1: But this basically was for government jobs, right? Speaker 2: No, city. Speaker 1: Well, that's what I mean, city or government. Speaker 2: But all of this was based, was Alabama's law that you couldn't, you was in violation for even just going in the building to stand or be seated. So, you had no way out of not being violating if you got to, you've got to do either one. Speaker 1: Do you remember your first sit-in, where you first went to sit-in? Speaker 2: Well, they named it D-Day. Speaker 1: Okay, so D-Day was the first time? Speaker 2: D-Day. Speaker 1: What--anything, any other time that you went to sit-in? Speaker 2: Well I went two times and I've always, I've gotten in contact with problems. Like I said, put your money in here, then you get off the bus, then they pull off and leave you standing in the street. Speaker 1: Well did you sit-in, did you all protest that type of action at the bus station? Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, that's what we done. Speaker 1: Okay, so that was a problem, something that happened all the time? Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't allowed, it wasn't allowed other side of that board, and then what got me about the whole thing, here's a lady with a baby and this bus moving all this mess, then he come and take a white man, get up and go to the back and here she is there standing with her baby and almost fall on him sometime but I always get up and give 'em my seat if it was possible but I didn't see any reason to, that you should make a special effort to com- accommodate some people and everybody had paid the same thing. Story_ID: 419324 Speaker 1: Do you remember when the 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] was bombed? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Can you tell me about, your thoughts about that? Speaker 2: Well my thoughts about that were, this special man, what did that were not just him, this was pre-planned by the organization who was representing to destroy and then he was the guy who was the expert, so he did it and I stayed upset for three months for one reason. This girl, a rock, cut through her head all the way to her brain, in this part of her head, one of the rocks that came out the building and it was just really no reason I didn't feel. You had church, having service, trying to do what you supposed to do and here's a person out there. You see he set the bomb that night but he was expert. He could set it and it'd go off when he say go off. He know that much about what he was doing. Story_ID: 419325 Speaker 1: Talk to me about--well I- I'm still sticking with 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] but the meetings were held--or the organizing church was Fred, Reverend Shuttlesworth's [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] church. Is that right? And they moved it to the 16th Street Baptist Church after-- Speaker 2: Well, no. Speaker 1: Okay, well you tell me the correct things then. Speaker 2: 16th Street was the headquarter. Speaker 1: But it wasn't always the headquarters, was it? Speaker 2: No, it wasn't always the headquarter but convenience made it be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because it sits right in town. We could go to 16th Street Church and leave with the marchers to go downtown 'cause it's downtown. Fred's was too far and not being able to accommodate you for that. So that was the reason it was done, this was the headquarter I would say because all our marching both was, every, started there, and downtown. So, for that reason, I would say that was the headquarters because that's what we used. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: That's my feeling. Speaker 1: But before it became the headquarters, Fred Shuttlesworth's church and home was bombed. Is that not right? Speaker 2: Yeah. We (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, tell me, tell me about the bombing at the church. Speaker 2: Well he was a target. They called that troublemaking, whatever you ask for, that's not in line with what I say. Authority sometime leaves the post of duty and become self-supporting. Story_ID: 419904 Speaker 1: We were talking off-camera about your wife [Lola Haynes Hendricks] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If--and let me tell you how it happened then since you want me to explain it. If we go in and ask for a permit, "Get out of here nigger, and if you don't get out of here, we'll use our (unclear) permit 'cause we're going to march you to jail." Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that's what they would say. Speaker 1: That's which, that's what Bull Connor told your wife when they went for a marching permit (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well, that's what they tell most of us if you're going to arrest us and we going, where we going he go where he go. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So that's the point. So those are the things that we had to come in contact with. Story_ID: 419905 Speaker 1: Now you were telling me about, about Armstrong [James Armstrong] and the barbershop, something that happened there. Speaker 2: Well he put one of his children into college--school. What it was, school, college, what was it? And then they-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): School. Speaker 2: --they, he had a real problem with that, yeah. Speaker 1: Who had a real problem with it? Speaker 2: Armstrong, about putting his children where the white folk go to school. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. He put his, his child in a school that white kids went to? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And they were having a problem? Speaker 2: A real problem. Speaker 1: And so what happened? Speaker 2: A, I know they wouldn't let her go and then they put, they went to, intimidating his house and we had to go up there and guard his house to try to keep him alive. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Who was they? Speaker 2: All of the people that would take some action in helping out with whatever the movement was 'cause the policeman wouldn't do it. We had to go help out with that and try to see to him, still being around here. Speaker 1: So you're saying that the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], or the white people, didn't want him to send his child to a white school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So they would, harassing him in other words-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or, and you all felt that it, you know, he might, his life might be in danger so you all started guarding his house? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, didn't you tell me something about some shooting or something that happened during-- Speaker 2: Yeah, some shooting was up there, that's when we got-- Speaker 1: How did, when did that happen (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) involved. When we got involved, that's when it, the shooting started and then that's when we got involved to go to his-- Speaker 1: Oh, okay, I see. So they would drive him, they would drive by and shoot his house-- Speaker 2: Yeah, shoot at-- Speaker 1: --up, shoot at his house? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And so you all got, so-- Speaker 2: So we start getting outside of the house to halfway protect his house. Speaker 1: So did you all have guns? Speaker 2: Some of 'em did. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: But we wouldn't openly have 'em out there, (laughter) aiming, you know, but-- Speaker 1: No, I understand. Speaker 2: --yeah, we went to be found by it 'cause we didn't know how far they were going. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what eventually happened? Did his daughter ever go to school? Speaker 2: Well, they, we were sort of, daughter, I think she got in school, got into school. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Speaker 2: Eventually. Story_ID: 419906 Speaker 1: I want to go back a little bit, talking about D-Day, okay? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Because I, I wasn't quite clear and I just wanted to get it on the record about going to, you know, about the children that were involved during this time, also, because there is a whole movement of children, and one of your daughters was involved, is that right? Speaker 2: Nephew and all that stuff. Speaker 1: And your nephews, okay. What is your daughter's name? Speaker 2: Audrey [Audrey Faye Hendricks]. Speaker 1: Audrey. Tell me, tell me again what happened during D-Day and how the kids was, and why the kids were separated from the adults? Speaker 2: Just children were, the jail was full of us. We, we filled the jails up. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So they had to place them some place and it kept the young, they made a decision to keep the young folks here and let us be over there in the jailhouse. Speaker 1: So where did they take the kids? Speaker 2: To the park, out there where, open fence. They was in the fence like cattle. Speaker 1: What was the name of the park? Speaker 2: At the fairground, wasn't it? Speaker 1: At the fairgrounds? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they was in a fence like cattle and what is so interesting to them was, they come out there and take the water hose and wet 'em down. Speaker 1: What was the purpose? Were the kids, they weren't acting up or anything? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: They just took 'em there and just hosed them down? Speaker 2: Yeah, he'll tell it, just being real mean, that's what he was. We never did, we was trained to not hit back. I've run many a day when they're striking at me. They had the dogs on us. Story_ID: 419907 Speaker 1: In preparation for these marches, and at these Monday night meetings, tell me more about the strategies that were used and you said you were trained not to hit back. What were some of the meetings and trainings like? Speaker 2: Well, the training was this. If you were out there with a .38 and these people out there with a machine gun, what you going to strike for? You know, you got to study the direction of where I'm going and what's there after I get there. You can't go in there knowing that you don't have the equipment to deal with the circumstance. We act up one night and I'd get in our work. We've taken care of the police department but when they called in the National Guards, see, those people can call the National Guards, part of the [U.S.] Army and all that junk, and those people don't understand what is, what hasn't experienced it. When they called the National Guards in here and they got off, that's like, have you ever see blackbirds fly? When a man say, hip hop, they hit the ground all at once. So when they hit the ground sound like wind (makes sound). When they hit the ground, there was some apartments there, didn't have no one in it. When they hit the ground when they, (makes sound), it dropped, toppled over those apartments. When they got off, they got off and they swung those guns and cut that top off of the side but when you go to looking at the facts, you got to deal, you've got to be prepared to deal with how far to go. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's what the training was about? Speaker 2: (Nods head) And then those dogs was pulling your clothes off you and cutting your clothes down your side, all this kind of stuff but you got to be able to deal with it. Speaker 1: Well what did they teach you about if something like that were to happen like if the hoses come or, was there any instruction if they were to hose you down of, or let loose the dogs, what were you supposed to do? Speaker 2: We, we overcome the hose. We made up, we made our, we made our condition to overcome the hose. Speaker 1: And how? Speaker 2: A man, a young, a young guy, one of their leaders out of town came here and they was washing us down the street with the hose. He said, "Come here, come here." He taken those children and us and made five people against this person and the other person against the other person. Say now, when they hit you with the hose, all you, you all lean the same way and go on downtown. He said, I don't want the girls on the outside, give me all boys over here, at least two boys on this side and the girls in the middle and when he hit you with the hose, all you, you all push in that direction. We went on downtown to sit in a neighbor store, we want to sit in, (laughter) but it-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): When you sat in the stores, what had you been trained to do? Speaker 2: Go sit in and they-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): And then do what? Speaker 2: And they, if they come out there saying something about you sitting down, you sit on the floor, (laughter) you know, make use of it, that's what they call the sit-in and then you deal with it, the problem 'cause you know what you expect that when you get there. So you have to prepare. That's what you do when you go face down, don't you? So, those were the thing that you, come with, you have to do. If you don't deal with it, you can't ignore the fact. Story_ID: 419908 Speaker 1: Tell me about your other involvements with the Civil--what else you did with the Civil Rights Movement? Speaker 2: Well, everything, I used to deal--we used to sing for the meeting Monday night. Every time the meeting with the group I sang with, we still sing like I said, and we did the music for them for the week. Speaker 1: Tell me what the program was like? What was the program like? It started with praise and worship or singing and then-- Speaker 2: Yeah, they'd sing, we'd do the same thing they do at church other than the plans, they are pulled to make the plans for the week. Speaker 1: Okay, and, and was that the strategy to make it appear that it was just a Monday night service? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It's what it was. We went through the same challenge that you go through Sunday. We had the choir, we had the speaker, we had this, all of this, every Monday night, and different churches would, that would accept, we'll, when put it on one church, we'd move from one to the other. So that was our goal. Speaker 1: All right, so, you and your group, did your group have a name at that time? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was it? Speaker 2: Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And choir. Speaker 1: And did you used to sing a solo? Speaker 2: Hm? Speaker 1: What did you used to sing? Speaker 2: Oh, oh (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Can't think of any of the songs? Speaker 2: There's so many of 'em I don't know what best to sing. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, she just said, what's your name of one, not to sing one. Speaker 2: Oh, you can sing one. Speaker 1: Oh, my song that the people make me sing, I put 'A Charge The Keeper Have,' [ph.] 'The Days are Past and Gone,' [sic. 'The Day is Past and Gone'] together, and made a solo out of it rather than a hymn. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. You want to give us a little rendition? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Sit up, you can do it. Speaker 2: Come on, you can do it. Speaker 1: (Singing) "A charge to keep, I have got to go, we found He gave, oh He gave his son a soul to save and fear, fear that's for, for the, for the sky." Speaker 2: Wonderful. I know why the people got stirred up (laughter). You have a wonderful voice (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So we did, I used to do that for, I did the words of charge here, words charge, and then I did 'The Days are Past and Gone' background to put it together and that respectable. That's the one I made. Speaker 2: That's the one (laughter)--okay. Now-- Speaker 1: But we did, we did mostly songs, like freedom songs. Story_ID: 419909 Speaker 1: In 1963, did you attend the march in Washington [March on Washington]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I couldn't hardly deal with that and work. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You see, my job wouldn't support me at all. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So, told you, I had to go to college (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) I understand, I understand. Speaker 2: But as long as it was here, you know, and I could reach it down, it wasn't to-- Speaker 1: What about the march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama]? Speaker 2: No, I couldn't, you know, those-- Speaker 1: Couldn't make it, I mean most people had to work, I understand. I'm just throwing out these different-- Speaker 2: I sure wanted to be there but I couldn't, you know, I just couldn't take off out of town too easy. But if it was anywhere where I could reach and wasn't too high on the shifts, I was there. Story_ID: 419910 Speaker 1: Well tell me what your thoughts were when Kennedy was assassinated? Speaker 2: Well, his thought, what my thoughts was on that, the same as Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. Speaker 1: And what was that? Speaker 2: Misdirecting and dealing with the people who is destruction to this whole world. That's what it was and I won't get into detail now. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Well, I don't want to get into detail. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That, if you all want a de- that don't need to be, I can talk about it but it's not, it no need to be list. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: You all got me on the air? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: Okay, well I can deal with, but I can't deal with the real cause. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'll talk with you about that later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We've got to deal with that later. Speaker 1: All right. Well then, tell me, can you tell me what your thoughts are when--what were you doing, actually, let me ask you that. What were you doing when King was assassinated? Do you remember what you were doing at that time? Speaker 2: I was at home and, before it even hit the news, my phone rang. When they shot him, my phone rang and I answered the phone and someone said on the other end, "Somebody shot Dr. King" and never talked about the news. The news had never showed up at all. Then my wife [Lola Haynes Hendricks] came and took the phone and said, "What?" She's come over and took the phone. I said, "Somebody shot Dr. King." She grabbed the phone and she started talking, long before it was on the news, I knew. Speaker 1: Do you-- Speaker 2: So I said, "Let me ask one question and then you can have it." I said, "Where did the bullet hit him at?" He said the bullet hit him in the head and it was so powerful that it lifted him off the floor and dropped him back. I said, "He's gone." And this, you know, these, this world has, and whatever is the meaning, I found something in that. What you do is you, ain't but one thing you are accountable for, is what you do your whole life. What I think if I don't do it, it's not on my record but when you do it, I changed its not. Speaker 1: After, after King's assassination, how did things change or did they change in Birmingham [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Well, yes, it was a different, but mostly what had been done that is done even now. It hasn't been the same as creating a condition against evil. He was that person and he could really respond to the needs of success and he was programmed to build, he was a builder. Speaker 1: So, how did your involvement in the Civil Rights Movement differ after King's assassination? Or did it? Speaker 2: Well, it changed some because wasn't nothing left to move it much then but Fred [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] and Fred wasn't as strong as Dr. King but he was a strong man. He had some real material to work with also. And when you go out there, you can't be guessing and you can't go out there looking back. I have a little direction I had and I made me a little prayer, I'd pray to myself but these are the relief to success and I found that it was a real meaning in that Jesus had said to us, "I am the way" and you'll find yourself there-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --drinking from the fountain, 'cause it ain't no other way there that you can make it but through Him, it is cut short and it's sometime it helps to be made up out of someone who is, have the authority to make it happen. Story_ID: 419911 Speaker 1: Let's talk about your, your, your family. You--we talked about your wife [Lola Haynes Hendricks]. What about your other children besides Audrey [Audrey Faye Hendricks] who was involved in, in the marches or sit-ins. Tell me about your other children. Speaker 2: Other children, like my, Jan [Jan Hendricks Fuller]? Jan, all of us, the whole house was set into moving the barrier to success. Speaker 1: Who, who were your other children? You have another, Jan, Audrey and who else? Speaker 2: That's all. Speaker 1: You had, did you, how many children do you have? Just two, okay, all right, all right. And what does Jan do? Speaker 2: Well Jan, the whole house is working some toward but she, Jan wasn't old enough to, to deal with-- Speaker 1: No, I'm talking about now. What does Jan do now (laughter)? Yeah, she was born in 1961, so we know she-- Speaker 2: You see where she is now, don't you? Whatever we do, she's there to back, to back us in what we do, the whole house has, has had to meet with the problem and they had to have some, the children had to have some courage to deal with, with dad and mom and with our fate, with the threats and all that kind of stuff. It wasn't, it wasn't an easy task to them. Speaker 1: Did you always live in this house? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Wh- where did you live during the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 2: In (unclear), down there by Elmwood Cemetery [Elmwood Cemetery and Mausoleum, Birmingham, Alabama]. You don't know about that but on the other side of town, Southside. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Birmingham [Alabama]. Story_ID: 419912 Speaker 1: What year did you retire from Jim Dandy [Western Grain Company; Jim Dandy Company]? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I forgot. I don't know exactly. But I worked there thirty-eight years and that was enough. I know how long I worked there. Speaker 1: You worked there thirty-eight years, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thirty-eight years. Speaker 1: --was laid off and harassed and everything during the Civil Rights Movement and still was able to stay there and retire after thirty-eight years. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And after your retirement, what have you been doing? What organizations you belong to? I know you do-- Speaker 2: Well, we, I just, we just do programs now for-- Speaker 1: Your group is still singing? Speaker 2: It's still singing and our proceeds go to scholarships. Speaker 1: Okay. And what church do you belong to? Speaker 2: New Pilgrim [New Pilgrim Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama]. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: New Pilgrim Baptist Church. Speaker 1: Okay, and what else fills your days? Speaker 2: Well, work and-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): What are you doing, what kind of work? Speaker 2: Well I do, I do yards for people. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Landscaping. Speaker 2: I will do yards and different things, sometime for a few people, mostly I'm doing now is if I'm working for you and your husband passed, I'll keep your yard. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So you do landscaping for widows? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm. Well I do it for other people but that's the one I, I, as long as she need me, I'll try to stay because she can't handle it and I, and she, and we'll go along together and she's helping me and I'm helping her so why drop her now, you know, when she needs you most. Speaker 1: Okay, and your wife [Lola Haynes Hendricks]? Speaker 2: Well she is working. The children [Audrey Faye Hendricks and Jan Hendricks Fuller] mostly deal with her, you know now-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): She's in a nursing home. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Is there anything that we have not spoken about that you would like to tell me about? Speaker 2: I guess, not. We didn't put it well, touched base with most things, I think. Most things have been touched base, I guess, I'll think of something when you leave (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Speaker 2: But we went through a process but I, if you come back, I'll put some things together with some people. I want a lady to explain with talking to you about the jury was sentencing them and fell off the side of the thing dead. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And those kind of thing. Story_ID: 419913 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, when you look over your life, is there anything that you would change or do you have any regrets about anything? Speaker 2: Not about what I was doing because my focus was on the change of every person lives in God's world and God didn't fix the world just for me. Story_ID: 419914 Speaker 1: Tell me how you would like to be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: Well I would look at the works if you, and regardless to what we say, I found that what I am is what I do and there's only one thing who's accountable for, and that's what you do and there's no way to change it after you do it. What did I spend today? And what did I do today? Speaker 1: So you want to be remembered as a man of action? Speaker 2: And what you do. Speaker 1: Of what you have done (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, you are, I am responsible for my record and what I do. Story_ID: 419915 Speaker 1: If you had a message to send to the future generations, what would it be? What do you want the future generations to know from you? Speaker 2: To love and respect as I would want it to be. If you want a condition that's rightly done, then I want to be of myself, I think it should be built that way with everyone 'cause I found it's not about me, it's all about Him and the direction it's already built and what we need to do is follow what He had, what He has said. What He has said has already been written and what He has said is already there to be done. And He didn't say that we are the way. That's why I say it's already fixed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I'm trying to, I think we should follow what is and respect what, and think about what we should do before we do it because after you do it, you can't change it. So, that's what I try to look in the direction of. What is there that I've done to make it be what it should be. Speaker 1: All right. Well I want to thank you for taking your time to give us this interview. We really appreciate your story about your life. Speaker 2: Thank you. Story_ID: 419338 Speaker 1: That's Joel Fuller. Speaker 2: He is your grandson? Speaker 1: That's my grandson. My only grandson, precious (laughter) grandson. Speaker 2: Tell me who that is. Speaker 1: What, what my [paternal] grandma name? Speaker 2: Martha [Martha Hendricks]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Martha. Speaker 2: Or Julia? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Martha. Speaker 2: I can't think of her name. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Martha. That's what you told her, Martha. Speaker 2: Martha. Speaker 1: That's your grandmother. Say, "It's my grandmother." Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Say, "It's my grandmother." Speaker 1: It's my grand- Martha that's my grandmother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Who is that? Speaker 2: That's my [maternal] grandmother, Julia Perry. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next. Speaker 2: I need you to go, like the bottom row, tell me who they are and then the top row, left to right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Go ahead. Speaker 1: You all ready? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Elias Hendricks, Pittero Hendricks [Theodore Hendricks], [HistoryMaker] Joe Hendricks, Louis Hendricks [Louis Hendricks, Jr.]. Am I going to the top? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yes. Speaker 1: Otelia [Otelia Hendricks], that's my, Perry [Perry Hendricks], Mealings [Mealings Hendricks], John [John Hendricks], Lincoln [Lincoln Hendricks] and Jim Hendricks [Jim Hendricks]. Speaker 2: And Mealings. How do you spell that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): M-E-A-L-I-N-G [sic.]. Speaker 2: Where I'm at now? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You're on the second row, next sister, next sister. Speaker 2: Mealing, M-E-A, no Millie [Millie Hendricks], Louis Hendricks [Louis Hendricks, Sr.], which is my daddy, and Bettie Hendricks [Bettie Perry Hendricks] is my mother, Mary Hendricks-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Otelia standing behind her. Speaker 2: Oh, I thought she wanted me to come from the other side? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Uh-huh, but you missed Julia on the top row. She's standing in front of-- Speaker 2: And the one is Julia [Julia Hendricks], standing behind the last one I called. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I've got glare, can you tilt that forward? Speaker 2: All right, who's this? Speaker 1: Audrey Faye Hendricks, Jan Denise Hendricks [Jan Hendricks Fuller] and Joe Hendricks. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Let's start with the color photo. Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to start here. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Slide that away from you, keep left, another, go on, keep going, good, stop there. Speaker 1: Are any of these people different from what, when we were talking about? You can say, these are my brothers and sisters and, and where are you in the picture? Speaker 2: I'm looking-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): To the left, to the left. Speaker 2: And me standing by Mealings. Speaker 1: Say, this is me and my brothers and sisters-- Speaker 2: These are my brothers and sisters-- Speaker 1: That you are on the left, on the left. Speaker 2: And I, Joe Hendricks, Mealings Hendricks, John Hendricks, Louis Hendricks, Lincoln Hendricks, Perry Hendricks, who's that? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Pittero. Speaker 2: Pittero Hendricks and Elias Hendricks, Millie Hendricks, Mary Hendricks, Julia Hendricks and Otelia Hendricks. Speaker 1: Do you know what year this was? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, well this picture, I think is the same as the other one so that's fine. We're going to do your mother and father. Do I need to move it this far. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Yeah, if you can. You can rotate it so-- Speaker 1: We're going to do the bottom one first. That's your-- Speaker 2: That's my mother, Bettie Hendricks. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Great, next. Okay. Speaker 2: And this is my daddy, Louis Hendricks...