 Story_ID: 30234 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archives. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Observing are Dashka Slater of Mother Jones and Steven Mudroch of The HistoryMakers archives. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Tyrone Bernard Hayes. The first is T-Y-R-O-N-E, the middle is B-E-R-N-A-R-D, but I usually just go by "B". And the last is H-A-Y-E-S. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth is July 29, 1967, Columbia, South Carolina. Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a professor of integrative biology. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: March 7, 2011, Monday. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in the 5150 Value Life Sciences Building in the conference room at the University of California at Berkley [Berkeley, California]. Story_ID: 30235 Speaker 1: All right, okay. Now, before we go into depth there are five, light-weight "People Magazine-ish" type of questions that I'm compelled by management to ask everyone. And they only require a short answer. The first one is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? Wow, no, I'm an adventurer. I eat everything. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I mean I can pick some favorites, but I don't think I have a single favorite. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: I'd probably have to say Christmas for two reasons. It's the one time that I'm together with my entire family, and it's also when my grandmother [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey] who was like a third parent to me passed, Christmas Day, 2005. Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Nah, like my food, I like to go to a new place every time. Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't think I could say it on camera (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Any one of my students can tell you what it is though (laughter). Story_ID: 30236 Speaker 1: All right, well, I'm gonna ask you about our family history. And I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side. And we'll start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, her maiden name, you know? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Susan Louise, Susie Louise Richardson Hayes. So her maiden name is Richardson. Her first name is S-U-S-I-E, middle is L-O-U-I-S-E, last name is Richardson, R-I-C-H-A-R-D-S-O-N and Hayes, H-A-Y-E-S, my father's name, her married name. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, her date of birth is October 29, 1947. And she was born in Columbia, South Carolina on 4210 Fair Road. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family? Are there stories about where they came from and what they were doing back in the old days of the nineteenth century? Speaker 2: So my grandmother actually was still living in the house when she died that her father built, which was still on property that was originally slave-owners' property. My grandmother was a Bailey. And when she-- Speaker 1: What was her name? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: Her name was Agnes Elizabeth Bailey. And then Richardson was her married name. She still had in that house the bill of sale from when her grandfather bought her grandmother's freedom along with a horse and a carriage and the property. They were Baileys so they were owned by--and I believe his name was Richard Bailey who also owned an indentured servant family from Ireland, Flannigan. So my, her father, I believe was Richard Flannigan Bailey. And the slave owner apparently had children with both his indentured servant and with one of his slaves and with his daughter, apparently. And that daughter would have been my grandmother's grandmother--I think I'm remembering that all correctly. And we still have, so the white side of the family so to speak died out. There're no more of them, but the Baileys, the black side of the family, are still around. And we still get invitations to the family reunion in Ireland. I always joke that one day I'm gonna show up with my Korean wife and give 'em a surprise (laughter). Speaker 1: So they don't know that this side of the family is black now? Speaker 2: I don't there's been any connections actually to Ireland in a long time. Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's quite a story. Are there any other stories from that period of time about what is going on in the Civil War and-- Speaker 2: You know, I believe one of my--somebody in my grandmother's family fought in the Civil War. I don't remember the details. And I don't remember any stories other than that in particular. Speaker 1: You know Frederick Douglas was, I guess, initially owned by Baileys. Speaker 2: Is that right? Speaker 1: Yeah, Frederick Washington Augustus Bailey was his (unclear) name. Speaker 2: Apparently, there was a lot of slave owning by Irish which is why Tyrone is such a popular name in the, among blacks in the South. It's an Irish name. So. Speaker 1: Okay, we often think of it as a black name now. Speaker 2: That's because Irish people owned a lot of slaves (laughter), but it's from Tyrone, Ireland so it's actually an Irish. In fact, my name is Irish. I can, once we get into it, I can tell you many stories about showing up different places in the world where people expected an Irish guy to walk off the plane (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so, your grandmother lived on property that her grandfather had built, your great grandfather had-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, built the house. My grandmother-- Speaker 1: --had built a house? Speaker 2: --my grandmother's father built the house that she was living in. She didn't die in the house, but she was still living at that residence. Speaker 1: Okay, was that a frame house or a--? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a tin roof, originally with a well. So, and later indoor plumbing was installed, but-- Speaker 1: Now, was this in Columbia itself? Speaker 2: Yeah, Columbia, South Carolina, 4210 Fair Road. It's still there. Speaker 1: And you said your grandfather purchased the freedom of-- Speaker 2: Oh his--The woman who became his wife. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's before the Civil War ended, yeah? Speaker 2: Oh, I can't, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, when slavery was still going on, yeah. Speaker 2: That would have been my grandmother's grandfather. Story_ID: 30237 Speaker 1: Okay. Did your mother [Susie Louise Richardson Hayes] talk about what life was like growing up? Speaker 2: So my mother grew up mostly with her grandmother [Louise Bailey], so my great-grandmother. My--she never knew her father, and my grandmother [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey], as a single mom, taught in Orangeburg [South Carolina]. So she actually taught out of town. So my mother was mostly raised by her grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have relatives in Orangeburg too? Speaker 2: No, not that I know of. We probably do, but (laughter) not that I know. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: And her mother--her grandmother was Louise Bailey who actually was born on the same date that I was, July 29, obviously some years before, but. Speaker 1: All right. Now, your mother was going to school back in the days of segregation in Columbia [South Carolina]. Did she--? Speaker 2: In fact, when I was born, schools were still segregated. Schools weren't integrated until 1970. I was actually born in the colored hospital, the black hospital [Good Samaritan-Waverly Hospital, Columbia, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Was it associated with Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: I don't know that it was. Yeah, I don't know that it was. Speaker 1: Okay, did your mother have stories of those days, you know, living as an adult in a segregated town? Speaker 2: I don't particularly remember her--it was, I think it was just kind of a way of life. I mean even when I grew up, my whole neighborhood was black. My whole school was black until sixth grade [ca. 1979]. And I don't think--it was just kind of how things were. I mean I, I mean I remember, I mean I do remember my mother and particularly, my father [Romeo Hayes], actually talking more about segregation and how difficult it was. So my mother's family was a little bit better off than my father's family. So my mother's family historically married cousins for a little bit. And most of them could "pass." So most of my, most of my--my grandmother was fairly dark skinned as well as a couple of her brothers and sisters, but many of them were very fair skinned and I'm sure you're familiar with the term "passed". And so many of them did a little better. My father's situation was perhaps a little more difficult. And I've heard my father talk much more about segregation and being beaten and things like that than my--and crosses burning and that kind of thing. But I don't recall many stories like that from my mother. She was fairly well protected. Speaker 1: Now, what did her parents do for a living? Speaker 2: She never knew her father, so I don't know. And her mother was a school teacher, my grandmother [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey]. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And she taught there in Columbia [South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Yep, she went to Benedict College [Columbia, South Carolina], and she--well, she taught at a school called, in Orangeburg, and then when I knew her, she taught at a school called Claude A. Taylor [Elementary School] in Casey [South Carolina]. So it was outside of Columbia. It wasn't in Columbia. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, did your mother--I suppose with a mother that finished school, did she go to college too? Speaker 2: My mother went to two years of college at Morris Brown [College] in Atlanta [Georgia], and, but didn't finish. She got married and had me about a year later [1967]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what were her aspirations? Was she trying to be a teacher or-- Speaker 2: I don't know. She majored in French. And I'm not really sure actually. She, at the time became a housewife and a mother and I'm not really sure what her other trajectories would have been. Story_ID: 30238 Speaker 1: All right, now, I'm gonna go to your father's side, and then we'll get them together. Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name is Romeo Hayes. Romeo is R-O-M-E-O, Hayes is H-A-Y-E-S. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind that name? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know. His mother [Ethel Davis] gave it to him. He loves it though. I can tell you that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is September 7, 1945. Speaker 1: And was he born in Columbia [South Carolina] as well? Speaker 2: He was born in Columbia, I believe on Gregg Street. They were both born in the home--in their homes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now what do you know about the ancestral stories on your father's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: So my father's family, so my father's--also never really grew up with his father actually or his mother. He was mostly raised by an aunt. His mother was Ethel Davis or is Ethel Davis. His father was Pete Freeman who I've only maybe met twice. His mother's side of the family--so Hayes is from his mother's maiden name. They, their family was originally named Whitecloud--that's the story according to my father. And they were Paiute Indians from Oregon who were brought into South Carolina. And then they changed their name to White, and then they were married and through marriage became Hayes. And that's where my father's name comes from. Speaker 1: Now, that's a story. So, okay, so what side of the family was Paiute? Your grandmother-- Speaker 2: I guess his grandmother was Paiute Indian-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --who I think I met once. Speaker 1: So that would be your great grandmother [Name unknown]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think I met her once. I think I met her once. She died when I was very young. Speaker 1: Now, is there a story that the family knows about how Paiutes of Oregon get to Columbia? Speaker 2: I think they were sold. They were bought and sold and brought across. I don't know that for sure, but-- Speaker 1: Okay, so this is your great grandmother? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's quite a story, though. Has anybody done any, I guess, genealogy study? Speaker 2: No, you know, I started through that Ancestry.com and I'm just like filling out the questionnaire for you guys [The HistoryMakers] (laughter), and I've never gotten around to really following up and going through. Speaker 1: That's an interesting story. That's one I haven't heard before. That's--yeah, 'cause often people say they have Indian relatives, but they don't know the group. They say Black Feet and, you know, and that sort of thing. But there is a historical basis for that, I've kind of figured out. But it's, you know, it's usually, you know, interesting to find these things out. Story_ID: 30239 Speaker 1: But, okay, so your father [Romeo Hayes]--now, what happened to his parents [Ethel Davis and Pete Freeman] that he wasn't raised by either one? Speaker 2: His mother, I guess was maybe fourteen or fifteen when he was born. I mean she was fourteen when she got pregnant, fifteen when he was born. And I don't think his father ever married. It's lots of kids. I have uncles that are, you know, little kids (laughter). So he had lots of kids, but I don't think he ever married. I'm not sure. I've only--well, he passed away now, and I only met him twice. So I don't really know much about him. So he was on his own for quite a bit, and then when he was a teenager, one of his aunts took him in and he lived there at my Aunt Polly's house, who I knew quite well. Speaker 1: This is your father? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Okay. So, did he have any stories about growing up that he shared with you? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He, my father, whereas my mother was fairly protected and had a fairly close family, my father was kind of on his own most of his life, kind of had a tough, tough life growing up in a very poor, pretty rough neighborhood--not that my mother [Susie Richardson Hayes] was rich, but she had family around her. You know, my great-grandmother had thirteen children, so she had lots of uncles and aunts that were around and all that kind of stuff. And we always had a very big--with my mother's family, big, sort of family reunions. So I knew almost all of my, at least the ones that were alive, I knew my uncles, her uncles and aunts very well. But my father's side of the family, I know fewer of them, and they're not so close. Speaker 1: Now, you said your father had some of the more egregious stories of segregation and oppression, you know. What were some of the--do you remember some of the stories? Speaker 2: Well, he's told stories about the [Ku Klux Klan] burning a cross in front of his grandfather's house, about being maybe four or five years old in the store and a little white boy spit on him and he hit the boy. And then the father beat him unconscious. And he says all he remembers, his memory of, was his grandmother begging for his life. Recently, I gave a talk at, lecture at the University of South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina]. I've seen my father cry twice. One was after my talk at the University of South Carolina. He lived on what they used to call Gregg Street Bottom. It actually belongs to the University now, but it was kind of a, you know, like a poor neighborhood. And I guess Barnwell Street, the street after that was the University of South Carolina, I mean--yeah, the University of South Carolina. And his school was on the other side, and he would say, and he told me that if he crossed, if they crossed the street that the police would turn hoses and dogs on them because blacks weren't allowed on the University of South Carolina campus. And so after my talk, you know, I asked him what was wrong? And he said, you know, I never thought I would see my son lecturing here with all of those people listening to him because he would, you know, recall as a kid, having that experience on that campus. Speaker 1: Now, let me clear, you said you've seen your father--did you grow up with your father? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, he just didn't cry a lot (laughter). So-- Speaker 1: Oh, you saw him cry twice. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the only other time, and it was so emotional and moving for him to watch me lecturing on the campus that, you know, that he used to try to cross and would have hoses and dogs turned on him. Story_ID: 30240 Speaker 1: South Carolina is, I guess, along with Mississippi, one of the tougher states to, you know, and the most populous black states. There're more black folks in South Carolina--at one time, the population exceeded the white population, the black population did. So, at any rate, well, now, did he have a chance to go to school, too? Speaker 2: My father [Romeo Hayes] did not finish high school. So he started working and then when he lived with his aunt [Polly], and he had a lot of responsibilities there. She had maybe five or six kids and so he did a lot of the home care and a lot of helping out there, so he wasn't able to finish. And then he was, then got married when he was twenty-one. Speaker 1: Now, what was he doing for a living when he got married? Speaker 2: When I was born, he was a prison guard. So he was working at the prison and he was driving a taxi. I mean I don't remember that (laughter), but I remember him telling the story that he, you know, had to get off work and that he took the taxi to come and meet us at the hospital and this kind of thing. But most of my life, he was a carpet installer, floor covering installer, which he learned from the uncle that he lived with, the trade he learned there. Story_ID: 30241 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, how did you--is there a story about how your parents met and got together? Speaker 2: The story that my father [Romeo Hayes] tells is that he met her at a party, and he asked her, my mom [Susie Richardson Hayes], her name. And he told Nuna--or she told him Nuna. And he said, what kind of name is that? And she said, none of your business. And I guess he pursued her, and the other stories I remember is on Halloween-'cause her grandfather wouldn't let them see each other, on Halloween he used to dress up as a woman, as a girl to get to see my mom. And then I guess she moved to go to college, and I guess he followed her there. And then eventually, they were married. Speaker 1: Now, that's determination. Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: He actually followed her to Atlanta [Georgia]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Did he say what he did to keep himself going in Atlanta or did--what kind of job did-- Speaker 2: He, my father's, he's worked--the stories that I've heard him tell, he's worked in a fish market. He's worked for a roofing company. And then he kind of did everything 'cause like I say, he's been on his own since he was about five. Story_ID: 30242 Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their temperaments, their talents and interests, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I think between my mother [Susie Richardson Hayes] and my father [Romeo Hayes] and my grandmother [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey], I've taken things from all of them. My father's sense of determination and pride in your work and, you know, my mother was a good student, studying hard and working and my grandmother, of course, was a teacher and concerned about people and the environment and a very progressive eighty-year old woman when she died. I can--the night she died, in fact, Christmas night, we were up arguing about prayer in schools. Now, my grandmother's family started, I mean built St. John Baptist Church [Columbia, South Carolina]. She was a very important figure in that church. And my 80-year old grandmother--well, you know, my father made some statement about, don't you think when people move to this country, they should speak our language and worship the way we do. And it was my grandmother who stood up and said, no, it's wrong, that she once had a Muslim girl in her classroom. And the little girl would have to leave when they said the prayer. And so here's my eighty-year old grandmother arguing with my father that, you know, that, you know, that is not the position that you would think somebody of her age and somebody who grew up in the church the way she did would argue. Both my grandmother and my father were storytellers, and I think that when I lecture, you know, rather than just lecture at people, I tell stories, you know. And it's a way to get people interested in the science and follow the science. And I incorporate into all of my lectures some part of my personal life, so that it's not just some foreign--you know, even my lectures here on campus [University of California, Berkeley]. When I talk about, you know, I study hormones and when I talk about hormones and during pregnancy, etc., I bring in my ultrasounds. And I talk about my kids, and they're getting the same data and the same information, but it's a story. And it's not just a lecture. And I think I got that from both my grandmother and my father. I mean my father can sit around and make you listen to a story about anything (laughter). So little pieces of all of them, I think are, in me. Story_ID: 30243 Speaker 1: Now, describe the neighborhood you grew up in and the house you lived in. Speaker 2: We grew up in a pretty small house on the--well, we lived several places. The place that I spent most of my childhood from about age seven until I left was a small house on the corner on Easter Street [Columbia, South Carolina]. And at the time, it didn't seem like a tough neighborhood. I guess because I was very well protected by my father [Romeo Hayes]. My father was very well known, if you know what I mean. And once people knew who we are, they didn't mess with you. And it was, it was--at the time, you know, there was a lot of open space around the neighborhood. And we had a lot of frogs and snakes and things around it. And that's when I really learned to love animals and to love science, that and my grandmother's house. My grandmother--the cemetery bought off a large part of the property, what used to be the farm. And as a result, it was a big field. So there were always toads and snakes and things around. Speaker 1: Now, is this that same house that her father built, I mean her-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, by the time she died, it was a very small piece of property because Lincoln Cemetery was right next door and had bought up--and also, the highway went through. So they lost the front part of their property because Highway 555, Fair Road, took up much of the yard. So when I knew it, I knew it as a very small piece of property. But, you know, at one time it had been a farm with a barn and all that kind of stuff. So, yes, that was, that was-- Speaker 1: Okay, and there were woods around there and-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, around my grandmother's [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey] home and the house where I grew up. Speaker 1: Now, did you roam by yourself or did you have cousins or brothers and sisters? Speaker 2: Mostly, my mother [Susie Richardson Hayes] was very, very, very overprotective, didn't let us out of the yard. But my grandmother, we went to her every weekend, and we were gone (laughter). So, and there were some people that, you know, there were some kids across the street that we hung out with. And when I was little, I started a bird club and we would log bird nests and watch bird nests. And then my grandmother had one of these 8 millimeter [mm] film things, and we still have them somewhere. I could film the birds, you know, bird nests as they were growing up and things like that. There were a lot of stray dogs around, so we spent a lot of time fighting dogs (laughter), doing these dogs that ran in packs, a lot of lizards. We spent a lot of time catching lizards, and there was a, at the end of the cemetery, there was kind of a pond there that had fish and tadpoles and things. And we would come and, you know, construct little ponds in my grandmother's backyard or use those plastic wading pools and make little zoos and things like that. And she pretty much mostly let us run so we were in the woods doing things and stuff. Story_ID: 30244 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I have two brothers. Speaker 1: And are you oldest? Speaker 2: I'm the oldest. Speaker 1: You're the oldest, okay. And what are your brothers' names? Speaker 2: What are their names? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: My older, younger brother is Vernon Romeo Hayes, V-E-R-N-O-N, R-O-M-E-O, H-A-Y-E-S and my youngest brother is Reginald Todd Hayes, R-E-G-I-N-A-L-D, T-O-D-D, H-A-Y-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay, are they like right behind you? Speaker 2: My older, younger brother is seventeen months younger than I am, and then my youngest, younger is six years younger. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Speaker 2: He was unexpected (laughter). Story_ID: 30245 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory, like the first thing that you remember? Speaker 2: God, the first thing I remember? The first thing I probably remember is our, being at our house on Pill Street [Columbia, South Carolina], and I would have been--let's see, we moved to Easter Street [Columbia, South Carolina] when I was probably four or five. And my earliest memories, I remember my dad killing a snake in the yard while he was cutting the grass. I remember the apple trees. I remember there was a house next door that had a rooster. I remember the guy next door, Vincent. I mean I don't remember him, but I remember I played with a kid named Vincent. I remember what seemed like a giant hole in our floor, but I guess it was the thing where you pull the air filter out. It was, there was a vent in the floor, but I remember it as this, you know, twenty-foot deep, you know, cause I think it was probably a thing, my mother [Susie Richardson Hayes], don't go near it, you'll fall in. Then I remember, and it was near my grandmother's [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey] house, I remember walking to my grandmother's house from there. I remember we moved actually, and we moved because there was a big storm, and the roof caved in. And I remember the roof, the pieces of the roof actually--we were away when it happened, filling up my brother's crib [Vernon Romeo Hayes]. And I remember thinking if we'd been home, you know, my little brother would have been smashed. And we moved right after that to the place on Greenview [Greenview Park, Columbia, South Carolina]. But I remember fairly vividly. I mean I remember eating pears from the tree, but my mother telling us we weren't supposed to cause they would make us sick--not pears, apples. Speaker 1: Those crab apples? Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I must have been--actually, we moved before I went to kindergarten. So those memories would have been from somewhere between age two and four. We moved when I was four [ca. 1971] to the new neighborhood. Story_ID: 30246 Speaker 1: Now, when you explored the woods around there, did you have any, did anybody--was anyone around to tell you like, this is the type of tree you were looking at or to explain or decode what the what the different animals and trees(unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No, but my grandmother [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey] gave me a lot of books. So I had a lot of field guides, and they had, you know, they had I guess what you'd call sort of folk stuff that they would say about the lizards. I think, you know, if the toad pees on you, you'll get warts. I mean my grandmother and great grandmother taught me a lot of things like that, "don't let it pee on you, you'll get warts". And, you know, there were certain things they'd say about fireflies and making wishes and that kind of thing. So, and my grandmother--and it had been a farm, and so there were still some remnants of the farm. So there were some plum trees and my grandmother had a peach tree that grew over the well. And I remember it was still this kind of wild asparagus that grew. So she knew things kind of about farming. And my grandmother was really into flowers. So she was always planting flowers, and we'd talk about fertilizers. And I remember I had a little guide to insect pests, and I would go around and inspect the flowers and try to figure out what pests she had on her flowers, you know, Japanese beetles on her roses and things like that. But not, I mean not really hardcore science stuff, but just sort of-- Speaker 1: Interests, keen interests. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then there were some things like snakes. Every snake was bad. I mean, and so--and in fact, I was because of that, sort of afraid of snakes until I was in college. And that's when I just decided, you know, this is silly 'cause I loved all animals. And I just really made an effort to learn about how to handle snakes and all that. But it was, you know, and my father [Romeo Hayes] was more of a, anything on his property was dead, you know, I mean lizards, I mean he killed everything (laughter), insects, lizards, everything was a threat somehow, you know, In fact, I remember my neighbor with these big skinks, actually interesting story, these big, you know, these blue-tailed skinks, these big lizards, my neighbor used to shoot them with a twenty-two [rifle], just pow, pow, blow 'em up. And people in the South, black people called them scorpions. In fact, my grandmother told me this story. She said that if you stepped on them, when she was working in the fields when she was little, that they would sting you with their tail. You know the lizard I'm talking about? They're big and they have bright, blue tails. Speaker 1: Big blue-- Speaker 2: So the interesting thing is-- Speaker 1: You call them a skink? Speaker 2: It's a skink, yeah. It's a, the family that the lizard belongs to, and they're ground-dwelling lizards. And when they turn adults, they turn into adults, they turn into the bright gold with a bright, red head. And black people in South call them scorpions. So here's an interesting story. When I started working in Kenya, the Swahili word that they use for a similar lizard in Kenya means scorpion and they tell the same story, that if one of them bites you on the toe in your field, then you'll get sick for a week, exact same story. So I don't know the root of it or how, you know, how it got transferred into the story that black people tell in the South, but obviously, it has an origin in Africa somewhere. Speaker 1: Hmmm. Okay. Story_ID: 30247 Speaker 1: Now, who, I guess, influenced you the most in terms of these explorations? I mean did your-was it your grandmother [Agnes Elizabeth Hayes], you think? Speaker 2: My grandmother only in the sense that she just let us go and (laughter) didn't pay attention to what we were doing when we were out. But it wasn't, you know, where I grew up, it was kind of a weird thing to be, you know, for example, I knew all the roads that teenagers liked to go on. And it wasn't because I was taking girls there. It was because I knew that there were snakes and turtles (laughter) back there (laughter), you know, so sort of a weird thing where I was growing up. And it was, even my parents, you know, saying, oh--my father would say, I don't know where this weird kid came from. And then I remembered, whenever I got ready to do a science project or I'd done an experiment he would help me build the backboards and in high school, I wanted to dig a turtle pond in my backyard. And he just kind of laughed at me for a while until he realized I was serious, and I had a fairly sizable hole in the backyard. Then he went off and bought the cement and helped me--it never held water (laughter), but, you know, he, you know, he then took a very, you know, once he realized I was serious about it. But I wasn't allowed to have animals in the house, things like that. So everything was always on the front porch. Speaker 1: But you never had any pets in the house. Speaker 2: I, not in the house. I mean occasionally, I snuck things in the house, but they were subsequently released. And I remember kids used to tease my brother [Vernon Romeo Hayes] 'cause I had a big dog house on the front porch. And it was because I used to use the dog house to manipulate light. I was doing an experiment with lizards to look at how they identified background and color match. You know, we have these anoles [polychrotidae] that change color. Then I would manipulate light by putting the dog house over it. And so everybody made fun of us. We had a dog house (laughter) on the front porch. Story_ID: 30248 Speaker 1: All right, yeah, we were just talking off-camera about a culture of killing things because they're around and maybe they're on your property. You have a farm, and you don't want vermin, but so it seem to pick up on that and start killing things. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mean and there were a lot of kids in my neighbor--see, we were, one of the things that my parents never believed in toy weapons. So we never, you know, but, of course, you could get a stick and you made your own gun. But we were never allowed to have, but a lot of kids in the neighborhood had BB guns and pellet guns and would shoot squirrels and birds and you name it. That was never a part of--you know, we weren't, we didn't have those things. Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting because I know Fort Jackson [The United States Army] is a dominant feature of Columbia, South Carolina. Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah. Speaker 1: And then how did the proximity of the Fort affect your neighborhood? Speaker 2: You know, not so much. I mean we were very much aware of it, and we had, I'm trying to remember. There were a couple of people in our family who were in the military. So we would go to the, we'd been to the base. And I had one, somebody in my mother's [Susie Richardson Hayes] family had been in the Navy, and so we'd go to Charleston [South Carolina] sometimes and visit. But it wasn't a real, you know--my father [Romeo Hayes] was a very, you know, Vietnam protester and this kind of thing. So the military and that kind of thing didn't really play a big role with us, at least within my family. Speaker 1: So he was never drafted for-- Speaker 2: He was, apparently, the story is both times he was called, my mom was pregnant. So he never had to go. Story_ID: 30249 Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, well, back to the exploration. Were you doing exploration prior to starting school? Speaker 2: Oh, as long as I can remember. I mean any chance to get out and see animals and things. And, you know, I tell the story in my lecture all the time. I used to dream--you know, fold out these 'National Geographic' maps and dream of, you know, planning these big things, which I get to do now. I mean I'm a 'National Geographic' explorer [2004], and I'm funded. And I've done some of the films. I mean that had a big influence on me as a child, watching those television shows and reading the stories in the magazines. Speaker 1: Can you remember any particular show you saw that really got you excited? Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, every Sunday night I watched 'Wild Kingdom', Mutual of Omaha's 'Wild Kingdom', and there were several of those. You know, I mean a lot of them took place in Africa, and then occasionally there were 'National Geographic' specials that came on and any number of those, just being able to explore and get out and see the Rainforest. You know, I'd always dreamed of going to the Rainforest in Africa or the Amazon and Australia--for some reason, Australia was never a draw for me. But Africa and South America were always, and Southeast Asia. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I read that you explored the Congaree Swamp [South Carolina]. Speaker 2: Um-hum. When I--by the time I was in high school [Dreher High School, Columbia, South Columbia], and that was a little far from my house, but it was a, it became a national monument [1976]. And so it got a lot of attention. And I actually applied for a job there in the summer to build the boardwalk that's there now. I didn't get the job, but then I started going there. Once I got my driver's license, I could go down there myself and really explore and started going down there at night, which I don't think was legal, but you see a lot more animals at night, really started hanging out there. So when I was younger, it was just any place around my house. And when I got older--because that was such a, a much larger piece of property, that there was much more wild life there than many of the places that I'd gone as a kid. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what about the name? I wonder about the name Congaree Swamp, is-- Speaker 2: I think it's a Native American name, but I'm not sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not sure which tribe it would be associated with, which nation. Story_ID: 30250 Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'm gonna ask you about school now. What was the name of your grade school? Speaker 2: I went to elementary school at Greenview, Greenview Elementary School [Columbia, South Carolina], right down the street from my house, less than a half mile. Speaker 1: In Greenfield or-- Speaker 2: Greenview. Speaker 1: Greenview, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, G-R-E-E-N-V-I-E-W. Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you like school? Speaker 2: Nah, I spent most of my elementary school sitting in a corner with my desk facing away from the class. Speaker 1: Now, this is surprising 'cause I thought that you would have been a person that would love school, but what was the problem with it? Speaker 2: I finished all the math books at my school by about third or fourth grade and most of the reading books and so it was considered disruptive and would have to sit with my back facing the classroom, most of my, most of my elementary school. Speaker 1: Wow, so did you have like good help at home in terms of your homework? Speaker 2: I had my mother [Susie Richardson Hayes] and my, you know, my grandmother [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey] bought me this, you know, she'd buy me in the summer the, the-- you know, there was a reading source [Houghton Mifflin Readers]. I can almost--let's see. The first three reading books were 'Tigers, Lions and Dinosaurs'. Then there was one called 'Rainbows' and then 'Fiesta' and then 'Images' and 'Kaleidoscope', I think. So there, you know, there were--and I think by third grade, I'd read through all of them. My grandmother would bring them in the summer and I would read them. And then they had something called the SRA [unknown]. I don't remember what it stood for, but where you'd read a thing and answer the questions. And so I was allowed to do that on my own, I think, by fourth grade. But again, I just finished that and did all the questionnaires. In fact, I remember the math book we had, third or fourth grade, was one of those where you tore it out and handed in the work. And I just sat home, you know, the first day and just did the whole thing and turned it in. You know, maybe it was a week, maybe I'm exaggerating, but it was within a week. You know, I just sat there until I was done with it, and then, you know, just went through book after book until I was done. So by third or fourth grade, you know, so all through I was considered disruptive, and you know, told I had to face away from the class and stuff because I disrupted all the students. Probably if they had a word for ADD [Attention Deficit Disorder], I believe I probably would have been (laughter) diagnosed like that or something. Speaker 1: It's a different kind of distraction that you experienced then. Speaker 2: Well, they deemed me hyperactive. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And back then also, you know, there was corporal punishment, and I got hit, beat by, in some cases, by teachers who meant well. In fact, I remember the big controversy was that by the time I was in third grade, your parents had to come and sign, giving the school permission to hit you. They couldn't do it on their own anymore. But I got, well, I got whacked around quite a bit. Story_ID: 30251 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on it, were you--was there anything impressive about the science instruction that you received in school? Speaker 2: It was awful. It was probably (laughter), I--if Ms. Hartwell's watching. But it wasn't--it no, it was more or less on my own. We didn't really have a science curriculum. Speaker 1: Now, how did you--now, what you described in terms of observing the birds and then going back and, you know, I guess making some kind of measurement of their progress. And so this is science, you know, and an assessment. This is a scientific method. Did you learn this in school or did you learn it from-- Speaker 2: No, no, 'Wild Kingdom', 'National Geographic'. You know, we would set up the blind and have the camera and do, you know, it was watching shows like that, that I was trying to be like those people that I'd seen on those shows. Speaker 1: So you would actually set up a blind and shoot-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we would, with my grandmother's [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey] blankets, you know, we would set up, or the shades from her windows. We would build a little thing. In fact, one of them I turned in for my--it was for one of my Cub Scout badges or something like that. We followed a group of mourning doves. You know, we'd go in and push the mother off and film what stage the eggs and the birds were at. And we followed them all the way through fledging and I don't remember what badge it was, but I remember I showed it for one of my Cub Scout badges. Speaker 1: And you had to climb trees for this, right? Speaker 2: In a lot of cases, yeah. This particular one was not--in fact, I still remember the, you know, some birds are more aggressive than others. You know, so these, I think there're called, these brown thrashers and jays. I remember we'd put pots on our head, you know, 'cause the female would fly off the nest and actually, you know, sort of bomb you. So we'd put my grandmother's pots on our heads and go through it. A lot of those were in these sort of low, plum bushes, you know, the nests were in there. But some of them, we had to climb, like blue jays tended to nest pretty high up, robins tended to nest pretty high up. The doves and things tended to be a little bit lower. Speaker 1: So you would get books from the library or-- Speaker 2: My, every weekend, my parents took us to the library. So we had the school library also, but every weekend my parents also took us to the public library. We had a public library card, and then my grandmother brought us a lot of books from school [Claude A. Taylor Elementary School, Casey, South Carolina]. You know, they had the--what's that thing called, like 'Weekly Reader', and you could order books through the thing. So we ordered--in fact, I remember one of the earliest books. What's was the name of it? The 'Coelacanth', one of the earliest books I remember getting. And you may or may not know, but a student here [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] discovered the second species of Coelacanth. Speaker 1: This was a prehistoric fish, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, big low fin fish. I distinctly remember reading the book about the discovery of that fish. It was a little, you know, made for like fifth graders or something like that. I still have, in fact, I still have many of them. I've given them to my kids. Speaker 1: Now, you're doing this kind of study, a self-motivated kind of thing in an atmosphere where you say kids were smashing turtles on their-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to see if-- Speaker 2: Yeah, and another source, I guess, are these books--again, I still have some at my house, called 'How and Why'. So it was the how and why book of dinosaurs, you know, these little thin, paperback things. In fact, we used to buy them at Seven Eleven. So it was 'The How and Why Book of Dinosaurs', the 'The How and Why Book of Birds' and a lot of those described experiments and how things were studied. And so I got a lot of information from those. And again, I have a bunch of them. So my son [Tyler Hayes] and my daughter [Kassina Hayes] now have them. Story_ID: 30252 Speaker 1: Okay, now, we've read that at an early juncture, you were fascinated by frogs. Is it true that frogs are more fascinating than other species to you? Speaker 2: For me, I mean again, I did the bird thing, and I kept the bird records. I think the frogs were more exciting because they were accessible. So, you know, they were a little bit easier to catch. And I could raise them and keep them and things like that, but I think the main thing was the metamorphosis and watching this organism transform. You know, and that's what I ended up studying, both in college and really up 'til now and not understanding it at the time, but wanting to know how, you know, how do you change from an organism with a tail and no legs to, you know, this frog or toad. You know, their eyes change. So, anyway, things that I could see. And many of the changes that they go through are no different than what we do as embryos, right, but I could see it. And just even that transition from water to land was, I think, what fascinated me. But, you know, lizards, and I think it was environmental interactions that were important. So, in middle school [Hand Middle School, Columbia, South Carolina] my science project was looking at--I raised guppies and I tried to look at how temperature would affect whether or not they became male or female and their--you know, they had these bright colors if they're males. And so I had big jars. These, well, I wasn't allowed to keep these in the house, but I had big jars with aquarium thermometers, and I maintained different temperatures. And it was that environment, developmental interaction. And then in-- Speaker 1: So did, now, did you read about that some place or did you have any guidance from (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I had read, and I can't remember where, but I had read about the influence of temperature on sex somewhere. I remember reading a thing about turtles, and-- Speaker 1: Now, I'm thinking right now, I wouldn't know. I mean so you had to really do some deep research to figure out-- Speaker 2: And on some of these television shows. Speaker 1: --how, you know, what the sex of a guppy is. I wouldn't, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter). Speaker 1: --ordinarily, we can't--it's not obvious like a dog. Speaker 2: Yeah, no it's not. Speaker 1: How do you tell the sex of a guppy? Speaker 2: Well, once they get adults, the males have these, you know, big, brightly colored tails that they use, and the females are larger and just sort of drab. But I, you know, I was telling you the other one I had these anoles [polychrotidae] that matched the background, like a chameleon does. But I noticed that at night they didn't match anymore. They always turned brown. So I was interested in what, you know, and I knew it was cooler at night. And so I would, you know--I didn't have the equipment I have now, but I would heat 'em up with a blow dryer and then I--it was dark at night as opposed to day. So I would put the dog house over them and make 'em dark. And it turns out that they have to be awake to color match. So it has nothing to do with the environment. They have to see what color they're on in order to match the color. So when you wake them up, they'll change back the right color. And I won a big prize for that at State science fair for that little project. But most of the things I was interested in was environmental interaction with development and physiology, which is still what I'm interested in now. And my last big project was my turtle project, which never really happened cause I couldn't get them to breathe. But I wanted to look at shell pattern development and sex ratios at different temperatures, and that one never happened. So, in fact, most of my turtles died in a really bad car accident (laughter). Speaker 1: So, why did you let them drive? I mean I-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a good question (laughter). No, I was taking them to the zoo [Riverbanks Zoo, Columbia, South Carolina] to see a veterinarian who was gonna--I guess they didn't have ultrasound back then, but x-ray to see which ones had eggs and which ones didn't. And I was making a left turn, and I was hit by a car. And all of my turtles were in the back, and most of 'em didn't make it (laughter). Speaker 1: They didn't have their belts on? (laughter) Speaker 2: Neither did I. I actually went through the windshield. Speaker 1: Oh, wow. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So this is later on. Speaker 2: This is--I was a senior in high--senior? Yeah, I was a senior in high school [Dreher High School, Columbia, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So that would have been my senior project. Story_ID: 30253 Speaker 1: Okay, so at Greenview [Elementary School, Columbia, South Carolina], you know, through sixth grade, you said you were there, did you have any--were there any significant encouragements from teachers or-- Speaker 2: I would, definitely, Ms. Jackson. She's since passed away, but she, she was one of the ones who beat the crap out of me more than any, but I think, you know, I think it was a different time, and I think she meant well. And she tracked me. So she was my teacher first and second grade, and then things weren't going so well in fifth grade and she got me in her classroom again. So she was my teacher again fifth and sixth grade (laughter). I couldn't get rid of her. So all but, you know, all but third and fourth grade, she was my teacher. And she really, you know, kept in touch with my parents and again, she was still the one who made me sit in the corner (laughter) with my back to the classroom. But I think she, you know, I think she really cared and really wanted me to do well. It's just her methods were kind of(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: What were they saying about you in those days? Speaker 2: I was hyperactive, you know, that I couldn't sit still and I was always, you know, the legs were always shaking and I was always talking. And I was just bored as hell (laughter) to be honest. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have any--did you have any--were there any role models in the community for a kid that was interested in science? Speaker 2: No, not really. I mean there were no--I mean my--no. I mean there were, yeah, I can't think of anybody I'd put in that category. So. Speaker 1: Did you know any of the doctors in town? I know there must have been some black doctors in town. Speaker 2: In my neighborhood? No, not that I know of. Speaker 1: Did the City of Columbia provide a--did they have a science museum or anything like that? Speaker 2: Yeah, there is a science museum. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yep, and, yeah. And we went. I mean we did--my parents did a lot of stuff like that with, but probably the biggest influence was Riverbank [sic, Riverbanks] Zoo [Columbia, South Carolina] was built when I was maybe in middle school [Hand Middle School]. And it's one of the top-ranked zoos in the country. And I spent a good bit of time down at the zoo. In fact, in high school, I tried to get a job with the zoo veterinarian. It didn't work out but I tried to get an internship with the zoo veterinarian. And that probably had a bigger influence than the science museum, you know, 'cause there were stuffed animals and stuff in the museum. And I didn't wanna see stuffed animals. I wanted to see the real thing. So the zoo was probably much bigger, had a much bigger impact on me. Speaker 1: Okay, now, I imagine from what you're describing that you're probably--how were your grades? Speaker 2: I always did very well. So I did very well in elementary school except for, you know, we got a grade for conduct. So our grades were 'E', 'S' and 'N'. So I don't want to say I got all Es, but I, you know, pretty much, and I often got threes in conduct (laughter). Three was bad. So one was good, three was bad. So for stuff like conduct and--I don't remember. There were several sort of behavioral categories that I often got threes in. So I never had trouble with my grades, but every PTA [Parent-Teacher Association] meeting, I'd get in trouble for my conduct grades. Story_ID: 30254 Speaker 1: Okay, now, was church a big influence on you growing up? Speaker 2: My, so my--when we were little [Hayes and his brothers], we went to Sunday school and church and vacation bible school. And my parents [Romeo Hayes and Susie Richardson Hayes] sort of had a rule that when we were--I forget what age it was now, then we can decide. And so I think maybe by second grade, I stopped going. So it must have been about age seven, they said, well, you can decide if you wanna go or not. But we were required to go, I think up until about first grade. And they--maybe it was fourth grade. I don't remember, but at some point, yeah, I think it was probably fourth grade. How old are you in fourth grade? Ten, yeah, that's what it was. Probably at 10, my parents said, well, it's up to you. And I stopped going. Speaker 1: Okay, were your parents active members? Speaker 2: They are now, but they weren't at the time. They're very, very involved in the church. Now, my grandmother [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey] has always been a Sunday school teacher and all that. My parents weren't, and they--I don't remember them going when I was a kid. Speaker 1: Okay, now, what were the popular culture influences on you growing up? Speaker 2: Prince [Purple Rain, Prince]. Speaker 1: Prince. Speaker 2: I just saw him the other night. In fact, my son's [Tyler Hayes] first concert ever we just went to see Prince. I was a big Prince fan. George Clinton, who I also just saw recently, big George Clinton fan. By far, Prince was my biggest, and then by oh, middle school, you know, Sugar Hill Gang and rap music started to take off. But I really didn't get into a lot of rap stuff until more recently. And now I listen to some of what they call "old school" stuff. But Prince, by far, was my big influence, popular. Speaker 1: And you mentioned George Clinton. I thought of 'Maggot Rain'-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --in terms of biology, their only biologically themed album (laughter). Speaker 2: And he's what, seventy? I just saw him at Yoshi's [San Francisco Jazz Club, California] at a time, I mean I was right up front, just saw him like, just a few weeks ago. Story_ID: 30255 Speaker 1: Okay, now, okay, well, you went from Greenview [Elementary School, Columbia, South Carolina] to the integrated-- Speaker 2: I went to Hand Middle School [Columbia, South Carolina]. Speaker 1: Hand? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: H-A-N-D? Speaker 2: Hand, yeah. I was very much, a pretty good artist at the time. And I placed into a program called ARTAG, Artistically Talented and Gifted. So I got to go to that middle school. Speaker 1: Okay, art themed. That's interesting. Now, here you are like, obviously a scientist, and well, you know, I'm not diminishing your art skills-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --I'm just saying you're in an art school, you know, art themed or-- Speaker 2: Well, but I, 'cause I think it was, for me, even with the science, it's visual stuff that tends to capture me, even though I might be doing molecular biology, it's the transformation of a tadpole into a frog or the lizard changing from green to brown or I don't know if you know I've patented this frog [Hyperolius Argus Endocrine Screen, HAES Test] that changes color in response to estrogen. So I might be studying the underlying mechanism, but those visual things or even things like the trees, leaves turning color on the trees, those things have always captured me, and so that the details of morphology. And so I was really into painting and drawing and stuff like that and had done it on my own for a long time. And my parents [Romeo Hayes and Susie Richardson Hayes] saw this opportunity for me to go to the better school. And that's how I went to school out of my neighborhood. That was my, sort of ticket out. And then I was able to continue in the high school [Dreher High School, Columbia, South Carolina] in their academically advanced program. Speaker 1: Come to think of it, when you see the documentaries of the nineteenth century naturists, most of them are artists too, the [John James] Audubon one, Darwin (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, another good example, I mean now I do a lot of stuff with photography and visual imaging and things like that which I think sort of reflects that as well. Story_ID: 30256 Speaker 1: Okay, now did you notice a difference, I mean--well, what was it? It seemed like it would be a time of crisis, you know, the integration of a school in Columbia, South Carolina. You know, so what was the difference and how did all that, the change affect you? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll tell--it was the first white people I'd ever met, that I'd ever known. Now, we had some teachers who were white, area teachers and my dad's [Romeo Hayes] boss was white. But it was the first time that I was, had colleagues that were white. And, of course, growing up in an all-black community, and there it--I mean here [Berkeley, California], right, there's Asian and Hispanic. There was black and white there [Columbia, South Carolina]. And if you weren't black or white, then you tried to be white, right? And if you were Asian, then you tried to be part of the white culture. And, you know, so, of course, growing up, we talked about things like, you know, white people do this and white people do that. And so now it's like I actually knew white people. And probably there were several situations where it was like, do you guys really do this, you know, that stuff, that kind of thing. One of my most--I can't tell the story on camera. Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: Well, it's a word that I've only said once in my life. It's part of the ARTAG program, was we went through, like part of it we did painting and drawing, you know, two-dimensional art. Part of it, we did three-dimensional sculpturing and then part of it we did photography. And I remember this, my first experience from middle school [Hand Middle School, Columbia, South Carolina] is the following, is a girl named Cindy DeCorsi (ph.), and we were in the dark room. It was the photography part, in our first semester. I, I'll never forget this. And I remember we were in the dark room rolling film, and I asked Cindy where is the container for rubbing the, you know, for rolling the thing. And she said, I put it in my C-U-N-T. And I'd never heard--why don't you go get it? And I'd never heard that word before, but I was too embarrassed, you know this was the first time I'd met white people, so I was too embarrassed to tell her I didn't know what the word meant. So I went to this black girl, Yolanda, and I said, can you help me find Cindy's--that word. And she said, what? And I said, Cindy asked me to get something out of her [blank]. Can you tell me where it is? And she turned around and slapped me. And then I remember I got home, and I got the dictionary, and I looked it up and I never understood why somebody would have said something like that to me. So that's my first memory of--that was my first memory in middle school and my first interaction with a white colleague, somebody my age. And I never asked her, like what? I mean I don't know if it was supposed to be funny, if she was being mean or if she was giving me an invitation (laughter) or, you know. I have no idea. And that's the only time in my life I ever said that word, but I can't stand to hear it now because it upsets this--you know, and then I was asking a black girl to help me, and she thought I was saying something--well, obviously, I was saying something really inappropriate to her. But I just remember being so damned confused, like what just happened here (laughter). That's my first memory of Hand Middle School (laughter). Speaker 1: So how was-- Speaker 2: And my first introduction to white people unfortunately (laughter). And I thought, you know, what the hell is that all about? Story_ID: 30257 Speaker 1: So you were with the group that pioneered integration in the-- Speaker 2: Well, the, so the middle school [Hand Middle School, Columbia, South Carolina] itself was a little odd. It was in the more affluent white community. And most of the black people who went there--and my high was the same, were bused in from the community like where my father grew up, which was the really tough community. And the way my high school was, is there was the academic, our advanced placement program. Then there was the academically advanced placement, AAP, then there was a college prep program, then there was a regular program, then there was a vocational program. So I was in the advanced placement, AAP, program, maybe two or three other black people. All the other black people were in, either the regular or the vocational programs. So the only interaction between us was home room and PE [physical education]. I, because, and in fact, most of the people in the vocational program, they were bused from their neighborhood over here to this high school. Then they went to something called the Lynhaven Career Center [Columbia, South Carolina]. They were actually bused back to my neighborhood where they went to learn home ec [home economics] and, you know, woodworking and things like that. And they were bussed back for lunch and PE. So I had very little--my most significant interactions with black people was I was on the wrestling team, and there is where I got to know and interacted with black people. But other than that, none of my classes, again, other than PE. And I did take an art class that had black people in it. And there was almost zero interaction between black people and white people. And once a year, there was a big racial thing that broke out and, you know, they locked down the school and stuff like that. So my interaction was very different. I'd be locked in the classroom with the white people because I was in quote "the white" classes which created a lot of, you know, most of the black people would say, oh, he thinks he's white 'cause he's in the white classes, you know. So there was a, you know, and I wasn't from their neighborhood so I was this outsider who was brought in from somewhere else to take white classes. And, you know, it was a very odd, you know, so the funny thing is my first--I had some black friends, but my closest black friends are black people that I met at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know, because there was such a disparity and a disconnection between, you know, and then they found out who my father was [Romeo Hayes]. I mean and my father was, you know--so that was my level of protection because my--I don't know that my father ever did anything directly, but he was one of those people we used to say, "will get you got" (laughter). Speaker 1: So he had a reputation in the hood and--. Speaker 2: He was what I guess what they would call today, OG. People didn't mess with my dad. So once people figured out who I was, and then I had an uncle there too. I had an older uncle who was there and an uncle who was in the same class I was, and I think I was in one fight, and after that it became clear. Story_ID: 30258 Speaker 1: Now, how did the white students treat you? Speaker 2: I mean there were some--well, I'll tell you what it comes down to. So we were all sort of friends, but, you know, I was never invited to their house. And they had like little social clubs and things, and I was never invited to be a part. And the only one whose house I'd ever been to is a girl named Abby [Franklin], and she came from outside. She had been abroad for a year, and so she was also kind of an outsider. And I probably shouldn't have said her name, and that was fine until her mother saw us kiss one day in the driveway--and they were very liberal. But they just weren't having that because of what the neighbors might think. And that was kind of the end of that. And she actually lives here [Bay Area, California] now. We're friends now, but, you know, it became clear, like, okay, you guys can go out and do this, but, you know, don't go there. Speaker 1: Okay, so it was still trouble, you know. Okay-- Speaker 2: But I had some, you know, that we were friends. I, there were others, you know, we were all very competitive. So the top ten people in our class, we were all within .01 points of a GPA [grade point average] from each. And certainly for a couple there was a sentiment that I shouldn't be there or I can't be there, yeah, some guy named Dargen Koxsell (ph.) in particular. Speaker 1: What was the attitude of the school teachers and administration, I mean what was their attitude like towards you as an achieving black student? Speaker 2: Oh, it was very positive, actually. I mean I can't think of a--and, in fact, some of them still, you know, they'll see me on the news or something. And periodically, I'll get a letter from teachers from my high school [Dreher High School, Columbia, South Carolina], in particular, my science teacher there, Ms. Calloy (ph.) was very good. She taught me chemistry and physical sciences and she was a very good teacher and very concerned, and my math teachers all too were--I had very good relationships with them, yeah. Story_ID: 30259 Speaker 1: Did you see a big disparity between the equipment and I guess the way science was taught in the-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was a much better school. And my brothers [Vernon Romeo Hayes and Reginald Todd Hayes] who went to the school in my neighborhood had a different experience than I did. So, I mean there was clearly different resources, but again, the black, other black people who went to that school didn't have access to those resources. Half the time, they weren't there, right. I mean they were bussing them to Lynhaven Career Center [Columbia, South Carolina] and things like that. And so, but, you know, I mean there were some. There was Lisa Green and Abraham Henry and Leslie Bore (ph), so there were three or four who were in the AAP [Academically Advanced Program] program, but not many. Speaker 1: That's interesting what you described in terms of the kids in the vocational program being bused back to their own neighborhood to go to a career center-- Speaker 2: No, they were bused to my neighborhood. Yeah, their neighborhood was in the other direction. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So the Lynhaven Career Center was in my neighborhood. And that was, you know, home economics and woodworking and shop and, you know, automobile repair and stuff like that. Speaker 2: They were out of the school basically for most of the day? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Did you ever, you know, wonder if that by design of the school board to get rid of most of the black students, you know, before they could even get into school? You know, I mean you bus them there and then you bus 'em out. Speaker 1: I think then it was seen as a very, it was seen as a positive thing because you were teaching them a trade so that when they get out of high school, they would have an opportunity. I think it was seen as a positive thing, not so much as a--and I imagine there must have been some white kids in that group. But I, it was mostly the black kids who went there. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm tempted to be suspicious of the, you know, the whole thing, but-- Speaker 1: I can't think of any who were. I mean, you know, 'cause again, they had all these gradations so there was, you know, it was the regular program and the college preparatory program and the, and you know, I don't know how they were different. Presumably, the college preparatory program, people were being prepared to go to college just like we were. But it was a different, you know, level. They didn't take the AP [advanced placement] classes and things like that. And we didn't have that many AP classes. I think we had English, we had English, calculus, biology--no, we didn't have biology, chemistry and maybe physics. Story_ID: 30260 Speaker 1: Okay, so you go on to high school. You go to Dreher High School [Columbia, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Dreher High School, D-R-E-H-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. And now was that, did they have the high schools academically ranked, too, or was that only-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the high school I was talking about. So the middle school [Hand Middle School, Columbia, South Carolina] sort of had the same program. I don't remember all the gradations of it. But the vocational, regular, college prep, academically advanced program, that was how they were named in the high school. The middle school, I think didn't have the programs, but they had that like ARTAG [Artistically Talented and Gifted Program]. So we took special classes, like we took a class called Humanities where we learned history and walked all the way up through history. So we had special classes set aside, and then we were tracked through the honors math. So I guess they had an honors program. So we took, I think by eighth grade we made it to pre-calculus, I think was the course. So it was, it wasn't as--there weren't as many grades, gradations, if you will, in the middle school. It was the high school where you got all those programs or whatever you call them. Speaker 1: Okay, so what kind of student were you in high school? Did you have the same issues that you had in grade school? Speaker 2: No, high school was much more challenging. So I mean I graduated with a four point, something, something, you know, 'cause we had those weighted grades. And it was much more challenging than the experience I had in elementary school. Speaker 1: Were you the top student when you graduated? Speaker 2: I was not. I was, I don't remember where I was in the rank. I was in the top ten, but again, we all differed by like point something or point--the number one person was a guy named Ty Wynn. And we were all, we were all above 4.0. So Tracy Barns, Sharon Ann Rothson (ph.) Dargen Koxsell (ph.), Ty Wynn, I forget who else was up there, Susan Bull, Abby Franklin. So we were like the top ten. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now in high school, you--when did you start taking chemistry, well, biology, I'm sorry? Speaker 2: I actually didn't have good biology. And it's the one science class that wasn't that good. But I took, I think physical sciences, freshman year. Then I think you take chemistry, and then biology junior year, but it wasn't--she wasn't that good. Speaker 1: Why do you say it wasn't that good? Speaker 2: Class just wasn't that good, so we spent a lot of time kind of goofing around and the teacher just wasn't that good (laughter). So I didn't really pick up, in fact--and there was no AP [advanced placement] biology. So I didn't take AP biology there. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, I take it at home you're still conducting experiments, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah. I was still going to science fair, but I did it mostly with Ms. Cloy, my chemistry teacher. So she was the one who actually took me to the state science fair in Charleston [South Carolina] where I won the award for the lizard project. So it wasn't done as part of her class. You know, I was still doing it at home, but she was the teacher who encouraged me to apply and go to these science fairs and things like that. But she wasn't my biology teacher. She was my chemistry teacher. Story_ID: 30261 Speaker 1: Now, what you're describing is really unusual because most of the--most parents I know have, as I was a parent, you know, of a high school student at one time, two of them, they get a note: science fair is coming, and they have to come up with a project. So, we'd get and try to think of, what are you--what are we gonna do, you know. Then we'd come up with an idea and, you know, you help them out with it, but you're already doing these. Speaker 2: Well, and so most, you know, cause I--it was all live animal stuff. Most of my stuff was done in the summer. That's what I spent my summers doing, you know. I spent my summers, you know, playing with lizards and breeding. I have all--at one time I had this big--I don't even know why, locust breeding project. I had all these locusts breeding. You know, we screened in the porch, and I had locusts breeding (laughter). And I was interested in it, you know, 'cause they come in different colors, and I was interested in trying to do crosses and look at how the patterns changed and things like that. So most of that stuff was done in the summer when school was not even in. And then I would just write it up and, you know, build a big backboard for the science fair. But we weren't required to go to science fair anyway. Speaker 1: So there was no--okay. Speaker 2: No, there was no requirement. And like I said, it was my chemistry teacher who took me when I was doing stuff in biology. Speaker 1: So the state had a science fair, but they didn't--you weren't required to participate? Speaker 2: Yeah, no, we weren't required--I don't even think we were required at our school to do it. Speaker 1: Now, before we get out of your youth, now you said you were a boy scout? Speaker 2: I was a cub scout up until about third grade, and I quit because I thought we were gonna be doing a lot of camping--the reason why I joined is I thought we were gonna do a lot of camping and out in the woods and stuff. And-- Speaker 1: Didn't happen. Speaker 2: --no, we didn't. You know, we learned how to make those little vinyl bracelets and stuff like that (laughter). So by third grade I quit. So I never got above cub scouts. I think I would have been a bobcat or something next (laughter). Speaker 1: Were you involved in any other organized activities, you know, away from school? Speaker 2: No, I played violin, and I played piano up until high school [Dreher High School, Columbia, South Carolina]. And then I worked full time my last bit of high school. Speaker 1: Okay, where did you work? Speaker 2: Crystal Burgers (laughter). Speaker 1: Crystal Burgers? Speaker 2: Crystal Burgers, yeah. It's kind of like White Castle. They sell those little burgers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But I worked from 5:00 [P.M.] till 11:00 [P.M.] every night my senior year. And then before that I was on the wrestling team from freshman, sophomore year. Junior year, we didn't have one for some reason. I don't remember why. And what else did I do? And then one year, junior year, I think--one year I did an internship at a vet--we got some kind of special honors thing for doing something that, career-oriented. And so I thought, knowing what I loved to do, I thought, oh, maybe veterinarian is what I should do. And I spent a year working there and figured out, nah, that's not what I wanna do (laughter). Story_ID: 30262 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, now, had you read at any point, did you come across at any time-'cause I heard a long time ago that frogs are an indication of the health of the environment. You know, that was a long time ago, and it came, precipitated down to me from popular culture because I'm not a scientist. But when did you first hear that and what does it mean to you? Speaker 2: Probably, people didn't really start talking about amphibian decline until I was in graduate school. So that would have been about twenty-two years ago [ca. 1989]. It was at that first Herpetological Congress in Canterbury [sic, World Congress of Herpetology, 1989, Canterbury, United Kingdom] where people started talking about the global decline of amphibians. That's probably about when I started thinking about it. Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm jumping the gun on that one. Speaker 2: I mean I had, maybe in college [1985-1989]--I mean I remember writing in my thesis ['Sex Determination and Differentiation in the Wood Frog: An Investigation of genetic and Environmental Mechanisms'] something about, you know, how temperature affects animals and, you know, how climate change may have affected the loss of dinosaurs and shouldn't we be thinking about those kinds of things now. And, but it didn't really become so popular a discussion in the academic community until about twenty years ago or so. And then I assumed it leaked down into the popular, you know, into popular press and things like that. Story_ID: 30263 Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school, were you--well, let me just ask you--when did you first become aware of the environment in terms of, you know, preservation of the environment and ecology and-- Speaker 2: Oh, I was--always. Speaker 1: Always? Speaker 2: I mean even in terms of conservation and things, you know, I mean a lot of these shows I was talking about were about deforestation in the Amazon. That was the big one. Everybody was talking about that. You know, so I, and for me, it was almost, maybe even selfish, that I had this like, God, it's gonna be gone before I get to see it, kind of thing. But even watching, you know, development around my, where I grew up, you know, like one of the two woods that were adjacent to my house, they came in and actually, the chain gang came in and cleaned them all and made them into a church parking lot. And even that little piece, you know, it was only like a block. But man, there were turtles and snakes and lizards. And then across the railroad track there was even a bigger swamp that I used to go over in. And they turned that into some kind of industrial park. And I watched them do it. You know, and again, it wasn't like old-growth forest or something, but I watched these places that I enjoyed so much go away. They're almost all gone now. I mean the development in Columbia [South Carolina] is, you know, the place where my parents live now used to be nothing but woods. I used to go all through there. And now it's all housing development. And every Christmas that I go back, it's even more. So even from the big scale, right, so watching these shows about the disappearing Amazon, etc., from the small scale, watching the little bit of woods from across my house get, you know, cemented under, made me very much aware of that, and knowing, even, you know, I remember when I was a kid, very vivid, certain times of the year the sky would be black for days with all the birds migrating, I mean for days and days and days, just, you know, I don't know, maybe millions of birds. I haven't seen that since I was maybe eight, nine years old. It's gone. I remember they, you know, periodically, they would stop and roost in those little woods that I was talking about and it would just be--you know, my mom would be upset cause they'd be, birds would be pooping all over the clothes on the line and things. I haven't seen that in probably thirty years, over thirty years. Story_ID: 30264 Speaker 1: Now, Rachel Carson's book 'Silent Spring' published in '62 [1962]-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] Reports, I believe. It's either NBC [National Broadcasting Company] White Paper or CBS Reports did a TV special about it when I was twelve. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, and I know they were, it was required reading in college and that sort of thing. Did you come across that when you were in high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, not in school. It was something that I checked out from the library, yeah. And that, and the only other thing that I read--I was never into history and stuff until I got older was science fiction. I was an avid science fiction reader, not necessarily the good science fiction. Some of it was pretty junky (laughter), now that I think back on it. So that was the only other thing I read, cause that was also sort of a big, you know, like wondering about life in other places and on other planets, and, you know. Speaker 1: Were you a 'Star Trek, [The] Next Generation' [1987-1991] fan? Speaker 2: I watched all that stuff. But no, the first show I remember was 'Lost in Space' [1965-1968]. I mean now, it's a movie, but I mean the original 'Lost in Space'. Oh, I loved that show. Speaker 1: Who were some of your favorite science fiction writers? Did you have any favorites? Speaker 2: I used to read somebody named Clifford D. Simak. I, you probably never heard of him, but he wrote, oh, there was one about sort of going back in the Ice Age. And there was another one about some giant invisible barrier around this town, and everybody trying to get out. In fact, I think 'The Simpsons' did a spoof on that, (laughter) on that one. And I don't know how I picked him up. And I read some of [Ray] Bradbury. I mean I read some of the other more popular, more well known, but he [Simak] had one book called 'Mastedonia' [1978]. And it wasn't his book, there was another book called 'Omnivore [Of Man and Manta]' [Piers Anthony, 1968]. And it was, and the reason, the ones that I liked like 'Omnivore' and there was another one called 'Etidorpha' [John Uri Lloyd, 1895] which was Aphrodite spelled backwards because there were always books about these sort of make believe ecosystems, like this--I think it was called Omnivore, but it had these mantas things that actually flew through the air and these giant mushroom things. And I think that's why I liked them because there were these make--you know, these guys were building these make-believe ecosystems and how they interacted and how they put them together. And that's the kind of thing I liked about-- Speaker 1: Any particular movies? Now, when you came along, I guess 'Raiders of the Lost Art' [1981] was coming along and-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Movies, actually, along the science and nature thing, one of my favorite movies is one called, a movie called '[Mysterious] Castles of Clay' [1978], and it's a nature film. I think I saw it as a kid, and the whole, again, sort of ecosystem thing, the whole movie centers around these termite mounds. And so they look at how the lizards and the birds use the termites, and they look at how--it's set in Namibia of how the men have an area, a territorial property. And they get one wife per mound. And the wife tends the mounds and these termites, when they swarm or this important source of protein. So that one I loved. But a lot of other films that didn't necessarily have to do with, I guess were probably most science fiction, like 'Brazil' [1985] is one of my favorite films. And actually, more from college, what's that 'Eraser Head' [1977], the [David] Lynch film. Speaker 1: David Lynch, yeah, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, one of my all-time favorite films is 'Pink Floyd The Wall' [1982] (laughter). I never saw it until I was in college. It came out when I was in high school. But I saw it in college, but the music, the integration of the music and the movie was--and that's the same thing I like about 'Lost in Space'. You know, they had a certain music or a sound for everything. So you could tell when the monster is about to come or you can tell when somebody is about to have a romantic moment cause they had little theme music that came in for each thing. So I like that kind of integration. Story_ID: 30265 Speaker 1: Well, what was your adolescent life in high school? Did you have a normal adolescence in high school? Did you date and do all those kind of things? Speaker 2: I had a, I had a--it's funny. My son [Tyler Hayes] has had almost the exact same experience. So for most of my high school, I had an exclusive monogamous relationship with one girl who, the summer after my junior year, broke up with me. It devastated me (laughter). The same thing happened to my son, except I don't think he was devastated. And in a way though, so I won't say it's the best thing that ever happened, but there's no way that I would have applied to go to college if we had still been together going into my senior year. You know, 'cause we had plans. We were gonna USC [University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina] and get married, and there's no way I would have left. And then, you know, once we broke up in the summer, and then, you know, you start applying in the fall. And then there's no way I would have, I would have left the state if we had still been dating. And then after that I was not very serious with anybody until the night I met my wife [Katherine Kim], and I mean that literally. I told her the night we met that we gonna get married. A year and a half later, we were married. Twenty-four years later, we're still together (laughter). Story_ID: 30266 Speaker 1: Okay, now, on the verge of graduation, what did you see as your career path, you know? What did you wanna be? Speaker 2: You know, I didn't know. I entered college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as, saying I was pre-med because I didn't know--I mean I had had this internship with the veterinarian, a guy named Dr. Atkinson. And he was fine. It's just, you know, most of it was cutting the tails off of Dobermans [dogs] and spaying cats. And I was like, this isn't what I wanna do. I mean it was cool for a week, right? And I didn't know what it was that you do, so I was pre-med like most biology majors until I was a work-study student and part of my financial aid was I had to work. And I got a job working in a lab. And that's when I got the opportunity to see what it is you do if you like doing experiments because otherwise, you're sitting in the classroom and you don't realize what these guys spend most of their time doing. But because I had to work, I got to sit there and go, oh, that's what you do. That's what I wanna do. And then, I wasn't completely clear until there was this program at Harvard at the time called the Elephant Research Project. And I call it a scam, but what it was, was a graduate student who tracked and studied elephants in Kenya. And the way he paid for it was he taught a class on field biology in Kenya that had a tuition fee of like $2,000 or something like that. So the student paid $2,000 and paid for their own airfare, and then that fund was how he used to fund his research and he used the students to track the elephants and do the project. So, I shouldn't say it was a scam. It was a clever scheme. And, of course, I didn't have any money. So I had to take a second job. And the second job I got was working with a guy [Dr. Bruce Waldman] who behavior ecology on amphibians. And I didn't raise enough money to go to the project, but that was where I realized, ah, okay. This is, you know, what I've been doing every summer for play, you know, and I was on a, what's called a National Science Foundation R-E-U grant, research experience for undergraduates. And it was that summer when I realized, okay, here's what I'm gonna do. Story_ID: 30267 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna explore that more, but I wanna go back to how you chose Harvard as--and Harvard was the only choice. Tell us that story. Speaker 2: My mom hates this story. So after I took the SAT's [Scholastic Aptitude Test], I got a recruitment letter from Harvard. And my earliest memory of Harvard was from a television show called 'Green Acres'. And there was an episode where Mr. Ziffel asked Oliver Wendell Douglas [both characters on the show], where did you get your law degree from anyway? So the story behind the sitcom was this fancy New York lawyer moves to upstate New York and starts to farm, but he can't grow anything. So everybody always makes fun of him and tells him, you know, he's dumb and this and that. And so he asked him, where did you get your law degree anyway 'cause he can't grow any corn. And Oliver Wendell Douglas says Harvard. And Mr. Ziffel, this other farmer with the, you know, overalls, says "Huh, one of them new schools, huh". And I had no idea why that was supposed to be funny. But I remembered Harvard in my mind. So when I got this letter recruiting me to Harvard, that's the only place I applied. It never occurred to me that I might not get in. And not out of arrogance or because, you know, my grades were this. It's just, you know, 'cause I was recruited to the middle school, and I was recruited to this high school, and now this college had written me a letter so, of course, they wanted me to come there. Never applied anywhere else. Speaker 1: You didn't have a Harvard's-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, and when I realized that everybody else in my class was--'cause I applied early, was still writing applications, literally, that day I got the phone call. The guy said, congratulations, you know, you've been accepted in Harvard. So I never applied anywhere else. Then I started working at Crystal Burgers to earn the money for my plane ticket, 'cause I'd never been on a plane before (laughter). And we went up for visitor day, and that was--my first time on a plane was when I went to Harvard. Speaker 1: Now, that's--I wondered why you would endure Crystal Burgers. Now, that's-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I saved up money for, you know, my money for college. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so-- Speaker 2: And again, that's how I bought my plane ticket (laughter). Speaker 1: So this is 1985, when you graduated from high school [Dreher High School, Columbia, South Carolina]? Speaker 2: Graduated in '85 [1985], yeah. Speaker 1: Eight-five [1985], Ronald Reagan's the president, right, in '85 [1985]? Speaker 2: Um-hum, is that right, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Jesse Jackson had just run for president in '84 [1984]-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: For the first time. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Right, those were the days when Prince was a big hit (laughter). Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Speaker 1: Right, 'Purple Rain'. Speaker 2: 'Purple Rain', that was my senior year [1985]. In fact, my very first car date was to see Purple Rain (laughter), my first time driving. Story_ID: 30268 Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, so you're at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] now. What was, how did you like Harvard? I mean what was your impression? Speaker 2: Hated it, worse four years of my life [1985-1989]. But if I could do it all over again, I'd do it exactly the same. Speaker 1: I've read, we have a note here that you wanted to turn around and go back home, and-- Speaker 2: I was, by my third semester, I give full credit. If it was not for my wife [Katherine Kim], who I'd known for a week (laughter), and my professor [Dr. Bruce Waldman] that I worked with that summer, I would have quit. There's no way I (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: What was the circumstances that-- Speaker 2: I mean I think that the circumstances that anybody faces with a few extras. You know, there's the transition from high school to college. There's the transition from the South to the North. There's a transition from living at home to being on your own and making your own decisions. There was--you know, I had heard from my mom that, you know, that there were proctors and, you know, curfews and, you know, nothing was like that. We were free to do whatever we wanted, right. It was not like what she remembered from college. There was the transition from being in the top ten to being in a school where everybody was from their top ten. There was, there was being in a place that--I'm making a number up 'cause I don't know it, but where 90 percent of the students were legacy, you know, their parents and their parents had gone to Ivy League. And my mother had gone to some college and ms father hadn't finished high school. There was the, you know, Spring break, when everybody went away to Bermuda, and I had to stay and work. So there was, you know, there was the, you know, Harvard at the time was 16 percent minority. That included Asians, so there was the--you know, there was that. There was all that, you know, all that stuff that everybody goes through. And I think one of the tougher things for me was for the first time I had black friends, male friends that had kind of had my experience. But they had all been to private school and had all came from affluent professional families. And so, my, you know, I've said this to them before, and have made them feel bad. But it's not to make them feel bad. They were like, well, gee, here I am now with other black people. And they still are very different from how I am, you know, that they were going to Bermuda and my--one of my roommates was, actually his father might even be one of the people you guys are talking to for HistoryMakers, was Jay Stewart, Donald Stewart, former president of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], New York Times board, all that, you know. And, you know, so now I'm going geez, you know, I'm here with other black people and still kind of out of space. So it was, it was a tough, you know--and I'll be honest too, I'd never drank alcohol, and there I was in a place where alcohol was flowing free. And that was a large part of--I think in terms of trying to adjust, you know, that had a negative impact on my adjustment because then I got away from it. But at the same time, I was, you know, further, you know, making the situation worse, not better. And then I met my wife [Katherine Kim] on February 21. I was not gonna enroll. And I think we met on a Friday. That Monday was the last day to register. And I registered so just I could still be there and hang out with her and get to know her and because my, my undergraduate professor [Dr. Bruce Waldman] had said to me, you know, I don't care what you do. I'll find a way to get money so you can keep staying here and do the science because you're gonna--you know, he said to me, because you're gonna be a great scientist one day. And to this day, I have no idea why he said that because I mean, pardon my language, I was fuckin up. And this guy, I don't care what your grades or what you're doing, but if you don't register, I'll find a way to keep you here. And so it was those two people who, for whatever reason, you know, had confidence in me. And I said, okay, well, I'll stick it out for you guys. I'm gonna stick it out here to be with you guys, you know. Speaker 1: Now, you said that the biology course at Dreher [High School] was not that good. Did you, were you majoring in-- Speaker 2: I majored in biology, yeah. Speaker 1: --biology. Okay. Speaker 2: I did well. It was chemistry that kicked my ass (laughter). I liked it so nice, I took it twice (laughter). And we'll leave it at that (laughter). No, you know, and I'm actually, I'm actually not ashamed. I failed again organic chemistry mostly because I was, you know, mostly because I realized in the first couple of mid-terms that I was not gonna be at the top of the class, and I couldn't deal with it. You know, so I half went, drank a lot of beer, and you know, went to the final drunk, failed it and decided, you know, this place wasn't for me anyway. So, but then, like I said I had this professor who said I don't care about that. You're gonna be a great biologist one day. He said, if you couldn't do well in that class, then they weren't teaching you well. It wasn't your fault. Story_ID: 30269 Speaker 1: Now, what do you think impressed him [Dr. Bruce Waldman] about you? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'd only known him--well, I'd known him since that summer, I guess. So I'd known him for a little while. But I guess it was the idea that somebody would care enough to actually sit down and have a conversation when there's tons of students waiting at his door to get a position. Why should he even take the time to talk to me and say, no, look, we'll work it out, you know. Speaker 1: Now, this is Bruce Waldman? Speaker 2: Bruce Waldman, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And what kind of work did you do in his lab? Speaker 2: That summer I started out as one of his undergraduate technicians on a project. He worked on kin recognition, whether or not tadpoles recognize each other, which might sound like--but the reason for it is that they all go back to breed at the same pond. So they have to know when they come back not to breed with a brother or sister 'cause there's increased likelihood--So that's the kind of stuff he did, but invariably on, I was really interested in, you know, effects of temperature on sex ratio and metamorphosis. And he really set me up and helped me get funded to be independent and do my own thing. Story_ID: 30270 Speaker 1: Okay, now was there--I know we've interviewed some people from Harvard, Archie Epps, who was a dean of admission-- Speaker 2: Um-hum, I knew him, yeah. Speaker 1: Did you know him? Speaker 2: I knew who he was. [S.] Allen Counter was-- Speaker 1: Him I don't know. Speaker 2: --[S.] Allen Counter launched an expedition to Surinam on a--I think he was, he might have been a biology instructor or a science instructor-- Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: --maybe anthropology. Speaker 1: Now, the person who's there, the black is Scott Edwards. Speaker 2: Okay, Scott-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a professor there. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, Scott? Speaker 1: Scott Edwards. Speaker 2: Edwards, okay. Speaker 1: He was at the Detroit event [The HistoryMakers, NSF 2011 ScienceMakers Public Program at the Detroit Science Center], and Scott, there's a funny story about Scott cause Scott was a senior when I was a freshman. So I never met him at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And he worked in one of the adjoining labs. And when I first started working in my freshman summer, all the graduate students, you know, the White graduate students would say to me, "Oh, who are you, the next Scott Edwards?" And actually, I never met Scott. So I didn't know what they were talking about. I was like, oh, maybe they mean 'cause I'm a freshman and starting off, you know, cause he was very well known. He had done summa cum laude and all that, you know. So then when I came here to interview at Berkley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], Scott was here getting his Ph.D., but I had never met him. And so, and then I came and people said, "Oh, who are you, the next Scott Edwards?" I go, what the hell is that supposed to mean. Then I, and then when I came here and I met Scott, I'm like, oh, that's what everybody meant. So I didn't know he was black all that time. So I was sort of traveling in his footsteps all this time, being asked, "What do you think you're gonna be the next Scott Edwards?", you know, (laughter) and he laughs every time I tell him that story because I didn't find out--cause he was away in Papua New Guinea in the beginning when I first came here [University of California, Berkeley]. Then he showed back up. And, oh, that's what everybody meant. (laughter) Speaker 2: Okay, now was there a network of black students, I mean was it an effective like kind of a network for black students at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] do you think when you-- Speaker 1: I, it-- Speaker 2: --did they still have a black student organization? Speaker 1: They did, but I wasn't--there was a, there was sort of a, the people I hung out with, and my roommates ended up being all black men, and we're all still very good friends. We were sort of at odds with some of the things that the black student organizations seemed to stand for, like, for example, three of the four of us were in an interracial relationship. And there, the--you know, I just remember the black student organization, we marched for the apartheid thing once. And I remember the president, at the end of his speech, let's be our own mothers and our own fathers and build our own future. And I was, wow, you know, that's not where I'm at. And certainly my other two roommates who were also in interracial relationships, like, wow, that's not where we're at, you know. So we were sort of at odds with that organization--I mean not in any kind of clash or battle, but there was an underlying sort of philosophy that we just didn't really believe in at the time. Speaker 2: Okay, that's interesting. Now, did you know Dr. [Henry Louis] Gates [Jr.] at the time? Speaker 1: Um-hum. I knew, I mean not knew him well, but I knew who he was (unclear). Speaker 2: I think everybody in his department [W.E.B. Du Bois Institute for African and African American Studies] was in an interracial relationship. Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Well, and this was the student, this was the student organization (unclear) (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) organization is different from the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 30271 Speaker 1: Okay, now, well, tell us how you met your wife. Now, this is a big part of college. Your wife, Kim-- Speaker 2: Katherine Kim, yeah. I met her at a party. And I met her at a--I mean I could tell you the whole story. I was drunk. And I was with a couple of people who had broken a window. And we were hiding in another dorm, and I ended up at a party where I met her, ended up, you know, till the wee morning hours with me sitting on a doorstep trying to get into her room. And she said, no. She said, you won't even remember who I am tomorrow. I said, yeah, I will, I'm gonna marry you. And she said, well, if you remember my name, Katherine Kim, give me a call. So the next morning, after I went through all the Katherine Kim's enrolled at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (laughter) and found the right one, we, a week later, went on a date. Speaker 1: Okay, now, and she played a crucial role in keeping you in school, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. And we, you know, in part, we ended up moving in together--I mean not right away, in my, what would have been my junior year. She actually went away to graduate school and ended up coming back. And we moved off campus. And I think that was an important piece too because I think if I'd stayed on campus, it would have, I would have never finished. It was important for me to be able to go to school and come home where I had control of my environment, not where I would come in and I've got two other guys going, dude, let's go get a beer, you know. But they would have to call, and if I had work to do, I said, no, I can't go out tonight. So that was important for me to be able to be removed. And I, you know, I only lived a block from campus. It's not like I moved over into Boston [Massachusetts]. But to have a space that was mine and that I had control of. Story_ID: 30272 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, were there any significant discoveries that you made or things that you learned at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] before we get you in graduate school? Speaker 2: Discoveries, how--you mean? Speaker 1: Well, any--you know, now, you're a scientist by inclination, not just by training. I mean did you discover anything that, I guess is significant that you didn't, you know, I mean something that really made a big difference in your life or? Speaker 2: Well, I think the most important things were that I could do it and again, that I needed to have control over my environment. I mean I think after that, you know, in those last two years I took like six classes a semester and go like A's. And on my undergraduate thesis, I received a grade of summa cum laude. That was very important to me, and I was voted, as I left, one of the top ten graduates. So I got my photograph on the front page of the 'Harvard Crimson' with a, you know, little bio write up and things like that. And I think I needed that affirmation after, you know--but again, I don't think I could have done it on campus. I don't think I could have done it--I mean no offense to my roommates. We're all still very good friends, but, you know, Harvard is, 99 percent of Harvard is about how to get by, right? It's about we're going to give you more work than you can possibly do and it's your job to figure out how much of it's necessary. And the kind of schools that most of those people go to, these college prep, you know, [Phillips] Exeter [Academy] and Hanover [unclear], and the kind of schools that my daughter's [Kassina Hayes] at, you know, they're training you on how to do that. But I wasn't trained that way, coming from, you know, a public school in South Carolina. I was trained, oh, here's my homework; I've gotta do it all. And that's not really how it works. And so, but I could go into my own environment and then figure that out and then go back when I'm ready, you know what I mean? And just even figuring out things like, you know, and the other thing I think that happened with being in the lab is I got respect of other students. So I got invited to the good study groups 'cause I knew all the professors. I mean I went to lunch all the professors that they were taking classes from. So sort of learning how things work. That was important and sort of gaining the confidence that I can move forward and do this, that I can create and control my environment and function in somebody else's environment. Story_ID: 30273 Speaker 1: Yeah, we, I was asking, let me ask you like--do you think that working in a lab was--well, how important is that for a science student? Speaker 2: It was incredibly important for me. Again, my mentor [Dr. Bruce Waldman] was very important. You know, here was a guy who was my dad's [Romeo Hayes, born 1945] age who was also my friend, you know, and my boss. I mean, you know, that stuff is important. But I think also for me, if I were just sitting in these classes in a vacuum that there's no way it could have kept my attention. I chose my classes to get information to help me understand the research that I was trying to do and what the next step was that I needed to take, not because, you know, I had to take it. And I think if I hadn't been in the lab, there's no way that I would have, again, no way that I would have finished. It--I just don't think I would have seen the relevance of any of it. Speaker 1: Okay, now was there a capstone paper or something for graduation that you had to-- Speaker 2: Yep, my undergraduate thesis which again, I did very well on. Speaker 1: What was it? Speaker 2: I received a grade of summa cum laude. The title was, oh, I can't remember now, some like "sex determination in wood frogs, Rana sylvatica [scientific name for the wood frog] an exploration of genetic and environment mechanisms" [sic, "Sex Determination and Differentiation in the Wood Frog: An Investigation of genetic and Environmental Mechanisms"] or something like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: At the time, it was my life's work, but I have continued (laughter). I have moved onward, but the other things that were critical, and you asked what I learned, was I came into Berkley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], one with the idea--I mean that what I ended up working on for my dissertation was an extension of what I started as an undergraduate. I already had the skills of being an independent scientist. I was treated like a colleague in that lab. And I finished here in three and a half years. I was done. By what would have been my fourth year in graduate school, I was an assistant professor because I came in with really the experience of a graduate student. I mean I came in with four years of research experience, of designing my own experiments and carrying out my own experiments, etc. And that wouldn't have happened without--and with the confidence that I could do it because it was just about learning new techniques in a different environment, but I already knew. You know, I was learning how to extract hormones on my own back as an undergraduate. Now, I was in an endocrine lab that could give me guidance. So. Story_ID: 30274 Speaker 1: Okay, you would be--would you be a--you're an endocrinologist? Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay-- Speaker 2: Well, I--if I have to put down something, that's what I write down. My real interest is in environmental influences on development, but hormones are--you know, whether you're talking about breast cancer or whether you're talking about metamorphosis or whether you're talking about, you know, beard growth in puberty, the environment impacts those things through hormonal signals, the migration of salmon upstream, all hormonally controlled things. So if I have to call myself one thing, I'd say endocrinologist. Story_ID: 30275 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, how did you choose U-C Berkley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]? Speaker 2: So, I was a little more informed when applying to graduate. I applied to three. And the places I applied, I applied to work with people who were doing the kind of work that I wanted to do. So what I'd studied as an undergraduate was looking at how the environment, namely temperature, interacted with some inherent developmental processes to determine how fast the tadpole metamorphosis and whether or not it would metamorphose into a male or a female. And I was really interested in the ecological and evolutionary basis for those kinds of interactions, right. So for example, I was already thinking about things like if there's really global climate change and temperature effects sex determination, how would it affect these animals that are vulnerable. Those are the kinds of big questions I was interested in. But what I realized is that environment does these kinds of things by altering hormones that then change gene expression. So I wanted to go to a lab to learn the physiology. The top labs in that really were, Paul Licht's Laboratory who was here at Berkley, 'cause he worked on amphibians and hormones and a guy named David Crews [The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas] who had been a former post-doc with Paul worked on steroid hormones and sex determination in turtles. And then I also applied to Seattle [University of Washington, Seattle, Washington] where there was some endocrinology--so I wanted to go to a place that had endocrinology and herpetology [the study of amphibians and reptiles]. The short of it is, I didn't get into Seattle, which is ironic because the way that I got to visit Berkley and interview was Seattle bought me a ticket. I was being recruited. And so I booked a layover in San Francisco [California] and visited Berkley and then flew up--maybe they knew about that. Maybe (laughter) that's why they rejected me. I don't know. And then Austin, one, my wife [Katherine Kim] said, I will not move to Austin. And she was not my wife yet, but she was very soon to be, which ironically, she ended up moving to Austin later anyway. But, and the other thing in Austin, you know, I met with David Crews and he just flat out, you know, I laid it out. I said, here's what I wanna do in graduate school, you know, in my interview. And he said, there is no room for amphibians in my laboratory. You will work on turtles. And I said--and then he said, so are you gonna come or not? I said, well, I don't know. I have to wait and hear from Berkley. He said, are you gonna come or not? I said, I don't know. I have to wait and hear about fellowships. You wanna a fellowship, here's a fellowship, all paid. I said, well, I have to wait and see. And then Jim Bowls, one of the other guys I was gonna work with called me, and he said, you know, if you get the opportunity to go to Berkley, go to Berkley. He said, I'm a professor and Dave Cruise won't even let me do what I wanna do (laughter). He's not gonna let you work on what you wanna work on (laughter). And then, and then finally, you know, they kept pressing me. And then finally, I called Paul Licht and I said, geez, did I get in or not? And he sort of said, like, oh, didn't somebody call you? I'm like, no, nobody called me. I've been sweating here for (laughter), you know, for weeks. And so I got in and came here. Speaker 1: Okay, all right-- Speaker 2: So my wife and I got married two days after graduation. We had a little, little honeymoon, spent some time in the Caribbean and then drove out. Story_ID: 30276 Speaker 1: Well, things have obviously worked out here [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. But can you give us an example, I mean tell us why, you know, things worked so well here. Speaker 2: At the time that I came here there was a strong endocrinology group, everything from molecular endocrinology to behavioral endocrinology to psychology and neural endocrinology, cancer and hormones. There was a very strong group. It was--and that's been built up again. A lot of those people retired, but now we're back there. And there was also a very strong herp group [herpetology]. So we had Marvalee [H.] Wake and David [B.] Wake and Harry [W.] Green, you know, all people studying reptiles and amphibians. And, so there was that. There was the school, obviously, it's a top-notch school. But then there were so many other things that I hadn't experienced that, you know, I knew the swamps, but I'd never been to the desert. Wow, my first trip to the desert, oh, man. Mountains, I'd never really had experience in mountains and I'd never really lived near the ocean and, you know, like I said, I love to eat. And the number, you know, the different types of restaurants and things that you can, that you could get here. And eventually, you know, the wineries and all the micro-breweries and the, you know, so it's the school and it's the environment that really keeps me here. So-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --the diversity, you know, I mean I think for what it's worth a lot of the relationships between people are much more appealing than I found at Boston [Massachusetts], for example, or in South Carolina. Story_ID: 30277 Speaker 1: Okay, now you said earlier that you first, the first time you heard of the theory of--I don't know the name of the theory, but the demise of frogs being an indicator that the environment was, you know, becoming toxic, you know, was in graduate school, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a meeting in Canterbury, England, international herp [herpetology] meeting [World Congress of Herpetology, 1989, Canterbury, United Kingdom]. I didn't get to go to it, but it was there that the declining amphibian population task force had its birth where people really started to put together the data and realize that we were really losing amphibian species globally very quickly for enigmatic--and still, in many ways, unknown reasons. So that was, you know, those discussions really started happening right about that time. So I was here [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] in the middle of that. Dave Wake [David B. Wake] was the guy who started the declining amphibian population task force who was here and one of my mentors. Speaker 1: Okay, well, there's a special position for frogs in this-- Speaker 2: Well, I think, you know, because of one, they live in water and terrestrial environments, are sensitive to predications in both. With regards to my interest in pollution, whether it's in the air or the water, they have permeable skin, so things readily can absorb across the skin, as during development, unlike, you know, mammals which have the placenta and birds and reptiles which have these egg shells to protect them from things getting in, frogs don't have any membranes. So these pollutants, these chemical contaminants in particular, have direct access to the organism and in many of the cases, like the ones that I study, can disrupt hormones that are there to regulate metamorphosis and whether or not you turn into a male or a female, how your reproductive behavior is expressed. So they're more vulnerable in that sense. They're the targets of many of our pesticides. So frogs eat insects. So the insecticides that accumulate in the insects will impact the frogs. But as tadpoles eat plants, so the herbicides that accumulate and kill plants, they're also susceptible to. So, and, you know, and they're susceptible to fluctuations in temperature. Temperature can affect, extreme temperatures can probably affect sex ratio and certainly reproductive output or input, whichever, both, and certainly metamorphosis is effected by temperature; drainage of wetlands, you know, if you don't have a place to lay your eggs. So there are many different assaults and ways--exploitation for a lot of amphibians, either for the food market or for, you know, there's some big concern about collecting for dissections in high schools and things now as well. Speaker 1: So are there other amphibians related to frogs that also have a--you know, so frogs and toads are-- Speaker 2: Most people look at frogs and toads, but there's similar data for salamanders. Now, the third order of amphibians, the apoda, the so-called caecilians, people don't know much about. In fact, one of the few world's experts on caecilians, so these are the legless-worm like amphibians, is Marvalee [H.] Wake, who is here. They're very, you know, 'cause they're very secretive animals so people don't really know much about them at all or if they're in decline at all. Speaker 1: Where are they found and what are, what do we commonly call them? Speaker 2: I don't think we commonly call them anything (laughter). They're the apoda or the caecilians, not like the island. Caecilians is C-A-E-C-I-L-I-A-N-S, I think. A lot of them are underground so you don't, nobody ever sees them. There're none in North America. There's some species in South America and in Asia. And I think--oh, and there's some in Africa as well, but nobody really knows much about them. They're eaten in some places. I know in Thailand they eat them. And they look like worms. They're legless amphibians, usually subterranean, fossorial. Speaker 1: Do they have eyes? Speaker 2: Um-hum, and there are some that are aquatic. Some people call them, in the pet trade, they used to be sold as rubbery eels, but they're not actually eels. They're actually amphibians. Story_ID: 30278 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So what kind of changes, I guess, do frogs and toads go through? I know--from the, there are the color changes, sex changes, voices, I mean explain some of the changes they go through and why. Speaker 2: Well, the more obvious one is metamorphosis where, you know, the tail absorbed and they grow limbs, and the gills are absorbed and they grow lungs. And those changes are all regulated by genes that are controlled primarily by thyroid hormones, but other hormones interact. Like any organism, they have, you know, the sex is determined genetically, but the development of the sex is controlled by hormones. So even though the genes say you are male or you are female, it's actually the hormones that causes those structures to form just as it is in humans, right. I mean there are actually hormones actually involved in whether or not you develop a testis or an ovary or a penis or vagina and all that stuff. So the same hormones. It's just that the difference is, if you're developing as a human, you're in a more or less protected environment, although there's now evidence that hormones and chemicals can go across the placenta as well, but you're in somewhat of a confined, protected environment with a much stronger genetic control over that aspect of development, whereas if you're an amphibian hormones can short circuit your genes, if you will. So we've shown, for example, you can take a male frog, genetic male frog and turn it into a female, just because of, just by creating a hormone imbalance that gives it more of the female hormone. So they have sort of the same mechanisms, but a little more flexibility, if you will. Story_ID: 30279 Speaker 1: Okay, so the term "endocrine disruptor" and that's--would that be the agent that would disrupt the hormones? Speaker 2: Yeah, and that, you know, that term in the whole field and interest in endocrine disruptors came about, about the same time as the recognition of the global amphibian decline. So there were a group of people, Theo Colburn, Howard Burn, John McLaughlin, etc., who got together in a big meeting called "Wingspread" [1991], so similar; another big conference where people started to talk about, you know, a variety of things like--oh, her name's escaping me now, but one woman in Boston who discovered that her estrogen dependent cells were starting to grow. And it turns there was something in the cell medium that was mimicking the estrogen or somebody else who discovered that their male rats were being feminized, and it turns out there's a chemical in the plastics that was estrogen-like. And so these guys all started getting together and talking about these anomalous things happening in their experiments that they were noticing. And that's how the whole field or the whole study of endocrine disruptor developed. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so my interests sort of overlapped those two big events because I'm hearing about, you know, Howard Burn, who was one of my mentors here was one of the founders of these kinds of problems. You know, he's like the grandfather of comparative endocrinology, one of the most world-renowned endocrinologist ever. And so I was being influenced by him as well as people like Marvalee Wake and Dave Wake and Harry Green in terms of sort of the conservation aspect, and Paul Licht and, you know, so I had all these great people here [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. You know, so they're showing me all the different ways that you could apply endocrinology and the kinds of--in the ways that I was interested. Story_ID: 30280 Speaker 1: Okay, I ask this question. The other, some of the other black scientists who are on campus [University of California, Berkeley, Berkley, California], I guess, during the time would include, I guess, from what I have here, George Jones [1963-1968], Robert Bragg [1969-1987], William Lester [1981- ], Gibor Basri [1979- ], did, was there--did you all have any kind of association or any need for any kind of association of black scientists? Speaker 2: I know who they are, and I've been to some, but never--we haven't had a real strong association. I mean I know Gibor Basri mostly through his administration position [Vice Chancellor for Equity and Inclusion, appointed 2007]. And, in part, I think that's because, you know, biologists stick to biologists and chemists to chemists, etc. But I thought, you know, there's a couple of meetings of organizations where we've all gotten together and things like that, but not a real regular thing that we all go to. Speaker 1: Okay, I just wondered, you know, you come here and are on campus. And there're not so many of you, you know-- Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. Speaker 1: --the need to get together every now and then because of the politics of a college campus or, you know-- Speaker 2: The biggest, I think that we--I came together not so much with the scientists on campus, but right around Prop 209 [Proposition 209] when they were trying to end affirmative action or diversity initiatives on campus, several of us got together and several of us got together subsequently when the new chancellor came in [2004, Robert J. Birgeneau became Chancellor], and he wanted some ideas of how to improve diversity in the current climate. Speaker 1: So that brought some of the black professors together? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Faculty and staff. Speaker 1: Faculty and staff, okay. Story_ID: 30281 Speaker 1: Well, tell us, kind of describe your, I guess, your dissertation, you know, and what-- Speaker 2: Here? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: So, again, my dissertation was-- Speaker 1: You got your Ph.D. in '93 [1993], right? And you arrived in '89 [1989] and got your Ph.D. in '93 [1993], right. Speaker 2: So my dissertation, I don't remember the exact title [The Role of Steroids in Growth and Development in Anuran Amphibians], but focused on the role of hormones in metamorphosis and sex differentiation in amphibians, in frogs. Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: And then that became my life work at this point (laughter). But I mostly looked at stress hormones and how they interact with tyroid hormones to determine growth rates and development rates and metamorphosis, time the metamorphosis. I looked at sex steroid hormones and how they control sexual dimorphism, whether or not you--you know, I worked on this African bull frog where the males get about this big and the females only get about this big. Story_ID: 30282 Speaker 1: Now, you went to Africa in '93 [1993]. Speaker 2: It might have been my first time I went there, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. So you traveled to Africa to do field work, following the receiving of your Ph.D. and I have to ask this question, and I know in the news at the time, the African frogs had somehow come here and escaped or something and they were in golf courses and there was a story about African frogs inhabiting a pond at one of the major golf courses? Speaker 2: Oh, probably Xenopus [African clawed frog] is what you're talking about. Speaker 1: Yeah, they were really tough frogs. They were like unusual. They-- Speaker 2: Yeah, these were the African clawed frogs that--they're widely used in labs around the world for scientific research. Originally, they were brought here in the 1940s because the human pregnancy hormone, hCG [human chorionic gonadotropin], will induce these frogs to lay eggs. So they were the original pregnancy test. So hospitals kept them and would inject and would inject urine, and again, I love telling this story because who's the first guy who thought, gee, I wonder what will happen if I inject pee into a frog. But it turns out that the hormone that maintains human pregnancy [progesterone] is so similar to hormones in frogs that it will cause them to lay eggs. So that was the first pregnancy test. And so what happened is when, you know, other tests developed, the rabbit test [an early pregnancy test involving injecting rabbits with a pregnant woman's urine], which you may have heard of and now these, plus, you are, minus, you're not tests, a lot of people, I guess just threw the frogs out. And so you can get 'em, you can catch them in Golden Gate Park [San Francisco, California]. We used to go down to San Diego [California] to Sea World and catch them. They're in Arizona and they're in Florida. I know that they're in England, and they're a menace because one, they eat a lot of the native fish, crayfish and native amphibians. So people kind of don't want them there. But there's, I mean I can, you can--I can tell you places to go to get them around here (laughter) at several (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. I read about how tough they were. There's some story in "Sports Illustrated" about a guy hitting his ball in a pond and it was eaten by one of the frogs and stuff-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Yeah. Speaker 1: Some struggle with the frog, you know, but-- Speaker 2: Irvine [California], I mean at Riverside [California], I mean they're in a lot of places. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 30283 Speaker 1: Okay, now, describe your travel to Africa [Kenya, 1993] and what you were doing in Africa? Speaker 2: The first time I went there was to Kenya to work on African bull frogs, and again, it was a dream come true for me. So, then I went with another former student of Paul Licht. She was then a professor at Auburn [University, Auburn, Alabama]. It was a good experience. You know, all of these field trips, they all sound great when you come back. They're tough when you're there. You come back with a lot of great stories, but when you're there, it's--you know, because you're also there to work. And people think, oh, you're there watching elephants and going on safari's. I'm like, no, I'm--the last thing you wanna see when you're out at a pond at night is an elephant or a hypo. I mean it's (laughter), and everything thinks, you know, 'cause that's what everybody sees in Africa, but-- Speaker 1: So where did you actually go? You went to Kenya, but did you go out into the national parks? Is that where-- Speaker 2: No, we worked in, we worked near a village called Selai. We worked in a place called Nakuru because we can't collect and work in the parks, so. We worked in a place called the Arabuko Sokoke [Forest] which is where I've gone back to do quite a bit of work. And I think that was it for the first trip. Watamu which is near (unclear) on the coast [Indian Ocean]. Speaker 1: Okay, well, what did you find out, I mean about-- Speaker 2: One, the project I went there to do didn't work out so well 'cause the frogs were more difficult to breed than I thought. But that was where I started working on these little reed frogs that changed color. So I brought a bunch of those back and eventually, we started working on hormonal regulation of that color change. And then we patented a model to screen compounds for estrogenic properties [Hyperolis Argus Endocrine Screen, HAES Test]. Speaker 1: Okay, now you can actually patent a frog and-- Speaker 2: Well, you can patent the process, the patent the methodology, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So you can't patent the actual organism, but you can patent the use of the organism for, in our case, we were testing compounds perceived as estrogenic. Speaker 1: All right, so a procedure was (unclear) and to the-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: Okay, and the reed frogs changed colors based on? Speaker 2: They respond to estrogen. Speaker 1: Estrogen, okay. So what color would they go from, from what to what? Speaker 2: It depends on the species, but the main one we worked on, they go from green, plain green to sort of a reddish brown with big white spots. So they're very dramatic, and depending on the dose, they can make that transformation within five days, so completely changed their pattern, and it's a permanent change. Speaker 1: So it's not any conscious act of a frog at all? Speaker 2: No, not like the lizards. You're probably thinking of the lizards where they're actively changing color to match their background. That's very different. Speaker 1: All right, okay. So this is involuntary, okay. Speaker 2: And it's a permanent change. So whereas the lizards go back and forth, this is a permanent change. Speaker 1: So once they've changed, they're changed. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 30284 Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about your post-doctoral studies at the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development [NICHD]? Speaker 2: Yeah, that was sort of a--well, I shouldn't say scam, but so what happened was, I graduated in a weird way. A lot of things fell together. My approach was to do stuff a year early because assuming I wouldn't get it, right. So I applied for dissertation year fellowship in my second year assuming that I wouldn't get it but I'd get feedback and then I would get it the year that I needed it. So in my, it was my third year? So in my third year, I applied for a post-doctoral fellowship assuming that I wouldn't get 'em, but then I'd get back the critiques, and then when I, you know--anyway, to make a long story short, I was awarded two major fellowships at the end of my third year. So I--and I had already published, I don't know, six or seven papers. So I was moving along. But I went to my professor [Dr. Paul Licht] and I said, well, I think I should graduate, and he said, well, you haven't been here long enough. And I said, well, I have a post-doctoral fellowship, and if I don't graduate I have to give it back. So that's how I graduated. And at the time, my wife [Katherine Kim] and I had sort of decided that either she was gonna go back to school, she wanted to go get an M.B.A. and a M.P.H. or we would have a kid. And as it turns out, in the same week that she found out she got into graduate school, we also found out we were having a kid [Tyler Hayes]. So she deferred a year. I went to the post-doc and then just as I was finishing the post-doc, a job here opened up. My professor had become dean--was he dean then? Yeah. Was he dean? [whispering] Yeah, he had become dean, and-- Speaker 1: Is this Paul Licht? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so what he said was, there's no way you'll get the job if you're here, you know, 'cause they don't like to hire their own. So I, my fellowship was mine. I could take it where I wanted. So we moved to NIH [National Institute of Health], and by now my son was born actually. My son was with us. So we moved to NIH for the summer, but then I found out I had the job so I came back here [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]. So then I started my lab, but I kept my pay on my post-doc. So I deferred a year being a professor and paid myself and my lab. And then I had a, got sort of a ready-made lab because, you know, there was a graduate student behind me that ended up joining my lab. And another graduate student from Paul Licht's lab switched over to my lab. Another graduate student from molecular cell biology switched over and so I had like a big lab of really independent students who were already publishing and stuff. So we moved along pretty quickly. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is '94 [1994] when you join the faculty? Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, so I deferred a year. So I took a year and set up my lab. Story_ID: 30285 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Let's see-let's talk about--oh, yeah, the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was the EPA doing in those days? This is '96 [1996]. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: What is your assessment of what the EPA does and has done? Speaker 2: Oh, man. So I got involved with the EPA--well, we have to back up. So to make a long story short, after we patented that model, this group Ecorisk came to me and hired me as a consultant. And the original job was to review the available literature for this company--they were Novartis at the time, of whether or not their compound, Atrazine was an endocrine disruptor. So that went on for a couple of years. I keep using the word scam. It was kind of a scam. I mean I got paid. I mean I was a young assistant professor. I got paid something like a thousand dollars a day which now ain't that much. At the time, wow, you're gonna pay me a thousand dollars a day to sit around and think. So, and they would fly us, you know, somewhere for the weekend and, you know, some fancy resort, and we'd, you know, brainstorm and read literature and things like that. Speaker 1: Now, Ecorisk sounds like an environmental protection, you know, project or an independent, a not-for-profit--was it a not-for-profit or what was it? Speaker 2: I don't know. It was basically a guy, Ron[ald] Kendall, who had connections to people in industry. So he had connections to Novartis and deep connections to the EPA and he used those positions to get money out of the company. So he could go to Novartis and say, look--he was at the time on the Endocrine Disruptor Screening and Testing Committee of the EPA. He was the chair of the scientific advisory board to the EPA. So he could go to Novartis and say, look, here's what the EPA is gonna make you do. You can hire my company, and we'll do it. So that's what he was doing, right. And so what he did--ran was a panel that would do all the work for Novartis that then they would report to the EPA. So basically--and they would be reporting back to him because he was the chair of the scientific advisory board, right, so it was a real scam. Speaker 1: That's pretty tight (laughter). Speaker 2: And they paid a group of us--I probably got paid a lot less than the rest of them 'cause they were more senior. I got paid a thousand dollars a day. They might fly us to Hilton Head [Island, South Carolina] somewhere, set us up in a nice place would feed us and--So in the end of it, it turned out there was no information on amphibians and Atrazine. And so they ended up asking me well, what would you do? And I said, well, here's what I would do. And so I ended up getting this contract to do research. And so the way it worked was Novartis, and they later became Syngenta, paid Ecorisk. Ecorisk then--so I was advised to do was to set up a company, like a consulting company. So Novartis paid Ecorisk and Ecorisk paid my company which was basically just a bank account. And then I gave my lab a grant. So the money was--I shouldn't say things like on tape, so the money was laundered through a whole bunch. So I would never say, oh, I'm working for Novartis. I was working for Sokoke. So we named the company after the forest where we got the frogs. So Sokoke had given my lab a grant. So the University of California, Berkley [Berkeley, California] was doing research for this private group, Sokoke, who was being paid by Eco-Risk who was being paid by Novartis. So that's how it went down. Story_ID: 30286 Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: Now, I got involved with EPA because we completed the first project and that's when we discovered that the larynx or the voice box didn't grow when these animals were exposed to Atrazine. In other words, testosterone was supposed to make the male frog's stuff develop. Speaker 1: Now, before we go on, what is Atrazine? Tell us-- Speaker 2: Atrazene at the time, well, it's a weed killer. It's a so-called S-chlorotriazine. At the time, it was the number one selling pesticide in the world, and Novartis at the time was the largest chemical company in the world. And even now, we still use about eighty million pounds of Atrazine in this country, mostly on corn. And it's also used-- Speaker 1: It kills-- Speaker 2: It kills weeds, broadleaf weeds. So it's mostly used on corn, but it's also used in forestry, Christmas tree farms, golf courses, lawns in some states. So, anyway, at the time, we showed that these animals were demasculinized or chemically castrated. The company then--I don't know how much of this story you wanna know, but the company then really started trying to slow us down. And, you know, don't work too fast, don't move too fast. And then what I was--one of the members, one of the senior members of this Ecorisk pulled me aside and said, look, the company, a guy named John Giesy, the company already knows it's bad. So this guy, John Giesy was the graduate student advisor of a vice president in Novartis [Gary Dixon]. So there was a lot of connections. So John Giesy was working for Ecorisk who was being run by Ron Kendall. John Giesy's former graduate student was the vice president of Novartis at the time. In fact, if you go back to the first "National Geographic" news thing when this news first broke, that guy, Gary Dixon, is the vice president that was this guy's student. So anyway, John Giesy pulls me aside. He said, look, Gary Dixon told me a long time ago the stuff was bad. They need to get rid of it. And he said, but here's what you do. He said, you just take their money and you just do whatever you want. They don't want you to produce anything. What they need to do is to go back to the EPA and say, look, we're spending millions of dollars to solve this problem. You don't have to do anything. And then the EPA is satisfied, and in the meantime, the company is looking for the replacement or how to handle it. So he said, all you have to do is take the money, do whatever you want, and he said, in the end, once Novartis figures out a replacement product, you publish your results, they'll voluntarily give up the chemical, and the EPA says, look, the system works. And he told me, so you can look this up. He said, that's exactly what we did with 3M [Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company], with Scotchgard. You know they had to change the formula, said they just paid me. And then when they found the result they wanted, he published, they dropped the chemical, and they got the drop on all the other companies because they knew it was gonna be banned, right. I said, look, I'm not gonna operate that way. So the EPA involvement came because of the following. The EPA then opened up a scientific advisory panel meeting to evaluate Atrazine. This guy, Ron Kendall assumes that I had already gone to the EPA. I hadn't. So he goes t the EPA and starts complaining about my lab and my data and how my data is flawed. The EPA says, we don't even know who you're talking about. And the reason they didn't is, the reason I told you about that, all that, where the money came from, I would have been screwed because at the University of California, Berkley [Berkeley, California], you can't do confidential research, public university. But because the money came to my account, my Sokoke and I brought it here, I would have been responsible. So there's no way that I would have gone and taken the data to them 'cause they could have sued me because I was in a confidentiality contract. But once they did that, once the EPA said--the EPA then said, you're required by law to tell us about any results you have. And so they had to write me out of my contract and open up the confidentiality clause. That's how I got out of that. So that was my first interaction with the EPA. Story_ID: 30287 Speaker 1: Okay, so Atrazine. All right, it seems to be--is this the vegetable equivalent of DDT [dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, a pesticide] or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. It's, like I said, it was the number one, and the reason it could be used on corn is corn is naturally resistant. And the largest crop in the U.S. [United States] is corn. So it was the biggest. The only reason it's not number one now is 'cause now they have round-up, ready corn. So Glyphosate [N-(phosphonomethyl)glycine] made by Monsanto [Agricultural Company]. So now you can use round up on corn and soy. So that's why Glyphosate exceeds of Atrazine. Speaker 1: So is that dangerous? Speaker 2: It's another weed killer--well, I don't know much about it. Some people say--I haven't done many studies on it. There's some data out there, but it's not, it doesn't appear to be as persistent or as potent as Atrazine in terms of the non-target effects. Speaker 1: Is it--I guess is it, would you feel comfortable generalizing about chemicals used to control, you know, are they all-- Speaker 2: No, you know, and a lot of people make that mistake. I'm not Mr. "Anti-pesticide." I, my--I've been called an activist now, but my activism around Atrazine and a few other chemicals is based on my knowledge of the scientific data that shows it to be a risk in my opinion. So there's some other arguments we can get in about other chemicals where, you know, I'd have to see the data. And I don't, you know, I don't really separate. I mean I look at pharmaceuticals and pesticides in some ways in the same light. I mean they're both--if you think about some pharmaceuticals, it's designed to alter your physiology in some way and oftentimes designed to kill something, whether it's a drug that's targeting a cancer cell in your body or a targeting a bacteria. The difference is what you take into your body, you have knowledge of. Pesticides are a little more tough because you don't have a, in many cases you don't have a choice. It's what some people call chemical trespass. You know, if you, you know, for example, you watch these shows about, you know, they're gonna give you some sinus medicine. And then they have this list, may cause headache, blindness, blah, blah, blah, you know, this whole list, but you make that choice. You go, okay. I'm gonna weigh out whether treating my sinus problem is worth the risk of these other--you make that choice. You don't get to make that choice when you bite into an apple. You see, so my position is a little bit different. I see them in the same way. I do my best to take as few drugs as possible. I don't care what it is. I do my best to let my body take care of itself. I can make that decision 'cause I don't see it any, that different 'cause I see the same thing. And the same way people think, oh, I'll put this pesticide into the environment and I'm smart enough and I know enough that I know everything it's gonna do. Ah, bull. It's the same thing when you put something in your body. We have a good idea, right. But there's all those risks. Story_ID: 30288 Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this, and this is for the sake of scientists that are watching this. Can you describe your, I guess, the process of discovering the properties of Atrazine, I mean the destructive-- Speaker 2: The experiments that we did (unclear)? Speaker 1: Yeah, the experiments you did. Speaker 2: So we set up an experiment. Atrazine is mostly a water contaminant. So we set up an experiment where we exposed developing tadpoles to different concentrations of Atrazine. And those concentrations are what we call ecologically relevant. So in other words, they're not real high doses. They're doses that you can find in your surface water, in your drinking water, even in your rain water, so realistic doses. And we exposed the animals throughout their tadpole development, and then when they metamorphosed, when they turned into frogs, we examined the size of their larynx or their voice box because that's androgen dependent, and then we examined their gonads because it's also, can be affected by hormones. So we looked at how many males, how many females and to our surprise, we found that significant portion of the animals were neither or both, i.e., they had testes and ovaries which is not a normal occurrence in frogs. And then we've since then gone on to look at how the hormones are altered and some of the molecular, you know, some of the genes that are being turned on and off and all that stuff. But in a nutshell, we found that it had demasculinized, so it took away male components from a developing individual and can either partially or completely feminize other genetic males. Speaker 1: And I think I read where males were actually producing eggs. Speaker 2: Yeah, we have some males that completely turn into females and lay eggs as if they're females. Yeah. Story_ID: 30289 Speaker 1: Now, you know, well, the next question is, and I don't know if you can, you know, I mean you can only--I mean you know what happened to the frogs, but what happens to human beings exposed to Atrazine? Speaker 2: There's, so the data from humans either comes from are epidemiological studies. So people look at a group of people that are exposed or unexposed, and then they look to see if there's a correlation between exposure and some condition. Then there's also some data from human cell lines. So we do experiments on human cell lines, and then there's data from rats which we use as a surrogate for humans. Now, what those data show, the following. I'll start with the rat data. The data from Atrazine show that rats that are fed Atrazine suffer from, can suffer from neurological damage if exposed in utero. They can suffer from immune failure, but related to the things that I work on, rats that are fed Atrazine developed prostate cancer. They developed breast cancer. So rats get breast cancer as well. Pregnant rats that are fed Atrazine have abortions because the Atrazine causes a hormone imbalance that they can't maintain the pregnancy. And there're studies that's showing that of the sons that are born to exposed mothers, sons can be born with prostate disease. So in other words, the rat pups are born with the prostate of an old man and the daughters can be born with impaired mammary developed. So their breast don't develop properly. Those are the rat data. In human cell lines, it's been shown that Atrazine creates the same imbalance. So if you take a human cancer cell line and expose it to Atrazine, the cell line will start synthesizing estrogen inappropriately. Now, that's the experimental end of it. In whole humans, there's at least one study--oh, and in rats, it's been shown that Atrazine knocks off sperm count just like we've shown in frogs and fish. One of my colleagues, Shawna Swan showed that in humans men who have Atrazine in their bodies, as measured in their urine, are more likely to have low sperm count and low fertility. So again, you can't say that that's cause and effect, but it's in line with what we see in rat studies and other animal studies. Other studies in humans show an association between Atrazine and breast cancer. Once again, it's backed up by the rat studies and the cell line studies. And a study in their [Sygenta] own factory showed that men that who were exposed to Atrazine have an 8.4 fold higher incidence of prostate cancer. And all those men are, in that study were fifty years old. So they're getting prostate cancer at a very young age. They were all men that worked in the factory for ten or more years and men who were actively working and men who worked in the room where they bagged the Atrazine. So, and again, it's not cause and effect, but that's a pretty tight study. And we know that Atrazine causes that same problem in rats. Now, the thing that the company gets upset with me about that I think is the--signals the biggest problem with Atrazine in humans is the following. What Atrazine does, what it's been shown to do in human cell lines, what we've shown it to do in frogs, what they've shown it to do in fish, alligators and turtles, is it turns on an enzyme called aromatase. Now, aromatase is the machinery, if you will, that converts testosterone into estrogen. So it causes you to use up your testosterone and turn it into estrogen. That's been shown in human cell lines. In fact, it's been shown by one of my graduate students in a breast cancer cell line, that Atrazine turns on aromatase and is associated with breast cancer. Story_ID: 30290 Speaker 1: Turns out that the same company [Novartis, sister company of Syngenta] sells a chemical to block aromatase that they sell to breast cancer patients. So to me, that's the biggest piece of evidence. How are you gonna argue that Atrazine turning on aromatase does not increase the likelihood of breast cancer when you're selling a chemical that does exactly the opposite with the promise that it's gonna keep your breast cancer from spreading or occurring. Speaker 2: This is amazing. Speaker 1: And they, you know, I'm not sure what their argument is, but they write these letters to my dean. And, you know, I joke all the time. I told them, my Daddy [Romeo Hayes] lives in South Carolina. Writing letter to my dean ain't gonna get you nowhere (laughter). If my father calls me up and says, son, do something else, then I'd think about it. But writing to my dean, no. So, because I published that relationship. I published a paper called the "One Stop Shop, Chemical Causes and Cures for Cancer". And you'll see this. If you look across the board, okay, that same company under a different name, for example, sold DDT [dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, a pesticide], Cepegigge or gigge (ph.). DDT we know is an estrogen mimi. You know, it's like getting in this room. It fits into the estrogen lock, even though it's not. Okay, they sold an estrogen mimic. The same company sold Tamoxifen which is an estrogen blocker to treat breast cancer. So you have these big chemical companies really getting paid on both ends so to speak. And whether or not there's a conspiracy and anybody's doing, that's not what I'm saying. But the case of Atrazine, in the year 2000, January, that guy, John Giesy I was telling you about published a paper where he actually wrote in the paper, John Giesy, the former advisor of the vice president of Novartis [Gary Dixon], wrote a paper where he said, the induction of aromatase by Atrazine may explain some of the tumor-promoting properties of Atrazine. They wrote that in January 2000. In July 2000, they applied to the FDA [U.S. Food and Drug Administation] to start selling their aromatase blocker, just six months later. In November 2000, Novartis spins off this company, Syngenta, who keeps selling Atrazine. And now Novartis only sells the aromatase blocker. But come on. At some point you have to know there were two men in the same room who went, "Oh, shit" (laughter), right, but, you know, but treat it how it is. Those are the facts. All in one year, they discover that Atrazine turns on aromatase. Six months later, they start--they apply to start selling an aromatase blocker, and then by November, they spin off another company--they keep selling Atrazine, and they start selling the aromatase blocker. Come on. (laughter) Story_ID: 30291 Speaker 1: So, now what was--we have a note in here about some kind of email war between you and them [Novartis/Syngenta]. Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter). So for the last, I don't know how many years they have--I give a lot of off-campus talks, a lot of lectures. And they've done a number of things to harass me including passing out pamphlets or documents, you know, standing out--they've actually stood up in the middle of my talks and just started talking and interrupted. They've pulled fire alarms to get people out of the room, and most recently, one of the guys, Tim Pastoor, actually threatened me. So they have a whole consortium of people to deal with me, right. And so he--I was at the State House in Illinois about to testify. And so he comes up and he corners me, this guy, Tim Pastoor, and he says, "Who's your daddy?" You know, he's, so they're throwing out stuff to try to get at me, to try to get a rise out of me, you know, to make me nervous for my talk. I said, what are you talking about? He said, and he says, "Nobody travels this much unless somebody's paying you. And we're gonna figure out who it is." And then he says, "Don't you worry about your family when you travel so much? Don't you worry about your lab when you're traveling so much, right?" Speaker 1: Now, this is--takes place at the University of Illinois--? Speaker 2: No, no, this is in the State House. Speaker 1: This is the State House in Illinois [Springfield]. Speaker 2: Yeah. This is right before Cong-- Speaker 1: This is the-- Speaker 2: I'm getting ready to testify before Congress-- Speaker 1: --this is in the heart of corn country. Speaker 2: Yeah, and so then he said, oh, and he's calling me "Teabag," which I didn't even know what that meant at the time. I thought it was because of my initials, T.B. He's going, "Hey, Teabag, you know, don't you worry about your--so in the end he says, I tell you what. Next time you give a talk, I'm gonna bring some of my good 'ole boys and let you tell them how Atrazine is making them gay." Okay. So then I get back to my hotel room. Their lawyer Alan Nadel sends out an email and says, "Congratulations, Tim, I think you hit a nerve," and accidentally cc's it to my account. So, on this account, I got--and I could show it, I mean I have it all, so on this account are three major international law firms, the P-R [public relations] firm that worked for United [Airlines] after nine-eleven [September 11, 2011 Attacks]. So they're paying a huge number of people. So then, so I see that email, right, and then the next thing I see is a Yahoo alert email that says, "The sender of the previous email has recalled that email. It was sent by accident. Do not open that email, blah, blah, blah". So I let it sit for a couple of days, right. And then there's a website for people taking the bar exam, and there're different lessons on the website, and one of them is never send out an email recall. It just makes the sender look at it. So I forwarded it to their lawyer and all, everybody else on it. So now he knows that I saw it. So then we go back and forth, right. Then the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] announces that they're gonna start another review of Atrazine. Then it also comes out that--you know, 'cause they're claiming I'm the only one who's found problems with Atrazine so I emailed everybody in the world who'd worked on Atrazine. And forty-one of us are publishing a paper saying, no, we've all found effects of Atrazine. So what they do then is they go, oh, 'cause we've been, you know, they've been harassing me. We've been going back and forth on emails for the longest. So then they publish this email thing. The design of it was to embarrass me and discredit me and, you know, and then all of my, you know, all of my colleagues would drop off the paper and whatever. What it did was the following, since that thing went off, I've given 128 talks. It's been excellent P-R [public relations] for me because people looked at it. It backfired. People looked at it and said, oh, if they're doing shit like this--and it's obvious, right, you can see the emails where they blacked out what they wrote to me and they only published what I wrote, and they blacked out everybody's names on it (laughter). And on several of the emails, you'll see I say, you can show this to anybody you want. I don't give a shit. And so the backfire was, one, it brings all, you know, it brings the noise. It brings all this news, 128 talks since then. So, you know, so they're acting like P-R [public relations] for me. Story_ID: 30292 Speaker 1: The second thing it does is, because of the nature of some of the things that I wrote, it all ends up now on the Hip Hop, on the popular blogs. So now I got minority communities who would have never had access to information because part of thing I haven't told you is, you know, who's the most at risk of breast and prostate cancer disease and most at risk of dying from it are black and Mexican Americans. Who's more likely to be exposed to Atrazine? 90 percent of our agriculture workers are Hispanic, and they have levels of Atrazine in their urine that are twenty four thousand times what we use in a laboratory, okay. The community with an 8.44 prostate cancer? 80 percent African American. So our, is the likelihood of dying from prostate cancer and breast cancer which is two to two and a half times white Americans is it because of biological difference or that we're more likely to live in and work in areas where we're exposed to these chemicals, right. So now you've got them, now, my stuff's cycling the "Atlanta Post". It's on the Hip Hop wire. So now you've got a community that otherwise may not have even had access to the information, they've gotten that information there because I ended, you know, I ended up on Gawker [Media] and Bossip [Both gossip websites] and all kinds of (laughter), but I tell you, for about a week, you know, I remember--I'm gonna cuss now, but I remember this Bossip thing, one of my students said, "Oh, this is so cool, you know." And I was like, what is the thing? And I looked, and one of the headlines is, "Beyonce's camel-toe caught on film". The next headline is, "Woman arrested for masturbating while driving", and in the middle, there's a picture of me that says, "University professor tells company, I ain't scared of you motherfuckers." And I said, Ooooh, (laughter). But it was an excellent article. And from there, it went to the "Atlanta Post". It went to "Green Wire", it went to the Hip Hop wires. Some of that same group of black men I was telling you about at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] started a legal defense fund. Another group of people raised a significant amount of funding. Another guy is now writing a book, just signed a movie deal. So the whole thing just, you know, and now they played their hand, right. So now we have our other papers coming out. There's nothing left for them to talk about except the science and the fact that they're selling a drug that does the opposite of their pesticide. Speaker 2: This is incredible. Speaker 1: So it was, you know, and some of it's like, you know, some of the stuff they pulled--let me give you an example. That room, remember when I put the key in that other conference room. So I used to have a class in that room, okay. One day I'm in my class. It's a small room, but I used to have like forty, fifty people in there. Two guys with guns, a 100 percent true story. I can show you the evidence 'cause it sounds like stuff people make up. Two guys with guns come into the room, right, in the middle of my class. Guy shows a badge and says, I'm Special Agent Crump, you need to step out of the room. So these are from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Law Enforcement [U.s. Fish and Wildlife Service Office of Law Enforcement], so Syngenta and their people have--'cause I'm working in the Salinas River [California] studying, have told them that we're illegally harassing and collecting an endangered species. So these guys come with badges and guns, take me out of my classroom because they wanna inspect all the animals I have in my laboratory. You know, and it's little crap like that, that sounds like, you know, but when you're constantly, you know, harassed and things like that. So, yeah, I responded. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 30293 Speaker 1: I was told, I think someone mentioned to me this interview before that you were--there's a way that you raise money that's different, I mean from others because of your--well, when you came to campus, you figured out a way to, you know, raise money for your own research-- Speaker 2: Um-hum. Speaker 1: --you know, that was different from what the usual methods on the campus was, is that--? Speaker 2: Well, I think luckily, what I recognized early on, I mean it used to be that the National Science Foundation [NSF] supported careers. You got a grant and they took care of you for the rest of your--money ain't the way it used to be. And so what I realized early on, I was originally, initially funded by the National Science Foundation and California Sea Grant, but what I realized early on is that you gotta diversify, and so luckily, what I was doing at the time, even though I had a National Science Foundation, like Ecorisk, I said, okay, yeah, I'll take that as a source of funding, you know, as a different set of sources. And then I had a guy who, the university introduced me to some people, you know, 'cause they're trying to raise money. And I got introduced to a guy who owns a water company who said, look, I have whatever it means, nineteen million extra dollars a year. And I could either take a loss, you know, taxes will hit me with that or I can give it away and write it off. He said, or, if I give some of that to you I can write it off as a business expense because I need to know what's in my water. You know, so I had a long relationship with that guy, and I say, "luckily" because when all the stuff went down, all the--I mean a couple of things happened. One is, right about the time I was breaking up with Novartis, Ecorisk, my wife [Katherine Kim] who had finished her degrees, M.B.A. and M.P.H., started a company that then got bought out by a company in Austin [Texas] 'cause as I say, ironically, she moved to Austin. So I was here [Berkeley, California] with two little kids, with a two-year old [Kassina Hayes] and a five-year old [Tyler Hayes]. And she was back on weekends, but I was here trying to run a lab with two little kids, and I had just decided, you know what? I got to live my dream, I got to be a professor. I'm tenured so I'm gonna just let the lab dwindle down until we can get back together--I mean we weren't broken up, you know, it's just we were in different places. And it was just too hard with, you know, two little ones. So I let all my funding dwindle down, then I broke up with Novartis. So I had no money, right. And then at about that same time, my wife, ironically said, I can't take it, you know, being away from the kids. So she moved back, right. And then I was like, oh, man, now I gotta get started again. And by then my NSF had gone, had dwindled away. But luckily, I knew private people so I could write out and say, look, I need money. And then what's happened is because of some of the political--I'll give you another example, because of some of the political things around my work, for example, NSF, the next time I applied, I got five X's and a very good. And they didn't give me the money. I said, how can you not give me the money. Then I looked. Guess who's in charge of the program? One of the people who worked for Ecorisk, right, and I said, look, how can you let--you know there's a conflict. If I was sitting on a panel and one of their grants showed up, I, this is guy is in control of my money. So he went away quietly, and they gave me a hundred thousand dollars and said apply again. And then after that they wouldn't even review my grants. I'd submit a grant in January. In June I'll call up and say, I'm calling to see how it went. They said, oh, we didn't send it out for review because you're studying toxicology and we don't fund that. I said, no, I'm studying endocrine disruption. You have a whole endocrine disruption program. And the guy--I'm not gonna say his name, but the guy over the program said, no, if you were studying natural products, then you're studying endocrine disrupt--I said really? I said, so if I take my grant and pull out Atrazine and put in a natural product, you would fund it? He said, yeah. And I said, no, I said, look, I wouldn't change my answers for industry. I'm not gonna change my questions for you. Forget it. But then I could call up people. And so I was supported for the next couple of years by private foundations. So literally last year I stayed afloat 'cause I gave a talk, somebody in the audience said, hey, I run this foundation. Do you want fifty thousand dollars? Gave another talk, somebody said, hey, would you like fifty thousand dollars, I run this foundation. And now they support me regularly; got another NSF this year. But then they didn't get a budget, so even though I had a grant--they gave me maybe $125,000. It takes about $350,000 to run my lab per year. They gave me maybe $125,000 but because I thought the money wasn't coming, I hadn't looked into all my other sources. Then this year, they said, oh, no more money's coming. We don't have a budget. I was able to go back then to a couple of foundations and say, look, I need about $150,000 and there it is. Now, I don't know who you heard that from, but the University [of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] doesn't like it because they don't get overhead. See, if I get an NSF [National Science Foundation] for a hundred thousand dollars, they get fifty, but when people give me a check, they don't get anything 'cause they write, they say "All this money goes to Tyrone" or people who just gave me 150 [thousand dollars], what they say is every dime of that goes to Tyrone's students. And so the lab, the lab itself, research is being run by another source. But they're paying for all my undergraduates and graduates so that they won't have to work outside of the lab. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But if I hadn't diversified like that, I'd be shut down right now. If I didn't know people that I could call up and say, I'm a 150 [thousand dollars] short. And, you know, and that's not hidden. If you look at all my papers, all of the funding sources is acknowledged, every single time. The University just doesn't like it 'cause they don't get a cut. Speaker 1: Now, the National Science Foundation is not tied to the administration of--I mean the, whoever's in political power at the time, is it? Speaker 2: I don't know. I don't think there are any political appointees. Speaker 1: Yeah, I wouldn't think, yeah. I wondered if the political climate would determine the money. Speaker 2: Oh, it does, though. Speaker 1: Does it? Okay. Speaker 2: And there's an impact, yeah. I mean in terms of what I do, yeah. I mean it may not even be direct, but I'm sure there is. Speaker 1: Okay, so could you tell the difference between when Clinton left office and when Bush started in terms of funding? Speaker 2: Yeah, where money goes and how it's spent and how it's apportioned, how much NIH [National Institutes of Health] gets, how much NSF gets, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: What programs are there, what programs get hit, which programs, which programs don't. Story_ID: 30294 Speaker 1: Okay. I've been asked to go back to your patent work and ask you some questions about that. I guess people would wanna know how you, how do you, you know, patent a procedure and how does it, you know, how it works and-- Speaker 2: [Whew] I wish I knew. Speaker 1: --if you-- Speaker 2: To be honest, when I first did it, it was, you know, my wife [Katherine Kim] had the M.B.A. and the M.P.H. It was really her idea. You know, let's, we could have a little company, like a little mom and pop screening company or whatever. And the University [of Califonria, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] gets involved, right, because it's intellectual property. So the patent actually belongs to the University. The University pays the fees and all that kind of stuff. So even though it's, you know, because like I said intellectual property. And so the University, that office actually pushes you to develop these clients and show that you're gonna make money on it because they've invested in it. So they were very much involved until stuff went sour. Now, they claim they knew nothing about it. Like, how can you know nothing about it. You filed the patent. How can you not know that I was working on contract for industry. Speaker 1: Okay, and again, like you may have said it before. What's the practical purpose of your patent? Speaker 2: Well, the idea--oh, you mean what is it used for? Speaker 1: Yeah, what is it used for? Speaker 2: It's primarily--it was called the Hyperolius Argus, that's the species, Endocrine Screen [HAES Test]. Or it's a test for looking for hormone mimics in an aqueous solution. So with regards to the estrogen, if the animal is exposed to a compound that mimics or acts like an estrogen, then it'll change color. And we discovered that every compound that caused the frog to change color was also known to promote breast cancer. So it gives you answers about environmental estrogens, if you will, that are relevant to human health. And any animal does other things, right. We can also screen for androgens [testoids] because the androgens makes the focal side growth and we could also screen for the thyroid hormone because the thyroid hormone makes it metamorphose. So we kind of had three tests rolled into one. And it still is a very, well, it's a very useful tool. That's what the whole Atrazine battle is over now, is tadpoles responding to an endocrine acting substance. Speaker 1: Okay, and so this is well-known procedure now and scientific procedure in the community, I guess. Speaker 2: Well, in terms of that we published it, yes. But the government still doesn't have any--I mean the other appeal was, the two things that we've been talking about. You have endocrine disruptors that are a big concern and you have declining amphibians as a big concern, and now we're combining those two interests in a way that will not only help us find chemicals that might be effecting amphibians but also relevant to human health. So that was one of the big, one of the big driving forces. But the government doesn't have a standardized model. And that's one of the things that we're about to shake up as well because what we now know, these African clawed frogs you're talking about, each population responds very differently in terms of the sensitivity. And we're about to characterize that now. So we have some species--or some populations that are a thousand fold less sensitive than others. So if you pick the wrong population, you could get the wrong answer. But none of that's been standardized. So we're right now doing that. It's my laboratory. Speaker 1: Okay, so nobody else is really doing this anymore? Speaker 2: I don't even know if anybody's thinking about it. Maybe after they see this, they will so we'd better hurry up (laughter). Story_ID: 30295 Speaker 1: Okay, could you, when we go back, in terms of your laboratory work, can you really describe like, then some of the detail work that's involved? Speaker 2: So, what sort of makes our approach unique is that we really strive to do controlled experiments in the laboratory so that we can understand what is it that this chemical, whether it's Atrazine or something else, what is it that it does. But then we also do experiments in the, or studies in the field where we can ask, do we see this same type of effect in areas where Atrazine has been used. And both types are important because, one, when you do it in the laboratory, if I tell you, well, Atrazine makes them hermaphrodites in the lab, well, some others said, well, maybe it's a laboratory artifact. We know Atrazine did it because it's a controlled experiment. But when I go into the field, and I say, oh, there's Atrazine in the water and there's some hermaphrodites, then you can argue, well, maybe it's just, you know, just a coincidence. There're other chemicals in the water. There are other things that happened that wasn't control. And when you put the two together, you get a much strong argument. Typically, an experiment in my lab will start, it starts with the animal. Every student that comes in my lab, before they touch a pipetman [laboratory utensil used for measuring small amounts of liquid], before they run any kind of screening or any kind of testing or any machinery, they learn about the animal, to understand the animal 'cause that's where I'm coming from. Yeah, I always tell people I'm--and that I might have some letters behind my name now, but I'm still a little boy who likes frogs. And that's the focus. So a typical experiment will start with an exposure. So the animal is being treated with a chemical over time, and then typically what we'll do is we'll take it apart, so to speak. So we're interested in its morphology, how it developed. And that might involve looking at the animal just on the outside. That might involve some dissections to look at how the internal organs, mostly the gonads are developing. That might also involve something called histological analysis which you can imagine as we are slicing a tissue really, really thin. And then you lay it under the microscope and it allows you to look at the microstructure. That allows you to see things, like for example, if they have eggs developing in their testes, 'cause many of those things are microscopic. We do a number of what are called radio-amino assays. These are tests where you can measure hormone levels, the same kind of test that, you know, that a woman would get if she were pregnant and the doctor, and they measure your hormone levels or in similar ways, how they might measure your cholesterol levels. We can measure things like that in animals. We also do a lot of behavioral tests. So these are animals where, I mean studies where we might grow an animal up. And we know it's experienced a hormone imbalance because of an exposure. And then we'll ask things like, we'll put it in a situation where we'll ask, can it mate with a female properly. And if it does mate with the female, we'll measure or count how many eggs are fertilized to ask some questions about its fertility. And then when we put all that data together, so, for example, in the last study we showed that males exposed to Atrazine grow up, and they have very low fertility. And then we studied the testes using that histological analysis and showed that they have very low fertility because they have very few sperm. And then we used that radio-amino assay I talked about and measured the testosterone and said, oh, okay, they have very little sperm because they have very little testosterone because the Atrazine takes that away. Then, the next question though is, we go out into the field, and we might do a couple of things. We might look at frogs, downstream of agriculture and upstream of agriculture. And if we find that frogs downstream of agriculture and there's Atrazine and the water and they have low sperm count and low testosterone just like we do in the laboratory, we put all that together. Okay. We might also, one of the experiments my students did is sort of combine the two. So she would go out and dip water out of the field where those animals are affected, bring that water in the laboratory and then put animals in the lab in that same water and ask, do they now show reproductive impairment? So we really--and that's what been unique about what we're doing. We have the laboratory expertise, and I spent a lot of time catching frogs out in swamps. I know how to go out and do that part too. And I might have students in here who all they wanna do is look at whether or not some gene was expressed. Well, that's just one component of trying to understand how it affected that whole animal. And ultimately, we wanna understand how effects on those individuals affects populations. You know, if 70 percent of the males have low sperm count, that's gonna effect the frog populations. And that's what's also unique. When you talk about global amphibian declines and frogs going extinct, while everybody else is out looking for dead frogs and what killed the frogs, we're asking, how come there are no new frogs because Atrazine is not killing the frogs. Many of these pesticides aren't killing them, but when you're reproductively impaired, it's killing the population. And I think that's what's unique about what we're doing. The other thing that we might do is once we go out into the field and find that something's going on downstream, is we realize that there's a lot of chemicals out there. So we started doing studies now where we simulate mixtures of chemicals and ask what those effects are. And one of the things that we look at then is, we often find with these mixtures of chemicals, you get increases in stress hormones which, again, we can measure in the lab. And those cause the animals to be immunodeficient. Their immune system doesn't work. And so a lot of times, even when you had dead animals and people find that frogs are dying from different diseases, it's also because of pesticides and other stressors are making them more vulnerable. So we're really trying to look at those interactions in both a controlled laboratory experiment as well as in the real world. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 30296 Speaker 1: You're now a full professor at the University of California [Berkeley, Berkeley, California]? Speaker 2: Reportedly the youngest in the history of the Department [of Integrative Biology]. Speaker 1: Really, okay, okay. All right, and you have received some awards. And did--okay, now, it says here you're also studying small mouthed bass right now? Speaker 2: Well, we were--we have looked at some fish. We aren't doing too much fish stuff now. But we have, we used to have to have a big grant 'cause there was also an interesting fish because--from outside, because the fish are impacted. Then it has a direct impact on the economy whereas a lot of people go, oh, frogs, yeah, but when you're impacting fish in the same way that you're impacting frogs, then other people get interested as well. So we had [California] Sea Grant money and some other stuff to do fish. But we're not doing so much of that now. Story_ID: 30297 Speaker 1: Okay, a question occurs to me that when you make a very strong case against Atrazine and its effects on the environment and, you know, what--how does what you do--or has your voice been loud enough to actually make a difference in what the government's policy is around this stuff? I know it's still being used in, throughout the Midwest and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the last time I was at the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency] hearings, Syngenta and their allies claimed that I single-handedly manipulated the government into opening the review of Atrazine. There's five new reviews. I don't know if I have that kind of influence and power, but I'll take that to mean that they're taking me seriously. So I think that my work has had some influence on the EPA's, you know, 'cause they had the hearing already and closed it [2004]. Now, they've opened up a whole new review of Atrazine which is unprecedented. There's class action lawsuits across six states. Again, I didn't initiate that. I've been blamed for it if you go read some of the Google pages where I'm sure you've seen they're blaming on me, but I didn't, but some of it may be based on my lectures and the recognition, I'm gonna say that Syngenta and I have brought to Atrazine because it's, when they do these kinds of things in the press, it gets me more attention than anything that I do alone. So they're really helping spread the word, and I really appreciate that. And as I said to the whole group one time, that they have so many people working on me, I'm glad in this economy that I can keep so many people employed. So, some of the other impacts are there's a bill to ban Atrazine. A couple of states have initiated, have written a couple of bills and U.S. Congressman Keith Ellison [Minnesota Representative] has written a bill to ban Atrazine [2010] and I've worked with him to help write that bill. And I've interacted with and gotten the support of a number of environmental organizations which I've been criticized for, the Natural Resources Defense Council, Pesticide Action Network, a number of other environmental, a lot of--Black Women for Wellness, and sort of minority community groups have taken on the cause and invited me to speak, United Steelworkers Union has invited me to speak. And I've worked with a number of--like groups that prepare food for hospitals and things like that. So there's a big awareness. I won't say that I'm generating all of it, but I'm happy to be a big part of that. Story_ID: 30298 Speaker 1: Okay, and when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there a time when something that you projected as a conclusion did not happen that way because this is science after all. So, you know, so. Speaker 2: Um-hum. Well, I think, you know, there's a funny line, I can't remember where it comes from, you know, some CSI [CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, television show] thing, you "Follow the evidence." And I think even though it's hypothesis-driven research, you know, you have a hypothesis, but you, as a scientist, at least as a good scientist, you spend most of your time trying to prove yourself wrong. And when you look at all the data--and sometimes, you are proven wrong, and then you--you know, the first time that I started working with Atrazine, for example. We had done the review and all this kind of stuff. And I thought, gee, the company is asking me to do it. They must know that it's not gonna do anything. I didn't expect anything to happen. All I know is I know how to measure thyroid hormone activity, estrogen activity, and androgen activity. I'm gonna put this stuff in, and I doubt I'm gonna see anything. So there was nothing for me to follow. My hypothesis was really, nothing is gonna happen. One of the other things that we do in my lab--so the beauty of, for example, we just went through how my lab works, you know, that we raise the animals, and then we count how many embryos they can fertilize and then we do the histology and measure their sperm number and then we measure their hormones, for example. Here's how we do that. Four different things I just told you we'll measure. And we measure their behavior whether or not they mate. Five different people do all those different things. And it's all done blindly. So if we had time to walk through my lab and what you'll see when we have an experiment, some of the tanks are colored red-white, some of 'em are colored green-yellow, some of them are colored purple-white. And the solutions that we have in the lab are purple-white, red-white, green-yellow. The students who are doing the work have no idea which ones are the treatments and which ones are not. And then the students who are doing the analysis had nothing to do with raising the animals. So you have a student doing sperm count. They don't even know what they're doing it for. They just got to tell me objectively, fertility was this much here and this much here. They're measuring testosterone. Again, overall, they know the experiment, but they don't know that this one came from the control, and this one came from the--they just know they were measuring some testosterone. And then we put it all back together and you get the story, right. And so we follow the evidence. I mean I can give you-- Speaker 1: So you're the over-arching monitor of all this activity that's taking place? Speaker 2: Well, even my analysis is blind. So, for example, I give a student a purple-white solution. They--and this is how we did it with Syngenta too, my workers didn't know what was what. I'll give them the purple-white solution. They'll treat the frogs with the purple-white thing and then when the animals are done, he'll get specimen number zero-two. So I just examine specimen number zero-two. I don't know if it was treated with purple-white. I know what purple-white is but I don't know which animals were treated until after we get all the data together. And sometimes we do get, like for example, I told you about the downstream experiment. So my student goes, and she collects water and she raised animals in it, and then she looks at their fertility or she looks at whether or not they mate, okay. And it turns out that we would hypothesize that the ones downstream will make less from this one particular river. It turns out just the opposite. The ones from downstream--we don't know what the mechanism is, but then we follow that evidence. And its--And I think one, I think probably the--I'm not gonna say that I'm above being subjective, but I think especially when you have brand new students coming in, freshman, and they're excited, and they're looking for a certain result, it's better to have things done blindly, color coded so that they don't know what's what. And it's a much more rewarding experience, you know, to put the numbers down and decode everything and bam, you know, you get this bar graph showing this and that one's way down there. Story_ID: 30299 Speaker 1: We all know what the scientific method is, you know, observation and measurement and, but and theorizing, but what would you consider to be your scientific philosophy? Do you have such a thing as that? Speaker 2: I think that was just it, following the evidence. I mean you have to be--the other thing is, for example, if you're looking for one particular thing, let me give you a perfect example. Most of my dissertation focused on the role of steroids in metamorphosis. That wasn't what I set out to do. I set out with these particular species of toad to examine the effect of steroids on sex ratio. It turns out the species I picked, steroids have no effect on sex ratios. So if I were only looking at sex ratios, I wouldn't have discovered that stress hormones induce metamorphosis, but the thing is I measured everything. Even though I was focusing my interests was on whether or not they have testes or ovaries, my biggest discovery was something that I wasn't looking at, at all. Speaker 1: Okay, so there was an "aha" moment about something you didn't expect. Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's about really looking, it's about looking at the whole animal. If I were just focusing on that one question I wanted to answer, I would have missed all that. Story_ID: 30300 Speaker 1: Okay, what are you the most proud of, I guess, in terms of what you've been able to do? Speaker 2: Most proud that I've been able to get done what I wanted to do, which takes a lot of my time, and I think, I hope, not step on or get in the way of what my family wants to do. You know, that my son's [Tyler Hayes] doing his thing, and with all my traveling, I get back for all of his music events because my father [Romeo Hayes] was always there for me. I get back for all my daughter's [Kassina Hayes] gymnastic events and my wife [Katherine Kim] is now back in graduate school, yet again. And it's tough, you know, she gets up two o'clock in the morning. I get up at five o'clock in the morning. She's already been working three hours. She makes me feel lazy, but that, with all that, that when I, that when my kids were little, you know, I brought them in the snuggly and taught my class. They weren't off at, you know, at babysitters somewhere. They were in my lap. My son's been in the field--in fact, my son's about to co-author a paper with me, and he spent that time camping and being in the field with me. So, but I did it without--you know, there are people who say don't bring the job home. I think just the opposite. I'm a professor all the time. I'm a father and a husband all the time, and the same principles that, you know, when I look at some of these people who are manipulating and asking me to manipulate data, I say, well, how can I go home and then tell my kids to be honest and to tell my kids that, you know, to have integrity if I'm gonna--and don't get wrong. When I first, you know, I told you where the money came from when I first got involved in this work. And my view was the following. My view was, I'm just like an artist. If you pay and say, hey, do the experiment this way, analyze it this way, it's a job. That's your responsibility. Just like if you said, if you said--if I was an artist, and you said, hey, paint me this color. I'd paint you that color. You'd buy the painting; I'm done with it. That's how I originally went into this. It wasn't, you know, and then when they asked me--I'll tell you the first thing they asked me to do. When we found out that the voice box or the larynx was small in these animals, they asked me to divide the size of the larynx by the body weight of the animal because it makes it go away. And I told them, I said, look, my daughter was five years old at the time. I said, I can measure my daughter's calf and my calf--mine's obviously bigger. But if I divide by my weight, I'm so much heavier, it'll make her look bigger. I said, you're asking me to manipulate data. And how can I do that and then go home and tell my son don't ever cheat on an exam at school. That was a real easy one. So for me, mixing those things, mixing business and my home and letting my kids see, you know, they know those whole stories. They followed the whole thing, and now that they're in high school, you know, they're on the Facebook, and they see that Syngenta published this and that. They've known the whole thing. To be able to do that, to be able to be all of those things at once, and in some ways, you know, now, my students are my kids' age. In some ways, you know, I have a familiar relationship with my students as well. They have, you know, they all have keys to my house. They come cook at my house and pick fruit from my yard, whatever they want, being able to do all that, that's what I'm proud of. Story_ID: 30301 Speaker 1: All right. Now, you were raised in a black community in Columbia, South Carolina and it's--South Carolina's a very churchy environment. You got practitioners of Hoodoo there and other things-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --a very African place. I have asked other scientists this too, you know, what are your concerns about the black community and especially the poor black community in terms of its respect and acceptance of science as such? Speaker 2: That's a good, I mean, yeah, like I was saying, I interact with a lot of community groups, Black Women for Wellness, Sister to Sister and a number of different groups who are concerned about environmental justice. You know, I never thought I would be talking about environmental justice and public health. I mean I just thought I'd be studying toads and playing with toads all my life. But now I've been drawn into this thing and that's very important. And it's been very important for me to try to figure out how to reach the community, not just that community, but also the Mexican-American community because they really are the non-target organisms for these compounds. I've worked in communities where life expectancies are fifty [years old] for--you know, and the things that many of the workers are exposed to are, you know, chloropicrin which was originally developed as a nerve gas. It's still used as a fumigant [a type of pesticide] here in California. I think about when I was in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1985-1989] and we were protesting apartheid and we were talking about how men live away from their families and how many women have a pregnancy without ever seeing a doctor and then I look at the condition of the farm workers here in California and it's not all that different in many ways. I look at--in my lecture on this issue, I show a map of California, and I talk about how California is the fifth largest economy in the world based on agriculture. And as a result, we use more pesticides than any other state. I don't know if you know this, but California grows, 50 percent of the U.S.'s [United States] food comes from California. But then when you look at the top ten counties for agriculture, which are technically the ten counties that make us rich, and then you plot onto that the thirty poorest towns in California, they're almost all in those agriculture communities because the people who work there, whether they're migrant farmers or stationary, they're living in that community where they're, you know, where they're exposed daily to chemicals without a choice. Story_ID: 30302 Speaker 1: Education's a big part of it. One of my, not favorite stories, but one of the most appalling things I found was that when my son was applying to--he got out of private school in eighth grade and said, "Dad, I'm tired of being the only black and the only Asian kid. I wanna go to public school." And so we looked at the Oakland Public Schools [California], and the school we went to visit didn't have AP [advanced placement] Calculus. And so I, you know, I had to make a decision, so I said, you know, you're not gonna go to a school that can't even give you the AP Calculus that you need. Okay, so unrelated story, I volunteer teach every now and then at San Quentin [State] Prison [San Quentin, California]. They have a program where people can get a degree while they're in prison. I teach a biology class in there. Guess what the pre-req is for my biology class? AP Calculus. So you get better math classes at San Quentin prison than you can in Oakland Public Schools. The other thing that, you asked about education in the African American community. I'd bike through a community that's 36 percent African American to get here [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] to teach a class of 150 people. Last year I had one black person and she had to drop out for personal reasons. San Quinton had two black people. I'm like how can I not have black people in class in San Quentin prison, right. (laughter). So, there are all these things that I'm wrestling with in my head of how do I--I mean I told you, in my son's class--so I was invited to teach my son's class. I think maybe there was one other black person in two AP biology classes last year, even though that school is, you know, 30-something percent African American. So I'm baffled at how to get more African Americans involved in science and how to, you know, and how to do it. And certainly, it's an interest of mine, and it's--I take every opportunity that I can to do it, and I hope that my presence and my efforts and, you know, I give talks in middle schools, high schools, you name it. I never--that's why I got 128. I never say no. But it's a must. I mean especially when you consider the healthcare disparities, whether we're talking about, you know, blacks are more likely to die out of all thirteen of the top thirteen cancers in the U.S., more likely get eleven out of thirteen at greater risks for obesity and diabetes and early puberty and many of these things associated with exposure to environmental contaminants. I mean the first step is getting educated and becoming aware of what the risks might be. So it's a concern, how to do it, I mean other than what I've been trying to do, I don't know. Speaker 2: Now, okay-- Speaker 1: So I mean, you know, even here on the faculty level, you know, there's, we have one black person per department. I'm in biology. We have one in chemistry. We have one in psychology. We have one in astronomy. Yeah, that's the whole science, you know (laughter) right there. So it's a problem at every level, from high school, middle school, high school, even before that. Story_ID: 30303 Speaker 1: What would you tell an aspiring black scientist to do, I mean in terms of, I guess, other than keep his chin up or whatever, what would you say-- Speaker 2: I, you know, so a lot of-- Speaker 1: --he or she would have to do? Speaker 2: The talk I'm just coming from was actually called Louis Stokes [Cornell University Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Research Program]--what does it stand for? Anyways, it's programs designed to get African Americans and minorities in general close to science. One, I think to follow your dreams and do what you love is important. I think people get steered away almost--I mean I think somehow I would have ended up, even if I had left Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I would have ended up, I mean I would have been strong enough. I would have found a way go do it. But don't give up, and keep pushing forward. But the other thing that I really encourage people to do and then doing it in my lab too is, there's more than one way to give back. A lot of people only thing about medicine. And what I'm telling people now is, even academic science is not the only way, right. If you think about how decisions are being made, whether it's healthcare reform or stem cell research or globe climate policies, it's not by us, the scientists. It's politicians, it's lawyers, it's--so I'm encouraging people to get that science information. That's why I teach a freshman course that I don't have to teach for non-science majors. I'm pulling those people into my lab. I got a woman in my lab now who's a social studies and theater major who runs PCR [polymerase chain reaction, a technique to amplify DNA]. I don't know what she's gonna do with it, right, but once you have that science literacy, who knows? You know, maybe you'll go into patent law, environmental law, maybe you'll become a politician. Maybe you'll become a medical doctor that'll incorporate your knowledge of environmental impacts on health into how you run your practice. Maybe you'll, you know, become a business person who, you know, who will start a non-profit to get better access, to healthcare to minorities. Who knows? But as scientists, we typically don't do it. So I'm really interested right now, and that's where the big chunk of money I just told you about, that's where it's going, in training non-scientists on how to do science and what science is so that they can go off and do whatever. Whereas most scientists are just trying to train other scientists and clone themselves and get them off into universities. My approach is very different. My approach to diversity is not just ethnic diversity, but diversity of interests and a diversity of things that you're gonna do when you go out there. Story_ID: 30304 Speaker 1: Okay, now, what's next? What would you like to do if you could get the funding to do it, all the funding that you, you know, all the money you needed to do whatever--what project would you work on? Speaker 2: You know, the whole Atrazine--we've talked about in terms of environment health and the political things, but the other thing that we haven't talked about is it really is--I mean, if that was it, I would have dropped it a long time ago. It really is the science, also, understanding how this thing does it. How, let me give you--I can give you an example. Right now, even for humans, we don't know what tells a sperm it's a sperm. In other words the testes develops in part because of genes organize the testes, but the germ cells themselves, there's no gene that makes the sperm. There's some kind of chemical signal, natural chemical signal that tells the germ cell to become a sperm. Nobody knows what that is. Atrazine somehow turns that off and allows you to make eggs in your testes. That's an important scientific question. I mean, you know, it has all these implications for environment health and public health and human fertility and things, but it's an important scientific question as well. And that keeps driving me. I'll give you another example. One of my students--and again, this is another example of not just looking for what you're looking for. So we're repeating this experiment with all male frogs. One of my students discovers that--I already told you that the males won't mate with females when they're exposed. She discovers they'll mate with each other. Now, we're all into that, all into the brains. And what's happened with some of these animals is, they receive enough estrogen that they think that they're females. Their brains are feminized. And we know this in humans too, right, from the time you're born, there're differences in how you identify, whether or not you're male or female and those differences end up controlling whether or not you have a monthly cycle or not. So I'm not talking about intelligence or anything like that, but there're differences in the brains of males and females that are controlled by hormones in utero that later on will tell you, I'm a female, I'm a male. Well, in France what sexual orientation means is do I get on the top or the bottom, and we've got males that will preferentially get on the bottom every time we've tagged them. It's permanent. So they permanently think that they're females. And that has to do with, we think the programming of the brain in much the same way--and I'm not go too far into that (laughter), if that's what you're thinking, in much the same way the human brains are programmed. Because of hormone exposure, we've now got a model where these guys--and now we're working with another professor to do the brain imaging to really figure out if these males have female brains. We know that they have female-type hormones. So imagine it's a male with a uterus having a monthly cycle and behaving like a female. That's what we have. Speaker 1: Well, I'll say this just as a general guy out here observing things that a lot of people don't--well, I accept the notion that people are born either homosexual or heterosexual. It seems to me, just from observation, that's what it is. But there are people that don't believe that. I believe it's a God-given, sex is God given, and if you stray, it's some sort of a, it's acculturation of a bad guy or bad woman made you do this. Story_ID: 30305 Speaker 1: But the difficulty, and the reason why I say it 'cause I get asked this question all the time 'cause we're actually starting to show the data now. And believe it or not, well, it's probably easy to believe, these data I think are gonna be more disturbing to people than males actually turning into females because you have males with the behavior and the identity. The difficulty with humans I think is one, I believe there is an inheritable genetic component, two, I know that there's a hormonal influence component. I shouldn't say I know, but why should we be any different from any other animal, so we know there's a hormonal--but humans get more complicated because there's a social, there's a context component, right, like for example, things happen in prison and in college that otherwise, you don't even show that behavior. So there's a social context component. There's a cultural component. There's even how what we would call homosexuality, you know, like in Kenya, men and women can't hold hands in public on the Coast, but two men can. And it has nothing to do with homosexuality. It has to do with brotherhood. And in this country, you'd never walk down the street holding the hand of somebody who wasn't your son, maybe. You'd just never do it. So there's all those components that, you know, so you can't say, well, it's genetic, you don't have a choice, you know, no matter what or it's hormonal, and you don't have a choice or it's social context. All those things interact in a very complex way in humans. And the other thing is I had a colleague though, he was a post-doc--unfortunately, he passed way, who was gay. And when this data first started coming out that male and female brains are different and homosexual men had brains that were more like a female, he said, I don't wanna know. And it wasn't for religious reasons. He said, this science shouldn't even be done, he said because I don't want anybody to tell me that my lifestyle is what some might interpret as a disease, that my brain didn't form right. He said, I don't even wanna know. It shouldn't even be studied. I don't know if I feel that way, but I can understand from his, and he was also, you know, Puerto Rican and Catholic and so there was a lot, you know, he was struggling with a lot of things and a scientist though, that said, that's science that shouldn't be done. So it's, you know, it's a real, you know, somebody mentioned something earlier about what risks, well, this is gonna be a real risk for me. Speaker 2: Yeah, I can-- Speaker 1: So even this paper I published at PNAS Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, academic journal], you know, we have this great photo of a male and female but the female with a bottom of a genetic male. They published the photo and they considered it for the cover, but then they decided it was too risky. They wouldn't put it on the cover. Several of the magazines and newspapers did the same thing. They said, no, you have to send us another photo. But now, we're not talking about males turning into females. We're talking about actual males that have an identity that doesn't match their morphology. That's what I think is gonna be even more disturbing to people. Speaker 2: I'm learning that science takes courage. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 30306 Speaker 1: So now you have been the recipient of the President's Citation Award from the American Institute of Biological Sciences, the National Geographic Emerging Explorer Award. I know you're proud of that. The Rachel Carson Memorial Award, The Pesticide Action Network Award, and the Jennifer Altman Award for Integrity in Science. So how do you feel about these accolades. Speaker 2: I'm proud, and I'm proud because they recognize, like the integrity, and I'm, you know, proud that I'm being recognized for not just the science we're putting it into the correct context. That's what the Pesticide Action Network and these awards are about, of actually not being afraid to step forward and--you know, some people say, including my advisor told me, don't be an advocate, let the science speak for itself. And that impacted me, like when I go to testify before Congress and for the EPA [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency], I'm the only scientist who's stepping forward. And that's what's allowed the company to say, oh, he's the only guy who shows--no, there's like hundreds of papers, there's at least forty other labs, and now they've co-authored a paper with me. But they don't show up at those meetings because it's, you know, it's not your job kind of thing. And I recently found this quote that now shapes my philosophy in that regard, and the quote is "Those who have the privilege to know have the duty to act." Albert Einstein said that. Speaker 1: Yes, I know-- Speaker 2: And that's my, that's where I am on that. So I am very proud of those awards for that reason that they're recognizing that I'm not just sitting in the lab doing science, that I'm actually maintaining who I am, my integrity and at the same time, doing my best to make that available to the public. Story_ID: 30307 Speaker 1: You were telling us the story of some of your activities outside of the laboratory, how you stay fit and watch your weight. Now, tell us how you get to work? Speaker 2: Well, I, so starting in September [2010] now, I run. So it's about a thirteen-mile run. I ride a bike, but usually, I run 'cause I like running. Thirty years ago, I used to run, thirty years ago I used to run eighteen miles a day, seven days a week, all of my commuting. But what did I just say? Did I say thirty years ago? No, ten years ago (laughter), when I was thirty [years old], ten years ago, not thirty years ago. You know, and then my kids got too big for me to push them in the jogging stroller and things like that. So over the last three years, three to five years, I got back up to 240 [pounds]. I was 280 [pounds] at one point. My real weight should be about 140 [pounds]. So now that I'm running again, I'm down forty pounds. I've got another fifty to go. And the reasons are that once I couldn't commute, I don't do the gym thing and it's because of an old friend of mine, a guy named Dr. Leow Wei(ph.) Ping. And Leow Wei, who didn't keep track of his birthdays came from Hyun Island in China. But he thought he was about eighty years based on, you know, historical events that he could calculate that he remembered. But he was this old, frail-looking Chinese guy, working on this little Caribbean Island who would, you know, we'd be huffing and puffing climbing these mountains, and he would have the machete cutting down trees, you know, to make the trail. But anyway Dr. Leow Wei came to visit me once in California, and he said to me--one, he insisted he was gonna walk from San Francisco [California] to my house in Oakland [California]. And I kept, I said, no, you cannot. And the only way I could get him to not do it--and he could have done it, is I said, look, you're not allowed to walk across the Bay Bridge [Bay Area, California]. So anyway, we picked him up, and we go to this Chinese restaurant on Solano Avenue in Berkley [California], and we're walking 'cause he wanted that Chinese food 'cause he had been living in the Caribbean and hadn't had Chinese food for a long time. And we're walking and he stops dead in his tracks on the sidewalk. And my memory is he even dropped down to his knees, but I may be embellishing this story. And I said, what's wrong, Dr. Leow Wei, and he's standing in front of this store. And it's the twenty-four hour fitness place. And he looks at me, and he says, my God, I can't believe American. He said, you drive your car to work, you drive your car home, then you drive your car to a place where you pay somebody to ride a bicycle that does not move (laughter). And, you know, I'd never thought about it that way. So ever since, I go, no, I will not go to the gym. If I can't get my exercise by just commuting, you know, then I'll just do without (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, what else do you like to do? Speaker 2: I garden so we grow almost all of our own vegetables, and again, that's also, it's like a science thing for me. You know, I wanna put it in the ground. I wanna figure out where to plant this and how to plant it and where to--and how to do it without pesticides, of course. And I cook a lot, any kind of cuisine I'll try to cook except Korean. My wife handles the Korean cooking. But I love to eat. I love to go places and try new things and come back here [Berkeley, California] and try to reproduce them, and other than that, my life is pretty full with--my son's [Tyler Hayes] quite an accomplished musician. He's in an orchestra and a jazz band. So every other weekend, I've got music. My daughter's [Kassina Hayes] a gymnast and she, last year was ranked third in state. So every other weekend, I've got a gymnastics event. And that pretty much covers all the spare time (laughter). Story_ID: 30308 Speaker 1: Okay, now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything that you would do differently if you could? Speaker 2: Nah, there are things that I could do better. There are some decisions that I would have made a little better, but I think you learn from all of those things. I mean it's just like we were talking about Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I said I hated it, but if I could do it all over again, I'd do it all over again 'cause I learned so much in that process. And both things are important, both learning who you are and what you like but also learning who you aren't. And, you know, and that was one of my experiences with Syngenta 'cause at the time, I didn't know. I thought, sure you can pay me and I'll do whatever. I've learned that I'm not that person, the person that would do that. And, you know, on the other hand, I'm not necessarily judgmental of other people. If that's your choice, you know, then you do it, but that's not the person that I am. So there are a lot of things that I would have done better, maybe I would have done more efficiently, but you know, that's part of the process. So I wouldn't wanna do anything over. Speaker 1: Now, would you ever consider retiring or? Speaker 2: I think so. You know, my colleague, I was talking about Howard Burn, we just celebrated his ninetieth birthday, and he can't drive anymore so he can't come here every day, but he had somebody drive him in once a week. And sometimes I think, you know, I love this place, but I don't know if I'll still be coming here when I'm ninety [years old]. But it's an admirable thing. I don't know. I mean I can't imagine--I, yeah, I can't imagine not still doing the kinds of things that I do, you know, and, you know, I love to travel. I almost never go on vacation though 'cause I do so much of it with--and I don't get to, you know, necessarily go on safari or go visit the temple, but I love to be in other places and experience other cultures. And I think I'll always do that until I reach the point that I can't, of course. Story_ID: 30309 Speaker 1: Okay, now what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy? I don't know yet. I'm not done (laughter). You know, it's like I made the joke about my thesis and my dissertation at the time, they were my life's work. I'm not done yet. I mean my personal legacy, of course, is my children [Tyler and Kassina Hayes] who, hopefully, I did a good job. It seems like I did okay. Speaker 1: So what does your dad [Romeo Hayes] think of your career so far? Speaker 2: He's pretty, yeah, he's proud, I think. He did a good job, I think. Speaker 1: You said your grandmother [Agnes Elizabeth Bailey] passed in 2005. Is your mother [Susie Richardson Hayes] still--? Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 30310 Speaker 1: Well, is there anything I haven't asked that we need to ask before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: Nothing I can think of. I've been talking for a long time. (laughter) Speaker 1: Okay, well, the last question is, and maybe we'll be back thirty years from now to get the rest of it, but the last question is similar to legacy but a little different, sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: You know, I guess I would just like to be remembered, period. I once wrote something that said, you know, when I die that to me, Heaven is the following, when I die, will people say, "Wasn't that the guy who?" or will they just say "who?" I want to be the former, "Wasn't that the guy who?" whatever you think my accomplishment was...