 Story_ID: 50343 Speaker 1: I want you to state your name, state your position, and today's date. Speaker 2: Rickey Ricardo Hendon, Illinois State Senator, Assistant Minority Leader and today is January 24th? Is it? 2001. Speaker 1: Can you spell your name for us? Speaker 2: R-I-C-K-E-Y Ricardo, R-I-C-A-R-D-O Hendon, H-E-N-D-O-N. Speaker 1: Rickey, you've got Hispanic in your family or something? How did Ricardo happen? Speaker 2: Well it helped me as a run for higher office (laughter). But actually my mother was, Lucille Ball show was her favorite show. Speaker 1: That's what put me in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And I did good, because all my brothers and sisters had country names, so I took Rick Ricardo with a smile, trust me. Speaker 1: Okay, can I have you state your date of birth? Speaker 2: Twelve eight fifty-three. Story_ID: 50344 Speaker 1: Now I ask five questions of everyone, they have no relevance, except I start asking them, so you know, just bear with me. Just very short answers. I want to know what your favorite color is. Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: Black-eyed peas. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Puerto Rico. Speaker 1: Oh Ricardo (laughter). Speaker 2: Si, senorita. Speaker 1: (Laughter). See it was destined. Speaker 2: Muy (kisses fingers)-- love it, ready to go back. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: The struggle continues. Story_ID: 50345 Speaker 1: And we have a website, you know that. We're actually going to be streaming video on this. So pioneers in the struggle will have its own section. Now, let me get started. I like to actually take you back and know more about your family. I know by your bio that you're, you're the youngest child, but I'd like you to tell me your mother's name and can you tell us something about her. Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's Olivia Hendon, originally Olivia Garrett. She's from Alabama. She was the one sister that stayed in the house with my grandmother and cleaned and cooked, instead of working the fields. So she's very good at that, you know. She's up there in age now and doing fine. That's what she did really when she was growing up. My mother's an interesting person. She used to do hair in the house, so for years and years and years, instead of working a job, she was an entrepreneur and did pressing curls back when that was popular. She had four children, along with me, two boys and two girls. Speaker 1: Tell me, I'd like--let me go back to your siblings, but I want to go back to your mother. Can you just give me your sibling's name and the order, oldest to youngest? Speaker 2: Ruby Pearl, Jimmy Jerome, Barbara Alice and then me. Speaker 1: And--those don't sound too country. Speaker 2: See, I didn't say them the way we said them down south (chuckle). Speaker 1: Now--what they have nicknames or something? Speaker 2: No, it was how you say it. It was Ruby Pearl, Jimmy Jerome, and Barb Alice; so that's why we call Barbara Alice Shebeda today, because she was like, I hate Barb Alice. Speaker 1: Now I want to go back to your mother, you said that she--I'd like to know what you know about her growing up. You said in the South, but you didn't--did you give the state? Speaker 2: Alabama. Speaker 1: Alabama, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, we grew up and actually, when--after I was born, we moved back there to Bellamy, Alabama, which is outside of York [Alabama], which is outside of Livingston [Alabama], which is outside of Birmingham [Alabama]. Very small, little, one horse kind of town and my grandparents had land. We still have a lot of land in Alabama. So my mother grew up on the farm and she made a decision very early on that she was not going to pick cotton; she was not going to pick peas; she was not going to be out there in the sun sweating; so she butted up with my grandmother and became my grandmother's assistant in the house. So that was her way of avoiding that 95 degree weather out there in Alabama and all those mosquitoes and everything. So she was very good at that and she taught us, I can out cook my sisters, you know. So she taught us to cook and take care of yourself and clean that house and that kind of thing, because that's really what she did. In the spare time, she would do hair. All the country girls down South would come to my mother and she'd fry their hair up. That's what she did for a living. Speaker 1: So she was raised in the small town that you went back to? Speaker 2: Yes. Story_ID: 50346 Speaker 1: That's where she was raised, okay. And did she give any other--did she tell you any other stories about you know, your grandparents, or growing up during then? Speaker 2: Oh yes, my grandfather was a preacher and pastor of a big church down south and a community leader, as pastors were back in those days. They called him Pappy Legs because he had these skinny legs. They say I got his legs. I got muscles in them now. He was always up at two o'clock in the morning, waking us up at four o'clock in the morning and he was almost a slave driver. If you weren't up at four, he was in there with a whip and he would get you up and we were in the field by four thirty [4:30]. He was a hard man. It was hard land; you know, hard times, hard land. We were one of the last families to still have land that was black-owned in that part of Alabama, because most of the land was white-owned and people were sharecroppers on that land. But we owned our own land and my granddaddy had his own pond, his own lake. And he was a very independent man. My grandmother Molly Garrett was just as tough as granddaddy (chuckle). Some people say even tougher because she was a petite woman, not a big woman at all, but she could--she had a left hook that take your head right off. She didn't play at all. So my grandparents were pretty rough people in hard times and they were hard people for the times. Speaker 1: Do you know how they ended up owning the land and why? Did you ever know? Speaker 2: Well, what--my grandfather was a sharecropper early, early on in his life, because they were--my great-grandparents were slaves and they tell me that my grandfather was able to earn the land by working the land and building the church. He just began to expand his territory. We had some good white people that he worked for and they worked along with him as far as granting him the land that he had earned. What was going on in Alabama at that time, people were--the government actually came in and gave people their houses for a dollar, because they had paid for them for so many years, without ever getting title. The government decided it was illegal what some of the white land owners had done to them and actually gave people their land and their homes for a dollar. My grandfather already had his, but most people didn't. Story_ID: 50347 Speaker 1: Now tell me about your father. Speaker 2: My father-- Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: --my father is Jimmy George Hendon. My father was a Christian man, very gentle man; never whipped us; never hollered at us, nothing. He was older than my mother [Olivia Hendon]. It was one of those marriages, one of those Alabama old day marriages. My mom got married when she was [thirteen] and she really didn't have any choice. My dad was late thirties, early forties when they married. So he was older than my mom, considerably, but that was the way it was done back then. My dad died when I was three years old. He was a hard worker, but just the most gentle person you could ever meet. Mom would whip us and he would come in and make it all right, you know (chuckle). He never had a bad word to say about anyone, just a beautiful gentleman. Speaker 1: Now when you say that he--you know, she didn't have any choice, that's how it was done, explain that a little bit. Speaker 2: Well back in Alabama in those days, if you were fifteen and not married, something was wrong with you. It's just the way they thought. A young lady was supposed to be married by the age of fifteen. Your parents would actually organize your marriage. They'd actually pick and select your husband. My mom fell in love with my father, but it wasn't that way in the beginning. This was a man that they said, we want you to meet this man. She knew that fifteen was the age when they expected you to be married off, so it wasn't something that the young ladies even fought against too much, back in those days. They just accepted it as the way it was. My mother was born in 1925, so those were different times. Story_ID: 50348 Speaker 1: How did your parents end up moving to Cleveland [Ohio]? Speaker 2: Looking for work. My father [Jimmy Hendon], work in Alabama kind of dried up, unless you wanted to be a farmer and my father was not really a farmer. We had fruits, vegetables, that kind of thing, but we didn't have cotton. Bellamy [Alabama] was actually the city. My grandparents lived out in the countryside. But my father wanted work in the mill. He worked in the steel mill. He was a bricklayer, a brick mason. Some of the pictures that I--a few that we have of him, is at the saw mill laying brick. So we actually came to Cleveland looking for work. I'm the only one of my siblings born in Cleveland and that was a fluke because my mother was pregnant with me when we arrived in Cleveland. Shortly after having me, when my father died when I was three, we moved back South. It was a transition time for my family. We moved around--it was back to Alabama, Cleveland. There was one period when they had to separate the children even. And my aunt, I stayed with my grandparents, and my sisters stayed with my aunt and my brother was with my uncle. We went through that for about two years while they settled up north. Speaker 1: And then, so you were about five at that time, when you settled up north or five or six? Speaker 2: Well no, when we settled up north I was--when I was born, I was born in Cleveland; went back to Alabama when I was about eighteen months. But I went back, my family didn't go back; they dropped me at the train, I remember seeing my grandmother and grandfather pick us up at the train. I was about eighteen months old. All my country cousins say, alright, you couldn't remember that, but I remember it. I remember it right now just like it was yesterday. I remember seeing their face for the first time. I remember the truck ride from the train. And I took psychology, a little of it in school, and they say, when something traumatic happens to you, I mean, your mother handing you over to strangers--. And as I recall, she just got back on the train going back. So here I am with two new people and my mamma gone, but they was just smiling so much, I figured it had to be all right. Then when I was three actually, I got malaria from, I guess, the mosquitoes or something. The hospitals in Alabama really weren't--couldn't handle it. They weren't equipped. So they shipped me back to Cleveland where I went into the hospital at Cleveland. I remember them, my mother standing over me crying and I could hear the doctors telling her I wasn't going to make it. I remember the Lord telling me I was going to make it. So I was trying to tell my mother I was going to make it and I made it. That's when I was eighteen months. So I met my grandmother and grandfather, I must have been about nine months. So I was eighteen months when I had malaria. Speaker 1: You don't remember nine months. Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I remember it. Then they say like the malaria thing probably helped me remember the eighteen months. But yeah, I remember I was about nine months when I met my grandmother and grandfather. I remember turning off the road, up and I saw the little house way up in the back and we had the little, you know the box, the bread box for the mailbox sticking up out of the ground, things I never saw before. I remember that. I remember the train ride, just the way it was. Speaker 1: The same Katherine Dunham [HM], I recently interviewed her and she remem-she said she remembers. Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember clearly. Speaker 1: I don't remember anything. Speaker 2: And then it was--actually we had a big family reunion and all my brothers and sisters had said I didn't know what I was talking about. And we brought--my auntie and them came out on the porch when they heard us--it was really a argument, because nobody going to tell me what I don't remember. My auntie said that happened. She said, it happened. I had you and Poochie was over there and Jerome was at--and Rickey went down, back down. Leena took, that's what they call my mother [Olivia Hendon], Leena took Rickey south. So once my aunties remembered and said everything that I said had happened, then everybody began looking at me kind of crazy. But yeah, I remember when I was nine months old. Speaker 1: So now what age were you then, when you said you moved north, is that Detroit? Speaker 2: No, it was Cleveland. Speaker 1: Cleveland, okay. Speaker 2: Cleveland, so I was born in Cleveland; went to Alabama; when I got sick they took me back to Cleveland and that was when I was 18 months old. Then my dad died when I was three, I was in Cleveland. We stayed in Cleveland after my father died, oh, to about fifth grade. That was a kind of crazy time for us. That's when I first met racism in the face. I guess I was about eight years old and after that we moved back to Alabama. Then to Chicago and Detroit [Michigan]; we moved a lot. Speaker 1: Tell me about, your father at this point is dead. Speaker 2: Right, dad died when I was three. Speaker 1: Did your mother ever get remarried? Speaker 2: Yes, she did. She remarried back in Alabama. Went back down to Alabama, to Robert Larkin. They called him Steelhead. He was a great guy. Everybody loved him except my oldest sister, she just couldn't--didn't want my mamma to marry nobody. And he brought us to Chicago, 1967. Story_ID: 50349 Speaker 1: Well I want to just quickly go back to when you said the first time you experienced racism. What happened? Speaker 2: My best friend name was Joey. We were like, tight. We were tight. We used to throw rocks at the gang boys and they would chase us home together and we always were at each other's house, all the time. We never had a closer friend, never. We were just tight. Didn't get any tighter. This was a transitional time in Cleveland [Ohio], I guess, because they were one of the last few white families in my immediate neighborhood. And he was around--he lived around the corner from me. One day I went to Joey's house, as I did every day, and it was like Joey, Joey, come on, let's play. Come on, come on; let's go, let's go. He came to the door, which was strange, because normally he's out; I'm let right in or he's running right out. But he wouldn't open the screen door. He just stood in the screen door and he told me he couldn't play with me anymore. I was like, oh man. What the hell's wrong with you what are you talking about? He's like, no, I can't play with you anymore. He said, his sister had caught leukemia and she got it from me, because I was a nigger, which was a word he never used to me before. I'm like, Joey, what are, what are you talking? I went home crying. And my mother [Olivia Hendon] heard me up in my room crying and she was like, what's the matter? And I told her I had leukemia. She said, boy, you ain't got no leukemia. What's wrong with you? I said, yes, I do, I've got leukemia and I gave it to Joey's sister. She was like, oh that's just a mess. Them white people don't want you hanging out with him or being his friend. That's all that is, his mother or somebody ignorant in their family. His sister's sick, but you had nothing to do with it. It's unfortunate that she has leukemia, but how can you give it to her if you don't have it. So I went back to his house. I'm like Joey, Joey, I don't--it ain't me. I don't have it. And he was still like, it is you. My mother--I don't want to put it on his mother, but somebody in his family, mother, father, somebody immediate had kept telling him it was me, it was my fault. Girl, we started fighting everyday. We fought every day in school, every day. Every day, me and my best friend, we were fighting every day. So of course, they called the parents in and there's nothing that anybody really can do, because we had just disintegrated to the point that where we just hated each other. There was nothing his mother could say. The counselors tried to talk to us, but we still fight every other day. We might have filtered off a little bit, but that was my best friend and I think about him every couple years because I'm wondering what he's doing and hope he's doing okay. Speaker 1: How old were you? Speaker 2: I had to be eight maybe; seven, eight. Speaker 1: And how did that make you feel then? Speaker 2: Well I didn't understand white people, I can tell you that. I was very, very hurt because I didn't play. I didn't have any black friends in my neighborhood. I fou--I didn't like none of them. Me and Joey, I just, it took me a long time to get over it. Actually we had to move because they were gonna--they didn't know which one to expel. They were like, we'll just have to kick you both out. So the only thing that brought it to an end was we moved from Cleveland [Ohio] back to Alabama. Story_ID: 50350 Speaker 1: And when you moved back to Alabama what was--were you there a long time at that time? Because this is city versus rural. Speaker 2: Right, we didn't like Alabama at all. My sister and I we were just, didn't want to go. I'm a Northern person, I just didn't want to go. But it's so funny, funny story, when we first got there, all of our little country cousins were sitting on my grandmother's porch, right. We saw cotton for the first time, because I didn't remember cotton when I was eighteen months. We got all, went out and just started picking cotton and playing in the cotton. They were sitting there like hm, mm; yeah, you'll see in about a week. We thought it was just wonderful. Girl, about a week later, we're like oh Lord, mamma please. We got to go back north, get us out of here. Because it was, grandma, everybody would, all the children would send their children to help till the cotton and pick the cotton to grandmom and them house. We used to hate to go to grandma house because you had to work. I mean, you worked. Four o'clock in the morning, if you're big enough to drag a sack, you were out there. So I didn't like Alabama then. I like it a little more now. We have a lot of land down there, but they can keep it. My country cousins don't have no problem trying to worry about me trying to get our part. Story_ID: 50351 Speaker 1: Now when you, so you went from Alabama at that time, to-- Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: --Chicago. Okay, because she [Hendon's mother, Olivia Hendon] had married. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So how long were you--so 1967 you're in Chicago. Speaker 2: Right, when we came to Chicago, we just knew it was the promised land. I mean, our little friends was standing there just crying and we were like, oh, we're going to Chicago. We're going to the North. We just wonderful. All we saw were pictures of the skyscrapers and the Sears Tower. We just, that kind of thing. We sung the entire Motown Revue on the way there. My brother was in Cleveland [Ohio], so we all packed up everything; were in this little car with a trailer and we just singing and singing and we fell asleep toward the end of the journey. It was raining very, very hard. I remember my mother woke us up, say we're here. We just, oh, we're here. We opened our eyes and we were at 14th and Kedvale [Lawndale, Chicago]. There was an abandoned car turned upside down in our front yard and the building that we lived in was like leaning like this here. We were just like, we want to go back down South (laughter). My mom was like shut up. The only thing that saved us--oh, I got to say that. There were about 25 gang bangers standing across the street like mm, hmm; new meat. He was waiting on us. But see, my sister Poochie was so tough that they didn't want to mess with her. She was like--she just went right to them, like all right, we from down South. Yeah, we back here up North and y'all better not mess with my brother. They were like okay, who's this crazy girl. So we actually didn't have a lot of trouble out of them after they met my sister, but we pulled a dirty trick on my brother. We just, we told him, oh gee, it is so nice. You're just going to love this place. Oh man, it's beautiful. That was the only way we could handle it. Oh he got there, he wanted to beat us up so bad (laughter). It was funny. Story_ID: 50352 Speaker 1: So now you're, at that point, I think you're let's see, '67 [1967], you're [thirteen]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was thirteen, fourteen and I went to Bryant Elementary School. They--it's no longer there, but I met one of the greatest teachers I've ever known, Mr. Ritchie. When they burned down during the riots, they burned his store down. He had a store on Pulaski. I remember standing in front of his store trying to stop him from looting and burning it down. My brother Jerome, snatched me out of the way of danger, because the, the, what do you call--National Guard had thrown a Jeep right through the window, where it used to be a window. There was no window there, because they smashed it. They just drove the Jeep right through the window, right in front of where I was standing, maybe two, three minutes after my brother had pulled me out of the way. Because I was like, you can't burn this store down. This is Mr. Ritchie's store. He had a little clothing store. They didn't want to listen to me. They burned it on down and stole everything out of there. I remember going back to the school seeing him and talking to him about it. He was like, it's all right, Rickey, it's all right. I'll deal somewhere else. He never did rebuild, but he was a great teacher. Story_ID: 50353 Speaker 1: Now, can you, what kind of child would you say you were? Speaker 2: I was always in trouble. Speaker 1: You were in trouble? Speaker 2: Hm, mm (yes). I was quiet. My mother [Olivia Hendon] couldn't--punishing me was, she couldn't put me in the corner like she could my brothers and sisters and punish me. Because I get in the corner and make a whole village. I'd make some people out of the lint. I'd create a lake, a river. I'd have the first World War right there with a popsicle stick I found on the floor. So she had to whoop me. If I was bad, I had to get a whooping because I couldn't get--you couldn't punish me by isolating me or making me go to my room; or making me sit in the corner. Never, it just never worked because I had such a vivid imagination. I'd be all over the world in that corner, but I was, I was always energetic. So I wasn't bad, but I was always end up into something, because I was always energetic. I couldn't sit still. I couldn't stay in the house. Even at school, I was in all the activities; drama club, the choir. I was a good student. I was A student, you know As and Bs. And that was because I saw how it hurt my mother when my brothers and sisters got bad grades. So I was like, ma, you know you don't have to worry about me, I'm not going to have you crying. Plus that little 50 cents you got for them As girl, I could buy my girlfriend something to eat and get one of them little rings out the little machine. Hey, it was going on. I got my As. I wanted that money. Speaker 1: So now do you--would you say that you were more--(interruption)--Would you say that you were more like your--well your father [Jimmy Hendon] died when you were young, but what do you have of both of your parents? Speaker 2: Well I'm more like my mother [Olivia Hendon] because my mother was always outgoing. She played bid whist. She played poker. She gambled. She was outgoing. My father was laid back and reserved. I'm getting to be more like my father later in life. What I got from my father was his work ethic. He always worked and I always worked. When I was a little boy, I had a paper route. I worked at the store. I hustled bottles out the alley, so I got that from my father. My love for children, I got that from my father as well. Story_ID: 50354 Speaker 1: Now you went from Bryant [Elementary School] to Mason Upper Grades--were you at Mason? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay and then to Farragut [High School]. Can you talk about those years then? Speaker 2: Bryant was--I got my first job, job, good job, while I was at Bryant. Some Deacons at my church, Columbus and William Dar (ph.) had a junkyard. They gave me a job at the junkyard and I couldn't do nothing. There was another young guys there who could break a motor down. I could take a tire off (chuckle), that kind of thing. I could gas up the truck. So they gave me a job, I worked in the office a little bit. I was very small and it was very dangerous neighborhood. We were in K-Town [North Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois]. There was gangs were everywhere. Guys who just got out of jail were everywhere and I was actually attacked twice by big--bigger guys, real grown men. I fought both times and broke away, and got away both times, but I had to fight to do it. Fortunately for me, my sister Poochie was so mean, I had a lot of practice in fighting, because she'd beat up everybody in the house. Then my brother Jimmy, he boxed and was a football player for Farragut and basketball star. He would beat you up. So I had a lot of practice, everybody except my sister, Shebeda, Barbara Alice, who would just cry. You leave her alone just to get her to stop crying. But it was a very violent time for me sixth grade, seventh grade. When I went to Mason, I got to be a little bit taller. That helped a little, but that's where I sort of, kind of discovered girls were okay, and that I liked them a lot. And since I was a, a, a honors student, I got to go on the floor where the girls were at-- Story_ID: 52822 Speaker 1: My mother [Olivia Hendon] used to dream things and they'd come true. She was a scary woman, so I had some of that. Speaker 2: Well a lot of that happened in the South. A lot of southern people used to have--my grandmother was like that. Speaker 1: Oh yeah, it was common down South. I mean, my mother would dream about somebody dying in the family and five minutes later the phone would ring and somebody in the family was gone. She hit the numbers so much, they wouldn't even take her number no more. She had to become a bookie (laughter). She had to get her own book and this was before the lottery and all that. Black people really ran the numbers business. And uh, she would dream things, play the number, it would come true. And uh, so she was spooky in that kind of way and my daddy [Jimmy Hendon] was the balance (chuckle). He was the balance for my mom. I remember my father very well. Speaker 2: That's interesting, wow, because I don't. I'm wondering if I'm retarded (laughter). Speaker 1: No, he was, but some of the things that stuck with me like going to church, he was the church one. He was the one that we go to church. Then my mother, she went, she went; if she didn't, she didn't. So my father kind of was the one who ingrained that, the spiritual part of my life into me at an early age. I hate losing him so, at three, but I had a lot of memories of him. I just remember stuff. Story_ID: 52823 Speaker 1: Okay now, I want to go back to your-- Speaker 2: Mason [Upper Grade School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 1: --Mason. You say you had discovered girls. Speaker 2: Well actually I discovered girls uh, in Alabama. I mean, well a girl discovered me is really what happened. And well I won't go there, but anyway (chuckle), I was eight years old when I discovered girls, okay. But I didn't really know what I knew by sixth grade. In Cleveland [Ohio], my brother, before we, we moved, my brother did a dirty trick on me, because this girl who was his age, had her way with me and he blackmailed me and made me give him my marbles and my GI Joe and all of that, because he caught us. He said, I'm going to tell mamma. I'm going to tell mamma. And I found out later, he went and was going to start going with the girl. So when I found out that he was having his way with her, we had a big fight. I normally couldn't beat my brother, but I beat him that day. I beat him that day, jive turkey. About sixth grade, they had this song out, what was this song. I'm going to think of the song in a minute, but that song led me to really understand girls and get to liking girls. So I got to, since I was a A student, most of the girls, most of the people on honor roll were girls. There was two boys, me and Larry Robertson. Now he was a genius. His head would light up like a light bulb; it actually would. It was shaped like a light bulb. It would light up like a light bulb and he knew everything, okay, but he, but he was a nerd. So I was the cool smart guy, so I got the girls, smart girls. That's when I realized that girls were smarter than boys. I didn't know that for a long time, because I thought I was smarter than my brothers and my sisters, because I got As and they got Cs and Ds and Bs. But I looked around and said, we're doing honor roll and it's two boys, eighteen girls. It's like, girls are smarter than boys. So I developed a deeper appreciation for women. Story_ID: 52824 Speaker 1: So now, did you have a sense of--because you grew up on the West Side [Lawndale, Chicago, Illinois]. Did you have a sense of West Side versus South Side; or any of that? Was there a-- Speaker 2: I didn't have that until I got to high school and that really bothered me too, because we were the only westsiders that our South Side friends would come to our house for a party. That was a little later than high school actually when my sister Shebeda Carter, who is an actress and still doing well, we'd throw big parties, cast parties and that kind of thing, but that was after high school. Southsiders would get to door, let me in; let me in. Oh God, I made it; I made it. Okay, we go to the South Side, it didn't bother us, but they'd be so scared. They'd be scared to death to get in the house to the party and they'd party all night and then make their way as a group back to the South Side. So I didn't really realize it at that early an age, but later in life I got to really realize it and it was just a travesty to me. It still goes on today and it's very unfortunate, but that's the way it is. Story_ID: 52825 Speaker 1: Now when you got to Farragut [High School, Chicago, Illinois], were there any subjects you liked, particularly since you were a good student? Were there any activities you were involved with or-- Speaker 2: Oh yes, Farragut was a great time for me. If I made it to school, which I mean, past the four gangs that I had to get through to get to school. I don't name gangs names because I think that just helps them recruit. But I had four gang territories to get, to cross, to get to school. When I first got there, I got my lunch money took all the time. I mean, all the time, because I wasn't affiliated. I wasn't in a gang. I wouldn't join and they had, what they tried insurance back then. They would stop you and ten of them would say, who you with; where's your card. They actually would give you a card, a protection card, protected by the blank blank gang. This went on practically my entire freshman year, then I met this girl and we was in love. So I got tired of them taking my little 50 cent because I could take that 50 cent (laughter) and we would go to Goldblatt's and we would get our lunch on and then we'd find a little dressing room and get a little kissing on. After I stopped, when they was taking my 50 cents, she wouldn't let me--we couldn't do that. Because she like, let's go to Goldblatt's and I didn't have no 50 cent. So I started fighting for my little 50 cent, girl. Like uh, uh, you ain't taking my--this is more than lunch money you all getting from me. You all just don't understand. And I remember having a gun pulled on me at the back door. The young man who pulled it on me, he's dead now. He was a gang banger and this is when I wouldn't give up my money anymore. So all my friends, be four or five of us, you would think we could fight, we could hold somebody off, but they was good kids. I wouldn't call them chumps or nerds or geeks, we were really cool kids, but we weren't gang bangers. And one after the other, they just come out the door, give them their money; come out the door, hand them their money; come out the door; hand them their money. There was certain doors you knew not to even try to go out of, because they were waiting for you. But this was our safe door. So we're coming out the safe door and here this guy is standing there getting all my friends' money. So I refused to give him my money and he pulled a pistol on me and took my money. And one night, he was visiting a girl, a vacant lot over from my building that I lived in and I walked up in there and there he was. My brother would fight now. My brother was tough. We were going to get him real good. The girls talked us out of it. But all, every--him and I always conflicted because I started going with this girl that he liked and she lived in their neighborhood, so I had to sneak to her house and sneak home. This went on about three, four years, really until he got killed in a gang war with a gang from my neighborhood. Speaker 1: Now what kept you out of the gangs? Speaker 2: Well I just thought it was stupid. I just couldn't see it. I had a lot of gang friends now, don't get me wrong. I had a lot of--everybody grew up with, pretty much. There were maybe, and this is unfortunate, but on my block, there were maybe six boys who weren't in a gang and that's probably too many. Everybody was in the gang. They had gangs for the eight year olds and a pee wee division, twelve year old division. I was the one who had always got my money took from the gang guys. They'd beat me up and--my mother used to give me these hats, I hated. The one that buckle up under your neck and they'd fill my hat full of snow and stuff it on my head and buckle it up. I'd go home with snow dripping all down. And the groceries, they'd take the groceries and then we'd have to go get my brother. My brother would fight, but since he was a sports star, they really didn't mess with him. Plus they knew he could beat up most of them by himself, if they had a one on one. But you know what they had? They had school pride (chuckle), so they didn't mess with the athletes. So I just--I actually what happened, I became a black militant at fourteen. So instead of the gang, I joined another kind of violent movement and became mili--a militant and a black nationalist when I was fourteen. Story_ID: 52826 Speaker 1: Now I was going to ask you, were you aware of the movement of the Civil Rights Movement around that time, because a lot of activity was occurring in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: --and around the country. Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: So what group did you join? Speaker 2: Well actually my first affiliation, my first meeting that I went to was the Black Panther Party. My sister Shebeda and I went to the Black Panther meeting. But it didn't work for me. I didn't agree with the philosophies to a certain degree. We had the Black Conscious Library here at that time and we would go to the Black Conscious Library and we found that we were closer to the cultural nationalist movement than the Black Panther movement. At that time, the Panthers, which I agree with now, believed in the class struggle. They didn't believe it was black against white; they believed it was the rich against the poor. And we didn't agree with that. I guess coming out of my experience with Joey, I was jaded, had a serious problem with white people. Especially, I remember one night, my sister had a job at the five and dime store, five and ten cent store. My mother would--it was so bad that me or my brother had to go and wait for her to get off the bus to walk her home. Rape, assault, it was normal in my neighborhood. So my brother had a job, so when he was working, it would fall on me. Speaker 1: I remember one night going to get my sister and four white police pulled up on me and I probably wasn't sixty pounds, to be honest. I was a little boy. They asked me, they called me nigger and all that kind of thing. They asked me, what was I doing out of the house on the corner. I said, I'm waiting for my sister, so I could walk her home, because it's bad. And they actually got out of the car and tried to get me and I had to run away from them. They chased me and I ran through the gangways and was able to slip away from them and they actually circled the block for about, ten or fifteen minutes looking for me. It terrorized me and it, it actually flashed me back to the Joey thing, because I had got along well with my white teachers in school. Like Mr. Ritchie was my guy. So I had gotten over it, but when that incident happened, I fell back into being afraid of white people, not liking white people. So it was, when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated, that I remember sitting there watching it all. When [President John F.] Kennedy was killed, I was in school. I was in Alabama then, we hadn't moved to Chicago and I remember just being totally disturbed by it all and I knew then, that I had to do something. My mother was terrorized with us getting involved in the movement, but we was like, ma, we got to do something. We can't live like this. We can't be treated like this and just accept it. So at my high school, at Farragut, we had a Black Student Union, so we joined the Black Student Union and that's when I got my African name; Sahala Marri Malik Shabazz Aficanos Amed III (ph.). It comes from different people and different reasons. One, I was a writer and part of it was Malcom X's name, Medgar Evers's name and they all put it together and made it my name. Malik was a great story teller back in Africa and I was a writer and liked telling stories, writing plays and things like that, so they gave me that name in high school. Story_ID: 52827 Speaker 1: Now I have several questions to ask you. One is that you talk about these white police chasing you and then at the same time, you tell the story of basically having to go through four gang territories to get to school. One affected you a great deal and the other, you seem to be like your own person. You didn't feel pressured to join a gang and so I'm just trying to--both were dangerous territory you were--someone tried to pull out a gun on you and I'm just wondering what the difference? Speaker 2: Well, I don't think it was really any difference. My best friend and I, Michael Robinson. Mike is gone home now to the Lord. He moved to Chicago [Illinois] from New York and he wasn't in the gang and wasn't going to take it. So him and I got together and we got some guns. I wasn't in a gang, but I had a gun and my best friend had a gun. We would hide them of course, from our parents and hide them from my brother, hide them from my sister, but we had a couple of guns and we decided, when we decided we weren't going to let them take our lunch money anymore, we fought. We fought some gang guys, but we never would join our local gang. Then we just knew we--so we were terrorized by both, but we knew we had to fight the police or the gangs or anyone else who tried to take our lives or assault us or take our little money that we had. So we were careful of how we got to school and all this and all that, but we fought. Story_ID: 52828 Speaker 1: Now the other thing I found interesting was your description, you know, when you went to the Black Panther meeting, that it just didn't, it didn't hit you right. I was wondering, one, who, was Bobby Rush--was it Bobby Rush or Fred Hampton at that time? Speaker 2: Right, Bobby was around; Fred Hampton was around. I didn't--I met Fred--I didn't--the meeting that we went to, they weren't the teachers. Now if Fred was the teacher, I probably would have ended up with the Panthers, because he was very good with young people and he had a reputation that we knew about, but he was more in a different area. I think he was Maywood [Illinois] and we were West Side. So we went like to the West Side meeting. The guy who was running to me, he was a great person, but I just couldn't get with the philosophy. And probably because my sister couldn't get with the philosophy. We were, she was into the African gowns and the African clothing and they weren't. The Nation, the Black Panther Nation at that time was in the black. Black hat, black leather coat, even the sisters were dressed in the black all the time and the combat boots. And I think my sister Shebeda was, she wanted to be like an African princess, so she was like, well I like that group, because they had the nice African clothes and the nice African gowns and everything. So we kind of just went with the more cultural part of it than, the violent part. We were more into gaining our own culture and discovering who we really were. So my mom [Olivia Hendon] had to put up with that and we started getting the dashikis and all that. Personally I was like, I don't know about it. Where you get that from? We like, ma, this is the way we dress. We're black, we're--she like okay. She went along with it, but she didn't--wasn't crazy about it. But she had a couple choices-- gang; my sister pregnant and dropping out of school; or they have something. So the Cultural Nationalists Movement, the Black Nationalists Movement gave us something that my mother tolerated, because I wasn't big enough for the sports and like my brother. And my older sister, she went on and got married at seventeen, to get out of the house kind of thing. So she kind of went along with it, because of those reasons. Story_ID: 52829 Speaker 1: Now who was instrumental here [in Chicago, Illinois]? Who was in the Black Cultural-- Speaker 2: Well here, Brother Hannibal. [Baba] Hannibal Afrik, Harold Charles; he was my guy. He was my mentor. He taught me everything. Richard Barnett who was a West Side politician--well he's not an elected official, so he was always involved in campaigns. He ran Harold Washington's campaign, Danny Davis' [HM], Congressman Danny Davis' congressional campaign, when he first ran for alderman, and he ran my first campaign. He brought us into our Burnetta Hall Barrett's campaign for Congress against George Collins and that's when Congressman Collins was killed in the plane crash. So I was fifteen or so, at that time and it just bothered me that we could lose an election to a dead man. But that's what happened and we lost the election. I remember, I just bought a cassette the other day, Bobby Womack was hot then. Little Ghetto Boy and In The Ghetto and What You Going To Do When You Grow Up. He was at the Keyman's Club and our campaign office was there, so we would sneak over into the bar (laughter) and listen to Bobby Womack during the campaign meetings and his music had a great influence on me, because of the songs he was putting out at that time; What Are You Going To Be When You Grow Up. I always decided I was going to be somebody when I grew up. So he, those were my key influences from that era. Story_ID: 52830 Speaker 1: Now what impressed you about this movement? The Black Panthers didn't do it for you. I understand you were influenced by your sister, but what was the philosophy of the black cultural--? Speaker 2: Well the cultural nationalist philosophy was, at that time, they were still talking about going back to Africa. We saw a lot of film about Africa. The crazy thing that stuck in my mind, Julie, was that they would show films that they're showing in Africa of black people in America saying, we don't want them Africans. We don't want to be like them. They up in the bushes. Then they show us the films that they was showing us, of Africans saying, we were rejects and they didn't want us to come back. These were common in the '60s [1960s]. This was the propaganda and I recognized it for propaganda, but many of our people were buying into it. They felt that all Africa was jungle and bushes and a lion was going to eat you up and we bought into that. Then when we saw the reverse angle of the films they were putting of black people saying, I would never go back there and I was like, okay, somebody's playing a mind game on black people. We did sort of did--had a split with the cultural nationalists because we began believing and I still believe to a great extent, that complete freedom is having your own nation. So we began preaching and believing in Kwame Nkrumah and maybe black people could all migrate to the South and we'd have this big revolutionary war and we would establish our own nation in the southern part of America: Alabama, Mississippi, Georgia, where you still had large numbers of blacks. This was preached and taught at that time because the movement to go back to Africa was kind of fading, fading out. So then of course, the Nation of Islam movement was going on strong during that time. So we began to believe a little more that it was black against white and the only way we were going to be free was to have our own land here in America and not back in Africa. So we sort of split from the cultural nationalists at that time, who had a different philosophy. Speaker 1: Now how old are you at this time? I know you started fourteen-- Speaker 2: Sixteen, seventeen, I was young. Speaker 1: And did you ever check out the Muslims? Speaker 2: Well I knew some, but that didn't work for me because I believed in Jesus and I still believe in the Lord. And I appreciate Mr. [Louis] Farrakhan now more than ever because he, when he teaches now, he'll even teach from the Bible. I was with Brother Linden Mohammed the other day and he said, all praise due to Allah and Jesus. So they've made a transition, I believe, which is the best one to make for our people, because the division--any kind of division is no good. Well you're a Muslim and I'm a Christian, so we can't get together, I always thought that that was wrong. So I never condemned the Nation [of Islam] and I like the way they dressed and the way the Honorable Elijah Muhammad had them disciplined. And the Muslim brothers in my neighborhood, they didn't mess with them either. The gangs I'm speaking of. But I just never could get with it because of my relationship with Jesus. Story_ID: 52831 Speaker 1: And I, I truly, since I had--since we skipped over the part in my personal history, my mother [Olivia Hendon] used to dream a lot of things that would come true and she would also have nightmares. It skipped my brothers and sisters, but I had it. I would dream things; I'd have nightmares and my mother sat me down when I was seven and she said, Rickey, you have what I have. Your brothers and sisters don't have it, but you have it. You have the gift of intuition. You have a second sense. You can tell things. You can feel things, can't you? I said, yes. She said and you dream things. She said, well like right now it's troubling to you, but it can help you later in life, if you want it. Because and you can imagine, if you can dream things and know what's going to happen and believe it or not, I knew I was going to be an elected official, I dreamed it. I knew I was going to be a film producer. I had dreamed it already. But she said, if you don't want it, you can get on your knees and pray to the Lord and it will go away. I was on my knees in a second because I did not want to know nothing ahead of time. I didn't want to know when somebody's going to die. To me a funeral is bad enough, you go through when it happens. I don't want to know ahead of time. Then I thought my mamma was kind of different; she was kind of crazy. I didn't want to be like her. Believe it or not, got on my knees at seven, prayed to the Lord, went away. It went away. I didn't dream. I was able to sleep at night, which is wonderful and I still, I have some of it. [01:25:27:19] There were times in my life I would dream things, woah, it would happen. When I had my daughter, my grown daughter Wendy, I dreamed about fish and I was fishing. I woke up the next day and I told my mother. I said, ma, what do fish play for? Because we was playing the number. She said fish. You dreamed about fish boy? I said, yeah. She said, was you fishing? I said, yes. She said, did you catch a fish? I said, yes, I did. She got on the phone, called my girlfriend mamma and said, Ann, Diane pregnant. I'm like ma, what did you say? Diane pregnant and they just talking here and I can hear, she said, Diane come here. She called Diane. Diane like, what? You pregnant. This her mother talking. I ain't pregnant, what is you talking about. We ain't even doing nothing. She's like, yeah right, you pregnant. Took her to the doctor, she pregnant like a mug, okay? [01:26:22:24] Then they giving me numbers to play for baby. They give me too many numbers. They give me eight numbers. One out of the Wishbone book and one out of the Red Devil and all this now. Every one of those numbers fell, Julie. In one week, I didn't catch a dime, but my mother and her mother, they was bankrolled, because they played all of them numbers for pregnant and baby and every one of them failed. So I had that gift and I still have it. It's not as vivid as it was, but I have, I can see things coming. Like when the FBI was trying to set me up, I saw it. I knew it. It was just, that's the FBI. I mean, no other idea, nobody told on me, but I just knew. I could just tell things. Speaker 2: So I want to go back to, that's interesting though. You still, was it ever viewed as evil in the black community? It wasn't. It wasn't viewed as ungodlike. Speaker 1: Oh no, it was from the Lord. Now there were dreamers who were of the devil, you know what I mean. And most of them were like, I'm a fortune teller or call me and I say--my mother didn't like that. They were just like, we'll call Aunt Becky and say, hey be careful, I dreamed about some man coming in your house. Maybe I don't need to go on that trip. It was more of that kind of thing within my mother's circle. And the main thing was, what's the number that go with that dream. But I've had experiences where they've actually saved a lot of my relatives, cousins and stuff from bad things because they could see it coming or dream it. So it wasn't seen as evil in our family. Now scary, yes. You wake up in the morning, your mother standing in there crying and crying and you're like, what's wrong, what's wrong and she's just crying and crying. Then when you say what's wrong, she say, somebody going to die and then the phone ring, somebody dead in the family. You're like, okay, you will look at her kind of hard. But those people who dealt in it in that way, we stayed away from that. Story_ID: 52832 Speaker 1: Now you, what I'm curious about is, when did you move to Detroit [Michigan]? Because you went to Far--I'm still at seventeen and you're still in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right, in my junior year, my brother, some gang was after my brother because he was a sports star at Farragut [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and that's when Marshall [Metro High School, Chicago, Illinois] and Farragut and Harrison [High School, Chicago, Illinois] had very violent fights at every basketball game, at every football game. My brother would fight and they couldn't beat him. Then he started going with a girl that lived in their gang neighborhood. So they were after him to kill him because of this girl. So my mother [Olivia Hendon] made him go to Detroit for the summer and he messed around and got a grown man's job at General Motors and the money, we needed the money. My dad [Jimmy Hendon] had died, stepdaddy [Robert Larkin] was gone. So she moved there and I stayed with my sister for a little while, then my mother made me come join them in Detroit. So I spent my junior and I graduated Northwestern High School in Detroit. Speaker 1: Now why do you say he messed around and got a grown man's job. You say it in a negative way. Why-- Speaker 2: Well because it ruined his career. My brother was all that. That's when Farragut was like number one, number two in the city and he was right behind Otis Armstrong. Otis went on to play for the Denver Broncos and G was bigger and faster than Otis. He scored, they played a scrimmage game against the Bears, my brother scored four touchdowns. But when he got that grown man's job they would not let him do anything at the school he went to in Detroit, but run track because his mother wasn't there. They already had their half back, their point guard. So he went from being a star to couldn't even play basketball or football and he became very--Jerome was already tough, he became frustrated, disaffected; ended up on drugs, which eventually killed him, but he did have the opportunity to turn his life around and became one of the greatest counselors on, about drug abuse. I don't recall the name of the place where he worked at. And I remember when he passed, guys just kept tellin--coming up to me saying how they wouldn't have made it without-- Story_ID: 50355 Speaker 1: And what happened to your step dad [Robert Larkin]? Speaker 2: He and my uncle (chuckle), my Uncle Julius, they used to chase women, her brother together. They'd chase women and stuff and my mamma [Olivia Hendon] got tired of it, so they had a big old fight at the house. My brother jumped on him. After my brother jumped on him, he shot through the window and all that. We went and got our little gun that we had hid in the house. My brother's like, no don't pull it out, because mamma will have a fit. And my step daddy ran. He ran and moved to California. Speaker 1: What were you fourteen about, fifteen? Speaker 2: It was about fifteen, about fifteen when Robert left. But they cool, they friends and all that now. You get over it. He's a good man. I like him a lot. Speaker 1: So you're in Detroit [Michigan] at this point. You moved there and you're going to school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That's your--is that your senior year? Speaker 2: This is my junior year, the end of my junior year and my senior year. Story_ID: 50356 Speaker 1: And so anything special about the Detroit [Michigan] experience? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, Northwestern High School was a hot bed of revolution. So I come from Chicago [Illinois] and the Black Student Union [BSU]; they had the Black Student Alliance [BSA] and they were aligned with the Black Panthers. So I came in with this BSU stuff and there was a split in the BSA. The ones who came with me and the ones who stayed with the Panthers. So we actually had big fight with the Panthers. It was a, we joined the--that's when Eldridge Cleaver and Huey P. Newton fell out. So we joined the Eldridge Cleaver branch, not of, of the Black Panther Party. They called it something else, I can't recall what it was at this time. May have called it the Eldridge Cleaver Branch of the Black Panther Party, but we were with them. We aligned with them and not with Huey Newton. Speaker 1: Why? Speaker 2: Well because we had--they had a big rally at one of the big colleges and we had brothers out there selling them 25 cent papers, The Panther Paper who would get in a jam and weren't getting any help from the party. We had a problem with that. These brothers and sisters were putting their life on the line and police was snatching them off the street, selling the paper. We'd say, where is Brother Larry. He got locked up. Well, go get him out. Well the Panthers are supposed to get him out. Well why ain't they getting him out. So we had a lot of that kind of thing. We went to the big rally and our leader was still with Huey, still wanted us all to be Panthers, be with the Panthers. The Black Student Alliance kind of faded out, because the BSU, we became bigger than them. So they were strong at other schools, but at Northwestern, they faded out. But we still had members of our group who were aligned, wanted us to be with the Panthers. We went to this big, big rally and Huey Newton was the keynote speaker. May he rest in peace. They brought Huey out in a fur coat, a big, full length, to the ground fur coat. There was already word that he was living in a penthouse and this, that, and the other. Now he was living in a high-rise, but it was easier to protect him actually, in that high-rise. We didn't understand that at that time. We was like, living in a high-rise; then he comes out--but we got past that. But when he came out in that fur and they took it off of him like James Brown. Do you remember James Brown do that and they--now he got a lot of cheers. You had the liberals and the whites and the gays and all at the big rally and they loved it. A lot of the blacks loved it, but our little group, I remember sitting up in the balcony about fifty strong; we come in a bus and I looked around and nobody in our group liked it, nobody. We had a problem with him and probably because we had friends who were Panthers who was locked up in jail and couldn't get out; who had got shot by the police. We see them and they were looking down on their luck and you weas like, you supposed to take care of your own. Then the rumors about that they said in the news, he was living with a white woman, whatever. Remember, they believed in class struggle, so white, black could all be together. We still didn't believe that. Some of our members did, but we didn't. And when we saw that incident with the coat, we got a little disturbed. At the end of the rally, they went to question and answer and we started asking some questions. The next thing we know about five Panthers was standing over us in the balcony. You know what I mean? Like three Panthers on this side, and two Panthers--like we was the enemy. And we felt like we was being watched and sort of under seige by our own brothers. We was like, what is this? We can't ask Huey a question just because he don't like the question or some of you all don't like the question, because Huey was answering every question. He wasn't dodging the question, but some of his staff you could tell was like, you all can't ask no more questions; that kind of thing. So even our leader who was pro-Huey, pro-Panther, he got pissed off. When the leader got pissed, the chairman, he's like, we leaving. So we left. And when we left and got back to high school, the sister from New York and it's the baddest sister I ever met in my life. Bad sister! She was with the Eldridge Cleaver crew. And her man was in jail. He was a Panther and he was one of them that they would not help get out. So she came. She raised money and she helped get the bond and all that, to get the brother out. Because of her, we fell in love with her and she was with Eldridge Cleaver, so we joined Eldridge Cleaver crew. Story_ID: 50357 Speaker 1: What was Eldridge Cleaver? What was his philosophy at that time? Speaker 2: Well this is when he had got messed up in the hijacking airplanes, some of his guys did and they were after him, so he split to Algeria. So he was in Algeria at the time and he became more preaching more of a nationalist philosophy from there and a anti-Huey Newton philosophy. They had their own Black Panther paper and that kind of thing. So he became more nationalistic during that time. When he came back to America, he started wearing the leather pants and doing a different kind of thing. So he fell out with them. We were just pretty much on our own. Speaker 1: I find this, we were doing Bobby Rush [HM] the other day and he was talking about the Black Panther Party. A lot of people don't--there's not a lot recorded on this, on the divisions and the various things. And I remember when we did Julian Bond [HM], he was--he identified very much with the Southern Civil Rights. When I mentioned Black Panthers, he was like, oh no, no, no, no, no, no. Speaker 2: Well a lot of people don't want to talk about it. I think it's healthy, especially with this kind of program, because we can learn from it. We can grow from it. I grew to respect them and to love them more. I grew to bond with the Nation of Islam and not let our differences separate us. If they had to have that same thinking back then, I think we would have advanced greater and quick--more quickly as a people. But because of those divisions, it hurt the movement. It slowed the movement. Then we found out that some of the people that were with the Eldridge branch, that were with us anyway, were actually FBI agents. So we found that they had been infiltrated and that the government was actually pushing those divisions, because the main ones that was out there pushing the division, we found out later were actually FBI agents. Speaker 1: Now when did you really find that out? Speaker 2: That was in my senior year in high school, because of like I say, the sister from New York, we found out that they were trying to kill her. And she discovered some documentation on her leader, her local leader, who was an FBI agent. He actually sent some people to hijack an airplane, that we knew. We told them, don't listen to this crazy man. I mean, we don't trust him. He was their leader, he wasn't our leader. We still was independent high school students, but they were like in their twenties and all and they really believed in this man. Our friends who were with them, we was like, don't. Because they never would tell us exactly what they were supposed to be doing, but they let us know that they were going to be doing something real crazy, here's my mamma phone number, that kind of thing. If something happened to me, call my mamma. We like, what are you fitting to do? Well I can't tell you, but it's under the big--he was a big, heavyset black guy. It's under him. He's ordering us to do something. And when we saw the young white lady that they had with them, she was rich. Her people were rich. But she was militant and she meant well. We saw her coming on the set, we was like, they going to do something really bad. And we found out later what it was, when we saw them all on TV. They went to hijack an airplane and the FBI was waiting for them. Then the sister came and she said, let us know and showed us the paperwork for the big guy, their leader, was actually an FBI agent. Speaker 1: So what were you thinking of people like, well [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had died, but let's see, the more traditional civil--this is '70 [1970]-- Speaker 2: Well Ralph Abernathy, I had nothing but respect for him. I believed personally, that anybody who would fight in The Civil Rights Movement or who would stand up against racism and white supremacy, they were okay with me. Didn't have to agree with how they did everything or their philosophy, they were okay with me. I had no problem with the cultural nationalists; I had no problem with the Panthers. I just wouldn't join, but I got along pretty much with everybody, because my philosophy was, we all are in this together. I preached against the ones who preached--don't like that group, don't like this group, that kind of thing. Story_ID: 50358 Speaker 1: Okay so were you active in school at this time? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was a straight A student. Speaker 1: You're a straight A student, but a lot of the activity, even probably at the school, you're at a black high school. Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Was really still around this--were teachers involved? Were they encouraging or was it-- Speaker 2: Well I had some wonderful teachers. Miss Johnson, I remember, she was always trying to get me out of it. Rickey Hendon, what are you doing? Get out of that. Stop with that black power stuff. There's another way. You're straight As; you're an honor student, why? Why? Or she would be like, you know we got a test tomorrow and I mean, we'd run out for the riots, the fights, the whatever. I'd be like, don't worry about it, I'm going to pass. I'm going to pass. I hung out with the black militant. There were two power groups at my high school. Let me put it like this-- the gangs and the militants. The high school was like a college, we had a campus. So we'd lay out on the grass everyday and the gangs would be laying on that side and the militants on this side. Well the scared kids would hang out with the militant side because the gang side, they'd be trying to take their money and we wouldn't let them take people's money. So we were like the protectors of the students who really wanted to just go to class and get their education. So I got called into that. We're the protectors of the nerds and the geeks and the--but none of my friends went to class. I was the only one who went to class. Matter of fact, they had, Diana I mentioned, my daughter's mother, they had a group called the F Club. Every quar--every time report card would come out, we would all get together and be like, I got four Fs, can you top that? I got five, ohhhh, that kind of thing. Then here I come, because we always lockered in the basement. Nobody could locker in the basement, but the cool kids, the gang kids, and the militants. Everybody else couldn't locker in the basement. It was a rule. The nerd come down there, the gangs will beat him up. We'd would have to protect them. They wouldn't mess with us because anybody fight the police, the gangs was like, no, they too crazy. But I come down there with my three As and a B, my girlfriend wouldn't even talk to me for a week. Our big fallout was because she changed her grades and I told her mom. I should have never told her mom (laughter). Story_ID: 50359 Speaker 1: Now, okay now, okay, you graduated from Northwestern [High School, Detroit, Michigan] right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Now this is what I'm wondering, where do the theater and the arts come in? Speaker 2: I was in theater and arts at Northwestern and at Farragut [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and at Mason [Upper Grade School, Chicago, Illinois], all the way back to Bryant [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. I was always in the school play. I was always writing the school play or in the school play or directing the school play and I just continued that, even though I was in this militant group. We did poetry. I wrote a lot of poems, so we would put on our own shows, Black Nationalist type shows with, my sister and them would do the fashion show, showing the sisters the garments and all of that. Then they sold, so they would make them for the young ladies. That was one way that we were able to fund our movement. Then I wrote militant poetry, very militant poetry. And so I've been writing all my life. As I said, I was left-handed. I hold my pencil funny and people would always laugh at me, how you hold your pencil. And it would make me want to write. I never did try to correct how I held my pencil. I was like, I don't care what they say, but I write is significant, not how I hold my pencil. So, and I still write poetry now, it's just evolved to a different kind of thing. But we would still put on theatrical productions, even during the revolutionary time. Speaker 1: So were there any black artists that were in poetry at the time? Speaker 2: Well I like the, the, it was about five guys. Good Lord, they were black poe--I'll call them in a minute. But they had--I like Gil Scott Heron. He did a lot of militant type jazz at that time. Even Marvin Gaye was singing some progressive type songs. James Brown came out with Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud. That was my theme song. The Last Poets, those were my guys. Then we started our own group like The Last Poets and they would play the congos and we would say the poetry. Story_ID: 50360 Speaker 1: Now you went--then you enrolled at Omega State [now Omega School of Communications in Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Omega State, right. Speaker 1: What were your thoughts when you went there. You wanted to go into radio? I mean-- Speaker 2: Radio. Well actually what happened, I left Detroit [Michigan] and my sister Shabeda had moved back here after college. I always loved Chicago [Illinois]. I don't know why. It was West Side; it was ghetto; it was rundown, but I just loved Chicago. So as soon as I got grown, as soon as I graduated, I was like ma, I'm out of here. She's like, well where--I'm going to Chicago. So I moved back and when I moved back, I was staying with my sister. Her husband at that time was a school teacher and they had books forever. So I would stay down in the basement and read and read and read. So I went to this program to get into trade school and they were offering different courses and you had to take tests to see if you qualify. I passed. I aced all the tests. My counselor came and told me, I got the highest score ever recorded, but he was not in charge of what course I could take. That was a different person and that person would not let me take broadcasting. It was like truck driver, factory worker. He kept trying to force me into one of those and I kept refusing. They made me test--I had to take four more tests. I was the only one--now I got like a ninety-eight. One hundred is the most you can get; to pass you needed a seventy and he was still making me take more tests, trying to say I wasn't good enough. So my counselor called me in and said, okay look, it's not my choice or you know I'd let you take the broadcasting, but they keep saying, he keeps coming up with stuff. They want you to take four more tests. I'm like, four more tests. Yes. He said, but I know you're going to pass. He was a great, great, great white gentleman. I can't recall his name, but he's like, I know you're going to pass. I know you're going to pass; I know you're going to pass. So don't let it bother you, because everybody else was going on into their classes already and I had to take four more tests. I took those four tests, I got 100. He made me took two more tests after I took this second--at the time I was working in a factory too and it all ran together, show you how good God is. I was working in this factory pouring hot metal because I could pour hot metal. I used to work in a foundry, it didn't bother me. I liked heavy, hard work. Girl, I had muscles. So I'm pouring this hot metal, right and they call us off, because it's Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s birthday. We were supposed to have it off and they refused to give it--to let us have it off. So they called all the shop stewards, called everybody together, what we going to do about it? Everybody was old, been there twenty years, fifteen years. They didn't know how they going to get another job, so they were scared to say anything. I had one day to go to make it in the union. It was ninety days, you're on probation, but I still had to speak up. So I spoke up and I said, this is not right. It's in the contract; Dr. King was a great man. The white people that ran the factory was like, he ain't did nothing for nobody and dah, dah, dah, dah, dah and we forced them to let us have that day off. Well they told me never to come back. The day they told me--the day I lost that job, I got the call that I was accepted into broadcasting school. The day I lost the job and I say, okay, this is heaven sent. I'm glad I spoke up. I'm looking at, I could have a job, but that day I got--the week before that, I had to go over the placement counselor's head and I called the top president and say look, I had to pass seven tests. Why can't I get my scholarship for broadcasting school? We went to Omega, graduated and went to work out immediately in radio. Story_ID: 50361 Speaker 1: I was at in Highland Park [Illinois]. I went to, what was it called? Speaker 2: WVVX? Speaker 1: WVVX, Highland Park, I was the announcer, the engineer, the newsman (chuckle). We played dusties. Girl, I used to jam me some dusties up in there. I worked the midnight shift, so I worked from like twelve midnight to five o'clock in the morning. I went from there to WAIT, but I was no longer behind the mike. I became just engineer. I did that for the money, because they pay very good money. I wasn't making anything at the other station. Then from there, I got into the movie business with Fred Williamson and a TV show I produced about that time too. Speaker 2: So tell me what year we are right now. Speaker 1: Now we're in-- Speaker 2: Because you worked the radio it says for eight years. Speaker 1: Right, that was-- Speaker 2: 1970 what? Speaker 1: Then end of the '70s [1970s], so early '80s [1980s]. So I'd say '78 [1978], '79 [1979] to about when Fred did the big score, he taught me and my--well first he hired my sister, Shabeda and then he talked me into coming on board with him. I was--that had to be--I'd say, '84 [1984], '85 [1985], something like that. Speaker 2: Now how did Shabe--Shabeda was the contact with Fred or you had known him some time or-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she was the contact. The director, Marvin was Fred's director at the time. He was a young brother and Marvin, all of us hung out together. All of us did plays and theater together. Because I was doing theater back then and being an extra in movies and that kind of thing. So we knew the set, the scene. We were on the set, as they said. But Shabeda met Fred before I did. I just became closer with him. I lived with him in LA [Los Angeles, California] for a while and was his gopher; wrote a couple of scripts for him, that kind of thing. Speaker 2: What was that experience like? Speaker 1: It was great, except I missed Chicago [Illinois]. I just, being in LA, being in Hollywood, I loved the weather, but the politics, I mean politics was just in my blood. The politics out there was just laid back. It wasn't real. To me, the people were different than the people in the Midwest. I got tired of trying to figure out the nightclub scene, was it a gay club, or a straight club, or a bi-club. They had names. I'm trying to go to clubs and they say, well it depends on what you like. In LA, they had every kind of club, depending on what you like. I just got-- I don't know, Fred, we worked with Fred for a while and then one night (chuckle) he went to a golf tournament in Phoenix [Arizona] and he left me and his son at the house. He told us, he said, now don't drink up all my booze. You can have--you've got the run of the house. Don't eat up all the food, then drink up all the booze. You know what we did (laughter). We drank up all the booze. We had people over. He came back, he was mad at us and stuff. We was, you was gone longer than you said you was going to be gone. Okay, we'll buy some more. He's like oh no, no, no, I'm mad. So after that incident I was like, look Fred, I'm going back to Chicago. And that's when I came back. But I was ready to come back. I liked it there, but it just wasn't home. I was homesick. Story_ID: 50362 Speaker 1: So when you came back, what were your thoughts? Speaker 2: It was snowing. I thought I was crazy. I got off the plane and ice was everywhere, I tried to--didn't have enough clothes on. Oh Lord, I could have stayed in LA [Los Angeles, California]. But I got over that in a couple days and I just was happy. I was really, really happy to be back. That's when I did my TV show and when I went to LA, my sister sold all my furniture, sold my car and so I was homeless for a minute. I was homeless for about, a couple of months, but I wouldn't give that experience up for nothing in the world because I learned a lot. I learned--I thought I already knew a lot, but you learn a lot when you're homeless in Chicago in the winter. People who I thought would help me and look out for me was, hm, mm (no). The girl who I thought just loved me so much, she loved me until it was time for me to go and that taught me a lot. So that lasted oh, about three, four months I was out there homeless and I finally moved in with my sister for about a month. I got a job and these were like, I was selling diapers over the phone, Dy-Dee Wash. You talk about a job, I would do a lot of sales, but then the diapers would come back. They'd take money out of your check, I'd get like two weeks pay 80 dollars (laughter). But I persevered. I said, I'm going to take this job and I took a lot of small jobs, any kind of job I could. I moved from there and got another job in sales. Next thing you know, I was the top salesman at City Chevrolet. All of that in about seven, eight months. Speaker 1: And this is what year? You say-- Speaker 2: This had to be the latter '80s [1980s], like '88 [1988], '89 [1989]. Well actually a little bit before that because I became ward committeeman, Democratic Ward Committeeman in '88. So I'd say '86 [1986], '87 [1987], something like that. Speaker 1: So then you become the top salesman, right? Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 50363 Speaker 1: And then are you still active politically? Speaker 2: At that time, yes. I was--never thought I'd be a candidate. Even though I had dreamed that I would be President of the United States; I never thought I'd be a candidate because I didn't like being a candidate. I didn't--I was behind the scenes. I wrote speeches, radio commercials for Danny Davis, Congressman Danny Davis [HM], for Alderman Ed Smith, for Wallace Davis. I was the guy behind the scenes who threw a fundraiser, who put together a play and we put our plays on for fundraisers for the independent politicians on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. I never thought I'd be the candidate or anything like that, but I was very, very active. I never stopped being active in politics since I was fourteen. Speaker 1: So what--how did this opportunity come up then? Speaker 2: Well one night I got a telephone call and they told me that Wallace Davis, who was the alderman and the ward committeeman was going to jail. And he had come to that conclusion too. I was one of his captains. They called me over and said, if Wallace goes to jail and this is Nancy Jefferson, Wallace Davis, Danny Davis, Ed Smith; if Wallace went to jail, they want me to take over the organization as ward committeeman and that [Mayor] Harold [Washington] wanted me to do it. I was like, Harold want me to do it? Harold Washington want me? I called my mother up and I said, mom, they want me to take this position and she said, oh really, how much it pay? I said nothing. She was like, nothing? Boy I ain't raise you like that. You done lost your mind. Well, I can build it into something and took over the organization when Wallace went to jail. It was in shambles, I'm sure you can imagine. No order, no loyalties. He was trying to run for reelection from jail and the people he had more confidence in than me were just ruining his campaign. He was buying drugs from the campaign money. We had no posters, no fliers and I just became outraged at them. Out of my outrage came the determination that okay, at least I know I'll do it right. At least I know I'm sincere. So forget it, I'll run and that's the beginning of my elected part of my life. Speaker 1: You held that, how long were you ward committeeman? Speaker 2: I was ward committeeman for nine years. Speaker 1: Now you became alderman then? Speaker 2: Yes, I became--what happened, Wallace lost that election for alderman. He was in jail. We actually won it, but they stole it. You know how that works. I went to the new alderman which was Shanika Butler and her father was Reverend Doctor Jesse Butler. Reverend Butler met me at the door. Me and Alderman Butler were having a good conversation; he came in cussing and acting a fool and threw me out. I'm in there trying to make peace because I didn't want to be alderman. I said, I could just be the committeeman, register--get people registered to vote and democratic party and I don't have to be no alderman and all that. I didn't want that. But after he cursed me out and threw me out and they told me they was going to kick my A-S-S and kick me out as ward committeeman, I said, well--why? Well next thing I know, when it was time to run, she ran against me and we won. We sat there and said, well she ran against us, alderman was the next year, let's run against her. So we went against them and we won that. Story_ID: 50364 Speaker 1: I was--I kept the committeeman and I was senator and committeeman, but I gave up the alderman when I won the race for the senate [Illinois State Senate], because that was the first--at that time, we only had one black state senator on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. So it was a new map and I wasn't going to run for it, but people came to me and said, Rickey, if you don't run, there going to be eight people running and the strongest candidate lived on the South Side. So that South Side influence and South Side trying to run the west side came into play. The candidate that was the strongest candidate, had all the money was a southsider, Anthony Bass (laughter). He was with the eighth ward organization. So the leading candidates from the West Side sat me down and said, I'm not going to get out the race for him, but I'll get out for you. The other one is saying, well I can't stand him. I'm not going to get out for him, but I'll get out for you. After about six of them came and said that to me, that they would get out if I took it, but wouldn't get out if anybody else ran, I said okay. Let me sleep on it, pray over it and all that and I end up making a decision to run with all of their backing. So the southsiders stayed in the race of course, one westsider, and myself and we were victorious. Speaker 2: Now I want to--first of all, you were outside the system and you find the system, so what was that-- Speaker 1: I think I'm still outside the system. Speaker 2: Well you have a reputation of being a rascal (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, I'm still outside the system, even though I'm now the Assistant Minority Leader in the senate, which is the second highest African American in the senate. The Black Caucus put me into that position. So I owe my loyalties first to the Black Caucus; second to Leader Jones, but the Black Caucus put me in that position. Actually the position of the assistant is to represent their caucus. So I'm in the mix, but I'm still outside the system as far as when it comes to the system's interest colliding with my people's interest. Black people's interests are always going to come first with me. I represent a lot of whites and a lot of Hispanics who understand me and understand that part of me. They have no problem with it, because I also represent them well. I'm an anti-tax democratic. I've been one my entire career and that carries me well in the white part of my district because they don't like paying all these crazy taxes either. I get along with everybody regardless of race. They just have to accept I'm black. I was born black. If they don't have no problem with that, we can go from there. So yeah, I can work with the mayor. I can, but if I got a problem with the President of the United States, which I have had, I will challenge, challenge him. We marched on the Democratic National Convention because, even though I was a Democratic Ward Committeeman at the time and Democratic Senator, I still had a problem with the things that the Democratic Party were doing to my people. So yeah, I'm still--I've mellowed a bit, but I'm still outside a little bit. Story_ID: 50365 Speaker 1: I want to talk just about the ward committeeman and your experience as alderman, because that'll set the ground for--I was wondering what you learned during those--you said nine years, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Because it's all a learning process. Speaker 2: Well the first thing I learned as ward committeeman, because that's what I got first and Mayor [Harold] Washington, I was his last political appointee before he died, I was about to be on a roll and then Harold died or was poisoned, depending in which you did choose to believe. I believe there was something involved. But I learned that if we don't stick together, regardless of whether you call yourself a machine guy or independent, if we don't stick together, we don't get anything. I was one of the founders of the West Side Black Elected Officials. It was amazing what--I actually ended up the chairman of the group, the first chairman. The reason why was because everybody else in the room hated each other. They were like you did this to me back in 1965. And you did this to me back in 1971. It took a lot of meeting to get sixteen elected officials from the West Side to come together. When the southsiders found out there was such a group, they didn't believe it. The West Side Black Elected Officials? Oh no, no way, no way. That taught me a lot, that people don't expect us to be united or find a way to work together. I was a very effective Democratic Ward Committeeman. George Dunne and I got along. I was able to build my organization. I was doing great with getting jobs and all of that. Of course, when Mayor Washington died, that began the change of it. When Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer was put in, he aligned himself with Alderman Shanetha Butler (ph.), so we didn't really get along, because I didn't do anything to Gene, but he was with her and she was against me and he needed her in City Council, so they worked against me. So I went on and had to fight them. I had to fight for everything I did. The main thing I learned that, if you're with the people and the people know that, no matter how much money they put up against you--and of course my election, I was doing it this morning. I wasn't even thinking about this show. But I'll say in the six elections that I have been involved in, I have been outspent about three and a half million to 200,000 [dollars], total; you add them all up together. I have never had any money. We always had been poor group, little rag tag group that everybody said, oh, you can beat them. They don't have no TV commercials. They don't have no radio commercials. But if you're down with your people, and the people know that, you can win anyway. You can win despite the odds, despite the big money, despite the mayor sending all his troops against you. I'm living proof of that. I want to be proof to young people that you don't have to go along and sell out to advance, because I'm Assistant Minority Leader right now and I did not sell out. I refused to do it. There's some hard times and some lonely times; when you look around you say, dog, our organization is the last vanguard. We're the last the ones to fall. We still feel that way today. We're the only group, that we know of, political group, elected, that hasn't made the decision that, just go along with the mayor, Mayor [Richard M.] Daley to a large degree. Speaker 1: You're talking about the Black Caucus. Speaker 2: Well I'm saying the black elected officials period. Some of my greatest friends that I just knew would never kiss the ring or whatever, ended up with the mayor having a fundraiser for them. Like, wait a minute; my people are like, you going to that fundraiser. I'm like, you know damn well I ain't going to that fundraiser, because then I lose my people. We've been beat down. I've lost elections. My organization was in shambles, but I never gave up. I kept telling the ten we had left, don't even worry about it. Now you can't get in my office when we have our committee meetings on Monday nights. It's bigger than ever. I lost ground to Secretary of State Jesse White [HM], Alderman [Walter] Burnett [Jr.], the city clerk race. I ran for city clerk during that, after Harold. When you lose, everybody deserts you. When you win, everybody just loves you and everybody was part of it. What do they say, defeat is an orphan; victory everybody was there. I'm the reason you won. So I went through those losses without losing what I truly believe in, without losing my mission, because I can't. I'm on a different mission, I believe, than most elected officials. Story_ID: 50366 Speaker 1: Now how was--when you got elected, what was--what made you decided to run? Was it just it was--for the Illinois General Assembly, was there an opening, was that-- Speaker 2: Well what happened, it was after the remap and they created a new senatorial district for the West Side. We had the population; we had been saying we should have had a senator, but we only had one and that was further west, Senator Earlean Collins [HM] was the senator. This was right when Senator [John] D'Arco [Jr.] was in trouble. In fact, he was in penitentiary. So when you're cutting up the map, it was easy for them to cut the guy out that's in jail or on his way to jail or any kind of trouble. So they cut him out and created the district where I live on the Near West Side. I'm the first senator for the fifth district ever, on the West Side. So, with them creating that position and the other people saying it was me or going in with a southsider, that's really why I ran. Story_ID: 50367 Speaker 1: Now, that, the Illinois General Assembly, how was that different? Here you are, you're going to Springfield [Illinois], this is not the West Side, it's downstate. You have not really spent time downstate. So how was that whole experience? Speaker 2: It's so funny because when we went to freshmen orientation, everybody knew me. Everybody knew me, everybody. All the republicans knew me. You're Hollywood, aren't you? Yes, I am. I saw you on G(unclear), boy, you're something else. You give [Mayor Richard M.] Daley hell. I got that all day. Everybody, my reputation preceded me. So that helped me a lot. It really did. I made alliances on the republican side of the aisle from the very first day, because I wasn't the monster that I had been created to be, by my naysayers, by some in the media. They found out that I was a nice guy. I'm a happy go lucky guy. I laugh mostly all day, every day. I smile all the time. I'm a happy-go-lucky person. I look at life as a great gift from God and a great adventure that is to be enjoyed and I enjoy my life. So when they got to see that not only was I friendly, but I was quite intelligent and bright, I made alliances immediately. I did get that, you were just a rookie, you're just getting here, so sit down and be quiet. I never bought into that. My first weeks there, I was up talking on legislation, because I understood the legislative process. In city council I understood, I was on the budget committee, so I understood the money. So the first committee I got on in Springfield was appropriations. So I immediately was involved in the fray because it's all about the money. So I was heavily involved immediately and that's not a committee that freshman normally get. You normally don't get approp going in, but I asked for it, kind of demanded it and I got it. Story_ID: 50368 Speaker 1: Now a lot of people don't know about the Illinois General Assembly. They know about their alderman; they know about the ward committeemen; they don't understand even what this body does. I'm wondering if you would just talk about the importance of that. Speaker 2: Well you're absolutely correct and it's very unfortunate, having been alderman and committeeman, I'm still working like an alderman and committeeman, because people call for the things they call them for. But they miss the boat and they think that the alderman is the most important elected official that you have. The legislators actually are, especially the senators for several reasons. One, we appropriate money for the entire state. So we can appropriate money for programs that don't have to go through city council, that don't have to go through the mayor. We are much more independent than even the House of Representatives because there are fewer of us, number one and we're the upper chamber. So the senate has always been a little more progressive and a little more independent than the house has and of course, that's city council, because pretty much, city council is not independent at all. So people missed the fact that we write the legislation. We write the laws for the state and those laws supersede local laws. We can even get past home rule. We appropriate money for programs that the city wouldn't even sponsor. I've done very well in that area and that's one reason why we've been able to build up the West Side and build up my district, despite what the city's plans may be, because I can give money directly to people that I know are going to do what needs to be done in the community. Story_ID: 50369 Speaker 1: Now do you know much about the history of blacks in the Illinois General Assembly? Speaker 2: Yeah, I know a good degree about it. Speaker 1: Were there--are there people that you've admired who've come before you? Speaker 2: Oh yes. Senator Fred Smith and I'm in to the senators. Was a great man, a great leader, and that's Senator Margaret Smith's former husband. They have a statue to him there in the capitol [Springfield, Illinois] and that said a lot to me. My favorite senator before me, that I got an opportunity to serve a little bit with before he passed was Kenny Hall. Senator Kenny [Kenneth] Hall, that was my guy from East St. Louis [Illinois]. He would tell me all the old stories. Because Kenny, when I got there, he had already been there thirty years. Dick [Richard] Newhouse, Charlie Chew, Cecil Partee, and then of course, the great senator from the West Side, Senator Earlean Collins [HM]. And of course, her husband [Otis Collins] was a senator. So I learned a lot by studying all of them. I think I'm a little combination of them all. Story_ID: 50370 Speaker 1: Now--well, I want to ask this question about the Illinois General Assembly. What are the things that are really sort of critical that are responsiblity of the assembly that people may not know about. Speaker 2: Well the main thing and I don't want to harp on the money, but a lot of people miss the boat when it comes to the legislature. The legislature and the governor's office spends all of the people's money. They can spend it wisely or they can spend it foolishly. I've seen a lot of foolish spending of the people's money. For instance, we had a contract for underwear for prisoners and this came out. The State of Illinois was paying fourteen dollars a pair, per pair for underwear for prisoners. Now I'm sitting on appropriations when this comes up. Now long story short, of course, we find out that the Governor's buddy had the contract with the people who were supplying the drawers, but I had to ask the question, were these silk drawers or these designer underwear? Fourteen dollars a pair, and you can go get three in a pack for 5.99 at Value City. What's going on? Well as I said, somebody had the contract and they were getting money off the top and these were conservative--fiscal conservative republicans in charge of the government and they were preaching that prisoners don't deserve no cushy life, no easy life, but yet we're giving them fourteen dollar underwear. What's going on? Well we got a break. By the way, these were plain white, we found out. These were not silk, these are plain white and we're paying fourteen dollars a pair. They cut us a deal, the company that had the fourteen dollars a pair contract. They dropped it down to nine dollars a pair. Ooohhh! They said, oooohh, we're saving you five dollars a pair. Yeah, right. The next one that came up was prescription drugs, prescription medicine. We found out that they had medicine for senior citizens that was six dollars a pill. They were giving the same pills to horses, forty cents a pill. Same pill, same brand, same everything; human beings six dollars, horses forty cents. We did the research, we found out one of the governor's friends had the contract and this is under [Governor Jim] Edgar, who was supposed to be fiscal conservative, prudent Edgar, had the contract for the medication out of Tennessee. So, by sitting on approp my first four years, even though I already believed from sitting in city council that's it's about the money, it became even clearer to me that it's about the money. The people need to really watch the government when it comes to their money. So when they say we're going to raise your taxes, we need the money, I don't believe it, because I see the waste. I see the theft. I see all that they're stealing. They're stealing millions and millions of dollars everyday from the people of Illinois and from the citizens of the City of Chicago. So the main thing to me is that we spend the money. We collect it. We tax it and we spend it. I tell people all the time, whether you say you're with the government or you vote or not, you're paying taxes. Whether you think you're paying tax--well I don't own no property; you're still paying taxes. Every time you get gas, every time you buy bubble gum, you're paying taxes. So fight for your fair share of that money. Then when you look at the fights that have taken place in the senate over who gets the new jail, who gets the new prison, that lets you know it's about the money. I've seen republican best friends physically pushing each other over who's going to get the new prison in their district. Then you find out who the new crop is. The new crop is no longer cotton and corn. The new crop are black babies, black young men and black women from the inner cities who they have to keep in these prisons to keep that complex going. I was the sponsor of the bill to get rid of the death penalty in Illinois, because we found out that one out of two on death row was innocent. But guess what? People have only concentrated on capital cases. If one out of two on death row and capital cases are innocent, what about these other cases? What about the persons in there for theft that they didn't do? What about the other person in there for a drug charge where the police put the drugs on them or where the prosecutor concocted the evidence? It is becoming so evident across America that these jails are filled with innocent black people. Black and Hispanic and the fastest growing population are black females. Then when you try to find out why, it's because they get 40,000 dollars a year to incarcerate you. Story_ID: 50371 Speaker 1: I want to ask you turn to some more theoretical things--philosophical, not theoretical. With--what would you encourage in a day where politicians are viewed as scants and what would you advise young black people coming out why they should go into politics? Speaker 2: Well the first thing is, if you believe all politicians are crooks, become one and you don't be a crook and you can change it. That's been my--I've been doing that my entire career. I've had, during the [Operation] Silver Shovel, the FBI was all over me. I mean all over me. Every scam, every way to try to get me to take money that you can think of, they tried on me. I understood the rules to say, if they try you once, try you twice, you won't take money they're supposed to leave you alone. After that, it becomes entrapment. They say they have a right to try you, but then after they try you and you don't take the money, they're supposed to leave you alone. Well they hounded me and they tried at least six, seven schemes to try to get me to take money. Money for dumping garbage in my dist--ward; money for graveyard legislation. Once I became a senator, they were still trying me. After I left city council, they kept trying as senator to do bad things. So I say to young people, look, if you don't like the system; if you don't trust politicians, but you know in your heart that you're sincere about our struggle, join the fight. Get in it; try to change it and just be prepared for a tough battle. Be prepared to go the long haul. I tell them to take a look at me and the reason I talk about my experience with the FBI and the bribery attempts and all that is so that people can know that there are politicians out there who did not take the money. There are politicians out there who just ate the chicken dinner that they had for them and got out of the room. That's what I did. I ate lunch now. If they can send me to jail for that chicken salad I had, then I'm on my way, because I ate their lunch. But I never took the money and there are a lot of us out here who don't take the money. There are a lot of black politicians and Hispanics and even whites that I know who are sincere about trying to improve the quality of life of our people and of their people. That's why I say all the time, if you're Italian, be proud of that. I have no problem with that, represent the Italian community. You're a Latino, represent your community. You're Irish, fine, represent your community. I'm black, I'm going to represent mine. Story_ID: 50372 Speaker 1: What, in terms of your appointment, what things do you want to accomplish with that? Speaker 2: Well I have a lot of plans with this new position. The first one is, I already sit on leaders row. I was in a fight with another senator, so I took the seat next to the leader, so that I could hear what they were whispering about, so I would know the inside scoop. There was no westsider in leadership for the last eight years, so I believe we have some catching up to do. Leader [Emil] Jones [HM] has been good to me and my district, but I represent more than just my district. I represent the entire West Side. Cant' afford to look at it any other kind of way. My new colleague, Senator [Kimberly Lightford, HM], we're working well together. I'd like to help my district in the West Side, but I also have to look out for the entire caucus, as well as all Democrats. Because as Assistant Democratic Leader, I'm assistant leader for all the democrats that are in the senate. So I plan to take a much stronger fight to "Pate" Phillips [James Philip], President of the Senate right now, than he has received in the last eight years. I believe that the leaders, some of the assistants through our leader before me, the fight--they're a little up there in age and they just don't have maybe a fire in their belly that they used to have. Right now, we need leaders who still have that fire. I believe that Leader Jones has not been given the backup that he needs because the leadership was at that age of it's time to retire. Then there was no fire, there was no youth movement. I represent the youth movement. I'm forty-seven (chuckle), but I represent the youth movement in Springfield [Illinois], in the senate. So I intend to put a much more aggressive agenda together for all democrats and especially for the caucus that put me there and that's the black caucus. Speaker 1: So you really consider yourself a change agent in many ways. Speaker 2: Absolutely. There are several things. One, being an anti-tax Democrat, I believe that and this is just some party business, that the Democratic Party has made a mistake in being boxed into the corner of tax and spend, while the Republicans preach no taxes and lower government, but yet when they get control of the government, they tax and spend (laughter) and still like ninety going north. So I believe that the Democratic Party has to really look at the fact that a lot of our people suffer from over taxation. To me, my constituents are the ones who can least afford to pay high gas bills because of there's a tax on top of the fact that the gas companies are already ripping us off. Then you add the tax on top of that. If you live in the city, you've got the state tax, the county tax, and the City of Chicago tax. My people can least afford to pay those high prices at the pump. Our phone bills have a tax on top of a tax. In the City of Chicago, we can't afford to pay it. So I believe the Democratic Party needs to and we have made that adjustment to not just come up and always say, well we've got to raise the taxes and I'm telling you the truth and let the Republicans lie and say, I'm not going to raise the taxes, read my lips. Then when they win, they raise the taxes. So I hope to continue that, which I've been preaching now since I've been there on these tax issues. Instead, let's have more accountability and spend the money right and we won't need to over tax the people. Story_ID: 50373 Speaker 1: What are your, now I have about two more questions, but I think I have like three more minutes. What are your, what are the things that are most concerning you about the black community and its future. Speaker 2: Well right now, economic development and that's what I've been working on for eight years. I see it every day. You cannot get these young men off the corner, hollering crack and blow, if you don't get them a job or an opportunity. You just can't do it. You cannot let them drop out of school and then say, you won't let them come back in because they now are eighteen or nineteen and it's too late. That's been the policy. You can't do it. You have to go back, give them another chance. Give them another chance to get their education. Maybe they just woke up. I believe also that the drug laws in this state, in this country just have to be changed. It's wrong for you to get automatic penitentiary for five dollars worth of crack but you can get probation and home monitoring for fifty pounds of cocaine. I believe that we really have to take a look at the criminal justice system and make sure that our people are not just being set up by overzealous prosecutors and police officers who are looking to advance through the wrong way. There are some good ones out there, but the ones who cheat, the ones who put drugs on our young men, the ones who trade drugs for guns, they're not doing the people of Illinois any justice at all. Story_ID: 50374 Speaker 1: Just two quick questions. One, what would your father [Jimmy Hendon] say if he could see you now? Speaker 2: My father would say something like, I knew it. I knew it and just keep on, just stay close to God. Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I want my legacy to be that I never sold out and that I was able to advance and gain political power and prestige without compromising what I truly believe in, without going along with a program that I know will hurt my people. If I can just continue and finish my career on that, then I will be--I think I'll have served the Lord well...