 Story_ID: 8436 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Walter B. Hill, Jr. That's W-A-L-T-E-R, B as Bowers, B-O-W-E-R-S, Hill, H-I-L-L, Jr. Speaker 1: Now what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born in St. Louis, Missouri, in People's Hospital, no more exists, May 22, 1949. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a Senior Archivist and Subject Area Specialist in Afro-American History and Federal Records with the National Archives and Records Administration [NARA]. Speaker 1: And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is September the 11th, 2003. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: Well, we're at the National Archives and Records Administration College Park [Maryland] facility. We call it Archives II. Speaker 1: Okay . It sits on the northern edge of the University of Maryland College Park. Story_ID: 8437 Speaker 1: Sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food is spaghetti and meatballs, cornbread, and green peas (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: All right. Now do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Thanksgiving. I think Thanksgiving is an important time to give thanks to all of our blessings. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Yes. I'm a beach person. Each year I take a vacation out to the Outer Banks [North Carolina] because I see the beach as--I call it beach therapy where I go and do absolutely nothing but look and listen to water and read books and listen to music. So it's truly therapy for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Now do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: No, not in particular. I've come across so many but, no, none in particular. Story_ID: 8438 Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's is Ethel Dixon and that's D-I-X-O-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And she's from a family of thirteen children, two girls and eleven boys--a large family, by the way. Speaker 1: Can you give us her birth date and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her birth date is--she was born in Clarksdale, Mississippi, May 3, 1907. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: An interesting twist to her birthday, but I'll get to that later. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, I'll ask you about her life story in a second, but what do you know about her side of the family? How far back can you trace--? Speaker 2: Well, I go back to her--my grandparents, Jane and Israel Dixon, my grandparents, and I was around them as a young child because growing up in St. Louis, Missouri, my mother made sure that she would send us for about five or six years there in the '50s [1950s], we'd go down to Mississippi to visit our grandparents. And I remember my, being around my grandparents in those days, well a baby, but she did do that every summer for about five or six years. So I'll go back to my grandparents. And, of course, my mother's family was very large--eleven brothers and a sister. And I knew most of them, most of her older brothers, and I do have some, some images of my uncles. Speaker 1: Okay, did your grandparents live in the country? Speaker 2: Yes, they lived in the country in rural Mississippi, right. They had farms. I remember playing in the--with the pigs and the chickens and being in the cotton fields. They were sharecroppers in their lives, and so was my mother. My mother came up north in 1941, right. She left Mississippi in those days. She was a part of the, the Great Migration. Speaker 1: Okay. Is there a--are there any stories that your family tells about their ancestors? Did your grandparents talk about their parents and, you know--? Speaker 2: Well, my mother--well, the one story that I know when, but, that my mother told me the reason why she and her sister became a part of the Great Migration up north was because of the intimidation factor and the violent attack of black women in the South. You know they, her grand-, her parents felt that they needed to get away from the South and to move on and get an education, get a job because my mother only went to the sixth grade in those days and then she had to go work in the fields. But the reason why they came up north--part of the family went to Chicago [Illinois] and Detroit [Michigan] and her--and she stayed in, she and two of her brothers, stayed in St. Louis in 1941. But they were escaping and looking for better opportunities up north during the war years [World War II, 1939-1945]. Speaker 1: Okay, was it difficult to get out of Clarksdale, or-- Speaker 2: No, according to her, no, they just, they just took the train, but she said there was, you know, tension between white and blacks. And the racial dynamics was such, 'cause this was 1940, '41 [1941], Mississippi and, you know, segregation, Jim Crow, was, was in vogue. And the dominance of white Southerners over blacks was very much a powerful factor in black life. So that's what they did want to get away from and--. Speaker 1: So they, yeah, they just wanted to make a better life and get away from the Depression. Speaker 2: Yeah, make a better life for themselves, right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Now, but, I guess what I was asking, too, is there--were there stories from the slavery period or stories from Reconstruction that your grandparents told or stories about, not necessarily about them, but about the era and what was going on in-- Speaker 2: No, no. My, my mother always told us that her parents were just hardworking sharecroppers picking cotton. And nothing as a young child--I never queried my mother about my grandparents, you know, never did. Whatever information I had on, on them was really her volunteering the information, but--. Speaker 1: So they didn't talk about themselves. Speaker 2: No, not much. But she--one thing that I do know that she made sure that we got a chance to experience our grandparents, and we did, right. And much of her family was still there--a big family. Story_ID: 8439 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah, now my father--his name was Walter Bowers, and my father and my mother [Ethel Dixon] were never married. I came about as a sexual liaison--a love (laughter) child when he had left his, his first wife and came to St. Louis [Missouri]. His wife was sort of in, what was at that time in Detroit [Michigan]. She'd moved on to Detroit, and he stayed with my mother. So I pop up, you know. 'Cause my mother had three, three daughters, and he had a daughter, too. And I never knew much about my father. I know very little about my father. I've met him maybe in my lifetime. He, he died in 1975. In my lifetime I met and talked with him for about four different, on four different occasions. So I really never had a relationship with my father or I, I knew him and I had discussions with him, and that was the extent. I never--now I also met two of his brothers. They came to St. Louis when I was there between '73 [1973] and '77 [1977] when I met two of his brothers. And his, his, his--they told me that he was always a progressive working guy. He loved working. And they told me how he met my mother and what happened there. Speaker 1: How did they meet? Speaker 2: At a factory. My mother and my father met--they were, they were factory--they worked in a factory. And they just developed a relationship. And my mother began to take care of him and see him, and he stayed with her for a while and helped her out with the three girls, and I come along. And then his wife had--he was still married to his wife, and she wanted him back, and she said she would take him back. What had happened, there had been--according to my uncles' discussions, his brothers--they had, he and his wife had a big falling out and she had threatened him so he just left. And the relationship with my mother started, and I came along in '49 [1949]. But he went back to Detroit, I think, around 1950. And I didn't meet him until about 197-, '69 [1969]. And I saw him like three other times in those years before he passed away. Speaker 1: So you were basically grown when you--. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was a grown man. I'd, I'd grown up in St. Louis through the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s]. I knew he was there; I just never saw him. And I think, I think he got interested--'cause he knew I was here, too, in St. Louis--and I think he began to wonder about me. So, some of his relatives contacted me and said your father wants to meet you and see you. So that's how we met the first time around, 1969. And we talked for a good while. But we really never had a father-son relationship. My, my mother made sure--she had so many brothers in St. Louis. She had about five brothers in St. Louis. And she made sure that I got to know my brothers--her brothers--and that was my, those were my male images in my life. And one of my uncles, I was very close to, my Uncle Sylvester [Dixon], and I do have a picture of him. Very close to him, and he's pretty much my image of what a father could be 'cause he took care with my mother. He was very close to my mother, and they helped each other out, right. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: So that was my, my rela-, (laughter) my short relationship with my father. But I did meet his daughter and my half sister, you know. And she's still in Detroit. We communicate to this day. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, did your father--did you have any idea of how he was brought up at all or--? Speaker 2: No, have no idea. He--. Speaker 1: Where was he born in? Speaker 2: He was born in Mississippi, Clarksdale, Mississippi, too. Speaker 1: Oh, he's--I thought--. Speaker 2: But they all migrated up--he, his girlfriend who became his wife, and my mother, her sister. They, they came up around the same time from Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. So, no, I didn't know he was from the same place, you know, Clarksdale. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. They knew each other down in Clarksdale. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: But they just happened to meet again in St. Louis at--working at the same factory. Story_ID: 8440 Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up. Like what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, I remember vividly coming into--I was born in '49 [1949], and from '49 [1949] to '50 [1950] we lived downtown St. Louis, Missouri, around the railroad tracks. There was a small community down there. And it was a black community, black neighborhood, very close-knit families. And I'm still friends with a lot of those old families like the Eubanks and the Dickens--they were all down there. And my mother [Ethel Dixon], her church was down there, too, in downtown on the periphery of St. Louis, downtown St. Louis. But when her church moved out of the, little bit out of the city, out, further out in the city, she couldn't afford to, to bring us out there every Sunday, so she became, she made us become members of Good Samaritan Lutheran Church--Transfiguration Lutheran Church--no, it was Good Samaritan, right, in those days, 'cause it was downtown. And all those families went to this Lutheran church, was, which was predominantly black. And I had a wonderful time growing up in that church 'cause we had a lot of activities in the church for young people. And, and then in 1955 the city got federal money to build the Pruitt-Igoe projects. And my mother in, in the summer of 1956 moved into the Pruitt-Igoe projects. When I left the old neighborhood I remember being sad about that because I really had fun growing up in that area. Speaker 1: What was the name of that area--what did they call it? Speaker 2: I don't know if they had it, an area, but it was a name, but it was right on the cuff of downtown St. Louis. It was around the railroad tracks. I, I remember distinctively the railroad tracks 'cause they went underground. And it was also around a lot of trucking companies. There were little black neighborhoods in between these trucking companies and the railroads. Speaker 1: Was there--well, were there distinct black communities in St. Louis that people, I mean, or a side of town as if you said the west side or the--? Speaker 2: That's right. St. Louis was a very segregated, classic segregated city. Most of the black people lived on the north side of the city, pretty much around the downtown area of St. Louis. Speaker 1: Is that--isn't that where you were, I mean, you grew up? Speaker 2: That's, that's where I grew up. 'Cause on the south side of the city was primarily predominantly white. Speaker 1: Yeah, what you described sounds a lot like the description of Josephine Baker's early child--I mean with the railroad tracks and same, you know, was the same--similar neighborhood 'cause they lived, I think, in her biography they lived right on the tracks in St. Louis--right next to the tracks Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Where we lived, we lived quite--we lived about two or three blocks from the underground railroad tracks. But then there was a railroad yard further down the road there that we used to play around. Story_ID: 8441 Speaker 1: So when Pruitt-Igoe [housing project, St. Louis, Missouri] was built, you all moved to Pruitt-Igoe. Speaker 2: Yeah, Pruitt-Igoe was further out in the city--midtown, midtown, St. Louis. But it was set on the north side. It was around Jefferson and Cass. That was sort of the big divide of the city, Jefferson and Cass Avenues. And it, it, it was a huge land mass area because they were really two distinct projects--Pruitt, who was named after Wendell [Oliver] Pruitt, the Tuskegee Airman pilot and Igoe, I don't know, it was--Igoe was named after, I think, a black politician in St. Louis [William L. Igoe]. I'm not positive about that. But they were really two distinct projects. And we moved in in the summer of '56 [1956]. And from 1956 to 1971 my life was there in Pruitt-Igoe. Speaker 1: Now can you spell that for us for the sake of--? Speaker 2: Pruitt, P-R-U-I-T-T dash Igoe, I-G-O-E, Pruitt-Igoe Housing Project. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And it was operated, administered by the St. Louis Housing Authority. Speaker 1: Okay. That's--it's been imploded now as it--. Speaker 2: Yes, they, they blew up Pruitt-Igoe in the mid to late, mid-, mid-'70s [1970s] because--. Speaker 1: So it lasted about twenty years, I guess, as a project. Speaker 2: Yes, right. Didn't, didn't have along life. In the earlier days of the housing project, I, it was a stable community, an integrated community, but always predominantly black. And these were families that was, I guess, upward mobile-type people. They had, they were some of the poor working class, lower middle class families saving money to buy houses down the road. 'Cause most of the families, when they did move out in those years, I know they went out and bought houses or rented houses elsewhere in the city. But that's the kind of life it was in those early days, say from 1955 to 1965. It was pretty much a stable, safe community. But after, post-'65 [1965] it began to deteriorate. The screening of families, the security, the maintenance, the administration of the project was wearing down. There was always complaint about people not taking care of the properties. And you can see the, the physical destruction of the projects because in those days they had a lot of activities for families in the administration of the housing project. They had a whole school system--about four or five elementary schools around the projects. Also we, it fed into the resident, at least the children of the projects fed into Vashon High School, which was--there were two black high schools in the city at that time and most of the kids went to Vashon. There were, I, there were a couple kids I knew who went to Catholic high schools, 'cause Catholic schools were very big in black communities in St. Louis, too. And there were quite a few kids that I knew grewing up, growing up with went to two--there were like two local high, Catholic high schools in the area that they went to. So if you could afford that, you, you put your kids there. Speaker 1: Okay. Now how many buildings were Pruitt-Igoe comprised of? Speaker 2: It, boy, I couldn't tell you that. It was huge. Pruitt-Igoe, let's see, there were like--we lived on Division Street and there were probably as I think of just on Division Street alone 'cause the projects were high rise. They were like eleven stories high. And the Division Street line had about, I would say, around ten buildings. Now there were six other streets--there was Cass Avenue and--I can't remember the other lines. But there were like one, two, 'bout six lines, and each of those lines had buildings and they were like anywhere from eight to twelve buildings on each line. It was a huge project. Speaker 1: That is big. Ten groups of buildings. Speaker 2: Yeah it was big--were about ten buildings. 'Cause the head of the project was Jefferson Avenue--that was the dividing line. And it went all the way down to what was called 20th Street. The borders were Jefferson, Cass Avenue, 20th Street, and I don't know what the other street was. So it was one huge city block. But the block was just big. It was a very populace concentrated area of families. Like I said, it fed into about four--they created about four elementary schools in the, in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s] there were like four elementary schools around that bordered the projects that the kids went to. And then the high school, it fed into Vashon High School and then some of the private Catholic schools. So it was a huge community. Speaker 1: Okay. How old were you when you moved into Pruitt-Igoe? Speaker 2: Oh, in Pruitt-Igoe in '56 [1956]. How old--I, '49 [1949], about six, about six years old. Story_ID: 8442 Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have? Speaker 2: I have, I have, my, on my father's [Walter Bowers] side, 'cause he had a daughter, and she, she's the oldest of my sisters. And then I have three sisters that my mother [Ethel Dixon] gave birth to and they're, we're very close and it's me. So I really have in terms of growing up the three sisters because I didn't really meet my other sister until after I met my father in 1969. That's when I, I met my sister about five years later. So I grew up with three and then there was the fourth one who lived in Detroit [Michigan]. Speaker 1: So who comprised your immediate family when you were growing up? It's you and your sisters and--. Speaker 2: My mother, my three sisters, and I, and I had, oh I had a huge extended family, huge extended family. Speaker 1: But in the household there was how many? Speaker 2: In the household just my, my three sisters and my mother. Speaker 1: All right. And you were saying earlier you had a pretty big apartment in Pruitt-Igoe [housing projects, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Yeah, in Pruitt-Igoe that, that was one of the nice things--they were very spacious 'cause we had a three-bedroom, living room, dining room, and kitchen, right. So they were pretty spacious. Most of the, most of the par-, apartments in Pruitt-Igoe were either three-bedroom or four-bedroom. Speaker 1: So you had your own bedroom? Speaker 2: I had my own bedroom, yeah, right. 'Cause by 1960 my oldest sister, Dorothy [Dixon], she'd graduated from Vashon High School, and she went against my mother's will and got married to a Marine and he took her off to California. And they still live in California. And then my, my sisters, my other two younger sisters, Bobbie and Marie, they were still there in the household. And they graduated from Vashon also. All right, so it was they, my mother's room, and they stayed, slept, and I had my own room. Story_ID: 8443 Speaker 1: Now, it was said, too, I guess, before we started that your mother [Ethel Dixon] was active in the councils in Pruitt-Igoe [housing projects, St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Yeah, in those days many of the buildings had what were called family councils where the, the women, primarily, would get together and discuss administrations of the building's activities and recreation for families--civic things that women tended to get into in those days. Unfortunately, I have picture of her, but, unfortunately, I don't have it with me. And there were in that, in that council in, on Division in that particular building there were like twenty, twenty families involved in the council. The mothers participated and--'cause in the picture there're about twenty women and my mother was in that picture, too. And she was very active in that--doing things, picnics, church, church activities, stuff like that that they would do. And that, that took place for roughly, soon as we got there in '56 [1956] well into the very early '60s [1960s]. I don't remember them being around by the mid-'60s. But the early '60s like from '57 [1957], '58 [1958], '59 [1959], '60 [1960], '61 [1961] my mother was very active in those in sort of family councils in, in, in these buildings. Story_ID: 8444 Speaker 1: When you were a little boy, what were you like and what did you like to do? Speaker 2: When--I always liked to read. When we were--I remember the school that I went to when we were living downtown in St. Louis [Missouri] I went to Dessalines Elementary School. Speaker 1: Dessalines, really? Speaker 2: Dessalines, all right, who is a, named after a Haitian, one of the military people in the Haitian Revolution. Speaker 1: Jean-Jacques Dessalines, "The Ferocious". Speaker 2: Right, right, Dessalines. I remember that school. And then when we went to--I really developed the interest in reading when I went to Pruitt Elementary School. That was the school that was built for Pruitt-Igoe [housing project], one other school went up. And I had a seventh and eighth grade teacher who detected my interest in reading so they really fed me. 'Cause all of my teachers in those days were black. I had black teachers. Even though Pruitt Elementary did have white teachers there, most of my teachers were black. And they saw I had an interest in reading, so they would make sure I read, read certain books that they'd give me--books on black history, you know, Negro history in those days. And I developed that interest going into high school and had a love for history. Speaker 1: This really sounds unusual, though. I mean, I guess, I remarked that in other cities I don't think you have this kind of a concentration of black history being taught. And I can just tell from the names of the school, I mean, Dessalines School is a name that, I mean, Dessalines was a nationalistic--he's a hero to a lot of black nationalists now, and he's the kind of person that you wouldn't name a school but Dessalines without intending to do it. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I remember there was a, there was a picture of him in the school, you know. 'Cause I was always fascinated about the uniform, you know, what era, you know, this was the 18th century, 18th, early 19th century, and there was this, this, this black person. And, you know, I remember vividly the image of, of this guy in that school. But I didn't think anything of it. I was just a young child. And then going into Pruitt, 'cause Pruitt Elementary School was named after Wendell [Oliver] Pruitt, the Tuskegee Airman pilot. Speaker 1: Right, these are--there's a detail here that I'm seeing that's a little bit different from the places--Vashon [High School], Pruitt-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, when I went to Vashon, and Vashon High School is named after John B. Vashon, the prominent black petitioner in the 19th century. And they made sure you, you knew who these people were, you know, right. Speaker 1: And they're not the typical names you hear over and over again. Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: These are detailed names. Speaker 2: Right, so--. Speaker 1: So they had you reading. Well, what kind of books did you read? Speaker 2: Well, in general Negro history books. I remember reading Carter G. Woodson's history books in, in high school, right. Speaker 1: But in grade school, I don't want to stay in grade school--. Speaker 2: I can't remember. Story_ID: 8445 Speaker 1: But when I was at Pruitt High, Pruitt, Pruitt Elementary School [St. Louis, Missouri], I had two teachers that really pushed me to read. Speaker 2: Who were they? Speaker 1: Oh, I--and, you know, I have a picture of my high school, of my elementary--when we graduated from elementary school, we had a picture taken, and I had a, his name is Mr. McDonald (ph.), and he knew I, I was--he's my seventh and eighth grade teacher. And, as I said, he knew I had an interest in history. And he would give me these, these books to read, Negro history books. But I can't remember what they, what, what they were. They were just general history books. But when I got to high school, I had a history teacher by the name of Ms. Matthews (ph.), who pushed me. And I remember reading Carter G. Woodson from her history classes, and remember general history, western civilization and you really studied, and, you know, not so much a lot of Negro history in those days, you studied Europe, western civilization. But the teachers--and I had all black teachers in high school at Vashon [High School] and there were teachers who tried to instill racial identity in history and pride in you. I had a few teachers like that, and Ms. Matthews was one of them. Story_ID: 8446 Speaker 1: We were talking about the, the history and black history and I'm sort of in between--. Speaker 2: Did you read, in those days did you read--were the works of J. A. Rogers available? Did you--? Speaker 1: No, I didn't get to J. A. Rogers until I got to high-, college, till I got to college, at the College of Wooster [Wooster, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Now [Carter G.] Woodson and [Charles H.] Wesley had something called 'African Heroes and Heroines.' Speaker 1: Yeah, Woodson, they, those were, yeah, those were the books that I remember in high school. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'African Heroes and Heroines' and there's some other books-- Speaker 1: '[The] Miseducation [of the Negro]'--those books I came across as a, as a junior and senior in high school. And I continued to, you know, read Negro history at Wooster. Speaker 2: And had you come across Lerone Bennett yet? Speaker 1: No. In college I did. Speaker 2: Okay, right. Those were the days when that information was being assembled and put out in the marketplace, I guess. Speaker 1: In those days, yeah. Are we on now? Speaker 2: Yes, we're on, yeah. Speaker 1: So, now in those days we were sort of in the midst of the, the cuff, the transition in the Civil Rights Movement and the Black Power movement. So a lot of stuff in terms of Afro-American history and culture was coming out. And by the time I'd gotten out of high school, with the war raging, Vietnam, and the, the black revolution coming about, black history was pretty much in vogue--'67 [1967], '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. So I was right in the midst of that, and I was happy to be in college. And, of course, that, that--I went to the College of Wooster in Ohio, Wooster, Ohio, and we immediately began to develop a black identity. Story_ID: 8447 Speaker 1: What kind of activities were you involved in in high school? Did you, other than history--? Speaker 2: Well, I was--there were our social activities, and, and, and that was pretty much what we did. The, the athletics, because football and basketball were the--and track--were the, were the big sports and a lot of activity around those. And I was a, I was high school athlete. I ran track and cross-country, and the social activities like dances. And then there were clubs that I was involved in. The clubs really dealt with student issues, student government kinds of things that I was involved with. And, and this was one of things that was really fascinating about the student population at Vashon [High School, St. Louis, Missouri]. About two thirds of the students--I had a graduating class of about 267 students that graduated in 1967. Half of those kids went on to college--I being one. And this was a thing that has always fascinated a lot of people because these were students coming out of Pruitt-Igoe [housing project]. And Pruitt-Igoe had an image at that time in the late '60s [1960s] of being an environment of, of deterioration, crime and violence, and dysfunctional families. And here you have half of these kids going off to college. And I always laughed at it because I have a lot of friends now who I graduated from--going back to the class reunion and everything--and these are working people, professional people, people with all kinds of different lives who, who had success in the, in the work world. Speaker 1: Who was the principal at Vashon? Speaker 2: At that time his name was John B. [sic, E.] Anderson. He was a black man. He was the first principal of the new Vashon Technical High School because in 1966 the, the Board of Education closed down the original Vashon High School on Laclede Avenue and moved it to Hadley Technical High School, which was the black vocational high school in St. Louis. It had been there probably for a decade or more. It was the vocational school. And it had its own tradition--it was a black school. And I was very disappointed because my sisters had all graduated from Vashon and I wanted to be a part of that Vashon tradition, the original, at least. But in the fall of '63 [1963], the new students and the old students at Vashon were transferred to what was called Vashon-Hadley Technical High School. Speaker 1: This in '63? Speaker 2: '63, right. Speaker 1: Okay, so you spent most of your high school career in the, in a new, in different-- Speaker 2: In a new, yeah, the whole, my whole four years there 'cause I was in the class of '67 [1967]. And those first two years was filled with tension because, you know, you had the Hadley Technical High students who had their own identity and then you had the Vashon students who had their own identity and traditions, and, and competitiveness because Vashon and Hadley Technical High School had, were competitors on the field. But you also had Charles Sumner [High] School. Sumner School was the other black high school. And, so it was a rich, competitive environment in spirit in St. Louis among the black schools. And, of course, we played the other, you know, the public high schools. There were about nine or ten public high schools in St. Louis. But you had three predominantly black schools before they closed up Vashon and made Vashon-Hadley Technical. Speaker 1: Okay. Now were you a popular student when you--? Speaker 2: No, I was sort of on the fringe. I, most of my athletic friends who ran, who played football ran track--'cause the athletes were always the popular guys. And then you had some students who were smart and students who were popular because of who they were--their, their, you know, their personality and characters. I was well known. A lot of students saw me as kind of a studious, bookish kind of guy. But I had fun. I had a, you know, the girlfriends and because of my social activities, going to the parties and the dances and student organizations. So, I had my friends. Speaker 1: Okay. Now was music a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Music was huge. In fact, I was in the senior band--I was in the junior and senior band the four years I was there at, at Vashon. And the marching band and the symphonic band, they were one and the same, but in the fall they did most of the football games and, and in the spring they did most of the symphon--'cause we had a spring, a symphonic concert that we practiced for, but we participated in a lot of other musical activities around the city and the county. So, I had that experience. In fact, some of my girlfriends were a part of the band, too, you know, the majorettes, yeah. Story_ID: 8448 Speaker 1: Was television a big part of growing up or radio, records or that sort of thing? Speaker 2: In those days I think television were, was a big part of growing up because, you know, the Vietnam War was televised. So every evening there was something on the war. And I made sure I got an opportunity when I was home, I'd come home pretty much after when school was out, particularly during track season, which really began in December, indoor and outdoor track. I would catch the evening news and what was going on with the war and doing my, my homework. That was pretty much routine for most high school kids, particularly if you were active in high school. And then, of course, in the late '60s [1960s] the war really heated up, right. Speaker 1: And then did you have a chance to talk to soldiers returning from it? Speaker 2: Yeah, I did something myself one year that my mother [Ethel Dixon] really got angry with me. I wanted to go and fight. I, I got a, became a part of this militaristic attitude among young black men. I didn't, I didn't realize what was happening there in terms of race in the war. And I invited an Army recruiter to my house to talk with me about signing up for the war. And my mother found out about it, and she came home from work that day and wanted to know what was this soldier doing there. And, (laughter) I, you know, I told her I had sent this card in 'cause I was going to join the Army after high school. And my mother told me, you know, you're going to college. And I was, I was very gung-ho. I mean a lot of the guys in those days were gung-ho. We wanted to go and cure Vietnam and promote democracy in, in Southeast Asia. That was the thing in those days. And, and I had a lot of friends who went into the war after we graduated. But I--and a lot of those, some of those guys got killed. I had couple friends who were killed in Vietnam. I had a friend, a very close friend who lost his mind in Vietnam. When he came back he was an insane person. Speaker 1: But you didn't get a chance to talk to anyone in high school who had already been to Vietnam and--? Speaker 2: No, I didn't, yeah. The war was raging, but it wasn't until my class graduated in '67 [1967] and a lot of the guys, lot of my close friends, guys I had grew up with in the project as well as going to high school with went on to Vietnam. I was one of the few in my group that went on to college. Story_ID: 8449 Speaker 1: From my college career to my graduate career, I had pretty much been transformed to anti-war because I was learning about what was going on in the war and particularly in regards to race, right. Speaker 2: Okay. So in terms of the civil rights movement you talked about people, I guess, who were a part of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], I guess, and I don't know what other organizations were represented. I don't know whether SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] came by or who, but you, people did Freedom Rides and--? Speaker 1: Yeah, SNCC--there were, there were representative from SNCC because St. Louis [Missouri] was such a--they had a huge black population there and they had these black high schools there. At that time some of the junior colleges were there with large black student populations. So SNCC was very much traveling to various cities doing this kind of work, trying to recruit students to become a part of SNCC and go, particularly go South in terms of voter registration. Because I distinctly remember when the Mississippi Democratic Party and Fannie Lou Hamer arose in '64 [1964], we talked about that in some of our civics class what was going on in the South. We were always aware of the Freedom Rides of the very early '60s [1960s], you know, the buses and college kids going south. And then with the voter registration guide in that summer of '64--that was quite fascinating to us. And some of the SNCC representatives would come, came by Vashon High School 'cause we had auditorium assemblies in which they talked about voter registration and what was going on with the civil rights movement in the South. And they were recruiting. They would come by our classes and talk with the teachers. And I remember I wanted to go and participate in this move, but my mother [Ethel Dixon] did not let me. And that was when my mother began to really tell me about growing up in the South, that it wasn't pleasant and how bad it was for her and her family, particularly black women, how bad it was, and the kinds of opportunity. In fact, there were very little opportunities, you know, particularly if you were uneducated, you know, and which in those days most, most kids only went to certain grades 'cause they had to go to the fields and pick cotton for the most part. So my mo-, my mother was very opposed to us, you know, participating in these activities. She wanted us to finish our education and move on. Speaker 2: Yeah, it didn't sound like an easy time to make decisions with all the things pulling at you like that. Civil rights, you got the war-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, it was a tense period, you know. I always considered myself a child of the '60s [1960s] because the war going on, the rise of the peace movement, we're in the midst of the civil rights movement. There's a transition in the late '60s to Black Power and emphasis on black political power and empowerment. You know, these things were pulling on a lot of things in your head, you know, and you're trying to figure out what's happening here, particularly if you were a, a student observer of what's happening. 'Cause there were a lot of black people weren't paying any attention to this stuff, but then there were a lot who were. And I was a part of that crowd who was paying attention to some of this stuff, reading as much as I can. Story_ID: 8450 Speaker 1: Now was church still a big part of your life in--? Speaker 2: Church was huge. My mother [Ethel Dixon] was born, bred and raised in the church and she made sure that we were born, bred and raised in the church, too. As I said, when we were living downtown St. Louis [Missouri] my, she made us go to the Lutheran Church down there. And as we grew older, we began to go to different churches, but she always centered us in the church, yeah. That was a big part of our life. Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have like responsibilities in the church or that sort of thing? Speaker 2: You know, it--when I was at Transfiguration [Lutheran Church] and then we, that church, when we moved Pruitt-Igoe we went to what was called Transfiguration, another Lutheran church that was centered in the Vaughn Housing Project. See Vaughn was a separate housing project from Pruitt-Igoe. Vaughn was 'cross the 20th Street divide. It was a totally different project. And it was like nine stories high. Pruitt and Igoe were the older and they built Vaughn. Well, Transfiguration Lutheran Church serviced that community in the Vaughn Housing Project area and others. So we transferred our church--Good Samaritan [Lutheran Church] had, its members had to go to Transfiguration because Good Samaritan had closed down for, for some reason. And so we got to know the families there. And most of the families lived in the Vaughn Housing Project, so I got a opportunity to meet a lot of those kids, too. And I was very active in Transfiguration because they had youth, youth organizations. We went to different churches to sing, we had plays, we had summer camps. I did all of those things with Transfiguration Lutheran Church. And it was here again religious church base. Yeah, it was big part of my life growing up. It wasn't until I went away to college where I sort of moved a little bit away from church, but I never left it completely. Story_ID: 8451 Speaker 1: Did you receive any honors when you graduated from high school? Speaker 2: No, no, no honors. I was--I think my class rank was like--of 267 I think I was like 98, 99 somewhere. I was in that first one hundred. Speaker 1: You were studious but you weren't all the way up there at the top? Speaker 2: I would say, yeah, I wasn't all the way at the top. I, I had, I was, what you could say, college material because I, I--the North Side Team Ministry was a ministry, a ministry in the Pruitt-Igoe projects [St. Louis, Missouri] and they worked with a lot of the teenage boys--you know, keep them out of trouble, keep them active. And the reason why I went to the College of Wooster [Wooster, Ohio] was because Reverend Don Register, who was a Wooster graduate--he was a black guy, but he was a minister in the Presbyterian church, and he operated the Northside Team Ministry. And we had athletic teams--basketball and football teams and other activities, what not. And, and the office was located over in the Igoe side of the, of the projects. And when I was up--I was getting, I was really getting ready to go to Lincoln University in Jeff City [Jefferson City, Missouri] and so--'cause Lincoln University was a black HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] in those days named after Abraham Lincoln, of course, who freed the slaves (laughter)--that's where black students who were going to college went. A few of us, if you had athletic talent and was really smart, you'd go on to like Columbia University [University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri] in Missouri 'cause a lot of the great black athletes coming out of St. Louis went to University of Missouri in Jeff City in those days. But I was heading towards Lincoln University until I met Reverend Don Register who was a Wooster grad in 1959. He was there in 1959. And he said I, I got a school for you I want you to go to. And he said you got the grades, you did pretty good on the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test] and Wooster is the school for you. And, of course, remember in 1965 out of the Civil Rights Act, the National Defense Student Loan where colleges and universities opened up to black students. So that was the, the era where, if you were black and, and could do college level work, you got it, you got pretty much a free ride. 'Cause when I went to Wooster, Wooster was a private, Presbyterian, old Presbyterian school, very elite. It was only 1700 students there. When I got there in the fall of '67 [1967] there were 25 black students on campus. Speaker 1: Okay, it's like a lot of those Ohio schools--. Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of those Ohio schools were like that. And they had a ton of little liberal colleges--. Story_ID: 8452 Speaker 1: [College of] Wooster's [Wooster, Ohio] up near Cleveland [Ohio], right? Speaker 2: Right, up closer to Cleveland between Cleveland and Columbus [Ohio], closer to Cleveland. And it was a fascinating experience that really laid the foundation in terms of my, for my professional life. But, yeah, he got me there to Wooster 'cause he introduced me to the administrator and says get him in. They gave me money and everything. So for the next four years from 1967 to '71 [1971] I was undergrad at the College of Wooster. And, that's, that's when my intellectual development really took off because that was in the heat of the [Vietnam] war. I was beginning to be transformed. My black identity was really shaping up because we, we were in the throes of the black revolution. All the black power--we, we had them all come to the campus--Stokely Carmichael, Dick Gregory, (laughter) all those guys. So when the Black Panthers came to--we got them at Wooster. And they spoke and that was a wonderful experience, right. And then I went on to Northern Illinois [University, Dekalb, Illinois] to do my Masters degree, 'cause I got my BA [bachelor of arts] degree in history. Speaker 1: Okay, did you start off as a history major and just--? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: I was always--see, in those days what fascina--I, I thought I when I was a freshmen I thought I would major in sociology or psychology in, in, in '67 [1967]. But, see, from '64 [1964], '65 [1965] on all the cities were burning up. You know, blacks were out in the streets tearing up property. They called them riots and I thought this a little bit more than riots. So I kept trying to figure that out--what's going on here? So that was my sort of intellectual curiosity about why this was occurring. So by, by '68 [1968] I began, particularly after the [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] assassination and then the school sent me to Africa that summer. And, and I learned a lot 'cause I met a lot of black students from around the country who were--. Speaker 1: Okay. I don't want to stop you, but I just--but you mentioned King. Do you remember where you were when King was-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I was at Wooster. I--. Speaker 1: Yeah, but what were you doing? I mean how did you hear about it and how did you-- Speaker 2: Oh, in April, oh, we were just getting ready for spring break, just getting ready for spring break. And came over that afternoon or that evening, I think, that he had been assassinated. And we were all sitting around the student union and, and it was just stunned. You know, we had a black student union that was taking shape in those years, and it just froze the campus. And we had a vigil the next night, yeah. It was devastating--a man of God and peace who was trying to bring some sanity to the political and cultural situation of the United States at that time. And then that summer, in the summer of '68 [1968] I participated in a program that sent students across to Africa and, you know, I met a lot of other students from around the country. Speaker 1: Is that through--? Speaker 2: Wooster, College of Wooster. Speaker 1: Yeah, but what--was it a program of a department or American Friends Service Committee or-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--Don Register had gotten money from the Ecumenical Presbyterian Council in St. Louis [Missouri] to take a group of students to Africa to work in Kenya, around Kenya. And, and I participated in that program. And that afforded me the opportunity to meet college students from around the country because we took a boat over. And the, the boat was--I will never forget--it was the SS Aurelia, and it was a student liner 'cause on the boat when all of these students going into, going to Europe to do, to do different things. Our group was heading to Kenya. We stopped off in Paris [France] for about a week to rest and then we flew to, flew to Nairobi [Kenya]. But-- Speaker 1: So you took a boat across the Atlantic but you then flew to Nairobi. Speaker 2: Yeah, right. But what--on the boat, we were on the boat for about a week, and I met some very radical black nationalist students from Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and from New York University [New York, New York]. And I'll never forget those students. They were, they were cool. And here again it was the just shaping of a black political identity. Speaker 1: Those were the days of a lot of exciting intellectual activity and rhetoric and people-- Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah, because in those days--like I said, there were so many fronts on the political scene that were heating up in American society. And we had all these people, if you were on a college campus, you got a chance to hear these people and dialogue with them. And, you know, had--that's what I was exposed to. So I knew I was going to stay in history and continue to study history because I had to find out why cities were burning up and why black people were so angry. Story_ID: 8453 Speaker 1: Who influenced you at the College of Wooster [Wooster, Ohio]? Did you have a mentor there, somebody that-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. The person who would really influence me was--he had just retired--was Dr. Theodore Williams. He was the black chemistry professor that had been there since the late '50s [1950s]--very nationalistic, but very political, too. Because Wooster was not the coolest of environment in terms of racial politics also, but it was an excellent liberal program there that I thrived in. But the person probably changed me, really got me into a serious mode of study and becoming a serious student of history was Louis Jones, and he was a, he, he had just gotten his M.A. degree from North Carolina Central University [Durham, North Carolina] and he had studied under Earl Thorpe, who was a prominent black historian. Speaker 1: Earl Thorpe, right. He wrote the book about black historians, right. Speaker 2: Right (laughter). Speaker 1: So, he actually wrote the book about black historians. Speaker 2: So, yeah, right. So in '69 [1969] I, I had this steady dose from '69 till I graduated of Afro-American history through Louis Jones. Story_ID: 8454 Speaker 1: We were trying to create a black studies department. 'Cause from about '67 [1967] through 1970 was really the, a black studies movement on college campuses. 'Cause you know Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] broke open with the students taking over the administration building and the black student putting demands on them. And this was happening around the country where these radicals, black student groups, as well as radical white student group protesting the war, wanting change, educational and social change on the university scene. Speaker 2: Now what happened at [College of] Wooster [Wooster, Ohio]? Did you all take a, I mean, I know at Antioch College [Yellow Springs, Ohio] students took a building and called it [Nyambi] Umoja House. They took it. Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] had a black house that was--. Speaker 1: Right. Ohio was a hotbed of student activity. Now, Wooster, I don't put Wooster in the radical category, but we did have a black student union, we did make certain demands on the administration in terms of getting us yet our, our little space on campus. We had a, a room in the basement of Douglas Hall where we met, had our black student union meetings. We did have some radical black students on campus, but they tended, given the nature and the environment at Wooster, students tended to be more studious type. But, here again, developing a black psyche and black nationalist consciousness. But the students there tended to be academic focused 'cause a lot of those kids went on to graduate school, med school, law school, you know, and they're out in the professional world today. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know even I think that Angela Davis' brother, Ben Davis, was at Defiance [College, Defiance, Ohio] when you were in school. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause see these liberal arts colleges and, and schools, particularly in Ohio, the kinds of black students they got there were seeking their, you know, their identity, know more about black history, understanding black culture and black politics, black life in the city. Everybody was reading 'The Black Scholar,' you know, the magazine, the journal, the 'Negro World,' which ultimately becomes, the 'Black World.' And you got all this black literature out there that's talking about the black world. And then Africa, what's going on in Africa with the anti-colonial movement, you, you couldn't help but be swept up in that. Unfortunately, it, it happened pretty much on the college level because the masses of black people who were not involved or who were not associated and exposed to what was going on in the college campuses, miss on, miss out on a lot of this stuff. And unless you were just a progressive kind of person you didn't pick up on it, you know. Your life was not filled with what was going on a national level, international level with black folk in Africa and these kinds of things. But I was blessed and had the opportunity to become a part of this kind of intellectual uplifting and development. Story_ID: 8455 Speaker 1: Tell us about Kenya. I know you met a lot of students, but like what, how did it--going to Africa, did that like--how did that change your perception of yourself? Speaker 2: It brought me closer to Africa, the African slave trade, American slavery. Because I had been reading about this stuff for some time. But actually going to Africa, the first experiences I had with Africans in Kenya 'cause the groups that we met, we met the groups that were there in Nairobi [Kenya] who were sort of educated Africans around the University of Nairobi. And they treated us as our lost brothers and sisters from Africa who were in America. Now they saw us as Americans, but as, you know, black Americans, too. And then we went out in the bush to work with the various church and religious groups 'cause we worked with the Masai people and the Kikuyu people in Kenya 'cause they were building villages and we were doing water projects, irrigation projects. We did a variety of things to help different villages around central Kenya, particularly around Nairobi. And I had a wonderful experience, I met a lot of Kenyan students who were at University of Nairobi. Some had been in schools in Europe, particularly in Great--and in England who, and who were back involved in Jomo Kenyatta's government 'cause he was president of Kenya at that time. Speaker 1: Right, right. Kenya had just achieved independence in '64 [1964]. Speaker 2: Yeah, and this was the summer of '68 [1968]. And the one thing that I remember distinctly among the Africans was that--why was [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] assassinated? And I spent the whole summer and of the other black students in the group spent their whole summer explaining King's work and assassination to a lot of African students. Story_ID: 8456 Speaker 1: You were discussing some of your observations in Kenya and you mentioned the banking system and who were controlling it. Speaker 2: Yeah, when, when I got there I was, here again, I had just, because of my, I was an observant kind of person because I was developing this historical mindset, trying to put things in place here. So when we--I'd never bought into the images of Africa 'cause growing up in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] Africa was a place of jungles and uncivilized people in Tarzan. I'd, you know, I'd read enough to know that that's a bunch of nonsense and racial stereotypes. So when I got to, when we flew into, we flew out of Cairo, Egypt, we spent all our time there and then we went down to Nairobi [Kenya]. I distinctly remember flying over the city and seeing a modern city of skyscrapers. And when we got into the city we stayed in the city for about a week and a half and they put us with various families. And I stayed with a, a British couple who he was a, an executive with one of the oil companies there--very nice man. He was a young guy and his young wife. And I quickly observed that there were many different groups and classes in, in Nairobi. But I distinctly remember the Indians who operated the commercial, particularly the banking institutions in Kenya. And you go into any store, you didn't see Kenyans or Africans behind the counter, you saw the Indians. And I was, I was curious about that because I saw Kenya as an African nation. But there were plenty of--I, I saw Kenyans running around in their traditional African garbs, Kenyan clothing, as well as European American style suits and coats and just casual wear. And I interacted and dialogued with a lot of these people because they saw us--they knew we were, we were working with the, we were through the University of Nairobi because our groups were set up and the university at Nairobi had already set up what we were going to be doing in Kenya. And they had worked this out through the Ecumenical Council back in St. Louis [Missouri] and the Presbyterian schools in, of which [College of] Wooster [Wooster, Ohio] was a part of. So the, the summer was already laid out what we were going to be doing. And I came in contact with many types of Kenyan people. And while we were there in Nairobi we went to the nightclubs, interacted with the Kenyans. I, the Kenyans were enthralled over people like James Brown, the Four Tops, the Temptations, 'cause remember this was the '60s where Motown was taking off. And they all, they, they, they were playing that music and--but they had an African twist to it. It was fascinating. Speaker 1: They actually did have a dance called the Twist (laughter) at the same time. Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: Yeah, every night we were, when we went, went out to restaurants and, and, and nightclubs and that gave me an opportunity to meet a different variety types of, of Nairobi, of people, Kenyans. And another thing I discovered--that a lot of the people from the rural areas, the bush country, would come to--I saw some similar patterns that you see in the United States where people in rural areas would go migrate to the larger cities for opportunities to improve upon their life. Well the same pattern and process was taking place in Kenya because I met a, quite a few young people who had come to the city in Nairobi to find jobs to go to the University of Nairobi. And I had a lot of interesting conversations--I can't remember them, but I was just enthralled to meet these people and see another side of the world. Story_ID: 8457 Speaker 1: You were there [Kenya] in '68 [1968] it just occurred to me the '68 Olympics featured the first black distance runner to win a gold medal, [Kipchoge] Kip Keino, who was a cop from Kenya. Speaker 2: Yeah, a cop. Speaker 1: A Kipsani cop from Kenya, and he was the first in a long series of--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Kenyan runners, right. Now they had developed their athletic program. Speaker 1: --Kip, [Peter] Rono, and--was a bunch of them, Ben Jipcho, Julius Sang, all these--. Speaker 2: In fact, I met a--there was a student--I can't--he was, we, when we were in the Masai territory I remember talking with some of the students that they were training to go to some institute for athletes who were--'cause I think Kenya was developing its, sort of its athletic program on an international scale. So when the Olympics did occur in the summer, I wasn't shocked at all that here was this black Kenyan cop winning--I think it was the mile, it was, yeah, I think it was in the mile. Speaker 1: Well, no he was 1500 meters. Speaker 2: 1500 meters, right, yeah. Speaker 1: And then he ran steeplechase, too, I think, on top of it. Speaker 2: Right. And from that point on--. Speaker 1: You can get a distance runner, too, a cross-country man. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. A lot of interest in that, yeah. I follow. In fact I thought of Kip Keino, right. And, and since '68 on into the present day where the Kenyans and now the Ethiopians dominate the long distance run. But that started back then, oh, yeah, right. But I remember, they, they--I met kids who were very athletic, loved to run. And I, and I tell my, my, my children that, that when they, when they watch these track and field meets in the Olympics that don't be surprised if the Kenyans do exceedingly well because I met young people in Kenya in those days who were very athletic focused, running. Speaker 1: And I think the significance of that on some level was that there was a racial stereotype that black people could not win distance--. Speaker 2: Distance, right. Well, Keino shattered all of that. And that's a, that's a racial stereotype that has been put to rest a long time a-, but, yeah, that was the belief. I remember picking up on that belief in the '60s [1960s] that they couldn't, we could only do sprints, you know, given the fact that some of the great sprinters of the Olympics were black. But whenever--. Speaker 1: Before then they couldn't do that. Before that we couldn't sprint until we won the sprints and-- Speaker 2: Well, not really because Jesse, I think Jesse Owens had broken that. Speaker 1: Yeah. No, I'm saying before Jesse Owens came along, they said, well, we couldn't run track and field events. And now that he wins a sprints and then he-- Speaker 2: Well, I think when you look at the history of the Olympics, black people had been a part of the Olympics track and field since the turn of the century. That's something we just don't know about. Speaker 1: Major Taylor, the cyclist, I think he was from St. Louis [Missouri]. Was he from St. Louis? Speaker 2: Yes, he was from St. Louis, right, the cyclist. And that's a little known crack in the history that we just hadn't found out about, too. But he was a--and there were a couple black jockeys who ran in the Kentucky Derby in the late 19th century, turn of the century, where black people were dominant in the, in the horseracing business till they got pushed out. Well, there were a couple from St. Louis, too. Story_ID: 8458 Speaker 1: You came back from Kenya, you know, well, tell us about the rest of your-- Speaker 2: Well, the, the experience in Kenya, I think, was fascinating because one of the items that in our dialogues with the African students and the African people was why did [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]--why was he assassinated? So a lot of us spent a good deal of that time explaining the problems, the racial problems in the United States--why there was this emergence of the civil rights movement and the emergence of Martin Luther King and that there was still hate there, enough hate to kill King and other leaders who had tried to be progressive. Speaker 1: Were the Kenyans surprised that that, this was still going on in the United States? Speaker 2: No. They thought and at least in, I remember in some of the conversation, they did see a progressive United States where black people were doing fairly well, but I think they, some of them, particularly the educated group, knew there were still problems, that segregation and discrimination still existed rampantly in American society. And they wanted to know what was going on. Oh, yeah, many of the university students that we conversed with--I, I remember the, the weeks that we spent in, in Nairobi [Kenya] in discussion with the university students, the civil rights movement. Yeah, that's all we talked about that summer was the civil rights movement and Martin Luther King. Speaker 1: Okay. So, when you--did anything else that you want to tell us--is there anything else you want to tell us about Kenya? Speaker 2: Well, I--that experience also showed me that there was tension between the Indian populations and the Kenyans because they--the Indians were pretty much business and they dominated the commercial sectors of the Kenyan economy, particularly the banking institutions, the retail. And I wasn't surprised a few years later when Idi Amin in Uganda began to expel the Indians and the same thing that was beginning to take place in Kenya. And I remembered--I said I remember how, how the Indian, Indians had dominated. They had their own little world there because one of the students in our group, she was a white young student who had some of the black students go to a party. She had met an Indian guy who had invited her to a party. Well, they had a horrible experience that evening because they, they kicked them out of the party when those black students showed up with her. And from that moment on I began to pay attention to that relationship between the Kenyan population, particularly the, the Nairobi people, and, and those who live in the city, and then the Indians. But what also fascinated--when we went out to the bush country, and the bush country was fascinating because there were little pockets of commercialism where the woodcarvings and the sort of trinkets that tourists love to buy--those stands were pretty much managed by the Kenyan, but they were also managed by Indians. Yeah, I thought that was fascinating, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an interesting relationship. It still hasn't really been resolved. Speaker 2: No, yeah, they're pretty much involved in the economic life for many of the east coast African countries, right. Story_ID: 8459 Speaker 1: Now before you went over to Kenya, had you read the works of Basil Davidson or read about the medieval civilizations-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew of Basil Davidson. And, but my first assessment of Basil was really a critique of his work 'cause being a history student you got a chance to look at different aspects and different interpretations. And what I read about--he was a, a prominent African scholar, but the critique of him was that he wrote African history from the perspective of the European colonists. Even though it was a solid history, and I thought Basil Davidson wrote good history, but as I looked at the critiques and what they were saying about his work, I began to see some of that stuff in some of the works that he did. But I still respected him as a leading African historian. But later on in my graduate work, when I came across people like Walter Rodney, who was writing about Africa, I, I gained a different kind of perspective, too, because Walter Rodney was right on the target in terms of how Europe, in one of his books, how Europe underdeveloped Africa. I really got into that. And you, and then one of my professors at Northern Illinois University [Dekalb, Illinois] was an African scholar, John Higginson, who is a Chicago [Illinois] guy by the way also. He taught African history from the perspective of Walter Rodney and a lot of other African scholars who wrote African history. 'Cause that was his thing. He felt that if you're gonna study Africa, you study the Europeans who wrote about African history, but you definitely emphasize and taught the Africans who wrote about African history. Speaker 1: Now that's an aspect of--I mean we're always told we should be objective and, you know, and, you know, I was told in graduate school, I mean undergraduate school, said, you know, be objective and be--you know, don't--it doesn't matter who writes it as long as it's, you know--do you have a--I mean is there--I mean there's a--I think of in the '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s] black scholars started saying that there was a--that a black point of view made a difference in what you, what you--it's axiomatic now to say that, but then it was a big deal. Speaker 2: Yeah, most of the history is written in the '50s [1950s] and '60s. Much of it was written by white scholars, if you're talking about Afro-American history. But there were many other lesser-known black scholars writing. And that was one of the criticisms that we were not as objective. But I read, when I started reading people like Earl Thorpe and a couple other guys, they--and, and women, too--they were, they were pointing out that--they turned the table on white scholars that, if you you're going to write about white American history, you can bring the same values that--you can have the same value interpretive systems from--if you have those for American history, why can't we have a certain value system and standard for African American history because we can't separate from it, but we can be objective in writing this history and balance our emotionalism with the objectivity. And that's what black scholars in the '60s and '70s began to argue because that was their greatest criticism that this is not a, an objective history. And I didn't buy into the, the arguments of white scholars that blacks can't write an objective history. I didn't buy into that at all. Because if you look at white history, the, the history of white America, there was just as much nationalism in that history as you found in Afro-American history because--oh, in the first books that I took serious other than [Carter G.] Woodson and Charles Wesley, some of the older black scholars, when, when Lerone Bennett's 'Before the Mayflower' came out, everybody was reading that book. And that was a purely black nationalist kind of focus and point of view--thought it was important. But that, and that was one of the earlier pieces, but as, as black scholarship began to develop, as black, the black studies movement of the late 1960s and throughout the whole '70s began to take shape, that scholarship became very good. And by the '80s [1980s] it changed dramatically, you know, changed dramatically by the '80s. Story_ID: 8460 Speaker 1: So when you came back from Kenya and you--was there anything significant we need to discuss-- Speaker 2: Well, coming back in that fall of '68 [1968], you know, here again it was dealing with ci-, the civil rights movement and [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. And I think the, of the politics of the war because I think what was taking place on college campus was the war, anti-war movement was intensifying. [Lyndon B.] Johnson doesn't run. [Richard M.] Nixon comes in. And there's this apprehension of what Nixon wants to do domestically as well as with the war. By the '70-, 1970, the race was, the war was clearly a class war because only poor whites and poor blacks, the urban kids going to the war. And that was one of the reasons why Nixon instituted the lottery system 'cause he got all this criticism that the only kids that fighting this war are these poor white kids and these, these poor urban black kids, which was true when you look at the composition and the demographics of the U.S. Army in Vietnam. College students were getting deferments or going to Canada, you see. And these were primarily, most of those were--a lot of these kids were middle class, upper class kids, who didn't want to fight that war. Speaker 1: Yeah, about the, about that time, I think, people in the black community started figuring out that it wasn't as exciting to go over there and fight as they thought. Speaker 2: You know, what--and that was--because--. Speaker 1: People were coming back. Speaker 2: And that's the complexity, that's the complexity of this period because we're still in the throngs of the black revolution and black power movement where the, the whole identity, the whole state of the black mind was such that we needed to empower ourselves. Some people were thinking about moving from the United States. African roots were being rediscovered. And there were people arguing that this war doesn't mean anything to black people, not relevant to black people--what was happening to them domestically. Because there was this FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] campaign that destroyed, not only the civil rights movement, but the, the black power movement, the Black Panther Party. And there was this debate in the black community is why are we fighting this war when our real battle was here in the United States. So, you know, it was a very complex and complicated period if you didn't try to inform yourself what, what was happening. And, clearly, with the war, the war was a catalyst in shaping black identity because by 1970, '71 [1971], you had to make that decision whether or not you were gonna join this man's army or become a part of the black power struggle and movement that was taking place in the country, yeah. It was a very intense time for young, particularly young black people. Story_ID: 8461 Speaker 1: So you were in school. You had a deferment for being in school I take it in those days--. Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a--but, see, remember I said I started out as a young kid being gung-ho. I wanted to cure Vietnam's and save, American democracy in Southeast Asia. But you have to educate yourself. So, the educational process for me really started in sort of my middle years at the College of Wooster [Wooster, Ohio] when the war was steaming up. Even though I had, I was really aware of it as a high school student, but by the time I was in my junior and senior year in college, and particularly when I went to Northern Illinois [University, Dekalb, Illinois] those two years that I was in graduate school working on a masters degree, I became thoroughly anti-war. I just felt that war wasn't healthy for this country. The war in Southeast Asia wasn't healthy in this country, for this country, and definitely wasn't healthy for African American people. But we were all caught up in this nationalist spirit and, you know, a lot of black guys felt that this was the thing they had to do. And there weren't that many options and choices for them to do something else. Now, being a college student, you're just educated and tuned to this that this war is immoral, and that was the conclusion that I came, I came to. I was anti-war. And I had gotten into many discussions and even debates and fights with blacks who served in the war. And I--'cause that was, that was a bad war for this country, you know. We're not looking at that war and its, and the troop participation like we, we're doing Afghanistan, the Gulf War, and this war because we're caught up in this nationalist furor about free institutions and democracy. Well, in that war, no. It was--this country was split down the middle. This, that war split this country in half. And the complexity of it, you throw race and culture in it, it was even more complex. And that war shaped a lot of black identities. And I had become anti-war and very nationalistic, very. I wasn't radical, I wouldn't, I wasn't ready to go out and burn up buildings, you know. I wouldn't, I didn't want to become an anarchist or anything like that, but I was pretty much geared towards and, and, and helping black people and bidding in working with black people were trying to be progressive in black communities. Speaker 1: All the rhetoric folks flying around in those days--. Speaker 2: Rhetoric flying all over the place. Speaker 1: Who's a militant, who's the nationalist, who's a, you know, who's an Uncle Tom, who's, you know, all those--. Speaker 2: Yeah, very much a part of our dialogue, our culture in the political landscape, yeah. You have the War on Poverty, which was underway. And the War on Poverty was very interesting because it created a huge black middle class. People who were running these poverty programs doing a lot of writing and doing a lot of reporting. And if you're a certain position, you were able to capitalize and got the opportunities to advance not only yourself, but you might could do some good things. So there were opportunities there for a lot of black people, but there was a fear that [Richard M.] Nixon would change all that because he did close down the Office of Economic Opportunity, which had been a poverty program in many cities, yeah. Story_ID: 8462 Speaker 1: Well you said you had a black student organization at [College of] Wooster [Wooster, Ohio]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, we dealt pretty much with the politics of the campus, the politics of black students because there was a national organization of black students, and they had annual conferences. They--and their focus was really the politics on campuses, black studies programs, the movement, because there was a black studies movement that comes out of this. In fact, there were like two or three books written on the black students movement of that period. And that's what they were concerned with, 'cause I went to two of the conferences--my junior and senior year. Speaker 1: Oh, the student conferences? Speaker 2: Yeah, right. Speaker 1: SOBU [Student Organization for Black Unity] or YOBU or what is it? I remember they had something called SOBU at one time a national-- Speaker 2: It was national--the one I went to was the National Association of Black Students. 'Cause I think there was, there were meetings in Detroit [Michigan], and I can't recall the other city--it may have been Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right. Speaker 1: That northern Ohio group of colleges were very involved. Speaker 2: Right, yeah, very involved because of Antioch [College, Yellow Spring, Ohio], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, Baldwin-Wallace [College, Berea, Ohio], Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio], Antioch, all the-- Speaker 2: And those students were talking to each other about, you know, what's going on in their campus. Of course when Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], when the black students take over--that, that makes national news. The black student movement really becomes national and the black studies movement becomes national. Story_ID: 8463 Speaker 1: Now at this time you're shaping yourself as a historian. Now who are your, the models you're looking at--. Speaker 2: Here, again, Earl Thorpe was my big model. But once I read John Hope Franklin's 'From Slavery to Freedom,' which is a book that, when I read it, it was like in the fifth or sixth edition. The book was originally, the first edition was published in 1947. I got part of the fourth or fifth edition because when [Louis] Lou Jones began to teach Afro-American history in my sophomore year--my junior year--he used Franklin and Thorpe and Woodson, Carter G. Woodson. And once I read John Hope Franklin's 'From Slavery to Freedom,' I knew, I, I thought I knew everything about black people 'cause the book was scholarly written. And it wasn't a radical, nationalistic portrayal because if you talk with John Hope Franklin even today, he would say I'm an, I'm an American historian. He writes about black history 'cause he sees black, American history as slices of different kinds of histories. And his focus was on African Americans. So those were the primary scholars that I read 'cause they were the sort of the giants at that time. But like I said since the '70s [1970s] this, the field exploded. There are so many young, good black scholars out there now who have done excellent work. But those were sort of the foundation pieces for me. 'Cause I think it really was my, my, my years at [College of] Wooster [Wooster, Ohio] that made me into a, a serious student of history. So when I go off to graduate school, I'm pretty much headed to become a, a professor of history and with a focus on Afro-American history. Speaker 1: Okay. Now at this time did you, I asked you before if you'd come across the work of J. A. Rogers and--. Speaker 2: Yes, at Wooster. Rogers was, of course, he wasn't a historian, but I picked up Rogers as a result of studying the Harlem Renaissance and all these black literary figures and here was J. A. Rogers and Monroe [Nathan] Work, too, were talking about black history. And I--in fact, I still have Rogers, I still have Rogers' three, three volume 'Sex and Race,' you see. And I read those books in--'cause that was the first time Rogers start talking about all these white people who were really black. And I thought it was a fascinating study, but as I became a serious scholar and student of history, I began to question some of his documentation and his analysis. But he's still one of the people out there. Speaker 1: You know, Rogers and his, some of his students like John Henrik Clarke and others--did you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, John Henrick Clarke. I, yeah, I read Clarke--in fact, I met John Henrik Clarke, right. And C. L. R. James, when he wrote '[The] Black Jacobins' I got very interested because I was studying the Haitian Revolution, too. In fact, I did a little report on the Haitian revolution my senior at Wooster. And I, you know, I, I used much of, of C. L. R. James's works on the Haitian Revolution. Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to go to many conferences and meet some of these people? Speaker 2: Yes, I did. I, in fact, I started going to the Association for the Study of--at that time Negro Life and History [now Association for the Study of African American Life and History]. 'Cause that was the leading organization for black, the study of black life, history, and culture. And I started, I went to my first conference in 1969. The College of Wooster sponsored me to go to that conference. And from, ever since then I've been a member. I sit on the Executive Council now. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right. Some of those discussions with the people you meet at those conferences--. Speaker 2: Well, in those days I, you know, I met all of the black scholars who, or saw them, who were writing, doing black history. I, I met Earl Thorpe, Charles Wesley, Rayford Logan--they're, they're quite elderly even then, you know. Speaker 1: Benjamin Quarles. Speaker 2: Benjamin Quarles--I met him. And, of course, there was John Hope Franklin and, well, off hand, I tell you I met John Hope Franklin at the Organization of American Historians, which was the predominantly, history group and it was predominantly white. But there were a few blacks attending those meetings in those days. 'Cause I met John Hope Franklin in 1977 in St. Louis [Missouri]. The OAH came to St. Louis. That's when I met him. And he wanted to know what was I planning to do 'cause I had told him I'd just, I had just finished a master's degree at Northern [Illinois University, Dekalb, Illinois]. I was teaching at St. Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri] in their, in their adult evening program 'cause they were trying to set up an evening school there. And I told him I was heading back to school to work on a PhD, and I was gonna go and study on Ira Berlin. So, and he followed me on all those years. Well, I--they were my--I don't like to use the term heroes, but they were my foundation piece for Afro-American history. You had to read the giants. Speaker 1: All right, now in terms of the study of slavery, see, I know you've participated in panel discussions on slavery and so forth and in those days I think we really didn't have a lot of scholarship about slavery coming from black scholars. Speaker 2: Well, in those early days, no, unless you went to the Association meeting 'cause as I said they were the predominant group studying black history, the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History. And now you got a chance to meet the established scholars, the up and coming scholars, the graduate students, even the undergraduate student that was studying black history. And I got my fill of black history through those meetings, those annual meetings. And I didn't miss one. As well as being at Northern Illinois, those, those two years of doing masters degree work in history, John Higginson and Christopher Reed, who is a Professor of History at Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois]--they were my mentors. I had gone to Northern Illinois because I, I thought that John Higginson, John Bracey, who was a major black historian who's still around doing excellent work. He, he had moved from Northern Illinois to UMass Amherst [University of Massachusetts at Amherst, Massachusetts], but--and Higginson came. And these were black scholars. They were up and coming. So I had an opportunity to work under those guys. And I, I did plenty of work under those guys, got a good solid foundation so that when I went on to graduate school, I'd just do it from that. Story_ID: 8464 Speaker 1: At Northern Illinois University [Dekalb, Illinois], you were there two years? Speaker 2: Right. Northern is critical for, for my historical and personal intellectual development because I was at Northern from 1971 to 1973. And that's an intense period of the Vietnam War. The black power movement is winding down, but the black studies movement is, is heating up at that, in those days. And black scholarship is beginning to expand. So those were really critical intellectual developments. Once I leave [College of] Wooster [Wooster, Ohio], I, I really see myself as becoming a serious student of history. I knew I was, my life was going to be in history and particularly African American history. Speaker 1: Okay. Now when you left Northern, you went to Maryland to study with Ira Berlin, right? Speaker 2: Right. But I, I had a little, I had a little three-year period because when I went to, went back to St. Louis [Missouri], my girlfriend was in St. Louis and she wanted to go to law school. She goes on to school at St. Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri] from '73 to, in '77 [1977], so that's when we, I returned to school. So I'm in St. Louis, and I was teaching at St. Louis University black history 'cause they wanted to start a black history program in the Metropolitan College Division of St. Louis University. And I set up about four courses to teach. I was doing civil rights, American slavery, and general black history. And at, in my last year I taught a course on black politics. And when Ira Berlin writes 'Slaves Without Masters,' he's looking at the free black population. I had always known about the free black population as a result of reading Helen Edmonds' work on free blacks in North Carolina and John Hope Franklin's work. I was a young undergrad student in those days, but when Ira writes his book on the slave, the 'Slaves Without Masters,' a light bulb goes off in my head. I, number one, I liked his scholarship, the way he wrote, but he was just a prodigious researcher, and I liked that about him. 'Cause I think the, the foundation to writing history is how you go after your sources. And, and but, and, of course, how you analyze and interpret those sources, but you need those sources there. And I liked his style, and so I said, I'm going to go study with this guy. I was also interested in working with Leslie [Howard] Owens, who was a slavery scholar at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and I had already made arrangement with Leslie Owens through the Association [for the Study of African American Life and History] 'cause he was participating in some of the panel discussions and I had come across his work. 'Cause he wrote a fantastic little book called 'This Species of Property [Slave Life and Culture in the South]' about slave, slave life. And I thought I was going to go to Michigan but that kind of fell through and then I, I still had this interest in working with Ira Berlin at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. So, the key to University of Maryland, because I applied to university late, and they admitted me but they didn't give me any money. But the key person at Maryland was Dr. Al-Tony Gilmore, who was the chair of the Afro-American Studies department. And I had met Al-Tony Gilmore in 1975 at the Association meeting that was held in Chicago [Illinois]. And he always told me, if you ever come out to Maryland, look me up. So I called him up and said, look, Al-Tony--I used to call him A.T.--I said I'd just got into Maryland, but the history department didn't have any money 'cause I applied late. They wanted me to come, but they didn't have any money. So he said I'll tell you what, come on out and I'll give you the money, you can teach in Afro-American Studies and do your coursework in history. So that's what got me into Maryland. And he really became sort of a mentor to me because Al-Tony was a historian himself. And he was a fine one, he was chair of that department. Speaker 1: Right, and well-known basically. Speaker 2: Well known, right, Al-Tony Gilmore. Story_ID: 8465 Speaker 1: Coming to Maryland and working under Ira Berlin, he really changed my, the professional direction in my life because I thought I was aspiring to become a professor of history. But Ira Berlin was starting his Southern Society and Freeman Life [The Freedmen and Southern Society Project] as a records, a, a documentary historical project at the National Archives [and Records Administration] in 1976. He had just gotten some grants--one was from NHPRC, the National Historical Publications and Records Commission. He'd gotten a big grant from them in '76. And he had sort of set up shop downtown in 1976. So he, when I came in, in, in '77 [1977] he brought me down in '78 [1978] 'cause he had about three PhD students. And he put us all on this project. And what happened then was once I got into that project--'cause what he was looking at was the transition from slavery to freedom through the prisms of federal records, which was kind of revolutionary in those days. He was writing--and it was a documentary. It was using original documentation to show this transition. And he was focusing on several areas. And one of the areas--I worked on two of the volumes of the project. I, the first volume that I worked on--well, I was working on, on them at the same time--was the black military experience. And then the other was the destruction of slavery volume. Because the war was a destructive process and that really opened my mind to primary sources because what I began to realize was that the slaves, themselves, had a big role in destroying slavery. And then the black military experience was the whole creation of the United States Colored Troops. So it was from that experience in working under Ira Berlin--and I always stayed with the project for about a year--I had, I had gained enough knowledge that, look, I'm, as a history student, I'm in the bowels of American history working at the National Archives. And I knew if I was going to become this, this great historian (laughter) I wanted to become, I needed to learn what was in these sources. And then there was a black manager here by the name of James Moore. I stayed with the National Archives working as I was completing my graduate work at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]. I stayed with the Archives as what was called an intermittent student. I was a, you could work as a student and get paid, as well as finish your graduate work, and I was at the University of Maryland, of course. And so when I, I finished my coursework and project work in '82 [1982] and I was getting ready, I got a predoc fellowship at the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.] in '83 [1983] and, and I finished the degree work in about '87 [1987], '88 [1988], finished, got the doctorate. But in all that time, I had sort of was transformed from an aspiring historian to an archivist. I'd begin to learn the archival profession. And I was really enthralled with federal documentation, federal records because it had an amazing amount of documentation on African American people since the colonial time, right. Speaker 2: Okay, so as you said you peeled the artichoke, basically. You went all the way to the core of--. Speaker 1: Yeah, I went to the core. Speaker 2: --you know, you tried to stay on the outside, yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The whole origins of American society are in these records. And I would spend--I was, I was being trained as an archivist. I had already received enough training as a, as a young historian, you know, the tools and the methods and works of what historians do in their craft. And I was, I had really began to teach because I was teaching at, at College Park. I had, I had, had some fundamentals of teaching when I was at St. Louis University [St. Louis, Missouri]. But when I moved to Maryland that expanded in '84 [1984]--Russell [L.] Adams at, who was the chair of the Department of Afro-American Studies at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] asked me to come down and teach a course. And I'm still there as an adjunct. You know, it's almost twenty years later. That was at 1984. So I was developing in two areas, professional areas. I was developing as an historian 'cause I was going to all the history meetings, the association, the OAH [Organization of American Historians], the American Historical Society. I was attending these meetings and other smaller conferences. And added this, and then I was also becoming this archivist, learning the archival systems and programs here at the National Archives. And once I became, I was an intermittent through '82 [1982], but there was a black manager in '83 [1983] approached me and said when you come back from your predoc fellowship at the, at the Smithsonian Museum of American History, I want you to come back and work, become an archivist. 'Cause I was gonna really--I was planning to go back to University of Maryland and, and teach in the Afro-American Studies Department. Al-Tony [Gilmore] had a job for me. But when Jim Moore offered me the archivist job in '84, I came back and stayed with the Archives. But I had been here since '78 [1978], you see. So my whole professional career, particularly with records and history had, was here at the National Archives. Story_ID: 8466 Speaker 1: At the National Archives [and Records Administration] you, I suppose, I would guess, there wasn't many black employees, I mean, people involved in the-- Speaker 2: No. There's an interesting history of blacks in the National Archives that really go back to the 1930s. It, it doesn't get its first black archivist until the late '40s [1940s] when Harold T. Pinkett comes in--he's a PhD already. But there have been black employees here as lower level technicians and people doing custodial work--they had always been here. But in terms of the professional staff, it was a very thin line. My mentor in those days when I came in '78 [1978] was Sara D. Jackson, who had been a low-level employee. She came here in 1941. But by the time I had gotten to her, she was a nationally recognized archivist working with NHPRC, the National Historical Publications Records Commission. And she was a specialist, an expert in 19th century military records. And she taught me just about everything she knew--I mean I didn't absorb everything, but she was really demanding. And I, I really learned an excellent craft from her. And then I moved on to work in other areas. But by then, by the mid-'80s [1980s] I was developing this expertise in Afro-American history in federal records. Story_ID: 8467 Speaker 1: This is important in terms of being able to, I guess, to have someone to guide you through records that can--they can remain mute if you don't know how to read them, right, or you don't know how to interpret them, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, in the case of archives is having good finding aids and guides, you know, descriptions of the records, but also having the people who are knowledgeable in expertise in those records. And I've had a very interesting career here now because I, I had, I've had about four different jobs here at NARA [National Archives and Records Administration]. But in all four of them I did projects, archival projects, reference projects that were relative to Afro-American history and federal records. And by '85 [1985], we had a--in the early '70s [1970s] when the Archives used to do academic conferences, they had a conference in '73 [1973] on Afro-American history, Afro-American resources of the National Archives, and a lot of prominent black and white scholars came to participate, and we printed a book from that. So the work on, on federal records, black history, is long standing. And I did an article in, in our, our, our journal, 'Prologue: Quality of the National Archives,' in the summer of 1970, '97 [1997]. I put together a special issue on federal records and Afro-American history. I had about twelve different people write about different records and different historical themes and how they pertain to blacks and federal records, the documentation. And my article was the introduction article, and I looked at--it was called "Institutions of Memory: The National Archives, the Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and History, and the," I think, the, I think it was the "American Council of Learned Society,"--these three institutions 'cause they'd come together in the mid-'30s [1930s]. 'Cause one of the thesis that I put forth in this article that one of the big boosts and enhancements of black history was the opening up of the National Archives in 1934 because the archival staff began to find out that there was immense documentation of black folk in these federal records. Carter G. Woodson understood that, too, in the '30s, and he approached the Archives to do a guide on black records that pertain to black, black history in the, in the late '30s. And in my article I pointed all this out--how federal archives really was a great enhancement to the research, study and writing publications of Afro-American history. Speaker 1: This wealth of information on black people that exists here, I guess, stands in stark contrast to the perception that we have no history that is still being taught in some places even as we speak. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, I, you know, I do a lot of public speaking and even in some the, our, my writing I always point out that the National Archives is the repository of the largest operable holdings on black history. Now when you think of doing research in black history in some of the institutions, the famous Schomburg Library, for example, in New York City [New York] is an amazing place to work--huge. When you think of the Moorland-Spingarn Research [Center] for black culture at Howard University [Washington, D.C.]--immense. When you think of the Amistad [Research] Center [New Orleans, Louisiana]. And these are manuscript repositories. They have manuscript collections, they have small libraries, and they have some archives. And they are the primary institutions where you may want to go and do research in Afro-American history. Well, the National Archives and Records Administration is an archival repository of the federal government that goes back to the 18th century. And, and when it begins to document the evolution of the American government--and this is what makes archives so fascinating, the federal archives--it documents really the history and evolution of American society and it includes everybody. And I discovered this the first couple of years as a young PhD student. I, and that's what I meant when I say I'm in the bowels of this country's history. I have a very good understanding of that history, and I began to develop the expertise of Afro-American history documentation in federal records. And the, and the management here wanted me to become the subject specialist. We've had two previous black history specialists here at the Archives. The first one was Robert Clark. The second one was Debra Newman Hamm, who did the black history guide, and she moved on in '85 [1985] to the Library of Congress. And then I took over. Story_ID: 8468 Speaker 1: Give us some examples as to the kinds of records that are here, I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, I'll give you three top, hot topics--. Speaker 1: They would surprise us about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll give you three hot topics, I think, in Afro-American history that everybody wants to talk about: Number one, United States Colored Troops, okay. Number two is the Tuskegee Airmen, okay. And, and number three is what I considered sort of, sort of, sort of the, the, the great individuals and the one person that I think is, is focused here is Robert C. Weaver when he comes to Washington [D.C.] in the 1930s in the New Deal, all right. Those are three areas that I have talked about and written about. And, and the Tuskegee Airmen and the United States Colored Troops, of, that's a very unique history 'cause they, they're no longer with us. And that's the fascinating thing about federal records. There's this breakdown in distinction between records that pertain to different groups. All this documentation of, of, of black people is sort of segregated and then you can go right to it. The records of the United States Colored Troops are there. The records of the Tuskegee Airmen and all the facets of that process is there. The whole fact that you had a segregated and--and I guess you can call that a fourth element--the fact that you had a black military dynamic where from 18-, from the Revolutionary War on to World, to the Korean War, you had this segregated--even though in the American Revolution the Continental Army was really integrated, a lot of black people don't know that. But a lot of black people don't even realize that we fought in the American Revolution (laughter). But by the time of the Civil War when--and, of course, after the American Revolution Congress designates that the, the Army should be white males. But in the Civil War when we get the creation of the United States Colored Troops, there's this debate about arming black men. So that's a history that is fascinating. And it's all in these records here. Now you get in the 20th century, and we have the Spanish-American War, World World I, World War II. You still have this segregated army that--and it's an amazing history, you see. And then you have the Tuskegee Airmen, the Tuskegee Airmen Association is still with us, and a lot of those men are dying out, and that history is very important. But it's a unique history. These are people, these are institutions that no longer exist, but they will always be studied. And I've written about all of this stuff, right. So this is what I mean about the immense documentation because you not only find the documentation of African American in paper documents we call textual records, but there's Afro-American history in the, the still pictures, the, the photos. We have over 10 million images in, in the, our holdings of the National Archives. And probably a quarter of those images, quarter, a million of them, 250,000 probably or 200,000 of those images contain images of black people alone or black people with other groups--amazing stuff, you know. Maybe a million more, but we have over 10 million images. We have black people documented, documented in motion on audio-visual. We have maps that, we have maps about slave populations, where slave populations are located in the slave-holding states. And even when the census began to count black people, we have census track maps that point to where black people lived in cities and rural areas--fascinating stuff. Speaker 1: So you can track their migration. Speaker 2: You can track migration. You can also track black families because remember what happened in 1977 when Alex Haley wrote 'Roots.' It changed the whole dynamics of genealogical research. And black people discovered, oh, we got a history that goes back to Africa! And I was in the National Archives [and Records Administration] in those days when that book came out, and I saw what happened in '78 [1978] and '79 [1979]--you couldn't get into that building because everybody was doing genealogical research, yeah. 'Roots' changed the whole dynamic. Speaker 1: It did and it didn't on some level. We still don't, I mean, a lot of people still don't know much about or dig into where they, their origin. Speaker 2: Well, it has a lot to do with their historical consciousness, quite frankly, you know--how much you think of history and what you think about history. Because there's still a bias about history because, you know, I, I, I teach at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and I, and I have juniors and senior students in my--I teach 19th century and 20th century black social and political thought. And I ask, half the students who believe that American history is biased and tell too many lies about black people. Now this is in 2003, so you can imagine what was going on in people's minds in those days, in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s]. But we've come a long way. And like I said I think it has a lot to do with our, the development of our historical consciousness and our historical thinking about who we are and what we are and what has happened to us. Because we don't know much about American history and we don't know a lot about our own history, yeah, in terms of, in terms of the masses, yeah. Story_ID: 8469 Speaker 1: I couldn't help but notice that most of the four items you mentioned, three of them have to do with the military. And the hot topics, the United States Colored Troops, the Tuskegee Airmen and the black military records going back to the 18th century. And so are there, are there any other--what other records would people find significant that, you know-- Speaker 2: I think if you want to do, if you want to do something like social history, you know, and how social history is very fascinating because it looks at all facet of American society. And some of the best record groups to look at social issues--the labor records, the housing records, you know, and law, and law enforcement records like the Department of Justice. Like I have couple projects that deals with some of these issues. For example, in the last five or ten years, the hottest topic has been lynching in American society. Well, lynching was an old issue that goes back to the 19th century when you look at people like Ida [B.] Wells-Barnett who tried to get a federal law to prohibit lynching. Well, in the Department of Justice records there's a whole series on lynching because the American people, particularly African American people, tried to get together and to get involved in this to stop lynching. And these records go back to the turn of the century. And I-- Speaker 1: In terms of Dyer Anti-Lynching Act? Speaker 2: In terms, of course, writing letters to Congressmen, to the president and other, you know, national groups, local groups writing the government to do something about lynching. And this is how black history is being captured because once it come into the federal purview and attention and the government begins to participate and, and become associated and integrated into these local level issues, state issues, county issues that involve American citizens, black people being American citizens, it began to work with these, these, these issues. So lynching becomes a huge--and there are about, in just this one series alone, there are about twenty boxes of records that pertain exclusively to lynching. I've had several scholars inquiring about those records. So I'm trying to create a whole database on what those, these letters identifying who's writing the government and the purpose. Story_ID: 8470 Speaker 1: Another area of interest, I think, is that black scholars are looking at the military dynamic of, of World War I and World War II, you see. Because in World War I, right after the World War I, because of the, the Russian Revolution and the Red Scare in this country, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] creates a file called "Military Subversive List." And in that list of these radical groups there's a, there's a series called "Negro Subversives." And that's a fascinating group of records because they're watching these radical and not so radical black group people in American society, and it's all documented. Speaker 2: Here's the beginning of the FBI's targeting--. Speaker 1: Yes, the FBI, yeah, the FBI's operating really right around the first world war. It really becomes an institution by the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. Speaker 2: Yeah, because it's like a pre-FBI before that. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it's a pre-. [J. Edgar] Hoover's there. Speaker 2: Hoover's there, yeah, right. Speaker 1: He's a young, very young man. Speaker 2: Right, he goes after [Marcus] Garvey, I know. And he's concerned about groups like the African Blood Brotherhood. Speaker 1: Yeah, all those people. Those records, those correspondence are on the African Blood Brotherhood, there's a few in those records, the Military Intelligence Division, the group subversive files. We got a complete list--I, I had a student work on that list, but about a year ago, it's, it's among our, our finding aids now. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know historians of the past twenty years, I know Tony Martin, for one, has used FBI records to show deliberate sabotage of Garvey's movement. Speaker 1: Well, Tony Martin and Robert [A.] Hill because Robert Hill is the editor of the Garvey Project. And he did an article in 'Prologue' magazine on how, the government's case against Garvey. And he went through all those records. I remember, I helped Robert Hill find some records, me and one other archivist by the name of David Langborg (ph.) found some Garvey materials in State Department records. And there were like five or six issues of 'Negro World' that Robert Hill had gone around the world and couldn't find the issues and here they were in federal records, you see. So you, you never can tell what you're gonna find in these records. Story_ID: 8471 Speaker 1: There's a, you know, a--for our people, you know, it's been profound for some people that we don't, that we have--and it's because of poverty and the other educational disadvantages--we will study ourselves the way other people do. Even our enemy was studying us on a high level more than we tend to and those are--there was a gentlemen in Chicago [Illinois] showed me a outline for a conference that was held in Sardinia, Italy, back in 2002. It was a--Maria Dietrich, who teaches part-time at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who wrote a book on Frederick Douglass's love life with a German woman at one point, held a major Afro-American history conference and culture conference in Sardinia, Italy, with primarily European historians. And they met for two weeks studying Afro-American people. You know, it's a--I mean, does this kind of stuff--I mean, I'm sure you're aware of these kind of efforts around the world--people are studying black-- Speaker 2: Yes. Well, I see the--in terms of research, particularly since I've been a specialist since '85 [1985] 'cause that's when I took over as a subject specialist in Afro-, which is truly a unique position. There's nobody like me in the, in this country that studies Afro-American history in federal records. So I am sort of the reigning expert here in, in terms of the system research and particularly that which is from the academic community. Now there's always been this interest among European scholars and in well, in 2000 I began to work on a database on federal records that pertain to slavery in an international slave trade. And we created a database--it's in our, it's in our website--but I wrote an article called "Living with the Hydra: The Documentation of Slavery and an International Slave Trade in Federal Records." And I went to four different, I was invited to four different conferences to talk about that research. And one of those conferences was at the Sorbonne in Paris [France]. And that's when I realized the extent--and this was the Black Diaspora Conference in Paris, and they invited me to come over. When they found out about the article, they had already closed the, you know, invitation. But they really wanted me to come, so I did, well, [National] Archives [and Records Administration] sent me over there. And for two, three days I talked with a lot of scholars who were European scholars who were doing research on slavery and the African diaspora or the black diaspora. Germans, people from Great Britain, Italian scholars, and scholars from Holland, from, from some other Dutch, Dutch countries, yeah, the Scandinavian, right--very much. Story_ID: 8472 Speaker 1: What's the most, what's the most interesting thing you've discovered here in the National Archives [and Records Administration] that most of us would not know existed? Speaker 2: Oh, boy, this goes back to my days with the project, Ira Berlin's project, because I began to read the letters of black soldiers and slave people. And just reading their thoughts about their--what's going on in the war--that opened up a lot because I began to see the slave agency that scholars had begun to write about and are writing about now that slaves were very active participants in their freedom. And I saw this stuff being documented because there were any number of letters that I came across in which black soldiers talked about what they're doing, why they're doing it, they're gonna get, they're gonna free their families, and this and that. And it was just fascinating stuff to me. That, you know, was one of the elements that attracted me to archives because I'm reading original stuff. You know, when you pick up a document and read a letter or a series of letters, you're really going back in time into the minds of that individual. And when I read all this stuff, what these black slaves and these Union troops, these black Union troops, and white commanding officers, I was just fascinated. I, you, and that's the fascinating thing about being an archivist and a, particularly a project archivist, because when you're processing records, you have a task to do. But when you, when you're reading these documents, these letters, these reports, whatever, you can get fascinated with them so much and you forget about you have a job to do, a task to complete. And I remember many days sitting in those stack areas down in archives going through these dusty boxes, reading these letters--oh my God, oh my God! And I'm forgetting what I'm supposed to be doing. But that was the really eye-opening thing to me about archives, black history, and black people. Reading the, the, the letters of these black soldiers and, and, and in, in those days, see, black people used people who can read and write to do, to, to say the things that they want to do 'cause we, we're talking about an illiterate people, you know. But they had minds, they knew what they wanted to say, what was going on in their lives. So from that point on, I realized that this is just fascinating work. And, and it was this story of this transition from slavery to freedom that really fascinated me. And that's why, one of the reasons why I stayed here at the National Archives and Records Administration. Story_ID: 8473 Speaker 1: Do you know about an exchange--there's an exchange between H. Ford Douglass, who is at [Fort] Leavenworth [Kansas]. He was a, he had been a radical abolitionist, black abolitionist before the war and was a commander of light artillery in Fort Leavenworth, Kansas--was having a tremendous conflict with his commanding officer. And there about four or five letters went back between the War Department and Douglass and his commander in the War Department. Speaker 2: I know who he is. Speaker 1: And then Douglass dies of a illness, they say. They say, but he was in Fort Leavenworth, you know, surrounded by enemies, you know, apparently, in the Union Army, you know. Speaker 2: Well, the great--. Speaker 1: It was a--that kind of stuff is-- Speaker 2: The one case that I followed and I've had scholars come, come after me is, is Henry [Ossian] Flipper at [United States Military Academy at] West Point [New York] and what happened to Flipper. Because we have some documents on what, what, what went on there. And there was a couple books written on what happened to Henry Flipper. He had, he, Flipper is this first black cadet there at West Point, and he's gonna become a Union officer. But he's kicked out because of these trumped up charges. So Flipper really becomes my focus of the 19th century in what's going on at--and as I said and when I talked about Sara D. Jackson, she introduced me to Henry Flipper, you know. So I sort of stayed with what was documented on Flipper's life in the military. But now Ford, I, I do recall Ford and, and his problems with the military. Speaker 1: 'Cause another one I remember--a letter from, a letter from a white lieutenant documenting a speech that Martin [Robinson] Delaney gives at the brick church in St. Helen's--. Speaker 2: What period of time was this? Speaker 1: This is about 1865, '64 [1864] or '65. Speaker 2: There's a good chance could be in the, the volumes. Speaker 1: It's in there, it's there, yeah. Speaker 2: See, when, when the project in the days that I worked for the projects and few years after that, overall the project looked at probably two million documents. But in terms of publishing, they only published about, there are five volumes out right now. I think they want to do seven volumes, and there are five volumes out. But I think they, they've already published about 250,000 documents of these documents. And they looked at over two million documents in the time of the project working at the National Archives [and Record Administration]. And as I said the two documents that I worked on was the black military experience and the destruction of slavery. And then the three, the other volumes to come out was labor in the lower South and labor in the lower, in the upper South. And then I think there's a, a fifth volume on black institutions like families and churches that are coming out. So, we, they captured a lot of documents. And, and many of these documents have to deal with white Union commanders, Confederate commanders, and Southerners writing about, and many black documents that pertain, that black people wrote or had written for them. They're all in these volumes. But there were many more that never got into the volumes. But I, I, I recall Ford, but I didn't see anything in--and there are some things in there on, on Delaney, too, right. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Delaney was in the speech critiquing Reconstruction. And he was the--was a pretty rugged critique of it, too, on this--. Speaker 2: Right. Well, you know, we have the records of those twenty-two House of Representative people and the two black senators that came with them. In fact, we did an exhibit called "The Long Road Up the Hill," which was the, the first historical period of black representative, representation in the Congress, which comes during Reconstruction. And it was a fantastic exhibit because it, it, it described and identified who these people were, what state they came from, their political position and some of the things they did in the Congress. Story_ID: 8474 Speaker 1: A lot of our history is--what's generally known in the population about black history usually comes from the movies. And we had a movie, 'Glory,' and we've had the 'Amistad' and other--And it seems to be for those who, if you really look at the documents, there seems to be a, you know, a major difference between what's in the movies and what actually happened. Speaker 2: Well, I think you have to understand the intent and purpose of Hollywood and the movie industry--it's to entertain. Now somewhere in there you can be educated because a, a pretty good historical theme movie will come out, such as 'Glory.' 'Cause 'Glory' really changed the dynamic of the whole debate about the Civil War and it's emancipation legacy 'cause we can't forget the position of neo-Confederates and Southerners viewed the war as a war of northern invasion and not a civil war and that the war was really not about slavery. Well, when, when 'Glory' came out, that really changed the whole debate about the Civil War and its emancipation legacy. It re-emphasized and refocused that struggle and debate on the destruction of slavery and the liberation of the slave population. Southerners don't want to accept that. That's why you got two movies called 'Gettysburg' and 'Gods and Generals.' Those movies are put out to counter what 'Glory' did. And 'Glory' woke up, I think, the American public and black people--. Speaker 1: But even in--yeah. Speaker 2: Hey, black people were very much a part of the American Civil War. Speaker 1: Even though it did, it's another level of it that when--you know, I know when my son saw it he said, "Gee, dad, all the black soldiers died." Well, they didn't all die at Fort Wagner [South Carolina]. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: And they had names, too. They didn't have to have fictitious names. They could've used the names of Lewis Douglass and Stephen [A.] Swailes and some of the people that were-- Story_ID: 8475 Speaker 1: Over 200,000 black men served in the Union Army and Navy, okay. I know this because I was the chief historian of the African American Civil War Memorial [Washington, D.C.], which is down on U Street and 13th Street. If you go down there and see that statue, every black soldier that served in the Union Army is listed down there, not the Navy 'cause in the Navy and there had been a couple projects on blacks in the Navy during the Civil War. There were over 25,000 black men who served in the Union Navy and the Union Navy was integrated. That's a little known historical fact. Many of the black ships--I mean the ships who went up and down the Mississippi River, the blockades in the Gulf, Mexican Gulf, those ships were manned by black and white sailors in the Union Navy. But in the Army, there was clearly a separate unit in the United States Colored Troops. And from 19-, 1863 to the end of the war you had these, over a hundred infantry divisions--light cavalry, light artillery, heavy artillery of black troops--and all down there on the, on, on U Street and 13th. So, they really changed the complexion of the war after '63 [1863], but they had been around since 1862. They were unofficial Union--I had wrote an article on past emancipation, and one of the major past emancipation during the Civil War was to join the Army. And there were certain Union generals who took the initiative away from [Abraham] Lincoln to set up black troops. But Lincoln cancelled those troops out. And, of course, when, when the emancipation comes out, Emancipation Proclamation comes out in January 1, 1863, it changed the whole complexion of the war. Speaker 2: Yeah, you're talking about [Benjamin F.] Butler and [David] Hunter and some of those--. Speaker 1: Yeah, those guys, right. Speaker 2: What real difference did the black troops make in the war? I know you've participated in panel discussions-- Speaker 1: Yeah, what I emphasized was the spirit and uplift of the slave population--that this war really was about us. And then they had always believed that from the day one. But when they saw and saw those sons and husbands and boyfriends and men going off to fight for their freedom, because all those men who fought in the Civil War understood that, yes, they were fighting to save the Union, but they fighting for their freedom of their families and themselves. So it took a great, a great push to get, to make that to happen. And when it did happen, that was, as I said, from '63 [1863] on, from the, from the spring of '63 on. The war was really about the destruction of slavery and the liberation of the slave population 'cause those black men were beginning to fight. Once, once they put that uniform on, went through the training and began to fight, there were over, there were several, there were several major campaigns, but there were just several of these smaller scrimmages and campaigns with Confederate troops throughout the war. But the big, part of the big campaign when [Ulysses S.] Grant was surrounding Petersburg [Virginia] and Richmond [Virginia], two-thirds of his army were black USCT [United States Colored Troops], you see. And you, you pick that up when Ken--. Speaker 2: Two-thirds? Speaker 1: Roughly a half to two-thirds of his army, yeah! And you, and you, and you found that out when Ken Burns did this Civil War piece--go back to that. And he, he does the USCT [United States Colored Troops] some justice and some credit there. Howard University [Washington, D.C.] picked up on it, too. But those major campaigns against Richmond and Petersburg, Virginia, they were predominantly fought by black troops. Speaker 2: Lerone Bennett wrote about the Battle of New Market Heights [Virginia] and Ebony talked about that. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's one of their, their smaller battles, right, yeah. Changed the dynamic of the war. It really did because emancipation and liberation was the, was end of the destruction. And Lincoln recognized that after the Battle of Gettysburg [Pennsylvania]. You know, he realized that. Speaker 2: I think after he said something to him. Speaker 1: Yeah, he realized that. He came, he came to a sort of a moral position and understanding of the war that this war had to mean something. It was, it was about saving the Union, but it was some things at stake here. Story_ID: 8476 Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the Tuskegee Airmen, I know you have a, some strong feelings about how they changed the, America-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, because, in the, the 20th, in the 19th century the white military established that used the same, had used arguments to keep, to prevent blacks from serving in the Army, that, you know, they weren't intelligent enough and they were not going to fight as vigorous and honorable enough like white troops. Well, those same arguments were used in the 20th century in World War I and World War II. The difference is the Tuskegee Airmen--these guys were flying airplanes. They became fighter pilots. So they had to be highly educated people to understand the mechanics and the aerodynamics of flying. And there was great opposition to them doing this. Now, there's a little bit of history that we need to understand because one of the pioneers--and I hate to use that term, pioneers--of trained black fighter pilots was a black woman by the name of Willa [Beatrice] Brown, who had a flying school for Negro pilots in, in Chicago, Illinois--Wilma Brown. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: (Laughter) And we have her records here because she petitioned the War Department to, when the War Department made the decision to train black men to become pilots and they called it the Tuskegee Experiment--we have to remember that--'cause they weren't sure if black men could fly fighter planes. It was an experiment state. Well, they had gone out and, and they had went out to various institutions to find out who would be willing to host a training school, and Willa Brown's application to the War Department that she could do that in her flying school. Well, she lost out, of course. 'Cause she had been training black pilots since the late '30s [1930s]. She was the first black woman to get her pilot's license, see. Bessie Coleman was the first black woman to get her pilot's license, but it, she got her pilot's license in Paris, France, and she flew here--and that was in the '20s [1920s]. Willa Brown was the first black woman to get her pilot's license here in the United States, which was a federal process in those days--pursue Aeronautical, the Defense and Patrol Administration. She had been training Negro pilots since the late '30s [1930s]. Now we have a list based on 1935 and '36 [1936], of black aviators, people who had, were learning how to fly planes and, you know, were getting their training. And she was very prominent in that field, very prominent in that field. Tuskegee [Alabama] won out. Tuskegee was one of the institutions that won on--that's why they became the Tuskegee Airmen. And there was like--there were several classes of the Tuskegee Airmen. And it was an arduous, rigorous training method and when they washed out, I understood, quite a few guys. That HBO documentary on the Tuskegee Airmen--it's, it's fairly accurate. That's why I say Hollywood can do some good things, but that was an HBO documentary. But it was a good movie. And if, if the black people really want to learn about the Tuskegee Airmen, I would start visually because we do learn visually. We don't read a lot of books. We go to museums, and that's important. But, you're right, Hollywood has taught us our history to a large extent. And what goes back to Tarzan in the jungle in Africa, you know (laughter), and bringing on--. Speaker 1: To either accept or reject. They are teaching what's out there, it's out there-- Speaker 2: That's what I mean by how we have developed our historical consciousness--what kind--how you inform yourself of American history and black history. And becoming a history student I had to rejected a lot of that stuff off, out right off early on. Story_ID: 8477 Speaker 1: If I'm not mistaken, you wrote once or was on a panel discussion where you said that World War II really started the civil rights movement. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on a panel discussion--I can't--I've been on some, quite a few panel discussions that pertained to World War II. Because I was also in a documentary that was done by [William] Bill Smith at PEVUE [Inc.] in the northeast in Massachusetts on the silent hero ['Invisible Soldiers: Unheard Voices'], something like that. But it was a documentary on World War II and blacks, and black soldiers who fought in World War II. And one of the things that I, I stated in that, in that documentary and also on a couple panels that I was on that in order to understand the modern civil rights movement, which, you know, scholars put at 1955 to about 1965, you got to understand the whole context for that movement. And that context really starts in terms of a, a movement coming out of the World War II because that's where a lot of the, the challenges to American segregation and these segregated laws really begin. Because the black press at that time was beginning to criticize the government heavily on this segregated Jim Crow army. Why are we fighting [Adolf] Hitler and his racism and Nazism in Europe and we got it here and in an American society? And a lot of black people didn't accept that. But we participated in the war and in segregated units. We had, you know, you get the 92nd and 93rd Infantry Divisions who had pretty good records during World War II 'cause they fought both in the European theatre and in the Pacific theatre. And then you had this outstanding history of the Tuskegee Airmen, okay. Well, a lot of those veterans and a lot of those black people, men, men and women, when they came out of the war and came back to a foreign racist society, they began to challenge these things. But that challenge to American segregation really began during World War II. So to really understand the modern civil rights movement, you really got to understand that whole context from, from 1940 through 1954 when Brown [v. the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas] comes out. But a lot of the issues of affirmative action really begins in the '30s [1930s] with Robert C. Weaver. Remember I told you there were certain black individuals--. Speaker 1: Right, yeah, that--I was getting ready to ask you about that. Speaker 2: Yeah, see, Weaver, Weaver was--I hate to use the term "ahead of his time" but he really was. He was a federal bureaucrat, but he was one who took up the interests and needs of African American people. When he comes to Washington [D.C] in '33 [1933]--and this is a guy who's a black PhD in economics from Harvard University [Cambrige, Massachusetts]. And he comes to work in the, and the, in the, in the Department of Interior and, which was dealing with a lot of the housing issues at that time. And he's at--and, guess what, he becomes Lyndon B. Johnson's--when HUD [Housing and Urban Development] was created, who's the first black secretary? Speaker 1: Robert C. Weaver. Speaker 2: Robert C. Weaver. If you go down to HUD now, Robert Clifton Weaver is on that building--Robert Clifton Weaver Building. And that, and that's a historical significance that we need to understand. And one of Weaver's battlegrounds was how do you equalize the attention, the participation, and the benefits of the American government for everybody including blacks? And he's dealing with a thoroughly virulent racist society in the '30s and the '40s [1940s]. But he does some magnificent things with the federal government. And the language and philosophy and the policy of affirmative action can be traced back to what Robert C. Weaver was doing during the New Deal in World War II. And we need to understand that. Story_ID: 8478 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today? Speaker 2: We have to improve the, the gaps of wealth and income in American society. Because there's always been this debate of race and class, and class means the benefits of American society and how American capitalism has broken American society up into these distinct economic social classes. And what we have now, if you look at American society, you have a society based on haves and have-nots. Now this thing has always been here throughout our history. It has intensified in these days because of what has happened globally. And, now that we're in the age of information technology there's what's called the digital divide, those people are, who within a computer technological world, black or white or yellow or, or brown, and those who are not. And if you look at it in a finite point, you're looking at people who are taking advantage of, have the opportunities and the benefits of American society. And there are just as many blacks and Hispanics as whites doing that. But you also have this tremendous gap of black people who don't have skills, who don't have access to good schools, to good health care, to all kinds of social issues in American society, social benefits of American society, and they're falling behind. And that is what, I think, where the American government in terms of what it can do for American citizens is to, is to close these gaps. Because the distribution of wealth in American society has created a lot of pockets of poverty, you know. We're the richest nation. You know, you've heard this over and over and over--a lot of it--the pundits about American society, talking about how great we are as a society. But within our midst we have all these, these social ills that affect people, regardless of race. So, you know, as I look to the 21st century my, my hopes and wishes is that these gaps between these various social classes can be closed and that the standards of American society can benefit all. But right now American are capitalists in, in least in your terms of its values, its operation, and institutional works in American society, it, it's still creating a society of have and have-nots. And if you don't have the educational wherewithal and the opportunities of American education systems, there's a good chance you're going to fall behind. Now I'm not saying you have to go to college and become educated to do well in American society. I'm not saying that because there are plenty of, of people who didn't go to college who are doing very well in society. They, least they had the smarts, the abilities to improve upon themselves and to do well. But when you look at our cities and our rural environments, there's still a lot of, of poverty, there's the working poor, you know, in terms of the minimum wage. You find people working three and four jobs, you know. What the most recent problem that the American government has discovered--obesity and our diet. And if you look at where this is taking place, characteristically it's among poor people, poor working class people. Speaker 1: This is true, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, because of what we eat. The fat--the food industry, particularly the fast food industry has fed this stuff to people, and now we have this epidemic of obesity and, and overweight people. Now, is that characteristic of class, social class and economic to selects it, it is. What's the other health problem? Smoking. Who smokes in American society? In all, a lot of this stuff all comes back to the social classes and class issues in American society. Now I'm not saying class issues should supersede race because race is still a problem in American society. Institutional racism is alive and well. I mean the last few years, you know, we've seen what has happened in American, upper reaches of American corporations and even the government for that matter--discrimination. We just got, just got through with the Michigan affirmative action case, so race is real, still a problem. The cost is just as much powerful, too. And I think that's where the debate is among social thinkers, people who, who study and, and write and talk about American society in terms of the cultural differences, the cultural divides and the racial divides--you know, the growing issues that takes place, you know. Hispanics are, or it's the, it's the number one minority in American society. But their poverty rates are just as great as black. But, they have the--just as much success as African Americans, too. You know, you're getting ready to see their third or fourth annual Hisparic, Hispanic awards. So Hispanic populations are doing extremely well, but so are black population. But on the other hand, you have a lot of social ills in black communities today, you know. Drugs still a problem, alcoholism, unemployment, bad education--and this is 2003. So my hope is that in the future--the government can't solve everything. I mean that's why we have these debates among conservatives and liberals and moderates who--what kind of government should we have and what should it be doing with the American people. Well, the current administration is, is pulling back, retracting government. And, I don't know where it's going to come, in the private sector, in the commercial sector, but these gaps between groups in American society need to be closed and that's for sure. Story_ID: 8479 Speaker 1: What about oral history? I'd be remiss if I didn't ask about that since we (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Critical. And that's why I admire The HistoryMakers for what they're doing here because oral history's been a vital part of the African American communities for (laughter), for decades because much of our history and heritage extending back to African society was based on oral traditions. And black people have a way of telling their stories. And this is what makes American history so fascinating because American history is a composite of multiple histories in which there are multiple voices. And these voices have a history to tell about their experience called the American experience. And we can hear that through listening to these voices. Fifty years from now we'll have this massive archive of voices telling stories about American history, American lives. And it's a vital component to even the writing of history. Scholars, writers will come to these oral history transcripts and interviews and, and pull things out of it. Because when people talk about their lives, they're going to talk about the context of their lives, the history, and what they seek, how they interpret it. And scholars and writers, journalists will put this, this together as a history, you see, right. So it plays a vital role in the writing and documentation of American history. It's, it's significant. Speaker 1: Do historians see a problem with oral history? I mean-- Speaker 2: Some do and, and most don't, yeah, yeah. Some do and, and some don't. And, and the reason for that is because historians are about objectivity and documentation. And when you, when people talk about their lives, you can embellish your life, you know. Or you can, can embellish the times, which not, which may not be accurate. But it's from the perception of that person and you have to weigh that when you write your history, your history, historical narrative. Nonetheless, it's a vital part. Give you a perfect example: During the 1930s the government does the, the slave interviews, the ex-slave interviews, which are at the Library of Congress. We have the administrative records here at the National Archives [and Records Administration], but the actual tapes are at the Library of Congress. Now, in the last twenty-five years there have been a few scholars going, looks through those tapes and write books. My advisor, PhD, mentor, and friend, Ira Berlin, has just published two books on slavery and remembering slavery based on those interviews. Now we found out a whole lot about slavery through those interviews, right, that added to the, the narrative, documentation and research on slavery. Here we have the actual people to do that. And this is the, this was one of the great benefits of the New Deal. Story_ID: 8480 Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point as your legacy? Speaker 2: Oh, oh boy. Well, I here again, my life--my professional career has been about promoting the history and culture and life of African Amerian people. And that has to do pretty much with my life and career here at the National Archives and Records Administration because the records of American history are here. And within those records is an extensice documentation of African American life, culture and history. And I have tried to make that known not only to the American public--'cause I speak to a lot of public groups--but I've also tried to make that known to the scholar community--those people who write about American history. I have a big push on scholars using the National Archives for African American historical research. 'Cause there's so much material here. I'll give you a point that I'm getting at--I've been here for almost twenty-five, twenty-six years, okay? In terms of my expertise, in terms of my knowledge of what's in these records, it's about one-fourth, which means that it's not even half of what's here. And I am a serious archivist and historian--my work, I think, reflects that. But, the point is, there's so much here, it takes quite a bit of time and effort and people and manpower efforts to get to them. And I never will, I'll be dead and gone and there's a lot of stuff I'll never see. Speaker 1: (off-camera discussion) Speaker 2: So in terms of the legacy, you know, I hope to have--and that's a fascinating question because I never saw my life and career in terms of building a legacy, but one of my colleagues, one on my managers asked me: "Walter, you're building a pretty nice legacy here." And I thought about it--this was a couple of years ago--'cause I'm building--in terms of my writings and my publications and my public outreach work, the documentary work that I've done over the years. It's really about black people and their history and these records. So if you want to call that a legacy, yes, it is a legacy that I feel very good about. I have a very unique position in American--Afro American history 'cause not only do I get the opportunity to work with federal records, documenting Afro American history, I get an opportunity to teach it at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], being an adjunct there for almost--over twenty years. So I get a lot of satisfaction from these sort of--I don't want to call it bipolar, but I'm enjoying the best of two worlds--the academic, in terms of an adjunct professorship at Howard and an archivist and a subject specialist at the National Archives and Records Administration. And it's a wonderful job to have. So, yeah, I think that's pretty much my legacy. When I'm dead and gone, people will still be reading some of my stuff. Story_ID: 8481 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As one who contributed to the writing, the publication, the scholarship of African American history. And interestingly enough, because I'm not in the aca--in the academy full-time--because most of our great scholars and thinkers are really in the academy. There are many in public institutions, museums and think tanks, you know, this--this is where our intellectual capital really is, in these kinds of institutions, people who make the study of history, culture and politics their life, they get an opportunity to write and talk about it, yeah---that's, you know, that's where I'm at. Yeah. I want to stay in this area. I really want to continue and broaden our historical consciousness--our thinking about history, our history. 'Cause history is a little box in most people's mind. And they don't understand the dynamics and the power and the power of history. For example, I've always had a strong identity in who and what I was--I really had no problems with my identity and the reason why that came about was because I became a serious student of history. And you can't help from when you learn history, and your own history, even in taking it down to the level of family history, you can't help from developing a strong sense of identity in who and what you are...