 Story_ID: 614951 Speaker 1: Course it's myself, [HistoryMaker] Larry Huggins, Mayor Harold Washington, Glenn Harston [Glenn M. Harston II], and former Alderman Allan Streeter. The event was at a fundraiser for Alderman Streeter in which Harold Washington attended. It was about in 1985, which was held at the, the, the Pick Congress Hotel [Congress Plaza Hotel, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: In this picture here is a picture with myself, Alderman, Latasha Thomas [Latasha R. Thomas], Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley], in which we do a Christmas in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. It's an event that started twelve years ago with Alderman Terry Peterson, and every year what I do is get together a lot of the developers and contractors and we raise money to make sure that the kids of Englewood have a very merry and joyous Christmas. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE); When was this taken? Speaker 1: That picture was taken 2004. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Let's stop this for a second. Go ahead with this photo now. Speaker 1: Well, this picture here you have [HistoryMaker] Elzie Higginbottom, Mayor Daley and, of course, myself and this is at the mayor's Interfaith Breakfast that he'd do every year for the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], and this, of course, was taken at the Conrad Hilton Hotel [Hilton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] in 2005. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture with, (laughter), of course with Mayor Daley and myself, and this is at the mayor's office. We did the Chicago Football Classic like every year and we meet with the mayor and this was taken in 2002 at city hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: And, of course, this is a picture here, you start with Connie Williams, who worked for the Cosmopolitan Chamber [Cosmopolitan Chamber of Commerce, Chicago, Illinois]; Ray Motor [ph.], who is a contractor; and, of course, myself, and this is an event that took place in about 1987. It's a Bronx hardhat award, in which the year before that I was the awardee, and just as in '86 [1986], I was the awardee and in '87 [1987], Ray Motor received an award. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Of course, this picture here is [HistoryMaker] Larry Huggins, Glenn Harston, Mayor Eugene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], C.F. Moore, Charlie Moore [Charles F. Moore, Sr.], and, help me out Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson]. Speaker 1: Okay, sorry, hold on. Speaker 2: As well as-- Speaker 1: We're getting a glare on that one too, because it's curled. It has to be-- Speaker 2: You mean over here? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Oh, that's, wait a minute--is that-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's him. Speaker 2: Wait a minute. No, I'm like, like--the accountant (laughter). Speaker 1: You're just like I am. The accountant, um-- Speaker 2: Yeah that's, wait, wait, I got it--he's on the board of the University of Illinois now. Speaker 1: And the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois], too. Speaker 2: Scott Stalverson [ph.]. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: Favors because there's a picture with Ollie North [Oliver North] and myself and that was taken in 1991 with a fundraiser that Republicans had for Ollie North. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Before you put the next one up, put that last one up one more time. Speaker 2: This one? Speaker 1: The one with Mr. McKeever, and just state that that's Mr. McKeever one more time. I want to make sure we've got that. Speaker 2: On the end is [HistoryMaker] Lester McKeever. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Good. Okay. Moving on. Speaker 2: This is a picture that was taken, of course, there's Glenn Harston of Black Contractors United, myself, and Rufus Taylor of Black Contractors United. The year was about 1988, in which I was the recipient of the (unclear) award from Black Contractors United. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: This is one of my favorite photos. Of course, you have Rufus Taylor on the end, President John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.], Congressman Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis], Glenn Harston, Alderman Beavers [William M. Beavers], Mayor Harold Washington, Eugene Sawyer, Bill Henry [William C. Henry], and of course, myself, Larry Huggins. This picture was taken in about 1986, at a Black Contractors United dinner that was also at the Conrad Hilton Hotel. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right. Do you have any more large ones, Julieanna? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Okay. Speaker 1: I think if we kind of stick with the big ones, then we'll-- Speaker 2: Okay. This one. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Of course, this picture you've got William Garth [William Garth, Sr.], Larry Huggins, and Don King when Don King was here in 2006 to promote a fight at the United Center [Chicago, Illinois]. This picture was taken at Army and Lou's restaurant [Chicago, Illinois] at 75th [Street] and Eberhart [Avenue]. Speaker 2: Everett Rand, Governor Blagojevich [Rod Blagojevich], of course, and Larry Huggins. This picture was taken in 2006, for the eighth annual Chicago Football Classic held at Soldiers Field [sic. Soldier Field, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: How many football classics have there been now? Speaker 1: Ten. Speaker 2: Have you been involved with all of them since-- Speaker 1: Yes, we're the original founders of the football classic. Speaker 2: Larry Huggins, Senator Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], Alderman William Beavers, state representative Barbara Flynn Currie, Congressman Jesse Jackson, Jr. [HistoryMaker Jesse Jackson, Jr.]. This picture was taken in 2002, and it's for the dedication of a Metra station at 71st [Street] and Jeffery [Avenue], in which Congressman Jackson was responsible for getting funding for this station; of course, I'm a Metra board member. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Good. Speaker 2: Joe Williams [Joseph Williams], Ross Williams [ph.], Father Michael Pfleger, Larry Huggins, and my daughter, Maya Huggins [Maya Huggins Garcia]. This is an event that was held in 2006 at the Gibsons restaurant [Gibsons Bar and Steakhouse, Chicago, Illinois], in which we are donating a fifteen thousand dollar check to Father Michael Pfleger, and it was for the Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] victims. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Oh, careful. You've got a cable under that. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 1981. My wife, Virlynne Huggins myself, and Murray Brown, who was partner in Riteway Painting and Decorating company [Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. We were the winners of the Bronx hard head award for (unclear) contractors' division. Speaker 1: Very good. Next. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my son Alvin Lowe, former Congressman Gus Savage [HistoryMaker Gus Savage], my wife Virlynne Huggins and, of course, myself and it was taken at my office for a fundraiser that we did for Congressman Savage. Speaker 1: I want you to take that one out because I wouldn't know who all those people are. Speaker 2: How about this one? You don't have to name all the people. Speaker 1: Okay, starting with the left is Steve Simms [ph.], William Garth, Larry Huggins, Father Pfleger, Terry Peterson, John Bonds, Mr. Muhammad, and of course, guy on the end, I can't recognize who he is, but it was an event that was held as a fundraiser for the Munir Muhammad show that was at the Muslim ballroom [Salaam Restaurant and Bakery, Chicago, Illinois] there at 79th [Street] off of Halsted [Street]. Speaker 2: Let's see. How about this one? Speaker 1: I don't know who any of those people are in that picture but-- Speaker 2: Do you know the occasion? Speaker 1: Yes, that was an award I got from the City of Chicago [Illinois] and the Roadbuilders [Illinois Road and Transportation Builders Association] as one of the contractors of the year for the work that we did on the Lake Shore Drive rehabilitation project. Speaker 2: Did we do these already? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Now that looks like a--yes. We're done. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, tell us about this one now. Speaker 2: It's a picture with myself and my project manager, Ziwa McBride [ph.]. At the time, we were the general contractors for the new Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] along with Walsh Construction Company [The Walsh Group, Chicago, Illinois]. This is at the beginning of the excavation project, excavation for the project. Speaker 1: Larry is this what you're talking about? Speaker 2: Right. This is pictures with Joe Cole, or Bailey Cole, myself, Ray Bailey with R.S. Bailey and Associates [R.S. Bailey and Associates, Inc.], and my partner, Al Williams. This was taken in about 1985, and it was the first time that three African American contractors joint ventured to do a major project out of O'Hare Airport [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], which was the new international, the new United [United Airlines] terminal. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Julieanna, if you would also rotate ninety degrees--yeah, because the photo itself is horizontally shaped and that wouldn't come-- Speaker 2: So who were the three? Speaker 1: Joe Cole and Raymond Bailey, and myself and Al Williams. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. And that's the United Center-- Speaker 1: The new United terminal. Speaker 2: Terminal, okay. Neither was built ten years ago, right? Speaker 1: In '83 [1983], '84 [1984], right. Speaker 2: Right, right, right. Under Harold Washington. Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: (Unclear). Speaker 1: Well, you know what, I think- Speaker 2: No. Was Turner Construction [Turner Construction Company, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah, Turner was the-Turner was the general contractor, 1986, Harold Washington was the-- Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he was elected in '82 [1982], right-- Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 614952 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer, and I'd like, and you're gonna be just looking at me and talking. Don't pay attention to the camera, but I want you to start out by stating your name for us and spelling it, and giving us your date of birth, let's start there. Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMakers] Larry Huggins, L-A-R-R-Y, H-U-G-G-I-N-S. Speaker 1: There's a middle initial, A. Speaker 2: Well, my name is Larry Andrew Huggins, L-A-R-R-Y; Andrew, A-N-D-R-E-W; Huggins, H-U-G-G-I-N-S. Speaker 1: And date of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth is February 5, '50 [1950]. Speaker 1: Okay, and I want to have today's date. Speaker 2: The date is February 4th, 19--it's February the 4th, 2008. Speaker 1: And I want to have our location, which is The HistoryMakers [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah. We are The HistoryMakers, located at 1900 South Michigan [Avenue]. Speaker 1: And, I would like to have your occupation. Speaker 2: General contractor, developer, and probably poli- political activist. Story_ID: 614953 Speaker 1: I'd like to, we ask five People magazine-ish questions of every one, short answers, you know, you know, just short answers. I'd like to have your favorite food. Speaker 2: My favorite food? A good steak. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summertime. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: The Bahamas. Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying has got to be, at the end of--at the end of the day. Story_ID: 614954 Speaker 1: So we're gonna get started. That looks nice. The blue does look nice. Tomorrow is, is your birthday and it's election day. Speaker 2: Absolutely (laughter). Speaker 1: So, okay, we're gonna get started. I want to start out by asking you, can you give me your mother's name and what you know of her growing up and her background? Speaker 2: Well, my mother's maiden name was Mary Elizabeth Hightower [Mary Hightower Huggins], and she grew up in Atlanta, Georgia, we grew up, and, basically my mother worked and in a laundry. She was the oldest of a family of six and she was just a loving and caring person that raised us, well of course she had four sons, and she raised us as a single parent mother and she was just my inspiration. She was my heart and I think she was the one that taught me about entrepreneurship and trying to just live a good life and live a righteous life. Speaker 1: Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins], let's, what do you know, though, about her growing up? Did she talk to you much about growing up in Atlanta and was it in Atlanta properly or was it, you know, a small town outside Atlanta? Speaker 2: She grew up in Atlanta and one of the things that she always talked about is that, you know, my grandmother [Ruby Hightower] who was basically very light and straight hair, and the fact that coming up as a kid because my mother was fairly light, you know, she was, they were called half-breeds, and you know, the fact that my grandfather [Andrew Hightower] died at an early age and my grandmother basically took and raised my mother and her sisters and brothers. That was a close knit family so it was a situation where, I think, she made us look at the importance of family and, of course, growing up in the South in Atlanta, you know, there was racism that sometimes some of the things that my mother experienced coming up as a kid that she told us about and, but, like I say, she was a kind, loving person that, very quiet, you know, and I think that's where I got some of my demeanor from because I don't talk a lot, but when she said something, you know, she really and truly meant it and she was the backbone for my family. Speaker 1: Was there any story that you remember her telling you that sort of sticks with you? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's like they say in the, in the South when she told us about the time that, you know, kids picked at her because of the fact that she was very light and you know, she told us that, you know, there were some things that, you know, coming up as kids you're gonna experience; racism, and basically just taught us how, how to deal with it. Story_ID: 614955 Speaker 1: Now, do you, on your mother's side, how far back do you know, do you go? Do--you don't have knowledge of, you mention your grandparents. Do you know any further back than your grandparents? Speaker 2: No, I don't. Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have much experience, you know, exposure growing up with your grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes, well actually it was just really my grandmother [Ruby Hightower]. My grandfather [Andrew Hightower] was killed when, at, at a young age. I think my mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] was only about eighteen or nineteen then, when I was born. I never had opportunity to meet my grandfather. So, it was only my grandmother that basically had an influence in my life. Speaker 1: Did you have- Speaker 2: And my great-grandmother. Speaker 1: Oh, your great-grandmother, okay. So you did go back further then. Speaker 2: Yes, actually, well--no, actually that was my father's mother who basically kind of helped raise me and my brothers; you know, since my mother went to work she was the one that babysat us and, you know, she was very strict. If we were supposed to have dinner at a certain time, we had to be there and if we didn't, you know, it was that belt that came out or that tree limb that she would basically take and make sure that we did right so, as I tell people, you know, that it was the influence of my mother and my grandmother that, that actually raised me, me and my, me and my three brothers [Julian Huggins, Jr., Anthony Huggins, and Gary Huggins]. Story_ID: 614956 Speaker 1: Now your father, what was, do you know, do you know anything about your father? Speaker 2: My father? Oh yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give his name? Speaker 2: My father's name was Julian Huggins, Sr. Of course, you know my father also grew up in Atlanta [Georgia]. That's where he met my mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] at and, of course, they were married when my mother was fourteen and, of course, when I was born my mother was eighteen at the time. My father worked for the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service]. He moved here in Chicago [Illinois] when I was about six, after my mother and him divorced, so like I say, and my father eventually worked for me; you know, so my father worked for me about fifteen years [at Riteway Huggins Construction Services, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. So, my father and I became close later in life and as I would say about my father when I look at my success, fortunately when you look at a lot of African American families when there is divorce in the family, you know, father starts another family and sometimes they have a tendency not, they forget about the first family but I always remember my father getting me a job at O'Connor Goldberg shoe store [O'Connor and Goldberg, Chicago, Illinois], and so it was his way of saying look, "I'm gonna give you a job, you know, what you've gotta do is earn your way." So it was a way of him not having me to always come and have to ask him or my mother for money. So, he really kind of taught me how to be independent, because I remember coming up as a kid, you know, I had to pay throughout. I worked at the O.G. shoe store. I remember, I always had money, so, but my favorite story about my father was that one day, one summer day, I used to go around picking up pop bottles, and I would take 'em and get the deposit at the store. My father saw me one day with these pop bottles and asked me what was I doing and I told him. He made me put the pop bottles and gave me about fifty cents but, of course, the pop bottles were probably a dollar for pop bottles because I don't know if you remember those days when you get deposits on those things so, of course, I went back and got my pop bottles and got my dollar. But he, in a way he did me a favor because when I grew up I was buying my own clothes when I was in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] because, as I said, my mother was a single parent and I became very independent, you know, and so I always had money in my pocket and you remember as a teenager, I had an uncle that used to come in here and borrow money and he would pay it back. So, the good thing about my father, like I say, is that in the end he was there for us and he taught me a lot. Speaker 1: Now, did he tell you any stories about growing up in Atlanta? Did he share anything later in life, any stories like that of his childhood? Speaker 2: You know, he, except for the fact that, and then again, I think when I look at my mother's place and my father's life, they both grew up being raised strictly by their mothers, you know, so it was, they, they had similar backgrounds. Story_ID: 614957 Speaker 1: Give your siblings' names and their birth order. Speaker 2: The oldest is Julian Huggins, Jr. He was born January the 19th, 1946. I had a sister, Betty [Betty Huggins (ph.)]. She's deceased. She was born in December 4th, 1948, and then along came [HistoryMaker] Larry Huggins, and I was born February 5th, 1950, and then there was Gary Huggins, who was born November 8th, 1954, and of course, the youngest is Anthony Huggins, who was born January the 13th, 1957. Story_ID: 614958 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: My earliest memories of growing up? You know, really, you know, back in Atlanta [Georgia] during the, of course, my favorite time of year was always Christmas, you know, and my mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] used to take us out and, you know, we would go meet Santa [Santa Claus] and always wanted to know what we wanted for Christmas and everything that we wanted was always there. So, and you know playing baseball--I was really into sports, so I've always loved it. You know, anybody talks about playing football or baseball, anything but basketball, I was always there, so I think Christmastime was my favorite time of the year and the fact that I'd like to say that my mother, who was an inspiration for me coming up as a kid, was always there to support us as, as a child. Speaker 1: But your earliest memory, was it a Christmas? What was your earliest memory if you could take yourself back? Speaker 2: Take myself back? I guess maybe when I was in school [at Wesley Avenue School, Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter). It was kindergarten. You know, kindergarten, I think I was in a play and trying to go on stage and memorize the words in the play and, you know, trying to get ready for that and, you know, the fact that my family was there in the audience and I got up there and did all right and then I got nervous (laughter), you know, but I think that was my earliest memory is about, being in kindergarten being in school and going to that play. Story_ID: 614959 Speaker 1: Can you describe family life, because you said your parents [Mary Hightower Huggins and Julian Huggins, Sr.] separated or divorced when you were six, right? Speaker 2: Correct, yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And you're the third, so at that point you have an older brother [Julian Huggins, Jr.], older sister [Betty Huggins (ph.)], and then there's you. You're the third. Was that, was that right? Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct. Speaker 1: Okay. So, can you describe family life? What was, you know, the street that, do you remember the street you lived on in Atlanta [Georgia]? Do you remember anything about that or what the-- Speaker 2: I remember, you know, we grew up in the projects. It was a development off of the Northside Drive. I think it was the Grady, the Grady avenue apartments, and, like I say, I just, you know, remember my sister died when she got burnt in a fire when I was born, you know, so I really did not get an opportunity to really know my sister, and my mother always tells the story that if it wasn't for my aunt, who I was counted the favorite, not that I was the favorite but my aunt just kind of embraced me. You know, she took me home with her and if it wasn't for that, you know, I probably would have been in the same bedroom when my sister passed, but I, when I grew up like I say the closeness that me and my four [sic. three] brothers had, you know, coming up as kids. You know, we were taught how to be, you know really independent, and like I say, my thing was sports. I used to love to play sports. That was what I did. Speaker 1: So now, your mother is raising the four of you, right, at that point as a single parent at this point. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Do you remember at all when your parents separated? Was that traumatic for you? Speaker 2: Not really, because you know, my grandmother, who was also kind of in the household with us, so it really had no impact on me as a kid. It was only when later on in life that I really missed that, that father figure, so it didn't have an impact because the end of the day-because I had two strong black women that, that was there to support me and my brothers. Story_ID: 614960 Speaker 1: Now, so let's describe what family life you have. What--your brothers, who, how are you different in personalities? Speaker 2: Personalities? Speaker 1: There's Julian [Julian Huggins, Jr.], I mean, what is he like and what are you like, and then, you know, just-- Speaker 2: The personalities, I gotta tell you Julian is the oldest. He's, he's more of the sophisticated one, you know, in the family. He's the, he lives a suburban lifestyle. He would be, if I were to describe my brother, he would be more of the Republican and I would be more of the Democrat, you know? Gary [Gary Huggins], who is right up under me, he is the, I think he's the brain of the family; the one that knows everything, good writer, but you know I think he's just too smart for his own good. But, you know, any subject matter he can talk about but, just like anything else, sometimes the, you have a tendency to go astray, but all of my brothers have grown up to live a real good life and never been in jail. Now, the baby Anthony, Tony [Anthony Huggins], he's the one that is more family oriented, you know raised, when he graduated from high school he went to the [U.S.] Air Force, got his, became a career officer, got his degree while he was in the Air Force, so I would say he's the one that really and truly loves family more so than any of us. So, I guess that would describe my brothers but, you know, all of us have, have done well in life and, like I said, that probably has more to do with how I was raised. Story_ID: 614961 Speaker 1: Did you have a nickname for your grandmother? At all, or what did you call her grandma or grand- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My grandmother was called Wowie [ph.] (laughter), you know, and I'm trying to think of, I think it was my oldest brother [Julian Huggins, Jr.] that gave her that nickname. It just basically stuck and my other grandmother was called Ma Male [ph.]. I don't know how she got that but that's what we called, so in the South one was Wowie and one was Ma Male. Story_ID: 614998 Speaker 1: I want to talk to you about, you know, growing up in Atlanta [Georgia] and I would like you, you know, you said you were in the, you know, the Grady apartments, but I want you to describe to me what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood. Speaker 2: Sights, smells-- Speaker 1: You can take them, each one. Just sort of take yourself back. Speaker 2: Sights, smells, and sounds. Okay. You want me to talk about it now? (Laughter) Let's see. A sight. The sight would be, you know, where we live at. That was like a little wooded area and one of the things I used to enjoy was going back and going through the woods, looking at the birds, and had a little creek and you know, we used to go and chase snakes and look for snakes and things like that, so that's what I always enjoyed about Atlanta, even though you were in the city to a certain extent, you were kind of like out in the country too. One of the smells I always enjoyed in Atlanta is that they used to have a market and they used to make, like in Jew town [Maxwell Street, Chicago, Illinois] where they had polish sausage, the thing in Atlanta used to be the, the hamburgers and hotdogs, but the hotdogs with the, that's what you call the, the thing where they put the little crust over it and when you were going to the marketplace, I'm trying to think of the name of those hot dogs, but when you go into this little marketplace-- Speaker 1: Po dogs? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Corn dogs. Speaker 1: Corn dogs (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Corn dogs, yeah. The corn dogs; I mean, he's had a market where the people would dip 'em off and fry the corn dogs and we would just line up to buy those corn dogs, so that was the one smell that I always enjoyed, you know, a kind of outdoor, restaurant (unclear) kind of a theme, and what was the last? Speaker 1: Sights. Sounds. Speaker 2: Sounds. I think the sounds of Atlanta would also end up being the voices that you would hear in, in that marketplace where, you know, it was where a lot of people went and everybody had a good time, you know, so it was the laughter, you know, the joy of, of us coming together. So I think that would be it, you know, the sounds of people just enjoying themselves, having a good time. Story_ID: 614999 Speaker 1: Do you remember summer nights you know, in Atlanta [Georgia], or summers at all? Does--I know you said that Christmas was your favorite holiday. Speaker 2: Well, you know Atlanta was always hot, you know. It was always hot in Atlanta you know, and during the daytime when, that old expression, you could see the sun dancing in the street. So, at nighttime, then again, you know you could always look up in the sky and you could always see the stars, so even though you were in the city. But Atlanta was kind of a peaceful place. You know, that's the one thing that I always remembered about Atlanta, big--it was peaceful. Summer nights, we would all, the neighbors would always get together on Fridays. We always had a fish fry and everybody looked at Friday to go to the fish fry. So, everybody would get together and fry fish and yeah I remember those, those, those nights, and we, the kids used to look forward to them, fish fries. Story_ID: 615000 Speaker 1: What were you as a young, like as a young boy? How would you describe yourself? Were you, you know, you said you were, you had mentioned earlier you were like your mother [Mary Hightower Huggins]. You're a man of little words but sometimes people are quiet and they've got a lot going on in their head. Were you rambunctious, were you mischievous, were you, what were you like? Speaker 2: Well, I think I would describe myself as a kid as a, just like anything, you know, I got into trouble but I always thought about the repercussions of if I got caught what would happen. So, I guess you could say that I came up as a kind of a good kid, you know, kind of the one that always thought about what I did before I did it, even though I did get into a lot of devilment. But my mother once said that of all her kids, she always knew that some kind of way that I would end up being successful because I had a mind of my own when I was young, and I could always come back and give my opinion of whatever it was but, then again, growing up like I say, just, as a kid we were into sports and always getting with the guys in the neighborhood and we just hung out. Speaker 1: So that, let's talk about that now. You would, what age are we talking about when you're talking about getting with the guys and, you know, hanging out. Speaker 2: Oh, I mean it was between the ages of, you know, from kindergarten up until, until I left when I was about ten (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Atlanta [Georgia]? Story_ID: 615001 Speaker 1: And now where did you go to, what, what was your elementary school name? Speaker 2: Wesley Avenue School [Atlanta, Georgia] was the elementary school that I, that I attended. Speaker 1: Okay. And would you walk to school from Grady? Is that how you got there? Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. So it's all, it's a segregated community, right? Was it, Grady was, what side of Atlanta [Georgia] was that? Was it south? Speaker 2: Southeast. Speaker 1: Southeast? Speaker 2: Southeast, right. Speaker 1: Southeast, okay. And then so you, did you have any teachers that you particularly liked or were you focused on school or were you not focused on school or were you-- Speaker 2: Well, when it comes to Atlanta I can't really recall any of the teachers, only when I got here to Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --that's when that became of importance, I guess, to me. I do remember, as I said, when I was in fourth grade I really did not want to come to Chicago and got into a little fight at school and the teacher asked me to bring my mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] in which, being smart, I told them that I can't because my mother's in Chicago. I did not know at the time because my aunt was not my legal guardian, my mother would had to have given up that right and my mother refused to give up that right. I had, they allowed me to finish up the school year but I had to come to Chicago. That's why I ended up in Chicago, so if it wasn't for the fact that I got into a little trouble at school, I probably would have grown up in Atlanta. Speaker 1: Now what were you doing in school that you in trouble, do you remember the incident? Speaker 2: Yes, I do. It was a situation where, you know, you have bullies in school and bullies want to pick at you and, I guess, it was a situation where he had picked at me a little bit too much and when I retaliated, I retaliated. So, I mean I was just really kind of like defending myself. Speaker 1: Do you remember the bully's name? Speaker 2: Yeah, his name is Scott [ph.]. (Laughter) I do remember that (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And-- Story_ID: 615002 Speaker 1: Now, at this time that you got in trouble, were other bro- was your older, was Julian [Huggins' brother, Julian Huggins, Jr.] living here? I mean, or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, everybody was in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: I was the only one-- Speaker 1: You were the only--now why, how, did you stay with your grandmother? Speaker 2: No, at the time I was living with my aunt, you know, like I was saying I became my aunt's favorite nephew and so, when my mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] decided to move to Chicago, I asked my aunt if I could stay because I didn't want to leave, and my aunt convinced my mother to allow me to stay and it wasn't until I got in trouble that my mother said now, "Larry's [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins] got to come back to Chicago." Speaker 1: Now your aunt, what was her name? Speaker 2: Anna [ph.]. Speaker 1: Anna, okay. And was she, why did you like staying with her? Why didn't you want to go to Chicago? Speaker 2: Well, you know, then again I mean, I was comfortable with where I was at, you know. I had friends. My aunt had a son and a daughter, they were my cousins, and we were close. So, my aunt used to always come by and pick me up and take me places and, so she was my favorite. You know, she was my favorite aunt. So, when my mother said she was moving I went to my aunt and told her that I didn't wanna, that I did not want to go and see if I could stay and she said yes. So, she and my mother got together and they, she allowed me to stay. Story_ID: 615003 Speaker 1: So when you come, your brothers [Julian Huggins, Jr., Gary Huggins, and Anthony Huggins] have been living here a year (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Your, your mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] and your brothers have been living here, your. Are they changed, do you come with a lot of anticipation or, you know, is the city, I mean, it's a totally different city than what you're used to at that point. Speaker 2: It was. You know, I mean I could actually tell you the story. My aunt tells it all the time. I used to keep, I used to have some fish and I put my fish in a jar and we came up on the train and I remember looking at the fish and I dropped the fish and it rolled up under the, up on the seat. Of course, I got up from the train and ended up looking for the fish and going all over the train and the conductor caught me and asked me what I was looking for (laughter) and of course he made me come back and when I tell the story, when I get here to Chicago [Illinois], now I don't know what you know about fish. These are fish and they have to live in warm water, because they're like tropical fish and I remember I was ten years old, I got here, was going, after I filled it with water, put my fish in cold water, and he died. So after all that trouble of trying to get the fish here, so I guess I've always been kind of like an animal lover, a good natured person but, now, when I got here to Chicago, my mother lived on 60th [Street] and Union [Avenue] at the time, two flat building and, of course, Chicago was, was just a big city. So, it was entirely different than what I had experienced in, in Atlanta [Georgia] and, of course, I, I didn't want to stay but had no choice in the matter. At that particular point in time I had to. Story_ID: 615004 Speaker 1: So what school did you go--so that's in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Is that in Englewood, right? Speaker 2: Beale, Beale, Beale Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], which was located at 59th [Street] and Peoria [Street] at the time. Speaker 1: Okay. And your brother, your oldest brother, Julian [Julian Huggins, Jr.], at this point, he's still in junior high, too, right? He's, he's like how many years older than you? Speaker 2: He's four. Speaker 1: He's four. Speaker 2: So that's right, he was, I think he had just graduated and is going to, no he didn't graduate at the time-- Speaker 1: No, he would have been fourteen. Speaker 2: Right, yeah. He was a-- Speaker 1: Fourteen, fifteen. Speaker 2: No. Let's see, I was in fifth grade when I came and he had just, I think he had just graduated and going to--I think he was a freshman in high school if I'm not mistaken. Speaker 1: Do you know where he went to high school? Speaker 2: He went to Tilden [Tilden Technical High School; Edward Tilden Career Community Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: He went to, okay, okay. So now, what is, tell me of your time, what was that block that you grew up on? What was it like? You said you were in a two flat. Who was in the other unit? Speaker 2: Well, the first place we stayed was at 59th and Union [Avenue]. I can't remember, we lived on the second floor. There was another family that lived on the third. It was a three flat; there was a family that lived on the ground floor. I can't remember their names, but I do recall when we moved to 943 W. 59th Street, there was a family called the Aberhardts [ph.], and the Aberhardts lived on the third floor. We lived on the second floor, and there was another family called the Drakes [ph.] that lived on the first floor and, as a matter of fact, the Aberhardts and I, we're still friends today. You know, it's a friendship that stands about forty, forty-seven years and if I tell the story about the Aberhardts, they were, they had a family that had a summer home up in Lake Ivanhoe. Lake Ivanhoe was the only place where most African Americans had summer homes at the time up in the Lake Geneva [Wisconsin] area. That's where they would go and during the summer months, I will always remember my mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] allowing me to go up on the weekends, but then they would take me up there and I used to sit on the porch waiting for the Aberhardts to take me up there, which is something I always said I wanted to do if I ever got to the point where I could afford a second home. That's why we're back, because now I do have a second home up in Lake Geneva. But, the Aberhardts were a family that the mother was a barber, father was a barber, mother was a beautician and, of course, their kids went to Catholic schools. You know, we went to public schools. So, they were kind of like an inspiration for us. You know, we always wanted to be up, grow up and be like the Aberhardts. Story_ID: 615005 Speaker 1: Growing up on Union [Avenue], you know there was a time when I always tell the story, you know, there was a group, when gang activity really started back in Chicago [Illinois] in the, in the early '60s [1960s]. There was the, a group called the Imperialettes [ph.], you have the group called Disciples [Gangster Disciples], you have the group called the Satan Lovers, and there was a family called the Mitchells; of course, Larry Mitchell [ph.] is now a doctor. He runs the emergency room at Roosevelt Hospital [Chicago, Illinois], but we always played baseball and because we played baseball and basketball and sports, a lot of gangs never really bothered us because, in a way, we were a gang because we kind of like stuck together as a group, but I remember, you know, when I used to go to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois] as a freshman. You know, you--I had to end up going and just going to school and ended up going through about three different gangs. But, they never bothered us. We never had a problem. So, that's why I tell our kids today, just because you live in a certain area doesn't mean you have to get involved with gang activity, but it really started back in the '60s [1960s] when the gangs really and truly started growing. Speaker 2: Right, did you, so no one tried to recruit you or no one forced you, or you didn't get in any fights in school or anything that, you know, where it was one gang against the other. Speaker 1: You know, no one really tried. Like I say, we to a certain extent, we were our full gang. We were the group that we kind of hung out, we did things together and we knew everybody, you know, so usually we would be at the playground strike out, you know, playing football, go to the park, so we were allowed to go through gang territory, because we were not affiliated with one gang or the other, but I can never remember really trying to be recruited. I can always remember getting into a fight with one of the gang members, and because of the fact that they didn't allow anybody else to jump on me, so it was just me and the one guy. But really and truly, never had a problem. You know, I can remember being at the playgrounds and the gangs would show up and they would start shooting and everybody would run, but we never ever got into situations where I was forced to have to try and join a gang. Story_ID: 615006 Speaker 1: What is influencing you during this time, because, well, you know we have, you arrived here at, when you were ten, and then, you know, we were starting to talk about when you were a freshman in high school, but in high school didn't you end up going to Washburne--that's later. Speaker 2: That's after I graduated-- Speaker 1: After you graduated, okay, okay. So, let me ask, so what is influencing you, 'cause like who are the big teams, you know, sports teams in the city at the time--you're at Englewood [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: I'm at Englewood, yeah, but really I was, like I say, because we played baseball, the White Sox [Chicago White Sox]. Speaker 1: Mainly baseball. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The White Sox were, were my favorite team. There was a coach, you know. We played at Ogden Park [Chicago, Illinois]. There was a lady by the name of Mrs. Dern and Mr. Dern [ph.], and we would always meet at the Derns'. They live at 61st [Street] and Eberhart [Avenue], and we played at Ogden Park, so what I did is that, I mean baseball became something that during the summer months that we always played, so if we weren't at the playground playing strike out or playing touch football, we were out at the park, you know, so I belonged to a baseball team and I was pretty good at that. As a matter of fact, I was a good pitcher, a good first baseman. I could hit the ball so people would always come just to see me hit home runs. So, really I think sports is what really and truly, that was my love, and the only reason I think I didn't excel in sports really didn't play a lot in high school was because, like I said, my father [Julian Huggins, Sr.] made me get a job. So I got used to working and had money in my pocket and believe it or not, while I was in school I had my clothes made, tailor made, and there was a placed called R and B's [ph.], that was up on 64th [Street] and Halsted [Street], so I used to go there and buy my knit sweaters. I became a shoe salesman at O'Connor and Goldberg [Chicago, Illinois]. I don't know if you remember O.G. shoe store, but I had a routine. I would, I was a stock boy on Tuesdays and Wednesdays, and on-- Speaker 1: How old were you at this time? Speaker 2: I was a teenager. I was about sixteen. Speaker 1: Sixteen, okay. Speaker 2: And I became, I became a salesperson on Thursdays and Saturdays, but I could sell shoes and I would get a commission, so I mean I would end up making about fifty, sixty dollars a week while I was in high school, but, like I say that's kind of like how I became an entrepreneur, kind of like how I stayed out of trouble because I always had a mission. There was always something that I had to do. But going back to Ms. Dern, you know, she planned baseball. That really kept a lot of us out of trouble, and the fact that, you know, because we were good people, we developed a reputation. So just like a basketball player, if a guy's good at playing basketball, everybody knows about it and everybody will want to be like him. So, that was kind of like with me coming up and the fact that because I was into sports and I was good at it, you know, didn't have any problems with the gangs. Story_ID: 615007 Speaker 1: In high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] you were, you know, we had, I'd asked you about any teacher that influenced you and you said, you know, not, not in Atlanta [Georgia] but you remember, you know, maybe in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: That was Mrs. Easton [ph.], who was my English teacher. Remember Dr. Byrd [HistoryMaker Manford Byrd, Jr.], who was the superintendent of Chicago Public Schools? Speaker 1: He, he was there? Speaker 2: Yeah. He was my principal at the time. And then again, Dr. Byrd, I always said Dr. Byrd when I look at me as an individual because I never got into any trouble (unclear) then again, I got into a fight one day at school, what I got from a gang that was picking at me and, of course, then again I mean I could always handle myself and even though when we went to the principal's office and Dr. Byrd, I told Dr. Byrd, well, you know, "Hawkins [ph.] is the one that started the fight and, you know, he's the one that hit me. I didn't hit him." But he said, "It doesn't matter who started the fight. It's just the idea that you were fighting in my school," and he suspended me. I always said, "Dr. Byrd, that was the best lesson that I ever could have had," and that is a fact that it doesn't make any difference who started it, just the idea that you were involved and because you were involved, I got punished. So, it taught me a lesson, you know, and that was to always try to avoid things if you can, and I always tell Dr. Byrd this story, Manford Byrd, so you know, he and I, we're still pretty close today. There was a teacher by the name of Juliet Walker [Juliet E.K. Walker], who was my African American history teacher and one of the things that, of course, I was the type of student that I wanted to do enough just to get by and she knew it, but she challenged me one day and what she said is that there was a student by the name of Michael Cooper [ph.], who was just, you know some students that are just naturally smart, just gifted, and they get A's, and she told me. She said, well, you know, "Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins], you could get an A just like Michael, but the difference between you and Michael, you really truly have to study, and if you study, you've got the ability to do that," and I remember when she said that, that really kind of bothered me, you know, but she challenged me, and at the end of the day, you know, I did study and I did get an A out of her class, and it was a lesson that I learned, you know, and that is that you can either be successful with what you do, but it's what you put into it, so it taught me a very valuable lesson and I never forgot that, so that's why I stay focused these days and it taught me that in order to be successful for me, because I wasn't gifted like Michael was, but I could accomplish just as much as Michael did and when you look at my life now and look at Michael's life now, not that Michael hasn't lived a good life, but the fact of the matter is that I've gone on to become an entrepreneur and I am what I am today, but a lot has to do with the fact that she challenged me. She made me work and that's the one thing that I will always admire her for and respect her for. Speaker 1: Now she taught you, were you in your junior year when she taught you, or freshman? Speaker 2: Actually I was in my senior year. Speaker 1: Senior year, okay. Speaker 2: I was in my senior year of high school. Speaker 1: Okay, because Juliet Walker, she teaches in, she's actually in Texas now. Speaker 2: Is she? Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. She may have been even, I wonder if she was a graduate student, because she was a protegee of [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin. She's been involved with this project, that's why I know. Dr. Juliet Walker, right? Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: And Manford Byrd's been very helpful to us too here. Story_ID: 615008 Speaker 1: What else is going on, like what things are influencing you, you know, at this time in your life. You know, obviously you're interested in girls, I bet (laughter) and you (unclear) any young red blooded man, but, I mean, what other things are influencing you? Are you, that was really, WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] was twenty-four hours then, right, and so would [HistoryMaker] Herb Kent, would you have known he was doing sock hops and things like that I think back then, or who would, I mean, I may be coming up with the wrong names, but-- Speaker 2: Who was influencing me at that particular point in time? Well, I mean, we did a lot in those days. You know, always, always loved music so, you know, when you talk about Stevie Wonder, Marvin Gaye and all of those individuals, I'm trying to think of a person that was, that really had an impact on me. Speaker 1: But Motown [Motown Records], so Motown is up. You know, there's the Civil Rights Movement going on, I mean, I'm just wondering as a young black person put things, you know, because sometimes we think of, you know, we're exposed to things, sometimes we're not. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think it was during the, well, when you talk about the fact that when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came here back during the time that I was, there was, that I was in high school [Englewood High School, Chicago, Illinois] and I always remember when he was talking about marching over there in Cicero [Illinois]. We used to hear a lot about those things. But, really I think it's, that's a part of my, I guess my life at the time. I don't think it was just any one particular individual that really had a big influence on me. I guess I could say that Mrs. Dern [ph.], who was my baseball manager, my mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] has always had more of an influence on me in my life, so I don't think it was anybody that was moreso outside of my family than people that I associated with that I was close to. It's just like I was saying like the Aberhardts [ph.]. You know, they were a family that kind of embraced me, and because of that I still have a relationship with the family today. When you talk about Dr. Manford Byrd [HistoryMaker Manford Byrd, Jr.], who kind of taught me that, you know, "Hey look, trouble is always gonna be here, but you can avoid trouble." When I was at school I played sports, I mean, I ran track. My coach, Wallace [Ed Wallace], used to brag on the fact, I mean, I was fast, I was good. But, you know, because I had to work I didn't, then again, put things into it the way that I really should have. But I can honestly say that the biggest single impact on me in my life was that in 1968, when I, when Martin Luther King, Jr, was assassinated, and I remember some kids coming over to the school and they asked us when King was assassinated, kids came over from Parker [Parker High School; Paul Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois] and we all left school that day and didn't come back. But, it was a career day when the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois] came over to recruit African Americans to look at careers and they were talking about because of King's assassination, Washburne Trade School [Chicago, Illinois] was gonna open up their school to African Americans and I remember going home and had a conversation with my mother at dinner one night and I was asking her, you know, the fact that these counselors came over, and were talking about an opportunity of becoming a tradesperson, and I told my mother, you know, one of the things that they were talking about was being a painter. I was telling her as I remember, every time we had to move, we always had to paint the house and I would always be one of the ones that would do the painting. And, so they talked about an opportunity of either you can go to Washburne and you can start off getting in to an apprenticeship program, where you will make, start off at two dollars and seventy some cents an hour, and by the time you get three year program and graduated, you become a journeyman. I think it was like five something. Story_ID: 615009 Speaker 1: Someone had told you about Washburne [Washburne Trade School, Chicago, Illinois] and how, you know, something about being paid two dollars, but you get $5.71, you know, an hour (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well actually it was a guy by the name of Paul Carbin [ph.], okay. He worked for the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois] and, like I said, it was that they came back for career day at Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois], and the conversation I had with my mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] in terms of whether or not to go to college or to end up going to Washburne where, you know, if it would start you out making, actually two dollars and sixty-two cents an hour and after three years you would graduate as a journeyman painter and you would be making five dollars and sixty-two cents an hour. So, as I said, you know, in our discussion as I told my mother, well here's an opportunity where I can immediately graduate, learn a trade and get a job, and I can help out with her at home or I can go to college for four years and get a college education and not knowing what was going to be there once I graduated. Of course, my mother wanted me to go to college, but she said that if this is really and truly something that you want to do, then having a trade really and truly is not bad. When I look back now, that probably, that was the best decision that I ever could have made. And of course, you know, if wasn't for, as I said assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], that opportunity would not have been there in order for me to go to Washburne, because if I went to Washburne, I think in my class, in 1968, when I went, I think that was the first time that there was an influx of a lot of African Americans being allowed into that school at one time, and that was the one thing that even some of the, our instructors basically kind of pointed that out. So, it was an opportunity for a lot of us to go to Washburne and, and get that trade. Speaker 1: So you went in what year? Nineteen-- Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. Story_ID: 615010 Speaker 1: Can you describe just from the sort of what you found there, you know, because, and describe what Washburne [Washburne Trade School, Chicago, Illinois] was? Now, there were, there are different types of technical schools, trade schools, right? Was it, there were some others around town, are there? Speaker 2: Well, Washburne at the time was the only trade school that was actually in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. I mean, so whether it was the electricians, the carpenters, the masons, the plumbers, the HVAC [heating, ventilation and air conditioning], everybody was located in that one facility, and they were there, actually up until when Harold Washington became mayor and because of some controversies that happened, all of the trade units decided to move out and be Washburne, but the problem with that is that is that, you know, when they moved and built these facilities out in the suburbs, it was hard for a lot of African American students to get to, relocate, to actually go there to those schools, so it made it difficult for a lot of us to continue to serving in these apprenticeship programs. Speaker 1: So, describe what the Washburne program was like. Speaker 2: Well, Washburne was a, of course, I went into the apprenticeship program as a painter. It was a situation where I wanted, had to have a job, so I worked for a contractor four days a week, and I went to school one day a week and we start out going on Mondays, so after every, I think 100, or every ninety days of school, you would go from Mondays to Tuesdays to Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, until eventually in that three year period you would end up graduating and, of course, as you went to different dates, your pay scale would increase, so Washburne turned out, I mean, it was good for me and that's why I basically learned a trade and became a very good painter. So Washburne is, learning a trade is something that once you learn that trade, nobody can ever take that away from you. You know, it just worked out real good for me. Story_ID: 615011 Speaker 1: Now who, who was in the class, what, what other blacks, the, you know, names you might know that were in the class that came in. You said how many, how many of you? You said it was the largest number. Speaker 2: During the time that I came, it was about ten of us. Speaker 1: And how many students were there in total? Speaker 2: In my class out of the ten, I think maybe there was about maybe thirty that were in the class. But, like I said, at the time there had never been usually at Washburne [Washburne Trade School, Chicago, Illinois] when you've got a class of thirty, there might be probably two African Americans or minorities that was in those classes, but when we came in, I mean that was the first time that you had that many African Americans that were allowed in Washburne at that time; of course, that was only in the paintings. I don't know about the carpenters or the electricians, but it was only the painters that I'm referring to. Speaker 1: Now--go on. Speaker 2: But also, I understand that even at the same time that was when guys like Glenn Harston [Glenn M. Harston] got into the Iron Workers Union [International Association of Bridge, Structural, Ornamental and Reinforcing Iron Workers Union] and a lot of the guys got into the electrical union, so it was only with the assassination of Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] that Washburne opened up its doors to minorities, or you say the unions are going to allow African American or minorities to attend Washburne. Speaker 1: Now, did you experience any racism there? Speaker 2: At Washburne? No, no. No I can, honestly say that we didn't. Speaker 1: Not even with the students, the other students? Speaker 2: The other students? Speaker 1: The other white students. Speaker 2: No, because I think when, because I think there's about ten of us and no, we didn't. I can honestly say that, at that particular time it didn't happen. Story_ID: 615012 Speaker 1: So, you graduated in 1971, '72 [1972]? Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971]. Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], and, and so why did you choose print painting to begin with? I mean, of all the trades, why? Speaker 2: Well, because I used to paint for my mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] when we moved and we had to paint the apartment. My mother would buy the paint and, you know, I would get a ladder and a stick and a roller and paintbrush and so, I had experience as a painter and I thought it was something that was a trade that I could easily learn, and I loved it. Speaker 1: Now who were you working with during the time, because you said you had to have, did you have to find your own job or did they help you find a job? Speaker 2: Well, actually Washburne [Washburne Trade School, Chicago, Illinois] actually helped me find a job, the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois]. They gave us a list of, well first of all we had to pass a test, and once we passed the test then we were referred us over to Washburne and then they gave us a list of potential employees and I started out working for a company called the American Company which, at the time, was the largest painting contractor in the city. I worked at Ecker [M. Ecker and Company, Chicago, Illinois] for about, about two years doing my apprenticeship, but what Ecker did is that they teamed me up with a guy that I became very close to, a guy by the name of Thomas Young [ph.] and Calvin Jackson, so we worked and at the time they were doing a lot of building out in the southern suburbs, which are Niles [Illinois], Palos Hills [Illinois], Homewood [Illinois], Flossmoor [Illinois], that area, but they were building homes and one of the things that we did is that they assigned myself and Calvin and Tommy and we became, we worked at, we were all apprentices, but we, they put a brush in my hand and taught me how to spray paint and taught me how to stain woodwork, and I became and we were doing the work really as some of the journeymen would. Here I was making two dollars and sixty-two cents an hour and the journeymen at the time were making about five dollars and some cents an hour, and I remember once my superintendent telling him that, "If you got me doing the work of a journeyman, you should, you know, I need a raise," and I remember the superintendent saying well, you know, "Your raise is based upon how many days you've been in school and Washburne would tell us when you have qualified for a raise." So, what I did because I remember I was telling you I had an experience as a salesman at O.G. shoe store [O'Connor and Goldberg, Chicago, Illinois] so, of course, in the wintertime, they had us going out working out of the suburbs, so I quit and went downtown and I was selling shoes during the winter, but I always went to school, so I still stayed with Washburne and then, of course, you know, my superintendent called me up and he gave me the raise, so I think I was one of the few apprentices that got, that was getting paid more than a pay scale, because it still goes back to what I told you about Juliet Walker [Juliet E.K. Walker]. Whatever you do, be the best at it, and even though I was an apprentice, I was doing the work as, of course, as a journeyman painter and really, I think when I graduated from Washburne in 1971, I was just such a good tradesman, and even though I was an apprentice, I was actually running work as a foreman and even though I would go to work and skip school that one day a week, I would still tell my journeyman painters what I wanted them to do and when I got back, they had to do it. So, it was like I say, Washburne, going to Washburne was a real good experience for me, and really and truly I, that's probably one of the reasons why I went into business for myself. Story_ID: 615013 Speaker 1: Now, what did you learn there about painting and, you know, because we learn things sometimes early in life you know, but about jobs and painting, or how to price a job or a technique. What were the things that you learned? Speaker 2: What they did at Washburne [Washburne Trade School, Chicago, Illinois] is first of all they taught you how to properly do everything from brushing, rolling, spray painting, wallpaper hanging. They taught you how to read blueprints. They also had courses in estimating, but once you got in the field you really had to take what they taught you and really basically take and apply it so, I mean, when you graduated from one of those trade schools, you know, you knew everything that you needed to know really about that trade, and that's why it takes almost three years because you actually learn things in phases and that's why I tell anybody, you know, you can, if you're gonna really become a tradesperson, it's better to serve an apprenticeship first because once you've gone through that apprenticeship, you know everything you need to know about that trade and if you want to go into business, you are better prepared to be a business person because you served that apprenticeship. Speaker 1: So, you apprentice, and then you're a journeyman and then what is the, are there other levels? Speaker 2: No. Once you, there's apprenticeship, and then you're a journeyman and then after that, you know, I, you can become a, a foreman or a superintendent or an owner (laughter). Story_ID: 615014 Speaker 1: What I'm trying to understand, Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins], what is between the time that you graduate [from Washburne Trade School, Chicago, Illinois] and then you become president of Riteway [Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], what is in that twelve year period because, basically, in 1971 you are twenty-one years old, okay? And are you doing small jobs, referrals, are you working, are you subcontracting. You said, you know, you were a foreman and sort of directing people. What kind of jobs were you doing? You know, what are you learning? You know, we're talking really about twelve years. Speaker 2: Well, really when I graduated in 1971, I was working for a company called R.S. Bailey and Associates [R.S. Bailey and Associates, Inc.] and after that, you know-- Speaker 1: Who owned that? Speaker 2: A guy by the name of Ray Bailey [Raymond Bailey]. R.S. Bailey, you know-- Speaker 1: Okay. Wasn't he in one of the-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --one of the pictures. Speaker 2: Right. He was one of the tri-venture partners. So, after graduating, one of the things, as I said to you, I became, I was a very good tradesperson and I was running work for Mr. Bailey. So, that was a company called R. Jack Construction Company [ph.] that had heard about me and what they did, they recruited me to actually come and run their painting shop for them, and I was twenty-one at the time, and there was a housing complex on the West Side called Barbara Jean Wright Court [Barbara Jean Wright Court Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], which is about 272 units, but I became R. Jack's foreman and superintendent at twenty-one, and he gave an opportunity to recruit a group of painters so, of course, people I went to school with actually ended up coming to work for me while I was at R. Jack and I think I worked there with R. Jack for about three years. Story_ID: 615015 Speaker 1: I went back to work for R- for Forrest Bailey [sic. Raymond Bailey] and we were doing a school, actually junior high school, Corliss High School [George Henry Corliss High School; George Henry Corliss Early College STEM High School, Chicago, Illinois], we were painting Corliss High School and painters went on strike and what happened is when the painters went on strike, we were on strike for about maybe, about three weeks and during that three week period, you know, where I had painted Barbara Jean Wright Court [Barbara Jean Wright Court Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], there was an organization called The West Side--TWO [The Woodlawn Organization, Chicago, Illinois]--not TWO but the, the name will come to me in a minute, but what I ended up doing is, they had ended up managing-- Speaker 2: (Unclear)? Speaker 1: No, WSO [West Side Organization, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: WSO. Okay. Speaker 1: WSO was the name of the organization. There was a guy by the name of Camelius Goodwin [ph.], who was managing the project for Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis], so I remember going to Camelius and one of the things that I said, "Camelius," I wanted, what I tried to do is I got a contract as a maintenance painter, so what I would do, matter of fact, I gotta go back even before then. I was doing maintenance painting for Camelius. What I would do is that I would end up working for a company. I would for five days for a contractor, but in the evenings on Tuesdays and Thursdays and Saturdays and Sundays when I got off, I would go and paint unit. And so what I was doing was that I was, I would end up painting on the average of about maybe five or six apartments a month, so actually I was contracting but I wasn't, I was doing it for myself but I wasn't doing it as a company at the time. So, what happened was is that when painters went out on strike, that was a maintenance count that I had and then I also went to a lady by the name of Lorraine Olbey [G. Lorraine Olbey], who is managing, managing the Chatham, Chatham Park apartments [Chatham Park Village Cooperative, Chicago, Illinois] on 83rd [Street] and Cottage [Cottage Grove Avenue], and they had a fire and they wanted me to give them an estimate. So what happened was I did that job for them and then they gave me the maintenance contract to do all the work at the Chatham Park co-op and, of course, when the strike was over Mr. Bailey didn't call me back to work and I think I was twenty-four at the time, so I made up my mind at that particular point in time that, you know, since I had gone and gotten this contract that I would actually work for myself. Speaker 2: I see. He did not call you back to work, you said? Why? Speaker 1: No, he didn't call me back and that was because of the fact that Joe Cole, who was the superintendent for Bailey [R.S. Bailey and Associates, Inc.], he was kind of jealous of the relationship, so, and things for Bailey were getting kind of slow, so he didn't call me back, so since he didn't call me back I decided that I was just going to stay out here and work for myself, and that's how I started, well actually I didn't start Riteway Painting, but I teamed up with a guy by the name of Murray Brown, of Brown's Drywall [Brown's Drywall Company, Chicago, Illinois], who was also a guy that I used to work with and I teamed up with him and we started, we formed Riteway Painting and Decorating company [Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 615016 Speaker 1: Now in this time period, who are, what are the, in the area, you know, the work that you were doing, were you competing with other black people or were you completing competing with any other nationalities? You know, I'm just, 'cause you know you mentioned Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis]. He was a big property owner back then. You know, [HistoryMaker] Jacoby Dickens was big, right? Am I right? Speaker 2: Right. What Dempsey did was Dempsey gave me, I was doing maintenance painting for a lot of Dempsey's complexes. He had a lady by the name of Roberta Ray [ph.], who was a property manager for Dempsey, so I kind of started out just doing maintenance painting and then when I teamed up with Murray Brown, who had a company called Brown's Drywall [Brown's Drywall Company, Chicago, Illinois], and during the time back in the early '70s [1970s] when you had a guy by the name of Charlie Moore [Charles F. Moore, Sr.] of C.F. Moore Construction Company [Charles F. Moore Construction Co., Chicago, Illinois], you had James Martin [ph.] of Robert Martin Construction Company [Robert Martin Construction Company, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], and you had a guy by the name of Ernie Bush [Ernest Bush, Sr.] of Bush Construction Company [Bush Construction Company, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. They were the three largest African American general contractors during that period, and Chicago Public Schools had started a school rehabilitation program, so a guy by the name of James Martin, who was Robert Martin's brother, gave us our first painting contract to paint the John M. Smyth School [John M. Smyth Elementary School; John M. Smyth Magnet School, Chicago, Illinois] so I really can't say that we, it was situation where you had, at the time, things opened up for some of the African American GCs [general contractor], and with the relationship that we developed with C.F. Moore and Robert Martin and Ernie Bush, what they start doing is allow us to do some of their projects, so we really kind of started at the time just only working in the African American community, because that was the only place we could work, you know, so it was a matter of us, you know, developing a relationship amongst ourselves and to a certain extent, we kind of took care of one another. Story_ID: 615017 Speaker 1: You're twenty-four when you start. Are you doing, are you seeing that you're making a decent living, you know, or do you have situations where, you know, you're jil- jilted on some jobs or you have difficult situations? What are you learning about the business? That's what I'm wondering. Speaker 2: When I was twenty-four? Well (laughter). Speaker 1: At twenty-four going forward. Speaker 2: Well, what I learned is that, like I say, the fact that when I worked for other companies, I made money for them and, in fact, I can make money for somebody else. I can make it for myself, and I was good at what I did, and because of that, at the time when we first started out it was just myself, and I had a team with a guy by the name of Al Williams, so we worked together and everything that we did, we basically made money. So, when we teamed up with Murray Brown and started painting these schools, I mean you gotta realize that I was there working in the field every day and as long as I was working and had a crew and I was setting things up, we did well. I mean, we did very well in the infancy stages of our business [Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. So, we kind of started off and Murray, who had been in business, Murray Brown, who had been in business probably for about twelve years, who really set me down and I think, I mentored up under him and he really wanted, really taught me how to really estimate jobs and he taught me how to really become an entrepreneur business person, and he taught me the value of cultivating relationships and so, to a certain extent, you know, I was fortunate enough in my young career just to meet the right people and work with the right people. Speaker 1: Now was Murray Brown, I know he was drywall [Brown's Drywall Company, Chicago, Illinois]. How much older than, than, than you was he? Speaker 2: Murray was probably, I was in my early twenties. Murray was in his late forties, about twenty years. Speaker 1: Oh, so he was really sort of, he took you under his wing. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Murray was old enough to be my father. Speaker 1: Right, okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. So, he was like, like a father figure. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 615018 Speaker 1: So, how does Riteway, I mean, so you worked for Murray, are you working for him all these twelve years, sort of, or, I mean-- Speaker 2: Yes, well we worked on the Riteway Painting and Decorating company [Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], which was formed in 1974, and up until 1985 we had a partnership. I think Murray died in nineteen eighty--I think Murray died in '85 [1985] or '86 [1986], was when he died. Speaker 1: Oh, so not really long after your partnership ended, right? You said 1984-- Speaker 2: Eighty--'85 [1985], actually it was about '84 [1984] or '85 [1985] when Murray died. Speaker 1: Okay, so is that what ended your partnership? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, oh his death ended--okay, okay. Speaker 2: His death ended the partnership. Speaker 1: Now, I see, that's, so, can you tell us a little bit about Murray Brown? Speaker 2: Well, Murray, during the time when I was serving an apprenticeship under M. Ecker [M. Ecker and Company, Chicago, Illinois], Murray was like a drywall contractor that was doing a lot of drywall on the, on a lot of the homes that we are painting. So Murray had takers and he kind of basically saw how myself and Tommy [Thomas Young (ph.)] and Calvin [Calvin Jackson], how we would come out and paint the homes where he did the drywall work. So, the relationship kind of started where he kind of saw how the talent, he saw a lot of talent in me and, of course, later on in life, you know, when I decided to go into business for myself, I stopped by Murray's office one day because his wife, Mrs. Brown, had opened up a paint store to buy some paint and Murray told me about the opportunity that he had with James Martin [ph.] to paint these schools, and he asked us about teaming up with him to become, to form Riteway Painting and Decorating company, and that's how we formed Riteway. So, but I had known Murray when I was serving my apprenticeship. Speaker 1: Now, you were president of Riteway, right? Were you president? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Were you, you weren't president at the beginning or you became-- Speaker 2: I was president at the beginning. Speaker 1: Now, how did you end up becoming president? Speaker 2: Because Murray still had his drywall business [Brown's Drywall Company, Chicago, Illinois], and so the decision was, is to make me president, really and truly from, from the beginning. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 615019 Speaker 1: Your business [Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] grew fast though, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And had I read someplace that it grew maybe perhaps too fast. Is that true? Speaker 2: Well--and what happened was, is that, I mean, our business grew fast because when Harold Washington became-- Speaker 1: Mayor. Speaker 2: --mayor in 1983, you know, prior to that the only place where we worked was basically in our communities, so when Harold Washington came up with executive order 25 and 5 [Executive Order 85 - 2] it just opened up the whole process. Speaker 1: Okay, you need to explain what 25 and 5, I know what 25 and 5 means-- Speaker 2: Well 25 and 5 is that 25 percent of the business had to go to an MBE [minority business enterprise] firm and 5 percent of the business had to go to a WBE [women owned business enterprise] firm, so what it did, it made a lot of general contractors that was doing work in downtown Chicago [Illinois], that was doing work out at O'Hare, out at the airport [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], they had to actually go out and find minority or woman owned businesses. So, of course, as one of the easiest things a lot of these GCs [general contractors] thought they could do, "Well let me find a painting contractor, let me find people in the finishing trades," and, so what happened was that all of a sudden, you know, we got contracts out at O'Hare. During the time, you know, they were doing River City [Chicago, Illinois], Presidential Towers [Chicago, Illinois], and we ended up going down in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois], so all of a sudden we went from a contractor where we had maybe about twenty guys, to running maybe over 100 guys, and so now we were working out of O'Hare, we're working downtown, we're working out of some suburbs, we're working in the city, so that's what happened. We actually, we just grew, because of the fact that Harold Washington came up with that executive order. Speaker 1: Now, Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins], let me ask you, did you, were you already certified or did you quickly get certified once, you know, you knew that he made the 25 and 5 order that had come out of, that had to go through, sort of, city council [Chicago City Council]. Were you certified as an MBE already? Speaker 2: Yes, I was. Speaker 1: You were. So when had you gotten certified as an MBE? Speaker 2: I really can't, you know, I don't know if I was actually. I was in business as a minority contractor. I'm trying to think of actually when that certification process--maybe that certification process didn't come until after Harold Washington, but right, it was after Harold Washington became mayor that the certification process-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --actually, actually took place (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because what they, there were people in the office like Anita Ponder [HistoryMaker Anita J. Ponder], you know, she was, you know, part of that. Story_ID: 614962 Speaker 1: --Campaign for Harold Washington, were you, you were really just an entrepreneur trying to make money, right-- Speaker 2: But--yes, I was. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, let me, let me go back to- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well, you know, in 1979 when we formed Black Contractors United. Speaker 1: So you, that, okay. Speaker 2: I was one of the founding members of Black Contractors United. Speaker 1: Can you talk about that, then? Oh, you are gonna talk about that, okay. Speaker 2: Yes, I definitely--well, Murray Brown, Murray Brown who was my partner at the time [at Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], James Martin [ph.] of, which is Robert Martin's brother, C.F. Moore [Charles F. Moore, Sr.], and Lawrence Woods [ph.], and a guy by the name of Reverend A.I. Dunlap [Alexander I. Dunlap], and of course, there was Taylor Cotton [Taylor Cotton, Jr.] with Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois] and Glenn Harston [Glenn M. Harston] and Rufus Taylor from the West Side. You know when (background noise), what's essentially Dearborn Park [Chicago, Illinois]- Speaker 1: Hold on one second. Hold on. While you're talking about Black Contractors United, what, was, was Paul King [HistoryMaker Paul J. King] in that at all? Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No, that's your office calling. Speaker 1: Paul King came later. Paul King had another organization [West Side Builders Association; The United Builders Association of Chicago], which was before Black Contractors United. Speaker 2: That was Black, Black-- Speaker 1: Was it community builders? Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Not community builders, but they were on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], so they had another organization. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: But BCU was actually formed and came together after the success of Dearborn Park where, when he was building that, the Urban League was able to get the developer to use black contractors down there, and like Ernie Bush [Ernest Bush, Sr.] built so many of the homes, James Martin built a lot of the homes and now the first time that you have a lot of black contractors working on a single project at one time, but with the success of Dearborn Park, the Urban League decided let's come together and form another contractors association [Minority Contractors Alliance], and, of course, our first meeting was at Army and Lou's [Chicago, Illinois], where we met for lunch one day and, of course, I was there, Steve Garth [Steven A. Garth, Sr.] was there at the time, and of course Taylor Cotton [Taylor Cotton, Jr.], James Martin, Glenn Harston [Glenn M. Harston], Rufus Taylor, Lawrence Woods [ph.], and like I said, Reverend A.I. Dunlap [Alexander I. Dunlap]. And, what we talked about is putting together an organization and we decided to name it Black Contractors United and the purpose of that was to make sure that African Americans got an opportunity to participate mainly in a lot of the downtown projects which, at that particular point in time, just really did not exist for us. So that's how we became more advocates, so one of the things that we did is that, of course, in the early stages of that, you know, if we went and we identified a project and they weren't using contractors, you know if we have to march or picket, we were always prepared really to do that so it was, of course, during the time when Harold Washington decided to come to run for mayor was when, from a political standpoint, we began to have help raise money during Harold Washington's candidacy which, at the time, when I think you had Bush, was a real strong supporter of Harold Washington and also Charlie Moore, so a lot of the money that we raised as contractors, we gave it to Ernie Bush and Charlie Moore, and they, in turn, contributed to the campaign. Story_ID: 614963 Speaker 1: Okay, so 1979, though, back when you formed, Jane Byrne was mayor, right? Speaker 2: Jane Byrne was the mayor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But then, again, that's when Jane Byrne, when they first did Delta, Delta Airlines, was, I was the painting contractor that did Delta Airlines. Speaker 1: At Terminal 3? Speaker 2: At Terminal 3. I termed up with an Hispanic firm and that was the first Hispanic, African American joint venture to paint Delta and we did that with Gilbane [Gilbane Building Company, Chicago, Illinois] so that happened under Jane Byrne's administration, but where I became a political activist--go ahead. Speaker 1: Okay. But I want to just look at this a little bit because really the black community is sort of getting just historically, you know, getting a sense of themselves sort of outside of their community; mainly, because they helped Jane Byrne get elected, right? The first time. Did they help her get elected? Speaker 2: No, no, no. It was just the snow that got Jane Byrne elected (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, I know about snow, but the black community came out too. Speaker 2: But, it was-- Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: But see what Jane Byrne did--remember when Jane Byrne, CHA was, you had a big problem with Chicago Housing Authority. What Jane Byrne did, remember, she went and moved in at CHA to show the conditions of African Americans at the time. She was trying to get rid of the guy that was there and bring in Charlie Swibel [Charles R. Swibel], so what happened during that same particular point in time, she was, you know you had Eddie Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak] and because of Black Contractors, now begin to have a voice. She was the one that started us, started actually during that O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] expansion, focusing in on minorities getting the opportunity to go out to O'Hare. So, not only was the O'Hare piece but remember the people movers. The people movers at the time was also done under when Jane Byrne was the mayor. Speaker 1: It was Jane Byrne--I thought that Harold Washington was the people mover contract. I thought that was. I don't know though, I can't, I don't want to speak to that. Speaker 2: All right. I think it was, I think it was Jane Byrne. Speaker 1: Jane Byrne, okay. Speaker 2: I think it was Jane Byrne during that time, but when the Urban League really got involved, and the Urban League really started focusing in on helping African American contractors, and when Gilbane came to town and they were talking about doing Delta, they formed a relationship with Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois] and Black Contractors United, and that's how a lot of black contractors actually got work out at the airport. It was the alliance that was formed with Gilbane and Chicago Urban League. It just so happens, it happens during Jane Byrne's administration. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But that was the first time that we were allowed to really go out to O'Hare and do work. Story_ID: 614964 Speaker 1: What were some of the issues that, that came about, though? You know, it's one thing to say that there's opportunity, but you know with opportunity a lot of times, you know there are other issues related to it, so what are the issues that are being discussed amongst you, you know, in this whole, you know, this whole-- Speaker 2: During that time period? Speaker 1: Yeah, during this time period. Speaker 2: Well, then again, I mean, because the airport was foreign to us and what you had out there is that good ol' boy network, contractors that had been out at O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] had been out there for years and that's all they did. I mean, when they got contracts, old contractors kept getting renewed and renewed, and you simply did not have any. At that particular point in time, minority contractors doing anything out at O'Hare. So, with the help of the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois], was when the new Delta [Delta Airlines] terminal actually came about, it was the first time to my knowledge that really and truly African American contractors and minorities on a whole really went out there and did anything out at O'Hare, because it was foreign to us. Speaker 1: So, when you were given a contract, who was your first contract, what with, you know, out there? Speaker 2: It was painting the new Delta terminal [Terminal 3]. Speaker 1: Okay, so were you a subcontractor to someone too? Speaker 2: I was a subcontractor to Gilbane [Gilbane Building Company, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Gilbane is spelled G-I-L-B-A-- Speaker 2: G-I-L-B-A-N-E. Speaker 1: N-E, okay. And, so what were, were you given 25 percent, or did they give you 10? What were you given at the initial-- Speaker 2: I don't know what my percentage of what that total package was; what I do know is that, I mean, it goes back to when it really taught me when general contractors really want to make something work they have the ability and the flexibility to do that. So, that was a situation where what we were told was that look, if you can team up with an Hispanic firm, we will negotiate this contract for you. So, that was like a negotiated contract that happened between myself and Jane with Gilbane, and what Gilbane did was make sure that we had all of the technical systems we needed to make sure that we got through that process because, like I was said, it was basically foreign to us, and that was the first time that any minority contractor had gone out to O'Hare and painted an entire terminal. I mean, that just simply did not happen. Speaker 1: Now, were there a lot of issues, though, what about payment? You know, were there any issues about getting paid for it on time? Did you have to go longer because it was, you know, a contract out at O'Hare? I mean, because those are some of the issues that both MBEs [minority business enterprise] and WBEs [women owned business enterprise] sometimes have had to put up with, no? Speaker 2: Listen, and because of the fact that this was something that was, everybody was focused on Gilbane, they made a commitment to make sure that we got paid in thirty days, I think because of the fact that an African American contractor had not been on out there. I went to Drexel Bank. Drexel Bank [Drexel National Bank, Chicago, Illinois] gave us a line of credit to do the job, so having that visibility really helped with, helped secure a better banker relationship that I had and, of course, Gilbane made sure that we got paid in thirty days. Now, of course, that doesn't happen every day but that was something that was, that program was designed to one, make sure that more minorities got an opportunity to participate and two, to make sure that minority contractors completed the process, because to go out there to do something special, and then you have minority contractors go broke, that, that, that was not smart. And, of course, Jane Byrne, at the time, was running for mayor. Speaker 1: (Cough) Excuse me. I have not been coughing like that. I wanna ask, so this contract, how much was this contract worth (cough)? Speaker 2: At the time in 1983, I think it was about maybe six hundred thousand dollars, but that was a big contract; I mean, that was a huge contract at the time. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay, so you're saying that okay, so the Delta contract with Gilbane--that worked out fabulously. Speaker 1: That was one of the best contracts that I've ever done. But yeah, that worked out good. That was kind of like the springboard, where Riteway [Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] became almost like not a national name, not a household name, but a name that everybody could recognize as a successful minority painting contractor. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That was the biggest project that I had ever received at that particular point in time. Story_ID: 614965 Speaker 1: Didn't you say Murray Brown died also in 1980, he died a year after-- Speaker 2: He died after we completed the project. Speaker 1: But he saw the success. Speaker 2: He saw the success. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: Okay. So when he dies, did you have another partner besides him? There was one-- Speaker 2: A guy by the name of Al Williams. Speaker 1: Al Williams. Speaker 2: Al Williams and I, we were, it was myself, Al Williams and Murray Brown, we were all partners [at Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: So, okay, then you said okay, after Delta [Terminal 3 at Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], then is Gilbane [Gilbane Building Company, Chicago, Illinois] still the general contractor for these other airlines or is that different? Speaker 2: No, Peck Jones [Peck Jones Construction; Jones and Jones Construction, Ojai, California], they were all different construction managers; so, Peck Jones was American Airlines. For Continental [Continental Airlines], I think that was also Peck Jones; and then, of course, United Airlines was Turner Construction Company [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: And those are all occurring over what period of time? Like when, like when-- Speaker 2: Those happened between '83 [1983] and '87 [1987]. Speaker 1: So, when you usually would get a job like that, is it taking all your resources because, like how long does it take to paint a whole terminal? It seems like it would take a while. Speaker 2: Well, actually a lot of those jobs took like two years to paint, to do. So, but you know, we had a decent line of credit with the bank [Drexel National Bank, Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 614966 Speaker 1: I can tell you when I get into the story about how I, I became a political activist and how we grew was when, the fact that when, that was 1983, no actually '81, 1981, when there was a developer, Mrs. Olbey [G. Lorraine Olbey], the Chatham Parks, Chatham Park Village [Chatham Park Village Cooperative, Chicago, Illinois]. What we were doing is building a senior citizen building there at 85th [Street] and Langley [Avenue], which was in the, in that development. Black developer, African American community, Chatham Business Association [Chicago, Illinois], said that this job had to be at least 50 percent African American participation. They hired a contractor called Forest City Dillon [Forest City Dillon, Inc.] out of Cleveland [Ohio] at that particular point in time. You know, the federal (unclear) was only because of the federally funded projects. You only had to use 10 percent MBE [minority business enterprise], 5 percent WBE [women owned business enterprise]. The community, the developer said that would not do here in Chatham [Chicago, Illinois], so what happened was, is that, Black Contractors United met with, met with the business association, had meetings with the owner and we had a meeting with Alderman Eugene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer]; so we were planning, you know, to picket the job, so what Alderman Sawyer told us to do, he said, "Well Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins], you know you guys don't have to do that. Because, in order to build that building, it requires a zoning change. In order for a zoning change, I have to sign off on it. If I don't sign off on that building, it won't get built." So, of course, a light bulb went off in my head and I said to myself, now here it is. We've been out here all this time, marching and picketing when projects are being built downtown and when the GCs [general contractor], or the developers-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: When the GCs or developers wouldn't allow us to work on the projects. Then, you know, here it is, just what this alderman said to us, is that if, if, "Without my signature, then it doesn't make any difference what the developer wants to do." It simply will not go. So, during that time BCU strategy was to always form a relationship with the developers and try to form a relationship with the contractors. And what Gene Sawyer taught us is that the first relationship you need to do is to start to develop a relationship with your political leaders and once you do that, because the developers have to come to us, the contractors have to come to us to order of their zoning changes, in order to get a permit, plus they were the first ones that knew exactly what was happening in the wards. And I think that was what made me decide it, to become a political activist and start working with our elected officials, because of what Gene Sawyer did. Now, what happened with that is that it was also the building, we started construction in '81 [1981], and it actually was in 1983, at a dedication ceremony, when Jayne Byrne was coming to dedicate the building, it was also the very same morning that Gene Sawyer now said he was going to endorse Harold Washington for mayor. On that same building that Gene Sawyer taught us, now actually, that building went from building 15 percent minority participation, to 80 percent, that developer. So, that's why I became a political activist and started developing a relationship with all of our elected officials and, as a result of that BCU became a political organization. Story_ID: 614967 Speaker 1: Now what is the growth of BCU [Black Contractors United] from 1979 to like 1983, '85 [1985]? Does, it, how many members is it growing at that point? Speaker 2: Well, I think we started out with about maybe, the founding members, I think there was about maybe eight of us, and between seventy-nine and between Harold Washington, there was about 100, and of course, once Harold Washington became mayor and he came out with that executive order [Executive Order 85 - 2], then that's when African American contractors grew to be into growing expanded businesses and that's when African American contractors began to come and join BCU. At that particular point in time, BCU's membership probably went up to about three hundred members. Speaker 1: Now, was there any dissension in the group? Speaker 2: With BCU (laughter)? Speaker 1: Yes. Because you paint it as, you know, all like, well I mean that everyone was getting their part, but some of you were getting business and some maybe not as much business or maybe some people wanted to approach it one way and another wanted to approach it another way. Speaker 2: Well, I think the dissension in the group came when I think, in 1991, 1990. Let me go back, during the Washington administration, again, there were times when I think most contractors really prospered and did well and at that particular point in time, we were all together. I think it was until the death of Harold Washington, where you had jealousy set in and people decided to go in a different direction and some people said, "Well, the only reason that this guy's getting work, or that guy's getting work, is because he's in a leadership." And, to a certain extent, there was some truth to that, but also when you was in a leadership, we had a responsibility that when we went to the table, you weren't going to the table to talk about self. You were really going to the table to talk about the benefits of the organization, and as leaders, that's basically what we did because also has leaders is that when you're in leadership, when your fellow contractor comes and says he has a problem and you have to go and address this problem. Sometimes, you know, you have to kick some people in the butt and the only person that remembers that, "Well [HistoryMaker] Larry Huggins said this, Glenn Harston [Glenn M. Harston] said that." So, when you had to go to the Walshes [Walsh Construction Company; The Walsh Group, Chicago, Illinois], Walshes of the world, and all these majority firms and raise hell with them about them not treating your fellow brothers right, at the end of the day you paid a price for that. You know, (unclear), you know, 'cause I think what happened is that one of the biggest problems that BCU had is when Jim Edgar ran for mayor, for governor, in 1990, '91 [1991], and you had Neil Hartigan, who was running for governor at the time, and you know, now it's a group of us that because Hartigan ran against Harold Washington, we could not endorse Hartigan, but we sat down with Edgar, and Edgar made a commitment, one, to keep affirmative action alive in the state. He made a commitment to make sure that in his administration, you had key African Americans that were in the branches of government. So, for the first time, you know, Republicans came to us as a business group and said that, "Hey listen, we want you at the table." The Democrats had always kind of basically kept us at bay, so you had Hartigan coming to us saying that, "Here's an opportunity to make sure that you guys are part of the process." But Jim Edgar didn't. So there was a split in the organization where some people thought that we were kind of stepping outside of our bounds, because at that particular point in time, there had never been a black association with anybody at that particular point or organization that endorsed a Republican. So, and of course, I was the leader of that and, to a certain extent, I took a lot of heat for that. But, it turned out to be one of the smartest moves that BCU ever could have made. So, yes there was dissension after Harold's death, but there was more dissension in the organization once people in the organization thought that we had gone too political. Story_ID: 614968 Speaker 1: Really you became political in the '80s [1980s] with Harold Washington. I mean, really you became bountiful during that time, everyone's making lots of money. There had been a lot of discussion. I'm just trying to set the stage of, you know, what you're saying. You, so, really Harold was in office six years total [sic.], right? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Right. And, now, what, like who are you getting politically active with during those Harold Washington years? Who, who are you supporting, you know, both personally or as BCU [Black Contractors United]? Who are the players, so to speak, you know, politically. Can you describe, you know, what is really, who's important to you, what are you learning about the political process during that time. Speaker 2: Well, as I said is that one of the things that I learned from Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] is the importance of aldermen are like fifty mayors. They control the economics in their wards, so my decision was is that what we need to do is develop a relationship with all of these aldermen. So, I'm the one that said look, at BCU we have 100, 200 members. At any given time, when we do a fundraiser for any of these elected officials, we can raise anywhere from ten to twenty thousand dollars if we came up with fifty to a hundred dollars apiece. So, what we started doing is supporting our elected officials. You know, we didn't open up a political pact, but we would have fundraisers at East Bank Club [Chicago, Illinois]. The aldermen would come and, you know, and for the first time without any expense to them, you know, the black, a minority association was supporting them, so it was something that really and truly had never happened before, so BCU began to grow. As a matter of fact, if you went to BCU's dinner and even one of the pictures that you had to had where you saw Harold Washington, Gene Sawyer, John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.], Beavers [William M. Beavers], Shaw [HistoryMaker William E. Shaw], so everybody, when BCU had a dinner, everybody was there including Reverend Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. You know, at one time, BCU had to, well we were the largest trade association, and plus our dinners would always draw over a thousand people, individuals every year. So, that's how we became very political is the fact that we had the resources and we were putting our money where our mouths was. So, when Harold Washington became mayor, I mean, his focus became, was on making sure that the African Americans and minorities got a piece of the pie. You know, it was only natural that he wrapped his arm around BCU. And, at every dinner that we had, Harold Washington was always there. So, whether you look at my business [Riteway Construction Services, Inc.; Riteway Huggins Construction Services, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], or whether you look at a lot of the black contractors, during the Washington administration was the first time that we got an opportunity to do work outside of our communities and, of course, when we did work outside of our communities, we began to develop those relationships with those majority firms because now they had to come to us and seek us out, and that's why the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois], the Urban League grew with their affirmative action program because of the fact of the Harold Washington administration. Where now, because of majority firms, they had to identify who the contractors were, all BCU members were union contractors, so it became unnatural, and that's how we grew and that's how my business grew and a lot of the guys within the organization. So, if it wasn't for Harold Washington, there's no telling where we would be today, but Harold Washington started that and even when Harold Washington died, Gene Sawyer kept his executive order [Executive Order 85 - 2] in place and to Mayor Daley's [Richard M. Daley] credit, in a meeting that BCU had with Mayor Daley when he first took over as mayor, one of the things that he said to us, you know, "When executive orders go when administration's changed, but what you guys need to do is, yes, I will keep Harold Washington's executive orders in place, but you need to make an ordinance. You need to make it a law." And that's when, you know, he did a predicate study and the only reason that we have the affirmative action program in the City of Chicago [Illinois] today whereas you don't have it in any of the other major cities in the United States is because of that predicate study that Mayor Daley did back in 1989, but he also did it at the request of a meeting that we had with the mayor to talk about keeping Harold Washington's executive order in place that was followed by Gene Sawyer and Harold Washington, the only they were saying I'm just gonna take it to a whole another level and it's because of that, that's why we got a program. Speaker 1: So talk about that study. Talk about what happened in that meeting and why is it called the predicate study? Speaker 2: Well predicate study means that what you have to do, you have to prove discrimination. You just can't say it, so you have to have people come in and do testimony (unclear). Speaker 1: And, and, and we have to look at this in the context that there was an onslaught occurring against affirmative action at the time of that study, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 614969 Speaker 1: So can you talk about the predicate study? Speaker 2: Well, the predicate study was, was something, as I said, that Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley] said that this is what has to be done. In order, you have to prove discrimination. That's when he put together what he called a Blue Ribbon Committee that consisted of myself and Glenn [Glenn M. Harston] and the Taylor Cotton [Taylor Cotton, Jr.] with the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois]. You had the Spanish contract association [Hispanic American Construction Industry Association], you had the FWC [Federation of Women Contractors], which is the women's contractors association. We all came together under Judge Getzendanner [Susan Christine O'Meara Getzendanner], and what they did is that they actually brought in contractors, both majority firms and minority firms, that could prove that minorities had been discriminated against, and that was the basis of coming up with the ordinance, so you had to prove discrimination, and the predicate study basically validated that and, of course, you know the reason that the county [Cook County, Illinois] doesn't have a program today is because they never did the predicate study, so of course, when the bills association sued the city [Chicago, Illinois], they didn't go, or actually sue to eliminate the program, they went at the county first because the county had never done the study, and that's why the county lost their program. So that was a situation where the county, at the time, was doing almost 40 percent minority participation, and now it's doing less than 1 percent, but they did not come after the city, but even though Judge Moran [James B. Moran] later said that the city has to adopt some of the federal guidelines, so what Judge Moran did is brought into later on the person's net worth issue as relates to the federal DBE [disadvantaged business enterprise] program, which says that if you was, your net worth was $750,000, that you would no longer be a minority-- Speaker 1: Business (simultaneous). Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) minority business-- Speaker 1: Which was controversial. Story_ID: 614970 Speaker 1: Let me ask this and I want to back to '83 [1983], but just a couple thin- you know, you mentioned several things that I'd like to address. What, how were you guys showing discrimination [in the predicate study]? What were the stories, like when you brought people in front to testify before, what were they, what things of discrimination were they talking about? Speaker 2: Let me give you the best example that really happened to me. When, under, during the Washington [Harold Washington] administration, as I said, when minority contractors got an opportunity to go downtown to do work in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois], at the time I was painting the Federal Reserve Bank [Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. I was the only minority contractor that was working at the bank at the time and there was another guy, I can't think of the contractor's name. He had a little small masonry job, but we had to contract to paint the entire Federal Reserve Bank under Pepper Construction Company [Pepper Construction Group, LLC, Chicago, Illinois]. Everything that I did, if there was a little spot on the wall, you know, when the architects came to punch list my work, anything that he saw he made me do it over and over again. And because I was the only contractor there, you know, there was a lot of change in the work, you know, Pepper wouldn't process to change orders and I remember going to Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], Congressman Savage [HistoryMaker Gus Savage], Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois], John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.] was the county board commissioner at the time, Allan Streeter, Bob Shaw [HistoryMaker William E. Shaw], Beavers [William M. Beavers], and I was telling them about the fact that Pepper wouldn't pay me, and this architect [Bertrand Goldberg] kept making me do work over and over again, and what they were doing, they were going to bankrupt me into bankruptcy because when I submitted a pay application to get paid, instead of them saying I was 30 percent complete, they would say I was only 20 percent complete, so which meant that I was taken another whole thirty days, they have to bill for the additional 10 percent. The unions came at me because when I went downtown, at one time, I used to have an all-black crew that made me put on a lot of white employees, so between the unions telling me that to a certain extent, you can't bring all these African Americans down here and work and made me put on some of their members at a Local 147 [Chicago Painters District Local 147], which was that downtown local, from the architect that scrutinized my work. As a matter of fact, I even got a letter from the union saying that basically my work, the work that I was doing was up to painting standards, so I even had a letter from the union that said that this architect was very picky. Story_ID: 614971 Speaker 1: But it wasn't until I went and had Congressman Savage [HistoryMaker Gus Savage], [HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer, Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.], Streeter [Allan Streeter], Bill Henry [William C. Henry], Shaw [HistoryMaker William E. Shaw], and there were a couple of the aldermen that marched down to the Federal Reserve Bank [Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] to walk through that building to see my work, and when they showed up in that lobby, they thought I was joking. Pepper [Pepper Construction Group, LLC, Chicago, Illinois] thought I was just joking, but when they showed up in that lobby and then Pepper said, "Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins], would you please call 'em off." And, he told me that, "If you call 'em off, then hey, I'm gonna pay you every week." We worked out a deal. All of a sudden I had no more problems, but what it did, it started me on, my downward spin into bankruptcy [of Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] because I never recovered. Every job, that when I did a job downtown, if they asked me to do a joint venture, I told them no. I said, "Why should I do a joint venture?" Because I got my own bonding, I've got the finances to do it, I've got the equipment to do it, I've got the manpower to do it, but every job I said I would not do a joint venture, I got picked at. So, what happened was I got punch listed into bankruptcy, so what happened is when you can't bill for stuff on time, you fall behind on your union payments, liquidated damage gets assessed, when you can't pay your taxes on time, there's interest and penalties so at the end of the day the only thing I was doing was spending good money for bad money, and that's really what started my downfall into, which basically led into my bankruptcy, so it was actually only, I mean, I had done work out at the airport [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois], but it was only when African Americans got an opportunity to go downtown to the City of Chicago [Illinois] that racism reared its ugly head. If you stop and think about it today, how many minority contractors are actually doing work in the Loop [Chicago, Illinois] on their own? I mean, think about it. So this happened to me back in 1986, '87 [1987], and what I did is that, I mean that's why I understand the political process. I respect it, but what it did to me is that I said that, and I told Turner Construction Company [Chicago, Illinois] when I went to Turner and said to Turner that, I asked him for some help. They had given me the contract to paint the AT&T Corporate Center [Franklin Center, Chicago, Illinois], and I said I wanted to get out of painting. They said, "Larry, if you just finish this one job, just finish this one job for me and then I will help you. If you want to become a GC [general contractor], I will help you do that." And what I did is I asked Turner if they wanted to give me some work, and if they would loan to me one of their executives who's actually a project manager, which is an Indian guy by the name of Vinay Chopra. When I did United Airlines, if you can just help me through the process because I wanted to give up painting and the AT&T Corporate Center was the last painting job that I did, but that was my form of discrimination, and that is that the unions were discriminatory. If a contractor or an architect did not want to see you succeed, they had ways of coming at you and, like I say, it was based upon manpower requirements, sometimes making you put on more people than you actually need, not submitting your pay requests when they should, if you fell behind in the union payments, they threatened to close the job down, so it was a form of harassment, so if that happened to me, I know it probably happened to a lot of other contractors. Speaker 2: So, so, on the union side, that was manpower. They would make you put more people on the job, is that it? Where would they discriminate (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not only more people on the job, but also their people. So, in other words, I went from having almost 100 percent minority crew; all of a sudden, you cannot bring your 100 percent minority crew to downtown Chicago to paint these buildings. Speaker 2: Okay, so, now who are the union leaders at the time that you dealt with, do you remember? Speaker 1: I think those guys are retired now, but I just can't really think of all the names at that, at the time. Story_ID: 614972 Speaker 1: That was sort of a down period really, because you had these major contracts and then, all of a sudden, you know, you're getting nickeled and dimed, and you're seeing your business go under, but you don't really take a, what, what happens then? How does the construction, you know, Riteway Construction Services [Riteway Construction Services, Inc.; Riteway Huggins Construction Services, Inc., Chicago, Illinois] come? Because you said you had the company already. Speaker 2: Well, at the time, you know, even at the time I was doing the Federal Reserve building [Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I was also doing, had worked at River City [Chicago, Illinois], where practically one of the same things basically happened to me at River City. But, one of the contractors that I did work for at River City was called Tribco Construction Company [Tribco Construction Services LLC, Chicago, Illinois]. And, I was walking downtown one day and I bumped into Jerry McCollam [Gerald McCollam] who was the owner of Tribco, and what Jerry said was that, you know, "Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins], I've got all of this work. I've got about $80 million in contracts, and 30 percent of my business has to go to a minority firm and I know you, and because I know you I would really like to do business with you," and he said that "if you could get certified as a concrete contractor, as a general contractor, I can give you 25 percent of my business to you." And he said, "Not only will I give you 25 percent of my business, but what I would like to do is to mentor you. If you will work with me for three years, I will teach you everything you need to know about concrete construction." So, I told him I had, which I had this business which is Riteway Construction that I had incorporated in 1985, and that's what I was doing. I was doing small GC [general contractor] work. So, I decided at that particular point in time, you know, because of the issues that I had with Riteway Painting [Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], and I was forced into bankruptcy, so I was now to start, I wanted to fill my dream of becoming a general contractor. A subcontractor, I found out, is that at any given time, you can get punch listed into bankruptcy, so not that I was a bad businessperson or I was a bad tradesman, it's just that people that had to scrutinize my work determined as to whether or not I was going to be a failure or I was going to be a success. So, this guy gave me an opportunity. He said, "If you really become a GC, one of the things you've gotta do, you've gotta learn a major trade. You should be a carpenter contractor or a concrete contractor." So, that's how I entered into a three year mentor protege relationship with Tribco Construction Company, and that's how Riteway Construction Services grew. But also, at the same time, you can recall that a lot of people didn't truly understand what a mentor protege relationship was, so to a certain extent, my relationship with Tribco was way back during the day the city, at one time, started awarding contracts to mentor protege relationships where a majority firm would actually take the time to mentor a smaller firm, and one of the things that I said is that how you judge a relationship like that is that you've gotta take at least about five years. You look at where the protege started out and then look at where he's at now, and that's how my business grew, actually when I entered into that mentor protege relationship with Tribco. Speaker 1: So yours was one of the first type relationships here. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what, now, this with Tribco, what year is this? Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's 1988? Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987]. Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987]. Okay. Story_ID: 614973 Speaker 1: What are the projects in that three year period that you did that were important? Speaker 2: Well, we did the Harold Washington Library [Harold Washington Library Center, Chicago, Illinois], we did the GSA federal building [John C. Kluczynski Federal Building, Chicago, Illinois], we did one-- Speaker 1: United Airlines terminal. Speaker 2: No, United was not with-- Speaker 1: That wasn't? What about Chicago Board of Trade [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Chicago Board of Trade was one of the buildings I did with Tribco [Tribco Construction Company; Tribco Construction Services LLC, Chicago, Illinois]. And, to show you how that relationship worked is that when I did the Unicom thermal technology plant [Unicom Thermal Technologies, Chicago, Illinois] for ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company], Tribco was my subcontractor. I, in turn, hired him to do work for me as a GC [general contractor]. So, that was how you, like I said that's how you judge those relationships, but what Tribco did is that not only did they take and mentor me and took some of the employees that once worked for them, and I hired them, but they took me in to, at the time, Continental Bank [Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company; Bank of America], and helped me establish a line of credit at the bank. They introduced me to the concrete suppliers that began to work with me, so those are relationships that I have that they, even though I'm not with Continental Bank, but the first time I tried to go into the Continental Bank and open up a bank account, they told me I was too small. You know, you don't do enough business with me. But, Jerry McCollam [Gerald McCollam] called the loan officer at Continental Bank and said, "Well listen, you need to open up an account for [HistoryMaker] Larry Huggins at Riteway [Riteway Construction Services, Inc.; Riteway Huggins Construction Services, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], because he's going to be doing business with me, and I'm guaranteeing you that this guy is going to do X amount of business," and that's what gave me my first $1 million line of credit. Speaker 1: What do you think he saw in you? I mean, obviously he needed someone, but what did he see in you and what did you learn. There's a difference between a subcontractor and being a GC. Speaker 2: What Jerry McCollam saw in me was the fact that as a painting contractor, we were good. And Jerry saw when Bertrand Goldberg came and was picking at my work, he had advised me that, "Larry, what you need to do, this is discrimination. This is racism, and what you should do is I would get the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois], I would get Reverend Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], and I would have them come here and they need to look at this." But I didn't do that. Now, what I did do is based upon the conversation that I had with him, when it came to Federal Reserve Bank [Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], that's exactly what I did. So I heard what he told me, "But this is--." I stuck through it and that's kind of like what started my, 'cause then again, I was spending, I had made money over the years but because I never wanted to be a failure, you know, I thanked him for the advice, but you know, we got through it. I just couldn't afford to go through that. I mean, I lost a lot of money. I never went back to him and said, "Hey, you need to pay me extra money." So, I think that's what he saw in me. But I had done a lot of work for McCollam Tribco at the time, so, and we developed, he's a small caliber, he's a guy that's a family owned business and so I think that's what he saw in me. He saw the commitment. He knew that I would, I always came to work. I always worked along with my guys, so, that was it. Speaker 1: Oh, you always worked alongside your guys. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. I never had a problem with picking up the paint tools, every so often just to keep my skills. You know, I will still go and spray paint. I think I'm one of the best spray painters in the business, so I was good at what I did. So, if there was a need if a guy didn't come to work one day, you know, you might see me on the job with my paint clothes on. Story_ID: 614974 Speaker 1: What about the business of running the business? Were there lessons that you learned along that, because as you're starting to get more money, you know, just the infrastructure of the business [Riteway Construction Services, Inc.; Riteway Huggins Construction Services, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], all of that, are there any stories around that, Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins]? Speaker 2: Well, I think that again, you know, kind of like if there was ever a mistake that I made, it's probably not bringing in a property controller, you know, somebody that had the experience. If you look at the person that's with me today, my controller, right now, she was actually, we got her through one of those job programs when she was a senior at Calumet High School [Chicago, Illinois], so she came over and was working in the evenings and I encouraged her to get a job in accounting so, of course, she went to Chicago State [Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and got a degree, but during the time that we were growing, I mean the people that were working for me were probably just like myself, you know, really didn't have the necessary skill levels to manage a big business the way, I mean, we went from being a Ma type operation to almost like corporation, and the people that I had didn't have all the, maybe the necessary skill set, but what happened was is that I've always been kind of a loyal person and I've always kept people around me, so if ever I made a mistake, I think that was one of the mistakes that I made, you know, I should have brought in people that had a lot more experience in working with larger firms than what I did. Speaker 1: So you're talking about the 1987 period, or beyond that? Speaker 2: I'm talking about the '87 [1987] period. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, let me ask what did you, in terms of annual revenue, you went from what to what? Speaker 2: Well, I think during the time we went from about a million dollars to about $3 million in painting, you know, so we more than doubled our size and $3 million in painting contracts was a lot of work, so it's not like you're general contracting, you know, we were set up. Speaker 1: So, when you then go from, get into construction, what do your annual revenues then become? Speaker 2: Well, right now, our revenue now is between $25 and $30 million. Speaker 1: That's good. That's as a GC [general contractor]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me what you had to put in place as a GC because, it's one thing to know painting. It's a whole another thing to know concrete or all the other things that relate to being a GC and having those relationships so, in that three year period when he brought his, some of his employees on, what are you learning about the construction business? Speaker 2: Well, here's what I did, if you remember the conversation I had, I went to Turner Construction Company [Chicago, Illinois] and said, "Look, I'm gonna make a transition from being a subcontractor to being a general contractor," and I asked Turner if they could loan to me one of their project executives and actually loaned me for a year to help me through that transition period. But, of course, that year ended up being twenty years, so once Vinay [Vinay Chopra] came, basically Vinay stayed, so with Vin's help, we were able to go out and recruit the talent to end up becoming more of the, more of a GC. We understood at concrete construction and basically and all the work that we did, we always set top form our own excavation and our own concrete, but in terms of helping manage the other work, we brought in the necessary project manager and engineers to help us do that. Story_ID: 614975 Speaker 1: So Harold Washington dies in 19- Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987]. Speaker 1: Eighty--oh, so that's the year that you were starting to have financial problems [at Riteway Painting and Decorating, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was the year, I mean that was the year when we were doing the Federal Reserve Bank [Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and that everything I was doing, like I said, I got punch listed into bankruptcy at the time, so, but that's when I kind of almost went into like a two year hiatus. Speaker 1: You did? Speaker 2: Right. Where I kind of was not really active with BCU [Black Contractors United], and the reason I wasn't active with BCU was because I was learning the concrete business. I was into the mentor protege relationship [with Tribco Construction Company; Tribco Construction Services LLC, Chicago, Illinois], but at the same time also I remember telling the guys at BCU telecon in Atlanta [Georgia], I said, you know, here's what I'm doing. You know, one of the things that we had talked about was that because you had the big three: C.F. Moore [Charles F. Moore, Sr.], Bush [Ernest Bush, Sr.], and Martin [James Martin (ph.)], who were kind of like, you know, seniors at the time, so one of the things we talked about is that some of us were going to have to take those guys' place, and I made a decision that I want to be one of the ones to replace one of the big three. So, I did it for because one, I was going into bankruptcy and two, I had to start a new company anyway, so timing was right for me so for about two years, even though I still was a member of BCU, I wasn't as active as I once was, because I didn't have the time to do that. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what are you learning, though, during that two year hiatus? What are you learning about construction or concrete or, you know, about big projects that you may not have known as a painter? That's what I'm trying to understand. Speaker 2: Well, what it is, is that I learn how to, I came in to learn how to estimate with concrete, I was actually out there on the job, you know, to see how they did the form work, you know, all the man hours that went into the work. A lot of the tradespeople I developed a relationship with, so actually I was there on a day to day basis, you know, out in the field, going back into the office, spent a lot of time with Jerry [Gerald McCollam] and Bob McCollam [Robert J. McCollam] and more importantly, is the people that work with me, Vin [Vinay Chopra], a lot of those people are still with me today, so it's been kind of like a good twenty year relationship I've had with a lot of the tradespeople, so they stayed. So, you know when we finished that three year venture deal, I mean they became permanent Riteway employees [Riteway Construction Services, Inc.; Riteway Huggins Construction Services, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. Story_ID: 614976 Speaker 1: Was Turner [Turner Construction Company, Chicago, Illinois] unusual in that? Like Hilton Smith. You know, he's, he's a Turner executive. What role did, did he play any role in this whole Turner deal at all? Speaker 2: Yes, he did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because during the time I developed a relationship with Hilton when we did the new United [United Airlines] terminal, and I used to go--we had a lady by the name of Mary Jean Carr [ph.]. I don't know if you remember her, but I used to travel sometimes with Turner and go and talk about the relationship with Turner and how they had helped me during the time of the, that unique tri-venture, because we did have some issues, and Turner made sure that we got paid everything that we needed, and it became success story so I think it was during that time that we really talked with Hilton, and would talk about putting together the tri-venture, so when I decided I wanted to get out of the painting business and to go into concrete, I sat down with Hilton, and a guy by the name of Dan McGuire [ph.] and Jerry McCollam [Gerald McCollam], and asked them if they would be willing to do that for me. So, at the time, you know, if it wasn't for the fact that Hilton blessed it, it probably wouldn't have gotten done. So, I mean, then again, that's why these relationships are so very important in my industry, so it takes a lot of help from a lot of people, so you never just do any of this stuff really and truly on your own, but now, but Hilton is the one that really okayed that. Story_ID: 614977 Speaker 1: Now 1987 Harold Washington dies. Nineteen eighty-nine [1989], okay between 1987 and '89 [1989], you're doing the Har- well, the Harold Washington Library [Harold Washington Library Center, Chicago, Illinois] is a big project after his death, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yes. But there was a lot of competition and bidding on--now what role, you weren't GC [general contractor] on that, were you? Speaker 2: No; no, no. I was actually the, I was a sub with Tribco, that's when I was in the mentor protege program with Tribco Construction [Tribco Construction Company; Tribco Construction Services LLC, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But what about the Chicago Board of Trade [Chicago, Illinois]. Were you also--that was your mentor relationship? Speaker 2: Mentor with Tribco. Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you do your first GC job [as Riteway Construction Services, Inc.; Riteway Huggins Construction Services, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: As a standalone? First GC job as a standalone was work that I did for the Unicom Thermal Technologies [Chicago, Illinois] project there at Van Buren [Street] and Franklin [Street]. It was a job that I teamed up with Nelson Carlo; it was the first major GC job. Speaker 1: Okay, that was, I have that down as 19--oh, okay, we have to change tapes. But I have that down as 1995. Speaker 2: Ninety-five [1995], yes. Speaker 1: Okay, but what we need, what I wanna make sure-- Speaker 2: Between '89 [1989], well actually did a lot of joint venture work with the McHugh Construction Company [James McHugh Construction Company, Chicago, Illinois], so McHugh and I had teamed up and, I mean, that's another whole story. You know, one of the things that I learned was, is that you cannot go downtown as a standalone African American contractor and survive, so I started doing joint venture work and that's why I started doing GC work with some of the major firms. Story_ID: 614978 Speaker 1: You were talking, about, (unclear) construction, Nelson Carlos [sic. Nelson Carlo], can you talk about how the players came together and-- Speaker 2: Well, sure, I think-well, you know, [HistoryMaker] John Hooker, who is the, I think vice president of ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company], he had actually gotten together with, I think it was Alderman Shaw [HistoryMaker William E. Shaw], and one of the things they talked about is that you know, when ComEd was building these cooling plants is about, you know, trying to do something for minority contractors and I think, I don't know if this, who had the conversation but Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley] kind of got behind it and one of the things that came out of it was that what they would like to see is an African American and Hispanic contractor basically come together as a GC [general contractor]. So what happened was, is that Nelson and I formed a joint venture relationship and it was the first time that a, any black contractor had ever gone downtown Chicago [Illinois] and to do a major job of that size, and what happened was, I mean, is that we actually operate as more construction managers, but we took and hired all of the subcontractors and we basically managed the project, and it was a very successful project, and this is something that the only regret from that project is that one, is that Nelson and I didn't continue to go and seek and do other projects, but what made it so good was that first of all because it was a private job, ComEd, we practically negotiated that project. ComEd waived the bonding requirements so it wasn't a thing that we had to have bonding for, so when you look at the impediments which stop most African American (unclear) contracts from becoming major GCs, it's because of bonding. ComEd made a commitment to make sure that we got paid in a timely manner and it turned out to be a very successful project, because everybody that was there made money. ComEd, like I said, paid us every thirty days and you couldn't ask for a better project. Speaker 1: Now, why didn't you and Nelson continue? Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's something that is something that is just unfortunate that we, that we didn't do it. I really can't tell you why we didn't, but it should have been a springboard, where not only Nelson and I should have continued, but it should have been an opportunity where my other minority firms could say, "Hey, look, let's joint venture and bring resources together and do something," because that's what the majority of firms do anyway. They would joint venture with other firms on large scale projects, so I mean right here today, you simply do not see any minority, minority joint ventures, and that's something that I guess, as businesspeople, at some point, you know, we've got to put our egos aside and really come together and work, because when I look at the two joint ventures that I've done, they both were with Hispanic firms; the one I did at Delta [Delta Airlines] and the one that I did for Unicom Thermal Technology [Unicom Thermal Technologies, Chicago, Illinois]. But, then again, but, but upon both of those projects, they was projects that the owners wanted to see happen and they provided the resources to make it happen. Story_ID: 614979 Speaker 1: Tell me what is the difference between a joint venture and a subcontractor? Contract. How does it operate, you know, differently? Speaker 2: Well, a joint venture is really just two firms putting together a partnership and in that partnership there are specific responsibilities that each company has to play, but it's two firms coming together to form one company for one particular job. Now subcontractor, subcontractor is strictly just an entity that self-performs a specific scope of work, such as whether you are doing electrical work, the painting work, or plumbing work, so you're sub to a general contractor or you're doing construction management. So, your job is only to do that specific trait. So, a joint venture, you could even have a joint venture as a subcontractor, or you could be a joint venture as a general contractor. So GCs [general contractor] are basically the ones responsible for the entire project and they hire all the subcontractors to, to do the work. Story_ID: 614980 Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back just a little bit in that in 1991, when you were talking about, you know, having the meeting with Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley], you know, him being new-- Speaker 2: That was '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Oh, it's '89 [1989], '89 [1989]. What am I--but '91 [1991] was the ruling. No-- Speaker 2: The ruling, I can't think of the year. I think the ruling was in '90 [1990], I think the ruling was in '90 [1990] or '91 [1991]. Speaker 1: So Harold Washington dies in 1987. Speaker 2: Well, Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] was the mayor, after Harold-- Speaker 1: Right, after Harold Washington. But during that period--I just wanna pull all these parts together--during that period of time, then after Harold dies, is it during Gene Sawyer that the, you know, with the Black Contractors United that people are starting to fight, you know, and the business goes under, or is that business still happening under Sawyer? You know, because remember you said under Harold Washington things go up, you know, lots of contracts. He dies. You said, then there started to be some infighting within the organization. Speaker 2: But the infighting here had nothing to do with my business, no. Speaker 1: No, I know it didn't have anything to do with your business, but I'm just trying to pull all these parts together. So, what I'm saying is that your business, I know that, okay, you have financial problems during, you know, that time, '87 [1987], but are there, is there infighting within Black Contractors United around that time, or is that a little later? Speaker 2: The infighting happened later. Speaker 1: Okay, it happened later. Speaker 2: It happened later. Not during, it wasn't during the Washington administration. Speaker 1: No, but was it after, was it during Sawyer's time or is it during Daley, at the beginning of Daley's time? Speaker 2: Well, the infighting, what actually started wasn't-the infighting. It actually started when, in '91 [1991]-- Speaker 1: Okay, see I remember '91 [1991]-- Speaker 2: In '91 [1991], when we endorsed Jim Edgar for governor. Speaker 1: I see, okay, okay. I got you. Speaker 2: So, the infighting started when our politics changed. Speaker 1: I see. Okay. Speaker 2: I mean, there were some members of the organization that felt that we should not, we should have not endorsed a Republican governor. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So wasn't, but at the same time, contracts are getting, you know, there's more competition. For, you know, because even you said your membership had blossomed up, and so, when at the beginning there were just a few of you. But you come back, you've done your, your sort of mentor, you know, mentor mentee, you know, relationship. You're positioning yourself under Turner [Turner Construction Company, Chicago, Illinois] really as a GC [general contractor], and that's a very productive time. Am I, I'm just wanting to get this right. Speaker 1: Well, let me, Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: See I think when, when we started lobbying for McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois], it was-- Speaker 2: And what year is this? Speaker 1: This is 1991. It was also during the same time that we endorsed Edgar for governor (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 614981 Speaker 1: Can you tell me politically who's around? Who's in what places in 1991? Speaker 2: In '91 [1991], Jim Edgar became the governor. In nine (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was after Jim Thompson [James R. Thompson] had been governor. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Right. But Jim Thompson had operated almost like a Democratic governor. Speaker 2: Absolutely. But in 1991 was also when there was talk of, we actually called the McDome, when it was also during the term when, I think, Hardy was running for governor-- Speaker 1: Hartigan [Neil Hartigan]. Speaker 2: Hartigan, right. Edgar was running for governor, and the McDome was also doing it at the same time. So there was a group that if Hartigan got it, Hartigan was probably going to end up putting in another developer. If Edgar got it, you know, as things turned out, Richard Stein got to development. And because of the relationship that we had with Richard Stein and Julia Stasch at the time, we knew that if Stein got the project that black contractors would have an excellent opportunity of getting work on McCormick Place [Chicago, Illinois], so our efforts began to one, to lobby for Stein along with the Chicago Urban League [Chicago, Illinois], and so when, of course, when Stein got the project, one of the things that they did is that they did some creative things. They formed, for the first time, Paul King [HistoryMaker Paul J. King], UBM [UBM, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], Riteway [Riteway Construction Services, Inc.; Riteway Huggins Construction Services, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], and II in One [II in One Contractors, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], formed the tri-venture to work with Walsh Construction Company [The Walsh Group, Chicago, Illinois] to do all of the concrete work at McCormick Place, okay? Speaker 1: That's huge. Speaker 2: And, of course that was the biggest concrete job that I had ever done, and I think what happened was there were a lot of the memberships in BCU [Black Contractors United], because we were in leadership, so now all of a sudden, you know, Riteway is getting a big piece, or this contractor, so it was a combination of a couple of things. It was a combination of politically we got behind Jim Edgar for governor, everyone, McCormick Place came, all of a sudden it became a real job, and there were a lot of us that got contracts from them, and people saw a reason to begin to try and divide the organization, so I think it was more outside forces that began to come in, a lot of these community activists, and just took the organization in a different direction. Speaker 1: Tell me, tell me, who, now you were president at the time of the organization, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Vice president. Speaker 1: Vice president at the time that you got the deal with McDome. Speaker 2: Correct. Story_ID: 614982 Speaker 1: Can you just like, not gloss over this? Can you just like talk about who the players, you know, so we can take it back then. Can you tell me what was going on? What were the issues? The very, you know, I'm sure there was some contentious fighting going on, you know. Can you just describe that, that's all. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I think you had a situation where if you take the leadership of BCU [Black Contractors United] now, which is Eddie Forte [Edward Forte], McKinney [Edward McKinney]. I think those were the guys that began to say, well, listen, the only guys that are getting contracts in this organization are guys that are officers of the organization. So, [HistoryMaker] Larry Huggins became a target, Glenn Harston [Glenn M. Harston] became a target. You have Rufus Taylor, Taylor Electric Company [Chicago, Illinois], that did not want to see the organization go political, so what happened was is during that time, they began to allow the old (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And he had, and Taylor had been part of the original group, though, right? Speaker 2: Correct. So, some of the old guard began to listen to some of the new players, so that's really where, I think the rift or the split came within the organization and, of course, Taylor Cotton [Taylor Cotton, Jr.], who was at the Urban League [Chicago Urban League, Chicago, Illinois] at the time, you know, he left because his father [Taylor Cotton, Sr.] had passed, so you only had Glenn Harston, Larry Huggins, and Jerome Peters and the way people looked at us, it was almost like we were the ones that were cutting the deals, so to a certain extent, you know, we got blamed for a lot of things, and you had the community activists, you had guys like Eddie Reed, that was there with Lu Palmer [HistoryMaker Lutrelle "Lu" F. Palmer, II], so all of a sudden, you know, everybody's saying well, you know, look, as long as you guys are not in leadership, as long as those guys are in leadership, they're always gonna be the ones that are gonna be made whole, but it really truly wasn't true. But that was the perception, and so that's really what happened. Speaker 1: So, what happened though, with the organization? I'm not familiar completely with what happened. What happened with Black Contractors United? You get bounced out? I mean, what happened? You got voted out? Speaker 2: I mean, there was actually an election and I decided not to run-- Speaker 1: And this is in 1992? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think the election--see, I've been gone from BCU for twelve years now, so this was about 1995. Speaker 1: Wow. You left. Speaker 2: I left. So in 1995, they had an election. I decided not to run and so I left the organization. Speaker 1: Okay. But they were probably, were they also upset that you had decided to endorse Edgar? Speaker 2: That started it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That started the rift because, I mean, the Edgar, the Edgar endorsement always came up, but what you've got to realize is that, that we also endorsed Edgar in 1994 or '95 [1995] when he ran again. So, what happened was that Edgar proved to be a good governor as related to African Americans. I mean, there was more, Edgar kept his word, so not only did Edgar keep his word, but when George Ryan became governor, you know, he kept African Americans in place, and Rod [Rod Blagojevich] is now the governor, and so it all started. I mean, think about it, it wasn't until Jim Edgar became the governor, that you actually had African Americans in primary position for state governor. So, BCU's endorsement of Jim Edgar was the right thing to do, you know, but people don't really truly look at that. Jim Edgar also was, while he was the governor, made a commitment to make sure that affirmative action stayed in place with state government. If a Democrat gets in, he's always going to end up keeping that place, but if a Republican gets in, 'cause you know that was during the time when affirmative action program was being under attack. So, what was important for black contractors at the time is to make sure that we had somebody that was in place who understood the importance of those programs. If Hartigan [Neil Hartigan] gets in, quite naturally he's going to do it, but you can't take that risk; plus, Hartigan has some baggage in the African American community because, remember, he ran against Harold Washington for mayor [of Chicago, Illinois]. So, people at the time during that time had not forgotten that. So, but we made, then again, we made a business decision, but it was also a political decision that benefited black contractors in the long run. Story_ID: 614983 Speaker 1: You decide to leave BCU [Black Contractors United], an organization that you founded. Was that hard? Sort of, or were you just like these crazy people have taken over. I don't want to be part of it? Speaker 2: Well, here's, in my decision I always tell Eddie Reed, you know, when I think there was a meeting that BCU had and Eddie Reed came to the meeting and I always tell Eddie Reed this. He came to the meeting and he talked about members of our organization and, of course, I was not there at that meeting, and when I found out about it, the one thing that I said, I was serious about it. I said, "I cannot be a part of an organization that I've supported over the years and we allow an outsider to come into our organization and talk about our membership." Now that is something that should never happen. So, I said, "I cannot be a part of an organization that will allow those things to happen." So, I made a decision then to leave the organization, and yes, it was hurting to do that, but I found that, you know, it was probably in my best interest to do it, because you cannot willingly go and fight for people who are not willing to stand up and fight for themselves. So, when you see where that division was at, so it's better for you to distance yourself from that than to be a part of it. Story_ID: 614984 Speaker 1: But at the same time, business wise, you're doing very well during this time period that you leave. Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that used to tell Eddie Forte [Edward Forte] and tell other BCU [Black Contractors United] members, I said I understand one thing, you know, and, and I told them, I said I'm not ego tripping when I say this, I said, but when you look at the success of this organization, you know, I put a lot of effort into, to help make the organization successful, I'm the one that developed the political agenda and told them instead of us always working with the contractors and developers, we need to form a relationship with our political leaders, and what happened was is that when the developers came, the developers told you that you need to, they're the ones who have to talk to the politicians anyway, and we started doing something that had never been done before. So, if I can lay out a political agenda for the organization, and the organization becomes successful. Now, when I come to the table, if I only had to talk about [HistoryMaker] Larry Huggins, now I have to talk about everybody else, I think I would do fine. Now, what happened, believe it or not, is that a lot of the majority contractors told me after I left the organization, they said, "Well, Larry, we were really too reluctant to give you work because we knew you devoted more time to that organization than you did to your business," which was the truth. I mean, if a meeting came up, I'd have to be somewhere for BCU and I had to be somewhere with my business, I would have chose to be with BCU, because I was just that committed to the organization. I always felt that I had people that worked for me that I paid that could help me run my business. And really, I mean, to my surprise, there were more people that thought that I actually worked for BCU and that my business didn't exist. So, what happened was is that when I left the organization, and I began to focus more on Riteway [Riteway Construction Services, Inc.; Riteway Huggins Construction Services, Inc., Chicago, Illinois], that's really when my business grew, and at that point, at that particular point in time, my business really needed me anyway. Speaker 1: Okay. And it was, that was ninety-fi- when was that you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was about '95 [1995]. Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995], so that's the year that you end up doing the joint venture with-- Speaker 2: Nelson Carlo. Speaker 1: Nelson Carlos [sic.]. Story_ID: 614985 Speaker 1: I want to talk, though, about how you transitioned, you know, also in terms of civic leadership, you know, because, and what I'm making reference to is that it was in 1997 that you were nominated or whatever to serve on the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] board. Speaker 2: Metra board. Speaker 1: Metra board, Metra board. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: So, and I say that to transition, because it's one thing to be a businessman, it's another, now, you were civically involved very much you know, but more on the activist side. You know, when you go, and then you're serving on a board, like the Metra board, then you become more of a civic leader, so you had been sort of transitioned. How did that come about, the Metra board? Did that have anything to do also with Edgar [Jim Edgar]? Speaker 2: No, no actually the mayor appointed me to the Metra board and actually I was the first African American who had ever been appointed to that board and right now, I'm the longest serving board member of any board member on that board, and what happened is, is that I was just in a conversation with the mayor [Richard M. Daley] one day and he asked me, I had been on the advisory board for CTA for about four years, so I had some experience and knowledge of transportation issues, so when the vacancy came up, he appointed me to that board. Now where, and even though you're a board member, your advocacy never stops because once you're there, you can help influence other board members in terms of their participation goals, in terms of their human resources in terms of making sure that African Americans are being hired, in terms of making sure looking at, so instead of you always using the same vendors, let's start looking at some of these other minority firms to come in here and do business with Metra. So, I mean just over the years, one of the things that, if you look at Metra as an agency, they pay faster than any public body, they pay almost as if you're a private business, they're doing a lot of business. They did now become a member of Black Contractors United, they're a member of HACIA [Hispanic American Construction Industry Association] prior to me going on that board. That did not take place. Every year, they look at job opportunities for minority firms. They go to BCU and HACIA and give them opportunities; so, those are things that basically started as a result of me being on that board. Now, since I've been a board member, everybody that was there before I got there is now gone, so you now have Lonnie Smith [ph.], who is an African American, who is from the southern suburbs, you also have Carole Doris, who is a female who is now the chairman of the board. So, everything has changed. It went from an all-white board to six white lawyers, one African American male, and now you have two females and two African Americans. So there is more of us now, but then again, I mean, I was the first to come on that board, and now the other (unclear) agencies have seen fit to diversify that board. Speaker 1: Now, so you've been serving on the board, you said, how many years then? Speaker 2: Ten years. Speaker 1: Ten years. Story_ID: 614986 Speaker 1: What are some of the issues that have come up during your tenure, ten year tenure? Speaker 2: Well, you always have issues that, with Metra, it probably is, not probably, it is, it's been rated as the number one transportation organization in the country. We far exceed any of the agencies that are out there, so we always get rated number one. We've been able to keep our fares down, you know, just only recently we just had, since I've been there we've had only, this is the third rate increase but, the only reason we got a rate increase is because, you know, the federal government, I mean the state wasn't capitalizing on all the Metra CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] pays. They weren't doing it, so we were taking money from our capital budgets and actually spending on operating costs and those were the only reasons why we had to raise fares in the first place, but Metra, overall, has been, I always say, it's a transportation jewel of the country. So, the only thing I've done at Metra, as I said, is to kind of help make decisions as it relates to the city [Chicago, Illinois], you know, because Metra has always been more or less viewed as suburban, but we have city issues, so when those issues come up, I make sure we address those issues, and that's the importance of having a board member; you know, you can't overlook these issues. I mean, so when the aldermen come and have problems, we address them. And so, and it's, it's been a good experience. Speaker 1: That's good. Story_ID: 614987 Speaker 1: The other thing I want to, I, I want to ask you about the classic [Chicago Football Classic], because that was in 1994, right? Can you (simultaneous)- Well, actually. Speaker 2: The classic was longer than that. Speaker 1: Right. There was a guy that started the classic in 1994, by the name of John Ray [ph.]. Speaker 2: Now, who was he? Speaker 1: John Ray was a guy from Alabama who basically goes around, well I can't say go around the country, but he does, he does go around the country and do a lot of--got to stop? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear). Speaker 2: Okay, keep going. Speaker 1: Do a lot of battle of the bands. But John Ray came to Chicago [Illinois] in 1994 and did the classic in '94 [1994] and he did it in '95 [1995], and John Ray left here owing a lot of people for a lot of money. So, what happened was in '97 [1997], in a meeting that I had with Ernie Sawyer [Ernest Sawyer], Dr. Robert Donaldson, and Abraham Morgan [ph.], they came to me and said, well, "Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins], you know, we need to do classic here in Chicago," and my conversation with them is that, "You're right. We should do classic in Chicago," because I have a tendency, I've actually gone to the classic in Indianapolis [Indiana]. I was going to one in St. Louis [Missouri] and I agree that Chicago, being the city of, when you look at the impact of how many African Americans are here, there's just no way a major city like us should not have a Classic. So, I agreed to join them and, of course, you know we had to meet with the mayor [Richard M. Daley] to talk to the mayor about doing the classic. And what came out is that you also had Tim Rand, Everett Rand and Jonathan Jackson [ph.] was another group that was also trying to put together a classic, so what happened was there were two groups that were trying to do it, so at a meeting that I had with Michael Scott [HistoryMaker Michael Scott, Sr.], Michael Scott said, "Larry, you know, let me make a recommendation. Tim and Everett Rand would like to join your team, and you know you guys should sit down and talk about it," and I told Michael, I said, "Well, you know, hey, listen, I mean, I've known Tim and Everett. They're prominent business guys in the community, have known the father [Thomas E. Rand] for a long time. I don't have a problem with them joining our team," and that's really how we came together, so it started out with me, Ernest, Bob Donaldson, and Abraham Morgan they're in a group, and Tim and Everett joined us, and we've been together now for just about eleven years-- Story_ID: 614988 Speaker 1: Let's go to Mike Scott [HistoryMaker Michael Scott, Sr.] being sort of the broker of the deal. Speaker 2: Right, well you know, Michael has been a guy that has been, you know, involved in a lot of things in Chicago [Illinois], very civic minded, and Michael was the president of the partnership at the time and, of course, Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois] falls up under the auspices of the Park District [Chicago Park District]. So, Michael, you know, found out that there were two groups going for it. So, he kind of like brought us together and it's turned out to have been quite rewarding, you know, because even though I knew Tim [Tim Rand] and Everett [Everett Rand], and I knew the father [Thomas E. Rand], I had never really done anything business wise or politically with those guys at the time, but I've been to a lot of events and seeing them, so it worked out perfectly. Speaker 1: Now tell me how it actually worked out. I mean, he mentioned it but that's a big difference between you guys making, because you were basically coming behind something where the guy [John Ray (ph.)] had left town owing a lot of money. Also, there's the whole thing of, you know, maybe between St. Louis [Missouri] and Indianapolis [Indiana], maybe them thinking they don't want you to do it? You know, was there any of that? Speaker 2: No. One of the things that we all agreed upon is that there is nothing here in Chicago [Illinois] that is done on an annual basis of that size that African Americans could say that it was their own. What the classic [Chicago Football Classic] does is it has an economic impact that it one, brings to the city, there's an educational component that is so very important, and it gave us an opportunity to focus on these HCBUs at the time-- Speaker 1: HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities]. Speaker 2: HBCUs, sorry, Speaker 1: HBCUs (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) HBCUs, at the time, which was, which were having some issues. So, it gave us as businesspeople at some point, you know, you have to give something back, not only to your community but you have to give something back to the city. You know, so you can't always make money and don't do anything to give back. So, this was our way of doing that. What the Rands brought to the table was instant credibility in terms of when you look at the success of the father and the success of the business. From a financial standpoint, you know, people knew that as long as the Rands were a part of it, that all the bills would get paid. So, that's what the Rands brought to the table was that balance sheet, you know, and that balance sheet is very important. Plus, they brought a commitment with the relationships they have with people in the food and beverage industry, relationships they had politically. They brought all of that to the table. So, everybody played a role. You have to show your name and, of course, the role that I played here in Chicago over the years, it was just a good fit. Story_ID: 614989 Speaker 1: Can you describe the classic for people who would not know what it is? Can you describe the concept? Larry's [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins] like, what do you mean, have they been living under a tree? Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. I, don't look at me that way. This--someone listening to the interview may not know what it is, okay (laughter). Speaker 2: Of course. These classics have been going on probably for about thirty-seven years. The Bayou Classic is, of course in New Orleans [Louisiana] and played between Grambling [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and Southern [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] every year, which is the granddaddy of all the classics. You have the Circle City Classic in Atlanta [Georgia]-- Speaker 1: In Indianapolis [Indiana]. Speaker 2: Indianapolis. Then you have the classic in Atlanta, the one in St. Louis [Missouri]. You have one also in Memphis [Tennessee]. So, these classics give an opportunity to come to a lot of, like say, these northern cities to showcase historical black colleges. It also gives the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] an opportunity to help raise funds that can support the schools. There are scholarship opportunities where, when kids come to see the battle of the bands, you know, a lot look to start going to some of these schools to get these scholarships. A lot of athletic directors begin to recruit kids from Chicago [Illinois], but more importantly it gives us an opportunity to showcase our city, to showcase Chicago, the beauty of the city, gives us an opportunity to provide some economic development, it gives us an opportunity to provide scholarships, and it gives black America an opportunity to really have what I would call just a big family reunion, because other than the Bud Billiken day parade [Bud Billiken Parade and Picnic], what do we have in the City of Chicago where the masses come out at one time and just enjoy themselves for a whole day. So it becomes more than just a game. It's a series of events that take place almost for the entire week. And that's what the Chicago Football Classic is. And it keeps growing; you know, we've got it up to fifty-some thousand, and this year we expect it to do about sixty-three thousand. So, Chicago has finally said hey, this classic is here, they've embraced it and, like I said, it just keeps getting larger. Speaker 1: Now let's talk. So are you, one other question on the classic, are you surprised at the success of it? Speaker 2: No, I'm not, no I'm not. I'm just surprised that it took this long in order for, for everybody to embrace it, but now that we've embraced it, then it's, it's just gonna grow. Story_ID: 614990 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the youth Christmas in Englewood [Christmas in Englewood Foundation; Christmas in the Wards, Chicago, Illinois]. Can we talk about that? That started in 19--was it 1996? Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct. Speaker 1: Now, we have to remember that that's where you lived, grew up. Right, Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], right? Speaker 2: Correct. Well, I mean, you know-- Speaker 1: Did Englewood change much from the time you grew up to-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it has (laughter). Speaker 1: Sorry, keep going. Speaker 2: Well, you know, Terry Peterson, who was the alderman of the 17th Ward at the time, called me and said, "Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins], can you get Black Contractors [Black Contractors United] to raise five thousand dollars for kids of Englewood?" And he said, "The reason we need to do that is because precinct captains have gone out of the community and what we discovered is that there's a lot of families that wouldn't be able to provide toys for the kids for Christmas." I told Terry I'd be glad to do that. So what I did is I reached out to not only black contractors, but I reached out to a lot of majority firms I had a relationship with, and even though Terry only asked us to raise five thousand, I think the first year we raised about seven thousand, five hundred, and the Christmas toy giveaway was held at the 17th Ward office on Racine [Avenue]. The next year, Terry asked me if we could do ten thousand and, of course, the second year we did fifteen thousand, and since then, just, it topped out, I think the year before last we raised eighty thousand and this past year we did about sixty-some thousand, but each year it keeps growing. But what they do, the impact of this classic [Chicago Football Classic] is that--I mean the Christmas toy giveaway is that they will identify families and they shop for the entire family based upon their age and gender, so every kid in that family would get their wish list taken care of, and then we also had what we call is a raffle where we will buy fifty bicycles. We might buy twenty-five TV sets. We'd buy a train set, we'd buy boom boxes, and my opinion is this has become the biggest Christmas toy giveaway in the city. As a matter of fact, it so large until people just show up, and so that's an overflow crowd that is also there and we also make sure that they get gifts. It is now 501(c)(3), and it's something that once you will always want to come back, and the mayor [Richard M. Daley] has been there every year. The mayor comes to the Christmas toy giveaway every year and helps us give away those toys. It's something that being from Englewood, I'm very proud of, 'cause it's also done at the Ogden Park field house [Chicago, Illinois], where I also played baseball and when I was at Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois], I ran track. So that's, that's the Christmas toy giveaway. It is, then again, it's also something in a way that as a business person, it's just my way of giving back to the Englewood community. Story_ID: 614991 Speaker 1: And also one of the other things I've done that relates to Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] is that every year for Principal for a Day, the mayor [Richard M. Daley] started a program back in '98 [1998], I went in '98 [1998] and every year I go back. I started in '98 [1998], giving out one thousand dollars a year scholarship to a single parent, because my mother [Mary Hightower Huggins] was a single parent, and about five years ago, that one thousand dollars went to ten thousand, and I've been giving away ten thousand dollars every year and, of course, when you look at Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois], after this year they will no longer exist. Englewood has now become a charter school, and this is going to be the last graduating class for Englewood High School. Now, one of the things I also did this year was team up with Nike [Nike, Inc.] and what we did was went ahead and purchase all new uniforms for the Englewood High School basketball team, uniforms and gym shoes, and today those kids were rated number ten in the city and there is a possibility, now here's a student body where you only have about 140 students. You know, when you look at Simeon High School [Simeon Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] and Whitney Young [Whitney M. Young Magnet High School, Chicago, Illinois], they have anywhere from 2,500 to three thousand students. These kids, these young men have been playing together for four years and there's a possibility that this year they might win city. They might win city. And just think, if they go ahead and win state. But what we want to do is make sure that on the last graduating class with that school, that what we're going to try and do is give as many of those students scholarship opportunities as we possibly can. Now, that's just a commitment that we have made in order to help out Englewood High School. Speaker 2: That's great. Story_ID: 614992 Speaker 1: I want to ask you, you know you were saying earlier that you know, you've now are moving into being a developer [at Riteway Construction Services, Inc.; Riteway-Huggins Construction Services, Chicago, Illinois]. I don't, I think you said that when we were off camera, and I just want to sort of understand where you are in your life right now; you know, both from a business standpoint and you know, from a civics standpoint. Where are you, you know, just at? Speaker 2: I think, when I sit down as a businessperson, I think my success is that I always try and figure out where I wanna be five, ten years down the road. When you look at these affirmative action programs on the whole, it's a struggle for minorities to succeed in those programs. The reason it's a struggle is because of the fact that one, the government historically doesn't pay on time, so historically when you do a job, it's going to take you anywhere from ninety to 120 days to get paid if there's change associated with it, so it really truly is not a market where we can really do very well. Can we survive in the market because of the fact that it's low pay? So it's hard for you to grow and sustain a business just strictly doing work for the government. So, what we have to do is look at private sector. The reason I decided to become a developer is just like years ago when I decided to become a general contractor. It's a way I can control my own destiny. So, as a developer I can go out and secure the land and get all the financial resources to develop a community, then not only do you create work for yourself, but you create work for other people and what you develop, you either own it for the rest of your life, or when you decide to sell it, you can sell it. But, when CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] came up with their transformation when they said they was taking all these public housing development and they were going to tear them down and rebuild them. They were gonna turn them over to private developers. I teamed up with Joe Williams [Joseph Williams] and we formed a company called Granite Development [Granite Development LLC, Chicago, Illinois], and we teamed up with a company called Community Builders [The Community Builders] and with Community Builders we are going to build two thousand residential units at the old Ida B. Wells housing development [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois], and then the other part of that component, there's a for sale component and we teamed up with a a company called MB realty [MB Real Estate Services LLC, Chicago, Illinois] and we're going to build one thousand for sale units so, on the residential side we have 30 percent of the deal, on the for sale side, we have 70 percent of the deal, so by the time that development is over, you know, I will probably be ready to retire and, but when you stop and think about the fact that the Olympics [2016 Summer Olympics] might be coming to Chicago [Illinois], and when you look at what, they're talking about building the Olympics, it is right in the heart, my development is right in the heart where everything is going to be going on. What I've tried to do as a business person and as a civic minded person, because look at the opportunities that we have to employ the residents from Chicago housing that, you know, have probably on general assistance all their lives, so here's an opportunity not only to rebuild in that community, but we're also providing jobs. We're bringing economic development back into the community. From a civic standpoint, you know, I enjoy, I probably enjoy more of working with people and doing things with people than I really do in building things, so when I go back to Englewood High School [Chicago, Illinois] and you talk to a group of students and when those students come back and say, well, you know, "If [HistoryMaker] Larry Huggins can do it, I can do it," and you know it takes not a lot of your time in order to do that, so just like Juliet Walker [Juliet E.K. Walker] had an impact on my life years ago, I think I have a responsibility to do the same thing. Now, what I do as a businessperson, when you are being successful, what you do is that you go back and you tap into Corporate America and you have Corporate America also come back and be a good corporate citizen. So, you can't come into the African American community and you build things or you sell things, and then you don't give back to the community. So, it's a shame on me that if I got those relationships, and I'm not saying that, hey, you've got to put your dollars back into the community, so if I can put mine back in the community, Corporate America, in turn, can do the same thing. Story_ID: 614993 Speaker 1: What my legacy would be, I don't know. But what I, I will say is that I'm a young man that grew up in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], never left the community, business has always stayed in the community, and understood the importance of doing the right thing and making others do the right thing. Because, I mean, at the end of the day, that's why we do the classic [Chicago Football Classic]. So, when we get the corporate sponsors to come here, you know, you can't do it without corporate sponsors, and so, to see fifty-some thousand young men and women; do you realize that there's a lot of people that will never get an opportunity to go to Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois] to see that classic. When you stop, the impact of that, so not only do these students get an opportunity to look at the educational part of it, it becomes a good entertainment for them, and it make it affordable. The majority of the tickets we give away, you know, but we make it affordable for these kids, and I guess in saying, that's why I like doing what I do, because it keeps me going. Story_ID: 614994 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, what, when you, since you're talking about this, what hopes and concerns do you have for the black community? And, I want you to look at this in the context of your life, where you started from, where things are now, your children, other young people you know. What hopes and concerns do you have? Speaker 2: I hope that one day we'll begin to truly, as people, learn how to work together and stop having that crab in a barrel syndrome. You know, when you see one person that seems like they're trying to get ahead, you've always got somebody that's trying to pull them down. That has been the downfall of a lot of people, a lot of people that we know, a lot of people that we don't know. So, if anything, we've gotta get to the point where we learn how to love one another and support one another, that Willie Lynch syndrome really and truly has, has to go away. From an economic standpoint, as a business person, one of the things that we look at, the majority community, they look at their politicians as, not so much as the politicians as being the leaders, but it's the businessmen that are basically the leaders in other communities. What we more or less look at is our politicians and our church people as the leaders, but it's the businesspeople that employ people. It's the businesspeople that really and truly have that economic impact. So, if we ever get to the point where the politicians, the ministers, religious leaders, and the business leaders can ever come together and work together, our communities will be much better, because right now it's just too many darn egos, but like I say in the majority community, I think it's the business guy that basically sits down and has an influence with the elected officials. That's why big corporation support. Who's going to be able to be the president of the United States? I think the business leaders also have a relationship with our, with those political leaders. I think 'The Godfather,' the movie 'The Godfather,' kind of taught us that. So, I don't think we can be any different than anybody else. What we have to do is learn from the mistakes of the past and see what we can do better. Story_ID: 614995 Speaker 1: In the field of construction, Larry [HistoryMaker Larry Huggins], if you were starting out today, would you do exactly that, what you're doing now? I mean, would you choose another career or would you choose the same career? Speaker 2: Well, I think I would be in construction, because you know, when I look at the fact that the average person that works for me, tradesperson, makes about one hundred thousand dollars, now where could I go and be able to be more impactful than that? You know, when you figure that, you know, there's a lot of people that, you know, go to college and they come out and don't make that kind of money, but in the construction industry, because it's a high paying industry, it gives us an opportunity to really be impactful. When I say impactful, when you look at the employees that worked for me, they've been with me for years. When I look at their families, the majority of them send their kids to college, you know. People are on welfare and on general assistance, so I, you know, I think the construction industry has afforded me an opportunity to do more for myself and my family and my community, than probably any other field that I would gone in. That's why a lot of people sometimes ask me, "Larry, why don't you run for political office?" I always tell them no. I want to be a businessperson. Because, then again, you know, we have an opportunity to, to do a lot of things that a lot of elected officials can't do. Story_ID: 614996 Speaker 1: If you were advising someone who wanted to get in construction, you know, be a you right now, what would you advise them? Speaker 2: What (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Don't, don't. Hold on a second. Whoever opened that door-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Well, I would advise them to, I would actually go to college and-- Speaker 2: Close the door. Okay. Go on, sorry. Speaker 1: Well, it's just like my daughter [Maya Huggins Garcia], I'd advise my daughter to, she's a sales engineer, she works for me [at Riteway Construction Services, Inc.; Riteway Huggins Construction Services, Inc., Chicago, Illinois]. So one, she's got the educational background and the knowledge and now she's getting actual field experience and the business experience really to take the company to another level, okay? So, education is very important. Whereas with me, when I came up based upon what my situation was at the time, it mattered me going to college, it mattered me going to trade school, I chose the latter to go to trade school [Washburne Trade School, Chicago, Illinois], based upon my economic situation at the time. But, it's about, as I say, the next generation, it's about with me creating generational wealth instead of individual wealth, you know, in my industry when you look at the McHughs [James McHugh Construction Company, Chicago, Illinois], the Walshes [Walsh Construction Company; The Walsh Group, Chicago, Illinois] and the Turners [Turner Construction Company, Chicago, Illinois], these are hundred year plus companies and companies are worth hundreds of millions of dollars, but it's generational wealth. When you look at black contractors, you know, we're most of us are one generation, and all it takes is one or two mistakes and we're out of business. So, what I would say to, to anybody and that is, I mean, future people in the construction, just do it the right way. You know, whether you're an architect, engineer, if you're a tradesperson, learn that trade, take some business courses before you go into business, surround yourself with good people and make sure that what you do is do just like other people do. You need to make sure that you encourage some of your kids to do what you do, not to do something else. That's the only way your business is gonna survive and become a generational business, because your family has gotta be a part of the business, and I think that's the one mistake that we make as people. We don't encourage our kids to do what we do. So, when, when, when the person dies, the business dies, you know, and that's why we don't have giants in our industry like you do in the other communities. Story_ID: 614997 Speaker 1: You sort of spoke of legacy. You can answer either one of the two: what do you want your legacy to be, or what do you want to be remembered for? Speaker 2: I think I want my legacy to be to say that [HistoryMaker] Larry Huggins truly understood the political process, to work within the political process. He built a business that he left behind for his kids. He became a person that was involved in the community, and the fact that he taught his kids to stay involved in the community, to stay in touch, you know, basically, with the people. So, my legacy is you know, that I came up from humble beginnings, never forgot from which I came and just still (crying)-- Speaker 1: Thank you so much, stop, thank you so much...