 Story_ID: 80858 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Lenese Brown. Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Eloise, E-L-O-I-S-E, Hughes, H-U-G-H-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your maiden name? Speaker 2: Williams. Spell it? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: All right, now, what is your date of birth? Speaker 2: February 1st, 1916. Speaker 1: And where were you born? Speaker 2: Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: Housewife, now I'm retired, now. Speaker 1: And what did you do formerly? Speaker 2: Well, I was a dancer. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Uh-- Speaker 1: You got me too. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): It's the 23rd. Speaker 1: Yes, it's the 23rd. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I was going to say the 22nd. Speaker 1: I want you to tell me now. Speaker 2: Okay. What do you want me to tell you? Speaker 1: Today's date. Speaker 2: Today? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Today's date. Speaker 2: January 20-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): --third, okay-- Speaker 2: --'03 [2003]. Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're at my home on 9542 South Green Street, Chicago, Illinois. Story_ID: 80859 Speaker 1: All right. Before we get into depth, there are five "People" Magazine-ish type questions that they ask me to ask people and the first one is, and they just require short answers. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first question is, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Soul (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, I'm not supposed to laugh out loud, here, that's why I have to-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right, and what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Christmas. Speaker 1: Ma'am, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: The Islands, with cruises. Speaker 1: And, ma'am, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: A favorite what? Speaker 1: Phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Let's see, I'm trying to--favorite phrase. Ms. Brown, what would that be? Something I say all the time? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): "Help me, please." Speaker 2: "Help me, please." Story_ID: 80860 Speaker 1: All right, well, with that out--I want to ask you some questions about your family history. How far can you trace your family back? Can you--are there any--is there anything that you know about your family or what they were doing back in the 19th Century, before the Civil War, or shortly thereafter, or during the, you know, way before you were born? Is there any history? Speaker 2: Well, really, not too much did happen. A few little things but it was so far back I couldn't remember back at that time. Now I could remember starting, maybe, 1925, some--a few things. Speaker 1: But, did you know your grandparents? Speaker 2: Yes, I knew my grandparents. I knew grand--I knew my grandmother, we didn't know our grandfather, did we Honey? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): On which side? Speaker 2: We knew our grandmother, but I don't remember my grandfather. Speaker 1: Okay, did they tell any stories about what your people were doing in the 19th Century. I mean were they--were they in slavery or were they free men, or what happened when they freed the slaves and did--or any of those kind of stories? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I'm sorry, I hear a TV in the background. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): He says your TV in the background. Speaker 2: Leon-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That's fine, thank you. Speaker 2: Now I did--I did have a background of our family years ago but I can't remember anything that they said. It went way back but I can't remember what, you know, what they said. Speaker 1: They didn't tell any stories or have any songs or anything songs or anything else (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: --that came from that period of time? Speaker 2: No-- Speaker 1: --that they shared with you, that you can remember? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, can you--now you said you knew one grandmother, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What was her name? Speaker 2: Annie? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Ella. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Ella-- Speaker 2: Ella-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): On dad's side. Speaker 2: On dad's side, and Annie on my mother's side. Speaker 1: Suddenly I hear a chorus of birds. Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: You have a bird chorus. So your grandmother's name was Ella-- Speaker 2: Ella Williams, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the other one was Anna Battiste. Speaker 1: Was it-- Speaker 2: B-A-T-I-S-T-E-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): B-A-T-T-- (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --I-S-T-E. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): French. Speaker 1: Right, yes, and do you know very much about either of them? Speaker 2: Well, I can remember my daddy's mother [Ella Williams]. She lived in Prichard, Alabama and we used to go visit her and I had some uncles out there then that had the grocery store and the moonshine place (laughter) and that was in Prichard, Alabama. Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us? Speaker 2: P-R-I-C-H-A-R-D, Prichard, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. The reason why I ask you to spell a lot of these because--it's because the tape is going to be transcribed and they spell-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: If I become a nuisance, forgive me. Speaker 2: Oh, don't-- Speaker 1: Okay, ma'am, so what about your other grandmother [Annie Battiste]? Where was she from? Speaker 2: She was from Mobile [Alabama], too, and she mostly stayed with us all of her life. And the one thing that I can remember most about her was her asthma because she had asthma and she suffered so bad. And I could remember back in those days, they used to burn a string and let them inhale that to help the asthma situation. They didn't have what they have now, Honey, for asthma. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Inhalers. Speaker 2: They have inhalers now, for asthma, but in those days I could just remember her grasping for air and that was in--that was around '29 [1929], '28 [1928], '29, we were very small then. Story_ID: 80861 Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your father? Can you give us his name and spell his name for us? Speaker 2: His name was John, J-O-H-N, Henry, H-E-N-R-Y, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: And when was he born? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Eighteen ninety-five [1895]. Speaker 1: Eighteen ninety-five [1895]. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Was he born in Mobile [Alabama] or in Prichard [Alabama]? Or-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Prichard. Speaker 2: He was born in Prichard. Speaker 1: Okay, and what kind of person was he? What did he do for a living? Or what was he like? Speaker 2: Well, he was a very quiet man and he worked in the saw mill in Mobile. And most of his family passed for white--could pass for white. And he worked there in this lumber mill, saw mill, where they cut lumber and I could remember him coming home and he'd bring little squares of wood that he had cut out and he would draw Choo-Choo trains and things and spend a lot of time with us. In fact, in--we had a Model T Ford and every Sunday he would take us out for a ride in the Ford and we'd go and buy tangerines, but we'd call them satsumas in those days, in the South. Speaker 1: Satsumas? Speaker 2: Satsumas. Now how you spell that, I don't know, but he was a good father. He worked hard. He loved us with all of his heart and he was a man that had a very peculiar sense of humor. He could come up with things that he said and right today, dad has been dead twenty years, and there's hardly a day that we are together, that something that doesn't come up that's funny that we laugh just like we laughed twenty-five years ago. A very quiet man. Loved his family better than anybody. If all of the family was together and somebody knocked on the door, he'd say, "Who in the hell is that?" "We all here now." But that's the kind of father he was. Speaker 1: Can you think of some of those funny things he would do? Speaker 2: Oh, and we laughed all of the time about him. Can you think one of some of 'em? She's the historian. Go ahead, Honey. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): I can't think of nothing yet-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, but he was just a funny man. Speaker 1: Well, if you think of something while we're talking-- Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: --that'll work. So he worked in a sawmill-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Story_ID: 80862 Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your mother. What was your mother's name? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Ethel, E-T-H-E-L, Rowena, R-O-W-E-N-A. It was Battiste at first but Williams after she married daddy [John Henry Williams]. W-I-L-- Speaker 1: Battiste is B-A-T-T-I-- Speaker 2: --S-T-E, yeah, and then she married daddy and she became Williams. Speaker 1: You're not related to a Harold Battiste [HM], are you? Speaker 2: No, not that I know of. Speaker 1: We interviewed one, I thought I'd ask you. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: He's from New Orleans [Louisiana]. All right. And what kind of--when was she born, first of all? Speaker 2: Mother was born in Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: About what year? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Nineteen hundred [1900]. Speaker 1: Nineteen hundred [1900]. Speaker 2: Okay, so your father was five years older than your mother? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And what kind of person was she? And what did she do? What is she like, I mean? Speaker 1: Oh, my mother, she was like our sister. She would raise us and beat us. She would skate, and she would beat us. And everything we did, she did together with us. She looked out for us. She made me take Honey. When I had to go out, she'd make me take Honey. That's what we'd call Lenese [Brown]. She'd made me take Honey. I don't care where I went, I'd just hate it. I'd run away sometimes and leave her and she'd come home crying and finally one day she thought about it, she said, now, why am I crying about Eloise because she can't go home without me. So, she had me then. And when we were growing up, people in that area didn't have anything but mother always managed--we had nice clothes, whenever we had to go to dancing, saw we had nice clothes. She saw that we had food. She saw that we went to church every Sunday. We had to go to church every Sunday. And she was just--just a good mother. She got sick and she--she was sick for quite a while with cancer and she always, during all of her illness, she always spoke about her three girls and what she would have done without 'em because during her illness, my mother never spent a day or night alone. It was three of us and we took three shifts. Ms. Brown, Honey, would take eight to four. My other sister, Annita [Ethel Vance], would take four to twelve and my shift was twelve to late in the morning. So she never spent one day by herself and she--she suffered so bad that--and back in those days, the doctors never gave you anything for pain. They wouldn't do it, it was against the law. But we had a doctor, father and son doctor, Dr. Reine, R-E-I-N-E, and my mother was in such terrible pain. So finally I called him and asked him if he could come over that Sunday morning. And he came and I begged him to give us something. He said, "Well, you know I can't do that." But after we talked to him, he finally decided to give her a shot. He said, if I give it to her, she might not come out of it and she would be in no pain. So she had that shot, maybe about four o'clock in the afternoon, and she slept all night long for the first time without pain in almost two years and she woke up and she called my daddy's name. She said, John, and then she passed away quietly. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): At forty. Speaker 1: At forty years old. Speaker 2: So that's about 1940, I guess, right? Speaker 1: Nineteen forty [1940] when she passed, 1940. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Now if I talk, would that mess up anything? Speaker 1: Well, I'd rather that you respond to a question--if she has a question about something-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, if she asks, but if you. The way it's set up, we can't hear you very well so if you just interject, we probably wouldn't hear what you're saying most of the time. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Well, could she hear me? Speaker 1: She can hear you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --but, yes. So, can you tell us how your parents met? Did they have a story about how they met? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): No. Speaker 1: No, we never knew that. Story_ID: 80863 Speaker 1: Okay, I want you to reflect back and tell me about your childhood and tell me about some of the--'cause you grew up basically in Mobile [Alabama], I guess it was, then in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, tell me about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in--let's start off in Mobile. Speaker 2: Okay. Well, in Mobile, I could remember--because we were more--less satisfied in Mobile, my dad [John Henry Williams] was anyway, but my mother [Ethel Battiste Williams] had a friend that she was very close to, this friend and her husband, and for some reason or another--he cursed a white man down there and he shot his head off with a shotgun. Speaker 1: The white man shot-- Speaker 2: Yeah, he killed Mr. Artis (ph.) and from that day on mother said she had to get us away from Chicago. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): From Mobile. Speaker 2: From Mobile. Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute. Let me go back to make sure we have this straight. Your mother's friend had a disagreement with a-- Speaker 2: No, no. My mother's friend's husband had-- Speaker 1: Right, (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: --had a disagreement downtown in Mobile with a white man. He called him a liar and he shot his head off with a shotgun. Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, who shot who? Speaker 2: The white man did, shot Mr. Artis for calling him a liar. So that was the thing that made mother decide that she wanted to leave Mobile and come up where it would be a safer place for her children. And another thing about my mother, I don't know why, but she insisted on giving me piano lessons and I hated it with a passion. Every time I went, I cried, but she made me take those piano lessons. But like I said, there was nobody like my mother and my dad. Story_ID: 80864 Speaker 1: Now can you remember--tell us about the house you lived in. What kind of house did you live in in Mobile [Alabama]? What was the neighborhood like? Speaker 2: Well we were born on Short Cedar Street, that was right by the gas tanks and with this little creek behind the house, you know, where the oil would flow through. And then my mother [Ethel Battiste Williams] decided that wasn't the place for us. We were all born in that one house, on Short Cedar Street. Then we moved to a better, much better neighborhood and we lived--that time we lived in a house and we had one, two, I think, three rooms and we had a flush toilet on the back porch which was unknown in those days. In fact, there were only two of them in that block. So we did have a flushing toilet on the back porch. And it was--it was comfortable. I can remember daddy [John Henry Williams] coming home and bringing the little wood from the--we'd sit on the floor drawing pictures. And another thing we could remember about in the South was during Christmas, when they started baking cakes, and pies and stuff for Santa Claus and (unclear) before Christmas. Then the side board, we called the chifforobe in those days, would just be loaded with cakes and pies and everything imaginable. And we couldn't hardly wait to wake up to see what Santa Claus had eat of the cakes and things. And I can remember one time I had an uncle, what was his name, Honey? With the hot fire? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Uncle Red. Speaker 2: Yeah, Uncle Red, he was a man that drank. And we had fireplaces. And he came in one night kind of mellow and he wanted to heat something. And so he--we had the fire going in the fireplace and he put this grease in the frying pan and was heating it and when it got red hot, something slipped and all that hot oil came on my--burned my kneecap. And being a child, I rubbed it and took all the skin off. It was just white and that was very painful. Because back in those days, they had something, a salve, they would put on it and it would dry, hard as cake, then they would pick that off and then they would put another one on it. In fact, I still have the scar from that. And another thing I can remember was, I had a peculiar eating habit. I didn't eat anything. And there was a lady lived across the street from us, she used to make cookies for the kids. I wouldn't drink milk. I never drank milk till I was twelve years old, from the time, you know, when I was a baby. And she used to make cookies for the kids in the neighborhood. So I went over there for cookies one day and she said, well I'm going to give you some cookies and milk. I said, I don't drink milk. She said, well you can't have any cookies. So I wanted cookies so bad, I drank some milk and from that day on, mother could have bought a cow 'cause I like milk so well. I just had peculiar eating habits. And now, today, my eating habits goes right back to mother because if I said I didn't like anything, she wouldn't have said, well try it. She just took it for granted that I didn't like it. If she cooked--what did you say, Hon? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): You were spoiled. Speaker 2: She said our mother spoiled me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): She did. Speaker 2: She did spoil me to death, though. And if I say I didn't like fish, then she bought me shrimps, but this is, like I say, it was a terrible way but I guess they did spoil me. And right today, I have those bad eating habits. It's pretty tough too. Story_ID: 80865 Speaker 1: Now, what did you like to do when you were a little girl, you know? What were your favorite activities? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't like to do much of anything 'cause my baby sister [Annita Ethel Vance], she liked to play mama pig with the boys and everything and I didn't play any of that. At Christmas, in Mobile [Alabama], that's when we celebrated with firecrackers. That was during the Christmas holiday. I could remember everybody was shooting the little firecrackers, and everywhere, I'd be sitting on the steps, I wouldn't touch a firecracker. I didn't want no part of that celebration. I could remember that. And when we went back to Mobile, many years later, I went by that same house that we were born in--that we lived in--moved to, and the lady graciously let us go through the house and see the house and took pictures right on the steps where we grew up and everything. Speaker 1: How did you feel looking back on it then? Speaker 2: How did what? Speaker 1: I mean, did it bring back a lot of memories? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it brought back such good memories. I could remember pecans. Back in those days in the South, they weren't called pecans, they was called "pucorns" (ph.). We'd called them "pucorns". Pucorns, that's what they called pecans 'cause with me now, when I got to hear when they say pecans, I thought it was one that you used, pecans, was what you used to relieve yourself with (laughter). And I could remember, you know, a star would blow all of the pucorns off the trees and we'd be helping our--just scrape 'em up and putting them in the barrel and I can remember eating big black figs, fresh from the fig tree. And it's just little things like that that bring back the good memories of when you're children. Speaker 1: Okay, what--tell me about--now, in your household, you had you and your mother and father, your two sisters and you had your grandmother too, living there? Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 80866 Speaker 1: Tell me about school. Where did you go to school in Mobile [Alabama] and how did you like it? Speaker 2: Well we've been--we went to Broad Street School in Mobile and, Honey, what other school did we go to, Broad Street? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): We went to a private school. Speaker 2: And then we went to private school and then we went to a public school, which was Broad Street School. And I can remember very much about that school that they say that a man had been lynched in the schoolyard and they would say every time it rained hard, you could see the blood. And I can remember as kids, when it rained, looking to see who sees the blood and this was in the schoolyard. Speaker 1: Was there a big tree there, or something? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a big tree. But that was one of the tales that had gone around for years. I don't know whether it was true or not. Speaker 1: Okay. What were your favorite subjects in school? Did you like--what did you like? Speaker 2: I didn't like math. I liked English and back in those days, we didn't have Spanish, and all the languages, you just had English, 'cause we didn't have that in the South. I don't need--I don't think they had it up here either back in the early '20s [1920s], they didn't have all the languages. Reading, writing and arithmetic was what you had. So I could remember writing. I thought I was pretty good at writing. As a matter of fact, I have some of the things that I did at school, at five years old, in my room in there. But I'd have to try to put my hands on them, you know. I have things like that from school, back in Mobile. Speaker 1: Could you draw too, like your--? Speaker 2: Oh, no, I couldn't draw very good. I couldn't draw at all. Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers that you remember? Speaker 2: Oh, now, I can't remember any of the teachers back there then. Speaker 1: Did any of the teachers or adults take a special interest in you and--? Speaker 2: No, not me. I think they treated all the kids more or less alike back in those days. Speaker 1: Okay. How many teachers did you all have? I mean, what was the size of the school? Speaker 2: It was small school. I don't think they had more than maybe three teachers 'cause the classrooms were kind of big and I don't think they had more than three teachers in the whole school. I couldn't remember name or even what they look like now. Speaker 1: Did they teach--did they teach you all any African American history in class? Speaker 2: Oh, no. They didn't even know about African-- Story_ID: 80867 Speaker 1: Tell me about now during the little pause we--you mentioned about your father's [John Henry Williams] father that came out-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --tell us about that. Speaker 2: Daddy's father was Hawaiian. Now, I don't ever remember meeting him. Speaker 1: From Hawaii. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was from Hawaii, I don't ever remember meeting him. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And on my mother's side, our grandfather was French. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): And Indian. Speaker 2: French and Indian. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, it's pretty mixed up there. Speaker 1: There are a lot of different kinds of people on the Gulf Coast in those days? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I imagine so. I can remember going to the wharf, where they--getting the shrimps and the oysters right at the--you know, right at the wharf, that's where we used to go 'cause we had--our uncle, he was one of those who worked on the ships. In fact, quite a few of our uncles worked on the ships that went around the world. Speaker 1: That's a different kind of experience than a lot of people experience in the South, you know, in the other parts of the South 'cause they don't have the same kind of traffic from people that have been around the world, you know-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --like you would in Mobile [Alabama], that's right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And then I can remember when we were kids 'cause the Mardi Gras originated in Mobile, Alabama, not New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And about a block and a half away from us was a man that made the floats. What was his name, Honey, Dr.-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Dave-- Speaker 2: Dave Payton. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Payton. Speaker 2: Dave Payton--Dave Patton--Dave Patton. And he made the floats for the Mardi Gras in Mobile. And when we were kids, excuse me, when we were kids, his place was just about a block from our house where he made the floats and every evening when we'd get out of school, we'd go and we'd peep in the holes, you know, and try and see the floats. But he made all the floats for the Mardi Gras in Mobile, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know what year that started? Speaker 2: The Mardi Gras? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: I don't know what year it started 'cause it had been going--it started before I was born. Speaker 1: Okay, so it'd been going on a while before they started it in New Orleans? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, do you know when they started doing that in New Orleans? Speaker 2: No, I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay, but you all did it first, right? Speaker 2: Yes, we had it first. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 80868 Speaker 1: Okay, well we were talking about school-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --before, well we just finished talking about the Mardi Gras but we were talking about school before and what school was like, you were explaining that. Speaker 2: Well, Doolittle, we went to Doolittle [Elementary School], I think. Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about the move to Chicago [Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Oh, okay. Speaker 1: --first and just get us to Chicago. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, when you were, I guess you were eleven, your family moved to Chicago? Speaker 2: To Chicago. Speaker 1: And you said it was because your mother [Ethel Battiste Williams] felt uneasy (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: About raising-- Speaker 1: --moving South with the racism being as strong. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: So, did your father [John Henry Williams] move to Chicago first and then bring you all up? Or how did that happen? Speaker 2: Yeah, daddy came first and then we followed him. Speaker 1: Okay, did he--where did he get a job when he first got here? Speaker 2: I think at that particular time, daddy was working over in Rogers Park [Chicago, Illinois], at a drug store, as a porter. Speaker 1: Okay, and so, where did you all live when you came to Chicago? Speaker 2: Well, when we first came to Chicago, we lived at 34th and Vernon and then we moved to on Vincennes, 30th and Vincennes--35th and Vincennes, and from there we moved to 4220 Calumet and all this time we're living with relatives. And then, in about 1930, we moved to 4131 Prairie and that was where we stayed until mother died. And we stayed until we all were married and left home. Speaker 1: Now--now, how did you all come up? By train or-- Speaker 2: Came by train-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --in the Jim Crow car, right in back of the engine (laughter). Speaker 1: Is that the worst place to be? Speaker 2: That was the worst place to be because you got all the smoke and all the smoke from things. That's where all blacks that left South came. That's what they rode in. Right next to the engine. Speaker 1: Now was it--did anybody try to keep you all from leaving? Speaker 2: Oh, no. Speaker 1: 'Cause we heard stories of people trying to keep folks from leaving the South, you know. Speaker 2: Well I think they had been leaving a little bit before we left so we didn't have any problem with that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: All right. So, how did you feel about moving to Chicago from Mobile [Alabama]? Speaker 2: Well I was kind of glad--I hadn't had any problems there but just the idea of going to Chicago was fascinating. Speaker 1: Did you have a big idea of what Chicago was about, you know? Speaker 2: No, I didn't have any idea but I was amazed when I got here, to see all the buildings and, there was a South Park, Grand Avenue, that was--what was before it was South Park, it was Grand Avenue. And we'd live right there at 35th Street where they had the statue for the black soldiers there. When we moved there, they built that--that wasn't there then but it was built in the time that we lived down that way. Story_ID: 80869 Speaker 1: Well what was the neighborhoods like--I mean what was Chicago [Illinois] like in the black community in those days? Speaker 2: Well, the neighborhood that we lived in was--was very, very good because when we lived at 34th and Vernon, there was this big lawyer they called, [William Grant] "Habeas Corpus" Anderson and that was the kind of people that lived in that neighborhood, it was professional people. Speaker 1: Habeas Corpus Anderson? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the greatest--he's the greatest one and he was black. In those days, he was the best in that field. A little bitty short man, I can remember him just as good. Speaker 1: Okay, now, who else do you remember from the neighborhood? Anybody else? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. Not too much I remember. Bill Day, a little fella that I thought I'd, at that age I liked, and his sister, Elsie, was going with one of the Harlem Globetrotters, I can remember that. Speaker 1: Do you remember which one? Speaker 2: Huh? Speaker 1: Do you remember which Harlem Globetrotter it was? Speaker 2: No, I can't think of his name, either, 'cause she married him but I can't think of his name. Speaker 1: What was--what was the community like in terms of the cultural life? And what was going on in the community? What did people do? Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, when I was a kid, I used to go around on 31st Street where the fighter, what's that--a fighter--the black fighter back in those days? He had a-- Speaker 1: Joe Louis. Speaker 2: No, no, this was in the '30s [1930s]. Jack-- Speaker 1: Jack, not Jack Johnson? Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a nightclub down on 31st Street and then there was another big nightclub called, Sunset [Cafe], down on 31st Street. And I could remember, as a kid, I used to go and--one of them had burned up and I'd just go look in--just a little because at that particular time I wanted to be a dancer (laughter). Story_ID: 80870 Speaker 1: Now, how did you get--how did you get that idea? I mean, where did that come from? Speaker 2: Wanted to be a dancer? Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 2: Because I hated piano lessons so bad. My--every time I went to piano lesson, I cried. When we came to Chicago [Illinois], the first thing she [Ethel Battiste Williams] did again was started me with piano lessons and I cried. And then the Regal Theatre--the Regal Theatre opened up in, I think, in 1928 and we used to ride the green trolley from 35th to 47th and it would turn left and go east over--and we'd go there, I think, it was three cents then. And I went to see the--to the Regal and I saw the "Regalettes". When I saw those beautiful girls dancing, I knew then that that was what I wanted to be, a dancer. So mother, she finally sent us to a lady, Viola Udonne (ph.), she sent all three of us there to take dancing lessons, right Nellie? And then-- Speaker 1: Who did she send you to? Speaker 2: Viola Udonne. That was the woman who just had one room. She taught a little dance, but it was really not too much. Then after that she enrolled me in Mary Bruce's Dance Studio and she had the largest one at that time in Chicago. Speaker 1: Now I heard of Sadie Bruce-- Speaker 2: Sadie Bruce was Mary Bruce's sister. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: She also had a--she also had a dance studio but Mary had the biggest one 'cause one of the--I told you, I was telling you about the four Kit Kats, Mary Bruce's niece was one of the four Kit Kats. Speaker 1: All right, and that was a performance--a song and dance group, right? Speaker 2: No, that was many years later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because at that particular time, Herminia was small and I was--well I was bigger then. She was younger than I was and she was taking dancing lessons. She was living with Sadie and taking dancing lesson at Sadie. But Mary Bruce had the biggest school. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause we used to have recitals down to the Eighth Street Theatre, I can remember all of that well. Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you--did your mother know you wanted to be a dancer? Speaker 2: Yes, she finally realized that day. I don't see how she couldn't when I cried for--with the piano lessons. So she was good about letting us do the things that we wanted to do with our life because my sister, Honey, she wanted to be a nurse. I refer to Lenese as Honey because she wanted to be a nurse. Story_ID: 80871 Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you get a chance to dance at school any? Did they have any programs or any activities for you? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I had many beautiful activities from Wendell Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois] because they do now what they call the "Hi Jinks" but back in those days when many a musician would go into Wendell Phillips, Ray Nance, Milt Hinton, I just can't remember all of the names that were in the orchestra under Walter Dyett. Now Mr. Dyett, I met him when we first came to Chicago [Illinois], we were going to Pilgrim Baptist Church and Mr. Dyett played the piano for junior Sunday school in the basement. And that was where I first met him. And Thomas Rigsby, he was a piano player and his mother was there. And when I--when we went to--when we went to Wendell Phillips, when Mr. Dyett became the head of the orchestra, musical department at Wendell Phillips, he's kind of took a liking to me because they had, what they called, the "Hi Jinks" now, what used to be the Concert and Walter Dyett was the first one who started the "Hi-Jinks" and the only one that was in the "Hi Jinks" was me, my sister and Johnny Board. I sang a song and did a little dance. Johnny Board played the saxophone and Annita [Ethel Vance] sang a little song and that was the beginning of the "Hi-Jinks" from Wendell Phillips. And Mr. Dyett, by having started with the "Hi-Jinks" with him, he's took a liking to me and I could--I could skip class and go to the portable when the band would be rehearsing and I know you heard of the--the play with Richard B. Harrison, "[The] Green Pastures". Well, Mr. Dyett took me, he and his first wife, took me to see "Green Pastures." And the funny thing about it was how we got there because Mr. Dyett didn't even have a car then. We were living at 42nd and Calumet, right by the "L" station at 43rd. I had to meet him at a certain time there and when it stopped, I had to stick--step outside so he and his wife would know I was on it and they took me to see "Green Pastures." And then they took me backstage to meet "de Lawd", Richard B. Harrison. I don't think I've had anything more important that happened to me in my life. And the funny things to show you about kids, when Gabe got ready to blow that trumpet, you know, and De Lawd wasn't even looking at him. And we--De Lawd said, don't blow that horn. I said, "How'd he know Gabe was getting ready to blow that horn." And I told Mr. Dyett--me and Mr. Dyett, we had a close relationship and as a matter of fact when they moved to Wendell Phillips, I was going to do a show. Speaker 1: Oh, where did they move to-- Speaker 2: To DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois]] and I was supposed to choreograph a couple of numbers for the show and I did. I worked with the girls and then I had to go to New York so I never got a chance to finish that. And that--that was the last time that I saw Mr. Dyett. Speaker 1: Now, how long did Mr. Dyett live for? Speaker 2: Well, I couldn't tell you. I know he married a Gwendolyn McGavock because the funeral home--McGavock's, they had a big wedding but I can't remember when he died. I don't even know whether I was even in Chicago, then. Speaker 1: All right, I just wondered, he was the mentor to a lot of musicians-- Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Speaker 1: Dinah Washington, Nat King Cole, quite a few-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Gene (simultaneous) (unclear)-- Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't think Nat came under Mr. Dyett. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Now Richard B. Harrison was, I guess--was he the most famous black actor in those days? Speaker 2: At that time, yes he sure was. And he wasn't--he wasn't young, he was kind of an old man 'cause his hair was gray. Speaker 1: Okay, he--I know, I heard that there was a--one of the first black theatre groups in town, was a Richard B. Harrison play. Have you ever heard of that? Speaker 2: Well I--well, I heard of him but I wasn't, you know, I didn't know anything about him. Speaker 1: Okay, I was wondering if you had heard anything about him-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 80872 Speaker 1: Okay. Well, in high school, you knew you wanted to be a dancer and-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah-- Speaker 1: --and you were involved in the music department and all that with Mr. [Walter] Dyett. Speaker 2: Yeah, because I was dancing when I was in school, like I said, and I was just a half a semester from graduating from school and my mother [Ethel Battiste Williams] let me go away on a show from out of New York, they needed a couple of chorus girls and I went and applied for it and they hired me. So that was my first taste of show business. I never did go back to school that half semester and get my diploma. Speaker 1: Now what show was it? Speaker 2: I can't think of that show--it was out in New York and I can't remember that. Speaker 1: In New York City? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were--the show was from New York and they were traveling and they needed a couple of chorus girls and I had heard about it and went to the old Grand Terrace, that's where I went, that's where they were looking, you know, where you had to go, and they accepted me. And I went on the show and I got sick and I didn't stay very long and I came back home. And that's when I started dancing, really started dancing professionally. That was in 1933 and there was a show, a movie show, a movie theatre, called the Indiana Theatre on 43rd Street and Indiana. They had the midnight show and then they had Sunday, Monday and Tuesday, that's when Leonard Reed took over as the producer of the show at the Indiana Theatre. Our salary was three dollars a day. We made nine dollars (laughter) for three days, show twice a day. That was my first really big--starting in show business. And then Leonard Reed--there was six of us girls, Nat [King] Cole's first wife, Nadine [Robinson], was one of the chorus girls then. And he took us from there to Dave's Cafe, that's where the Rhumboogie [Cafe] and Swingland [Cafe] was but it was owned by Dave first. Dave had a tavern at 51st and Michigan and the gangsters wanted it. And he wouldn't give it up so the gangsters came in one morning, told everybody to get out. They doused it with gasoline and burned it up. Then Dave's opened up at 55th on Garfield and that's when he started Dave's. Now, Leonard Reed was the producer at Dave's in 1933, '33 [1933], '35 [1935], he took us to New York. We had a battle of dance with the Apollo Rockettes. But in the meantime, Leonard had taught us to do tap dancing, like the men were doing. And no chorus girls had ever done that kind of dancing. They did what they called the, "soft shoe". But we were the only group of girls to do tap dancing so they took us to New York, then they took us to New York. We worked at the Apollo Theatre and it was kind of demeaning now that I think about it because the Apollo Rockettes were all beautiful, blond with blond hair. They looked like the--but that was the gender of the chorus girls in the Apollo-- Speaker 1: They're black but they have blond hair? Speaker 2: Yeah, they were over--some of them were blond, you know, dyed their hair but they were all beautiful girls. They were beautiful girls. More beauty than dance. And here they'd say what called us the "cowgirls". The Chicago cowgirls that was--and we thought it was all right then and after I got over it, I said, now that was demeaning. So anyway, we did our first show and we danced like they'd never seen the girls dance before. So the first show, you know, how they do right now they come and put their hand over you and people would applaud and they put their hand over the Apollo Rockettes and they applauded and when they'd come to us, the house went down. So that was--that was the time they did that. Now, at--you know, you heard of Etta Moten Barnett [HM]? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Well she was on that show. I told you I got a picture in my book. She was on the show then. Speaker 1: Was she with you? Speaker 2: No, she was doing a play in New York and Dusty Fletcher was there, Pigmeat Markham was there, Jimmy Baskett, as Uncle Remus, he was there. Speaker 1: Can you spell his last name? Speaker 2: B-A-S-Q-U-E-T-T-E [sic, B-A-S-K-E-T-T], Jimmy Baskett. Speaker 1: And he's the actor that later played Uncle Remus-- Speaker 2: Uncle Remus, yeah, with the white hair. Speaker 1: Movie "Song of the South". Speaker 2: That's right, yeah. I showed you his picture in there. Story_ID: 80873 Speaker 1: So we stayed, oh, yeah, and at that time they had the amateur show there [Apollo Theatre]. Ella Fitzgerald, made her first appearance in the amateur show. Being heavy, looking different from anybody else, it was kind of iffy, with the audience. You know how they--you see the show. But after she's--after they settled down, after the audience settled down, and Ella started singing, from that moment on, she became the greatest. Speaker 2: Okay so you were there--you saw her first appearance at the Apollo? Speaker 1: Uh-huh, at the amateur show. Speaker 2: Was the amateur show pretty much the way they show it on television nowadays? Speaker 1: Same thing, the only thing they had was a man named Jamaica, he done the part where they shoo 'em off the stage. His name was Jamaica and he was much funnier, though than the one's are now. Speaker 2: Okay, did they touch that stump before they--they came out? Speaker 1: Yeah, they had that--yeah they had that there then. No they didn't have it there then because, I can't think of the name--club, it was still open where the stump where they came from. I can't think. But not being from New York I can't remember but it was a nightclub. Speaker 2: In New York City? Speaker 1: In New York City and they had this-- Speaker 2: The Cotton Club. Speaker 1: No, no, it wasn't the Cotton Club 'cause black people couldn't even go to the Cotton Club then, at that particular time. It was only for white. And this was the biggest one where the club--Paradise. Speaker 2: Smalls Paradise? Speaker 1: No, no that was another one. I can't think of this one. But anyway that was where they had that troupe and when it closed down, they cut that tree off because they used to rub it there. But they didn't--that night club was still open then. So the tree stump was not at the Apollo then. So then we--we did stock. We worked--no we worked four weeks--four weeks at the Harlem Opera House, that's where Chick Webb had the band. That's where Ella eventually went with. He had the band there. So we did four weeks at the Harlem Opera House and then we did the circuit which was Washington [D.C.], Baltimore [Maryland], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and New York, that was the circuit. If you worked one, then you made the circuit. So we worked there then, we went to--we went to Baltimore and we did the circuit. Then we came back to Baltimore and we did stock. When you do stock--when the chorus do stock at a theatre, that means they are there continuously. They change shows every week. So we did stock in Baltimore at the Royal Theatre and that was where--on one of those bills, that's where Bessie Smith was. And this was at the very end of, I think, of her show business there. And she came back to Chicago [Illinois]--she lived in Chicago. We lived at 4131 Prairie and she lived in the 4100 block on Michigan Avenue. I'll never forget it because it was right by the Unity Funeral Home. They had a little park that run straight down the side and that was where she lived. And I used to go over there all the time and talk with her 'cause she didn't have no friends or anything. And she would--wanted to try to get a show together so we was talking about getting a show together. But then I had to go away and when I come back, she was gone. I never heard another word from her. I got a picture she gave me that was made in 1920 something '25 [1925] (unclear). Speaker 2: Now, how did Bessie Smith die? Speaker 1: You know I don't know how she died because I never heard another word from her after I, you know, from the last time I visited her where she was living. Speaker 2: I think she was down South in a car accident (unclear). Speaker 1: She might--I think she was down South and a car hit her and they wouldn't take her to a hospital because it was a white hospital. From that she died. Story_ID: 80874 Speaker 1: Okay, who else did you know of the celebrities around Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: You saw the pictures I have. Speaker 1: I want you to tell us though, you know, so we can get it on tape. Speaker 2: Earl Hines, of course he had the biggest band. Speaker 1: Earl Hines. Speaker 2: We had so-- Speaker 1: Earl "Fatha" Hines. Speaker 2: Yeah, Earl Fatha Hines. We had to--it got to the time that there were so many night clubs. There was the Ritz Lounge in the hotel--the Ritz Lounge in the hotel there at 40th and South Park, that was where Dinah [Washington] first started singing, in the Ritz Lounge. That was where I first met Dinah and we had so many night clubs. At 55th Street we must have had four night clubs everywhere you looked, every tavern had three chorus girls. They had shows, they had so many of them, right down the street from the Rhumboogie [Cafe]. Well, at first it was Swing Dave's, then it became Swingland [Cafe] and then the last thing it became the Rhumboogie, that was with Joe Lewis and the other--they had it together. And then over on the side they had one that was a jazz club where the jazz musicians played. Now, I worked at--after I quit dancing for a while, I became a bar maid and I worked at a tavern called, "The Congo [Lounge]", on 47th and South Park. Speaker 1: Now how far are we? Have we jumped over a lot of dancing from this? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm just asking. We jumped over a lot of your career to get to the bartending? Speaker 2: Yeah, well I quit bartending, I started bartending and later on in the '50s [1950s], I went back dancing again. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, all right. You see, I don't want to skip anything. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: I wasn't skipping (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --anything in the dancing (unclear) before we get to the bar maid part. Speaker 2: So, well, okay, so we'll go back to-- Speaker 1: So you--I know one thing we haven't talked about is Nat King Cole, your good friend. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, and Dinah too. Speaker 1: Was that before you became a bar maid? Or-- Speaker 2: Oh, that was in 1937. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was with Chef La Lonne (ph.) but I knew Nat--I guess I knew Nat--I knew Nat when we was in knee pants because his sister, Babe, and I went to the YWCA, we belonged to the club there. So that way I knew Nat. And she got married and I went to her wedding reception and there was Nat in knee pants, and Spats playing the piano. So then--that's how I started--I knew Nat. And then Nat and his family, they lived at 41--they lived at 40th and Prairie and we lived at 4100 Prairie, so we were kind of neighbors-like. But then I watched Nat get his little band together. He played with his brother, Eddie Cole, at the Panama on 58th Street, that was where he met Nadine [Robinson]. And like I said, we kept bumping into each other for years. Story_ID: 80875 Speaker 1: Now, Nadine [Robinson], was my best girlfriend and-- Speaker 2: Now this is Nat King Cole's first wife? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's his first wife. She was my best friend. And Nat had the band--Nat had the band on "Shuffle Along" but I didn't know when they got together. But anyway they came back through. She had married Nat. They came back through Chicago [Illinois] and they needed some chorus girls for "Shuffle Along" so they chose me to be the Sous Brit. So we all went out to California together. The show got stranded. Some of them stayed and a lot of them left. Nat--Nadine stayed and I stayed. And some of the--Mantan Moreland, he stayed, you know, I showed that picture. Speaker 2: Now is he from Chicago? Speaker 1: Who? Speaker 2: Mantan Moreland. Speaker 1: Oh, no, he's from New York but he was on "Shuffle Along", the show. And-- Speaker 2: So this is a revival of "Shuffle Along". Speaker 1: That was a revival of "Shuffle Along". Speaker 2: There was an older play. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, it was in the '20s [1920s]. It was in the '20s, back in those days. So anyways, we went to California and we got stranded. Nadine had relatives out in California so she and Nat didn't have any problems with somewhere to stay--food and everything. So every day, Nadine would fix dinner. I lived about three blocks away. I was working at a night club called "The Paradise Club" on Main Avenue and that was where all the movie stars used to come. And every day I'd walk around to Nadine's house and we'd have dinner. She'd cook and I'd walk and we'd eat together. And Nat hadn't--didn't even know he could sing--he never entertained the idea that he might ever sing a note and at that particular time he was playing at a movie studio for rehearsals. That's what he was doing then. And he had bought a big old raggedy car and I could remember me and Nadine and him going to the studio but we couldn't go in so we'd be sitting out in that car sometime four or five hours. Me and her just sitting out and waiting for Nat to finish his work. And so then I left and I came back home and I got a picture of me and Nat from the one in 1937. You saw that and I got one in 1942 at the Club DeLisa at the bar and Nat came through. No, I'm getting ahead of myself so--he had made "Straighten Up and Fly Right" right at that particular time all those songs they put him almost on top then. Speaker 2: Now, excuse me, ma'am, but when did he start singing? You said he wasn't singing? Speaker 1: He didn't even know he could sing a note until he got out to California. Now, the thing was, somebody--I heard this, I don't know whether it's true or not, but he was working in a night club and one of the patrons asked him to sing "Sweet Lorraine" and he didn't--he had never sang a note but the man told him, you got to sing it, this customer wants to hear it and he sang "Sweet Lorraine", the first song he ever sang. And it was a hit too. But anyway, when he started getting famous, he--I'd hear from Nadine, would call me from California, and we'd talk, and she called me one time, they were coming through--the first time they were coming to the Regal Theatre. And we were living at 5007 South Park and she called me. She wanted to know if I knew anywhere that they could get a room 'cause she was very tight with money. It wasn't like Maria [Hawkins Cole], you know, because they used to come all the way from California to go to Detroit to buy a car. Now, does that make sense? But anyway, I told Honey, and her husband was in the Marines, and I told--I said the place up to the house now where you and Nat can stay. So they stayed with us at 5007 South Park. And, well, actually through the years, I worked with them a couple of places. The last place I worked with them was at the Plantation in St. Louis and like I said, when he--then he had married Maria. Well, I never would go backstage to even talk to Nat then because I know she did not want to be friends with anybody that was friends with Nat's first wife, so I just never even bothered, although a lot of the people that knew him would go backstage and Nat would hardly have anything to do with 'em. Story_ID: 80876 Speaker 1: We're talking about Nat King Cole and I think during the break it was revealed that he used to win the turkey at the Regal [Theatre] every year but--at a Thanksgiving show. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): The Bud Billiken Thanksgiving show. Speaker 1: Oh, the Bud Billiken-- Speaker 2: Bud Billiken Thanksgiving show. Speaker 1: Tell me, what kind of person was Nat King Cole? You knew him well. What do you think about him? Speaker 2: He was quiet and he was likable. I don't think anybody disliked Nat and he would always take time. He wasn't the one that, because he was big, if you came up and said something to him, would brush you off. He'd always take time to talk 'cause I remember we had a--a policeman named Two-Gun Pete. You ever hear of Two-Gun Pete? He was tough. And I remember that picture of me and Nat at the bar, standing at the bar--at the Club DeLisa, and Two-Gun Pete just kept trying to say something to him, you know, and me and Nat's talking, and Nat say, who is he yelling at me. I say, Nat that's Two-Gun Pete. If you could have seen Nat, stopped talking to me and go over and shaking hands with. And we had a big laugh. Speaker 1: Two-Gun Pete's name was famous. He was about the only black cop over there, wasn't he? Speaker 2: He was one who would kick you in the butt and, oh, he was a horrible cop, you know. And he's not (unclear) now, do you know like we're even in the days now with the gangs and everything, somebody say, Two-Gun Pete ought to be here, they wouldn't be out safe. Two-Gun Pete here, he wouldn't be living now. Story_ID: 80877 Speaker 1: All right, we were talking about Nat King Cole-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --and well, do you know what happened with him and his first wife [Nadine Robinson] as to why they broke up? Speaker 2: Well, it really--the only reason was (unclear) Maria [Hawkins Robinson]. See, 'cause like I said, Nadine was older than Nat and she was not flamboyant, quiet, and she got sick and she got pregnant and she had a--probably had lost a baby, but she had to stay in the hospital and recuperate a little at home--while he was doing--that period that he met Maria. And that was the end of the marriage because she was something like Nat had never seen before in his life, you know, as long as--educated and all of that jazz. So, Nadine--I asked Nadine why she'd do it because she and I kept in touch until maybe about seven years ago. She lived in St. Louis [Missouri] and so I finally asked her, I said, why, you know, I told her because you would not believe this. Her settlement from Nat was $100 a week. Never, never went up. That's what she got till he died--till she died. Now, that's pitiful. But I told her, and I was kidding, I said, you know he could have had anybody he wanted but I still knew him as Nat Cole and the deal went down and she said, well, I just wanted him to be happy and she really felt like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, but I think, no I won't say this now, I think Nat regretted it because we were working together in St. Louis, that's where Nadine lived and he would get off of work at night--right--go straight home, laying in no kind of way. But this particular night he said, I'm going to hang with you. It was downstairs in the Plantation, they had a bar and they served food and we'd always gather down there and I'd be down there till 11 o'clock in the morning and so Nat say, I'm going to hang with you and me and him stayed there until about ten o'clock the next morning. Just me and him sitting at a table, drinking and talking about old times. And it's really a funny thing because Natalie [Cole] was damn near a spitting image of Nadine, the colored eyes and everything 'cause I remember telling Nat, I say Natalie, you sure you didn't sneak back and, you know, we'd laugh about it. But she looked so much like Nadine with her brown eyes and everything. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And I'd go down, we'd talk on the phone all the time and I went down a couple of times and spent some time with her and the last time I went with my church to Our Lady of the Snows up in Belleville [Illinois], right across from--and I tried to--called her telephone number and I couldn't get her. So I said, I wonder what happened to her? Then her sister, lived far from church, she said, you know I read somewhere that she had died. So that was the end of--that we had been friends from 1933. She was small, like I said. I got a picture of her. I got a picture in the "Jet" [Magazine] 'cause me and--there was four of us and we were kind of celebrating some of the chorus girls from "Shuffle Along." Story_ID: 80878 Speaker 1: Do you know Henry Fort? Now that was--that was Nat's dearest friend, I mean, his closest friend. He was in the band and he--after he married Maria [Hawkins Cole], he was--he was in Mexico and he stopped, called--called, where Nat lived and left messages and Nat never returned that call. And when they--when they set Nat up for that show on TV, you know, what was that, you know that show-- Speaker 2: His variety show-- Speaker 1: Yeah, no, no, this was that show where they had stars on it and they didn't know they were going to be on it. Speaker 2: Oh, okay, "This is Your Life". Speaker 1: Yeah, "This is Your Life" and when they got ready to do that show, they called Fort and he said he started not to go, he said, 'cause he--as tight as they'd been, Nat never spoke to him again since then. But see, this was Maria. That's why I say, I'd never go backstage 'cause I know she didn't want to be bothered--none of Nat's friends before. But I finally made peace with her, I'll tell you about that. Speaker 2: Okay, well what happened? How did you make peace with her? Speaker 1: Oh-- Speaker 2: You're not going to tell me? Speaker 1: Well, when we were working together in the Plantation in St. Louis [Missouri] and Nat would have to go in the back to come in, boy, there'd be so many people out in front when you were playing there. And the four Kit Kats were a hell of an act 'cause they said there were four people who could dance as pretty as Nat could sing. And Nat told me then, he said, well, he said this in front of Maria, the next time that I take a show out to Kit Kats, we'll be on it but in the meantime, I had left and I had married Leon [Hughes]. But the last time that I saw Nat, you remember the Sutherland when they had the jazz club over at the Sutherland, Jimmy Smith and everybody was over there. I was coming--I was a bar maid then--I was coming out then. I was waiting for the attendant to bring me my car and I was laid outside, laughing and I was screaming. I was laughing just as loud and his sister, Babe, came around the corner and she said, Eloise, Nat just said, I hear Eloise laughing. Said she's somewhere out there on the corner. Babe said, oh Nat. He said, she out there, I hear her laughing. So, sure enough, they come around the corner and Nat told Babe, said I told you she was out there on the street. And she came up and we hugged and Maria hugged me and about a year and a half later, he was dead. But in the meantime, when we were in St. Louis, we lived in a small hotel 'cause we couldn't live in white hotels. And that way I got to know Maria and we were sitting at the bar and having a little drink and we'd sit and we would talk so I got to know her. So then when I saw 'em, it was--we were kind of like together because she knew me, like I said, when I kissed her and then I kissed him and then he was gone in a year. Speaker 2: This is in the '60s [1960s] when he died, right? Speaker 1: Yup, '65 [1965] 'cause Dinah died in--he died in '65 [1965]. Dinah died in '63 [1963]. Story_ID: 80879 Speaker 1: Okay. Now, tell me about some of the other people that you met. We can talk about Bessie Smith-- Speaker 2: I told you--okay--Dinah Washington. Speaker 1: Yeah, Dinah Washington. Speaker 2: Yeah, we'll get back to Dinah. I met Dinah in the Ritz Lounge, at the hotel, at the Ritz Hotel in the lounge downstairs. That was where I first met Dinah. And one of her songs then was "Evil Gal [Blues]". Have you ever heard Dinah sing, I'm an evil gal, don't you mess with me. Speaker 1: How does it go, can you sing a little bit? Speaker 2: "I'm an evil gal, don't you mess with me." I can't get the lyrics but I got it on plenty of tapes around here. So then we just--we kind of became friends and then they opened the Colosimo's, they had a show at Colosimo's and I was chorus girl on the show. She had had George [Jenkins] then and he was just a toddler. He was just learning how to walk and I used to hold him and help him walk across the street. So we got to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: That was the son? Speaker 2: That's the oldest boy. So we got to know each other, I mean, real well. We worked together and we kind of kept in touch all the time. She used to entertain our little house and she lived at 82nd. She lived with her father at 82nd and Vernon. She'd have a house full of people. They'd be mostly white and if we were there six hours they'd never play nothing but Dinah Washington for six hours. Speaker 1: At her house (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: At her house, nothing but Dinah at her party. She played nothing but Dinah. And she could cook. Dinah could cook everything and she'd have all these people and she'd have chitlins, black-eyed pea, soul food, most people had never eaten soul food but that was Dinah. And we had a little thing between us about "Evil Gal" because they'd call me "Sweet Eloise with the big brown knees" and he--he'd, you know, this record, so it was only this--it was a little thing just between the two of us. I would call her "Evil Gal" and she'd call me "Sweet Eloise with the big black knees". I showed you that picture, that is, that's got that one. But that was our little thing together. And we worked together in Louisville, Kentucky, that was with the four Kit Kats and we had did, I think, about four days there and then black people had stood up--up top. And while we were there, that's--that [U.S.] Army base, Fort Knox, black Army base, but anyway one of the fellas came from the Army base to the theatre and said that they wanted to have a little party for Dinah and would she come. So, she would be giving no answer, she'd say, why don't, she'd say, I--should I go? I say, why not go. I said, why don't you just come and make them kind of happy, you know, they're trying to do a little something for you. So she and one of my partners, and I, we went to--and they had--I mean the table was set up beautifully, just beautiful and they played nothing but her records, again. So this was really funny. So when we got ready to go, one of the fellas, been working in supplies, and Army would say, do you want to go and get some supplies to take with you? I say, and Dinah say, yeah, let's go get some supplies. So, you know, those big ole Army duffle bags about a mile long, Dinah filled it up with sheets, pillowcases, all--all Army unit stuff. You know the color of them? I said, "Dinah, what you going to do with all that stuff?" She said, "I don't know, it's free." So I got--all I got was--'cause I used to fish and when I'd take my fishing trips when we traveled 'cause sometimes I'd get to a town and I'd meet somebody and the fella would take me fishing so I got a rain coat, I got some rain boots and rain hat, that was all I wanted. So I told Dinah, I said, girl, suppose they catch us coming out of here. I said, they're going to put us in the brig. But anyway, we made it out of there safely. Story_ID: 80880 Speaker 1: And then for--and then I got married I hadn't seen Dinah [Washington] in quite a while but I would always tell my husband [Leon Hughes], about of all the people that I knew in show business, and he would say, oh, you don't know anybody. So Dinah was working out at El Grotto in the Pershing Hotel. So we went out to see her that night. When she looked up and saw me, she hugged and kissed. We spent the whole night in the dressing room with her, me and my husband. She autographed the picture to us and she wouldn't let nobody in the dressing room, just us. So, I think, I didn't see her, then she passed. And they had the funeral at 37th and Indiana, a small Baptist church. And I was bar maid then and so I left to go to the funeral. Boy, it was cold that day. It was cold. And it was people that they didn't have any idea about Dinah because they had to reroute traffic two blocks just going east, two blocks going west, three blocks going north and south, they had to redirect traffic. You couldn't get near there. So the service finally started and it was hard getting in because most people, you know, none of the general public ever got a chance to go in for (unclear) and stuff. But I knew the funeral director that was handling the case here so when he saw me he took me on in with Mahalia Jackson, come on, come on, you all come on in. I think the funeral started at two or three o'clock. When we left out of there, it was eight o'clock at night when that funeral was over. They let everybody from off the streets come in and view the body before they let the people in church view the body. So Corny (ph.), that was the name, the fella that had the funeral parlor, they'd stand on the--I'm standing out there. Eloise, don't you want to go to the cemetery? I said I wouldn't go to the cemetery at night in my funeral. And then he said, don't you want to go? I said, no I don't want to go. And let me tell you what happened. When they got to the cemetery that night, they had all the cars, you know, turn their lights on around, but they couldn't put her in the grave 'cause the grave was too small for her casket. So they interred her the next morning. Well, all of my family decided to go and my sister, tell you, never went out there that I didn't stop and put that one red rose in a cup on Dinah's grave. And, I mean, it was--her grave was in disgrace. I don't know--it looked like nobody ever came out there to see it. But then I heard lately that somebody else had bought the Burr Oak, and they were going to make a memorial out there to Emmett Till and Dinah, something up above ground for her. But then I-- Speaker 2: She had a tombstone, I mean she had a tombstone-- Speaker 1: Yeah, she had a little small tombstone and with a little cup, you know, the little cup she'd bring out and she'd tell you, every time I go out there, we'd go out for mother's and daddy's grave and his mother's grave and I'd always stop and put that one red rose on Dinah's grave. And then it got so bad, the cup was broken and everything so I didn't get a chance to do that anymore. Story_ID: 80881 Speaker 1: Now, Billy Eckstine, he came to Club DeLisa and he had never sang a note in Chicago [Illinois] and from the minute that he hit that floor, he captivated the women. Oh, he was handsome and oh, they loved him. And at that particular time, we had started calling each other "Billy Boy," "Weezie Girl" and we were all girls and boys. In fact, (unclear) a picture I got of Billy, "Weezie Girl". And when my mother died, we bought her a little car. I used to drive him around in my car. He didn't even have a car so I knew Billy used to come up to the house at 5007. I knew Billy well and did I tell you--I told you about Ammons, didn't I tell you about Gene Ammons? Okay, Gene Ammons was working at a bar called, "The Congo Lounge" at 47th and South Park. At that particular time, it was Gene Ammons on piano, Gene Wright who became George Shearing's bassist, you know all the time with him. There was [Ellis] Bartee on drums and Gene Ammons with his sax. Sonny Stitt, "Bird" [Charlie Parker], all of them, Danny Green, all of them came down for sets at The Congo. That was where The Congo was. And me and Gene wrote a song that didn't have a title. I was a bar maid there. He wrote a song that didn't have a title. And the song took off but it was no name for it. So he was going with a waitress named Mildred and he married her and she had red hair and that's how the song was made, "Red Top." And you know that's one of his biggest hits? Now, Sonny Stitt--my sister was living in Saginaw [Mississippi] and I used to go down and visit her and stay with her. In fact, I went down there to get a job in the steel mill because that's where they was making the money. But anyway, when I met Sonny Stitt, he had just graduated from high school. His mother, Claudine--Claudine-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Wicks. Speaker 1: Wicks, she taught music in her home and his daddy [Edward Boatner], he was a prominent musician in Boston [Massachusetts]. Then there was another one from right at that particular time, named Harlan Floyd and we called him "Booby". He was the trombone player with [Count] Basie and I mean he was a hell of a trombone player. And he was with Basie for quite a while and then they were traveling, you know, would bus going to a job and we knew his wife, Doris. Honey [Lenese Brown] had been to their house. They lived close to us. And they was traveling and when they came to a stop to get off the bus for their job, everybody got up from the bus and everybody got off except for Bookie, he had died in his sleep on the bus. Now Bennie Green was another hell of a trombone player. He's from Mobile, Alabama, where we are from. His daddy and my daddy worked at the same sawmill. So I knew Bennie Green was with Charlie Ventura. He played with Charlie Ventura. But I say all of these group of musicians came to The Congo. Now Bird, Charlie Parker Bird, he was another kind of dear friend of me and my dead husband and the last time that I spent with Bird was me and John and Bird went to the Chicago Stadium to see Barnum and Bailey Brothers circus. So these are the musicians that I'd known pretty well. Story_ID: 80882 Speaker 1: Now what was Charlie Parker ["Bird"]--what were your impressions of Charlie Parker? There's been a movie about his life and did you see that? So much has been written about him. Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you what, he was stone junkie. Charlie, he was a stone junkie. He would come down to the club and he would play--he'd come down and play and would stay all night--he would come down and play at Ammons all night long but he was a junkie. And he couldn't get away from that. And he would like--he liked scotch and I'll never forget it that he took--at the time a double shot of scotch was a dollar and a half and the owner of the Lloyd West who owned The Congo [Lounge], "Eloise, be sure and get my money from Sonny." I said, don't worry, I'm going--from Bird--I said, don't worry I'm going to get it. As soon as he's turned his back, I got--I pulled him another drink for free. I never made him pay for a drink. But like I said, that was where all the big musicians of that era came down to The Congo. It was a little small place and it was--so one night we decided, me and Gene [Ammons], we decided that we were going to play a joke on Lloyd West. He owned The Congo. So we decided we were going to play a joke on Lloyd, Mr. West, we called him then. So, Gene said, I'll tell you what we're going to do, Eloise, he said, now I'm going to give you my sax and you going to be out there blowing with you and your man--martini and you're going to be playing the saxophone while I play it. So I said, how we going to do that when they had a little kitchen in the back and they had a little hole where you could look at the little restaurant in the back. So he got behind the wall, he got back there with the sax and we started blowing. He's playing in the back but I'm blowing in the front. Oh, I'm making all the moves. I'm going up and down and finally when it was all over, Mr. West came out and he said, "Eloise, I didn't know you could play saxophone?" And me and Gene, everybody had a ball. But we had some good times together. Some good times together. Like I said, I've known many a persons (laughter). Speaker 1: That's a wonderful story. Speaker 2: Yeah, that was really funny. He thought I was in there playing that saxophone. You could see me going down and coming up, swinging from side to side (laughter) that sax. Speaker 1: From everything I read about Charlie Parker now, he just--how did he function, I mean? Speaker 2: He was just quiet. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: He was just completely quiet all the time. But he was high all the time. Speaker 1: He was high but even though he was high, he'd get up there and play? Speaker 2: He could play with a whole lot of those musicians in those days, had habits. Bennie Green had a habit. I won't say about Sonny, you know, but they all did things like that. Especially the one's that was playing that type of music in that era, you know, to get from like Louis Armstrong was playing that new thing. Like Billy Eckstine, he started playing trumpet. He left--he usually stayed at the--he stayed at the [Club] DeLisa--he wasn't very--that very long but for--they wanted him at the Grand Terrace and although Mike didn't want him to go, but the gangsters, you know that day was full of gangsters back in those days. So some way they got him over there and he started playing trumpet, Billy did, and eventually he wound up with his own orchestra, with Dizzy Gillespie and Shadow on drums and everybody. He was going great with his own big orchestra. Story_ID: 80883 Speaker 1: Tell me now, in terms of the club ownership, most of the--all of the big clubs were really owned by-- Speaker 2: The gangster. Speaker 1: --Okay. You completed that for me. Speaker 2: The gangsters 'cause Colosimo was, you know, it was in the history with Al Capone. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Because Al Capone was supposed to have killed--they had somebody kill Colosimo because he wanted that place. Speaker 1: Jim Colosimo [James "Big Jim" Colosimo]-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah, that's the Colosimo's that we was working at when I first met Dinah [Washington]--when we first worked together with Dinah, that was Colosimo's then. Tiny Bradshaw had the band there but we didn't work together very long, about a couple of months 'cause were nobody getting paid and before they brought Dinah in, they had Billie Holiday there. And Billie Holiday gave us such a fit that when it come time for the show, her needle would stop up and she couldn't do no show until they got the needle for her to take care of her habit. So that's how Dinah got to Colosimo, to take Billie Holiday's place. Speaker 1: That's something. So, were the gangsters involved in drugs as well, I mean? Were they-- Speaker 2: I don't know--you know I don't think it was drugs so much back as it was bootleg whiskey because that's what the DeLisa brothers--they started with bootleg whiskey. That was their thing. And I think--'cause drugs wasn't too tough back in those days like, you know, like it got to be. Speaker 1: Now, prohibition started in 1920, right? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: It wasn't still going--how long did it go on? Speaker 2: It ended in 1933. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It ended in 1933 but that was you could sell beer but you couldn't sell whiskey. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: So you're saying that some of the taverns would bootleg whiskey anyway. Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --'cause that's how the DeLisas got their start. Speaker 1: Now, were they involved in the mob or? Speaker 2: Well, they knew 'em. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They knew 'em because, like I said, the Club DeLisa was closed one time. A sailor from Great Lakes came in, they were after him. They were after Mike. They came in and they caught him drinking underage and they closed the Club DeLisa down for a month but by the same token a policeman was killed right down in the basement and they never closed a day. Speaker 1: Now were the--do you know any details about that--about the policeman being killed? Speaker 2: Well, there was some altercation down with gambling or somebody hit him in the head and something and he died, but--'cause he was dead. As much gambling as they had shows upstairs, and you couldn't have that unless you dealt with the mob and stuff like that. They'd gamble 24 hours a day, down at Club DeLisa--poker and craps. Speaker 1: Now, oh, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: All that was down, right down the basement where the dressing rooms and everything was. Speaker 1: You know it was said, I read somewhere that one of the--one of the government officials who was looking at police reform in the country said that what they ought to do in Chicago [Illinois] is fire all the police officers and start all over again 'cause it was so corrupt. Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause we had-- Speaker 1: Nineteen twenties [1920s] and early '30s [1930s]. Speaker 2: --yeah, 'cause we had a couple of black policemen that was policing the Club DeLisa, you know, taking care of little altercations and everything. What I said, like I told you, when they put gasoline on Dave's Cafe and told the people to get out, when they got out they put a match and burned it up. Speaker 1: So, a lot of mob activity? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 80884 Speaker 1: Now you said--I don't know if we discussed--did we discuss your mother [Ethel Battiste Williams] working for Al Capone? Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother was the maid in the hotel where his prostitutes worked. Honey [Lenese Brown], she used to go out there and we'd take turns going out there, helping to make them beds up on Saturday and Sunday. And he'd call my mother, Ethel Waters. You know Ethel Waters was a big black--you know Ethel Waters? And he always called my mother Ethel Waters and I told you he gave her a .32 Smith and Wesson pistol, I got that in my back room right now. It's got nothing on it to say, with his name or nothing on it, but he gave it to her, didn't he, Honey? I still have it. Speaker 1: And that club was at his--Cicero--I mean his hotel? Speaker 2: The hotel was on Cicero, right down the street from--'cause Cicero was Western Electric. You remember that big Western Electric plant and it was just right on the other side where the Alton Hotel was. Speaker 1: This was called the Alton? Speaker 2: A-L-T-O-N, that's where--that's where my mother worked. Speaker 1: Okay, there's a time--were there any black club owners in those days, at all? Speaker 2: On the South Side? Let me see. I think the Cabin Inn was owned by a black man. That's where the first--that was the first--where the gay fellas worked back in them days, they called them "Sissy Joints", you know but that was the first--where the gay fellas worked. Speaker 1: The rave reviews and (unclear)? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: That was the only one? Speaker 2: That was the only--that was the first one in Chicago, the Cabin Inn because I never will forget my daddy's mother [Ella Williams] came up to stay with us for a while--came to visit and my grandmother must have been near a hundred year's old then, wasn't she, Honey? So, she--my mother asked us--don't you come on, let's go to church, she told us. I didn't come up here to go to church. I want to go where them sissies are at. And mother had to take her (laughter). Mother had to take her to the Cabin Inn. Speaker 1: So, there's some other people here that--George Kirby. Tell us about him? Speaker 2: George Kirby was the porter. He was the one who broke up the ice, where they had them big chunks of ice and like for the bowls of ice. He was running--that's what he did. He chopped up the ice and stuff. That was the job he had. And all the time he would--he couldn't--he was always doing his imitations in the basement. He could imitate everybody but nobody would--Mike wouldn't give him a chance and so eventually some kind of way, I don't know how, but Mike allowed him to get up on the stage and from that time on, that's the way he grew. Speaker 1: Now, George Kirby was an artist too? I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember him being an artist. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Other than one of the best impersonators that you--he could do everybody. Speaker 1: That was later on, I think on one of the shows-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. He was a very--now he was another very good friend of mine 'cause I showed you that picture, we're playing and we're doing this. That was made at Playboy [Club] in Lake Geneva [Wisconsin]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes sir. Story_ID: 80885 Speaker 1: Tell me what things cost then. You were just telling me off-line. Speaker 2: Well, at the Club DeLisa, to see a show, at the old Club DeLisa, ten cents for a glass of beer and 60 cents for a set up. That's the ice and the chaser and the cherries and stuff that they would give with, one dime. Speaker 1: The standards are different now for money, I guess. A lot different. Speaker 2: 'Cause I got some--I got, let me show you that, I got some brochures from way back then and it would tell you who was on the show and at the bottom it had how much it costs, ten cents. The steins of beer was like that. Speaker 1: Tell me about--did you know--do you know Etta Moten Barnett [HM] very well? Speaker 2: No, I didn't know her very well. I just worked with her one time but I knew her niece, I went to school with her niece, Carrie, because otherwise I wouldn't have known who she was when I went to New York. But she was in a play and a lot of times, you know, when you worked at a stage production, you could work and I worked with her then. But I know she's a society maven, yes, she's well-known here, and they had an article and I think she's 95 years old and still wearing high heel shoes. That was a write-up in the paper when they had, you know, her birthday. Speaker 1: Now what about Red Saunders, he had the band there, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, he had the band. He started over at the old Club DeLisa. Gene Ammons father, Al Ammons [Albert Ammons], played piano. He had the original band over at the old Club DeLisa. And he couldn't read music, Albert Ammons daddy couldn't read music, so they had to get somebody that could write the music for the shows. So then that's when Red Saunders was playing drums for Gene Ammons, for Al Ammons, and that's how--when they opened up the new club, then Mike let Red Saunders take the band over there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And Red Saunders stayed over there for a long time. Then he left and Fletcher Henderson came and he had the band for a while. Speaker 1: Fletcher Henderson? Speaker 2: Fletcher Henderson had the band there and then after Fletcher left, his brother, Horace, had the band there. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Now, you met some of these Hollywood movie stars, too, in the chorus. I don't know where exactly you met them but I hear that you knew John Barrymore-- Speaker 2: Well I knew him best of all because he was from the old club. The others, you meet them and you say "hi", you know, but like George Raft, Pat O'Brien, they were all at the new club but John, he was the big--the only one, the big one, at the old club was John Barrymore. And he stayed at the bar there all day and all night and anybody could drink with him. Speaker 1: Now, now, was the Club DeLisa like a segregated club with a black show and a white audience? How did they do that? Speaker 2: Well, it was a black show, I mean, it was a black show and it was, well we had a whole lot of--and then the old Club DeLisa, the white people got all the best seats. They got seats up by the stage and everything. That was a known fact. And then, like I said, where you could be seated would be what you passed out to the man that you--that you put in the hand, the film man 'cause they--they take you to somebody's table and push it over a little further and bring a brand new table and set it up in there with chairs around, move over, but the old Club DeLisa was--was segregated as far as the white people 'cause I got a picture made now, you see nothing but white folks. You don't see a black folk sitting in there. Story_ID: 80886 Speaker 1: Okay, now were most of those clubs like that--all those clubs or were there some black clubs, where black folks were the clientele, too, pretty much? Speaker 2: Well, on the South Side, black folks had it. There was, like I said, there was the Chez Paree. The black people could work there, like black acts could work there but that's all they could work. They couldn't sit out in the audience or nothing in between jobs, you know, in between shows. Speaker 1: So were there some where--well you said, that the [Club] DeLisa, black folks could come in but they had to sit-- Speaker 2: They didn't have to sit, you got what you paid for. Speaker 1: Okay, so if you paid enough, you could get up front? Speaker 2: Yeah, you could get up front. Speaker 1: So, the white people would find that offensive, or anything? Speaker 2: No, they didn't find it offensive 'cause they wanted to be up there too. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. So it wasn't quite-- Speaker 2: But it was just like a preference, you know-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --but then if it came down to the nitty-gritty, you could slip somebody a buck, and say I want to get up in the front. Speaker 1: So, it wasn't as bad as The Cotton Club in New York? Speaker 2: Oh, no, 'cause you couldn't go at all in The Cotton Club. The Cotton Club didn't have no dark skinned chorus girls. Speaker 1: Now why do you think it was different here in Chicago [Illinois] than it was in New York? Speaker 2: I couldn't tell--well, like I said, Connie's Inn, that's where the trio (unclear) was, Connie's Inn, it finally come, Connie's Inn. And then that big basketball player, that real tall one, he had a little nightclub in New York but I never went there but like I said, they had many places in New York that--that black people didn't go to. But like we didn't have any here but, well, there was some here like the Chez Paree, in the white neighborhoods, 'cause I worked at the, I can't think of this name over there, but that was only white. I can't think of it 'cause I worked there a couple of weeks. It was way over on the North Side somewhere. But basically on the South Side, it would just--white people just swarmed over here for these shows. Story_ID: 80887 Speaker 1: When you look back at your career as a dancer, you know, what were the highlights of your career, do you think? Speaker 2: I think a whole (unclear) I was young and I was young and anxious. I loved working at the Apollo [Theater], I--I just worked so many places, mostly it was just like a job, you'd be here and one reason I quit the last time, I quit, was traveling, it's where the station wagon traveling. We'd be in Portland, Oregon one week and the next week you'd be in New York and all of this was by--by that van, until I just got so tired of traveling and I said-- Speaker 1: Was it hard on you? I've talked, you know, to ballplayers and other people that did a lot of traveling. Was it hard to travel in those days? I mean, in terms of where you could stay and that sort of thing? I mean, how was it different from traveling today? If you had to travel today, would it be different from traveling then? Speaker 2: Well, traveling today--then it was a little different because in traveling in the South and places like that, you couldn't eat in the restaurants. You could go in the kitchen and eat but you couldn't sit outside and eat. But if you could go in the kitchen and eat, boy, help me, 'cause they had black help, boy, you could eat. I mean, eat and get everything but that was a known thing in the South. You couldn't--and it wasn't a--do not--they didn't serve blacks in restaurants, and that was all across the country. And like I said, but you could go in the kitchen and you could carry out but you couldn't sit and eat. Well if you decided to go in the kitchen, boy, you could eat. I mean, 'cause them black folks in that kitchen would feed you good and give you something to take out. Speaker 1: So you might get more, actually, even in the kitchen? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's right. Speaker 1: What about in terms of places to stay? Was it hard to find a place to stay? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it would be hard to find places to stay. But like when you go to places like Vancouver, British Columbia and places like that, you could always find places to stay. And like I say, when we went to--when we went in Louisville [Kentucky], we stayed in an old moth-eaten--some places were terrible to stay in. And a lot of times you stayed with private families, would take you in. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But a lot of places--a whole lot of places you couldn't stay 'cause now we worked in--when we left here with "Shuffle Along", that was with Nat Cole and us, we worked in Pekin, Illinois but you couldn't stay in Pekin so we had to stay, where is that Richard Price--where is that-- Speaker 1: Peoria [Illinois]. Speaker 2: --Peoria, so you had to stay in Peoria. Now we just--we just walked across the street and you're in Pekin but we couldn't stay over there so--you had--you couldn't stay over there. So we were staying in the red, and that was the red-light district. That's where he lived with his grandmother--lived in the red-light district. But this is a funny thing about me and Nadine [Robinson] and Nat [King Cole] 'cause they had run out of places to stay, so me and Nadine and Nat had to share the same room. And so I say, oh, how did you all sleep? I say, I slept at the foot of the bed (laughter). I say, you let me sleep with 'em--I'm talking about Nadine and Nat. I say 'cause I won't be getting in the middle of 'em, you know, and we would laugh. But I slept with them in Pekin. We couldn't even stay there. Black couldn't even stay in Pekin. And, you know, that's no place from here. Story_ID: 80888 Speaker 1: So how far did you range in terms of travel? Did you ever get out of the United States, other than Canada? Or did you? Speaker 2: No, no, I never got in and out of Canada. And you know the sad thing about it was when Nat Nazzaro took us to New York--when he took us from here to New York and trained us, we got some nice jobs with Nazzaro 'cause he had Buck and Bubbles, Stump and Stumpy--he had many a big act. Speaker 1: Now who is this, now? This person's name? Speaker 2: Nat Nazzaro. He was an agent. Speaker 1: Can you spell his last name? Speaker 2: N-A-Z-Z-A-R-O, that was his--Nat Nazzaro. And he had mostly big black acts. But then he took us from Chicago--he took us from Club DeLisa, his two sisters, three of us. We'd call ourselves, the "Wee Bits of Rhythm" and then he renamed us "The Rhythm Triplets." But the situation came to where we were working pretty good and then he had booked us for Europe. And my--the sisters' mother was our chaperone and she had a boyfriend. And Mr. Nazzaro had booked us for Europe and she wouldn't let her girls go unless Mr. Nazzaro paid for her boyfriend to go with us. So that knocked the European trip out. And I was young and foolish. I say, well, if it's going to be like this, then what I need to be in this act for and I left and that was the biggest mistake of my life 'cause, I believe now, had I gone to Mr. Nazzaro and explained it to him, 'cause he was paying room and board and everything for us, you know, and explained to him, maybe I'd have been famous, sure enough. But being young and foolish, I'd come on back home, went back to work at the Club DeLisa. Speaker 1: Now, what year was this? Speaker 2: That was in--that was in '35 [1935]. That was in '35 'cause that's when we worked with--the first job we worked with as a trio was with [Bill] "Bojangles" [Robinson] in Boston, Massachusetts. Story_ID: 80889 Speaker 1: Now what was he like? We haven't talked about Bill "Bojangles" Robinson, the most famous of the black dancers. Speaker 2: Like I said, I don't know too much, but this particular time, did you know that Bojangles could run back fast--backwards as most white folks could run. He was known for that. He would go to towns and they would close the town a block and the town up and the white fellas would start challenging him, that they could beat him running and he'd be running backwards. Well the same thing happened in Boston [Massachusetts]. And they closed the street down and one of the white reporters from the club came--from the club came to interview Bojangles. Well, our room--our room was here and his room was on the other side--dressing rooms. And he would just--the reporter was telling--and they got in some kind of argument. And--and the reporter told him saying, you know Mr. Bojangles, we can make you or break you and Bojangles say, "You know what you all can do, you all can lose so and so and so to so and so and so." And from that angle, I couldn't stand him 'cause I didn't even want a picture of him. That was the most foul thing I'd ever heard a man say. Now, the girls, they got pictures of that 'cause they didn't want nothing from that old dirty talking man. And they--that's what I heard. I don't know for sure but I heard somebody say like he'd be gambling somewhere and he'd be losing and somebody be standing by, would turn around and spit in their face. They say he was a mean old man. He was something else. Speaker 1: And the image that--that popular image of him, you know, we see him tap dancing down the stairs with Shirley Temple-- Speaker 2: With Shirley. Speaker 1: --you know, he was always grinning, you know-- Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh. Speaker 1: --like he wouldn't harm a flea, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah well, I guess he wouldn't, but I guess me being young and I just thought he was so foul-mouthed that I, like I said, I didn't even want a picture of him. I could hear--I showed you that caricature that that man drawed that I showed you--of the one I showed you that the man drew, you know with the white uniform on--with the white--now he made those and that was with the same show, that was "Bojangles Harlem on Parade." And we just did that one week with him so I don't know what happened to him after that. Speaker 1: Now, he's a little bit different from what we think, you know-- Speaker 2: I have no--I don't--I imagine he got worse when he started with Shirley (laughter) Temple. I guess--I think he really was something then. I thought he was something before. Story_ID: 80890 Speaker 1: Okay, so, let's see. Now, in terms of dancing, like what did--did you perfect some moves that nobody else could do? Or did you have a favorite move that you--dance step? Speaker 2: Well like I said, girls did not do the type of dancing that boys did. The men tap danced, girls did girly stuff. And what we did was tap dancing with Leonard Reed and even with the three of us. And then we had studied with a white teacher and then we did Ravel's "Bolero" in taps. So that--Mr. [Nat] Nazzaro did that for us, you know. But that was the thing 'cause they only had a couple of other--only one black girl team was the Edward Sisters and they did tap too. But we had a good act and I was just young and foolish. I come on back home and--and then in 19--I met my husband [Leon Hughes]. I married my husband. Speaker 1: In 19--what? Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954]. Speaker 1: Oh, '54 [1954]. Speaker 2: We'd be married 49 years, this year. Good marriage. Speaker 1: How did you meet him? Speaker 2: On the bar. Speaker 1: You were bartending? Speaker 2: No, I was just going to a bar-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and he used to always come up to me and say, he knew I was a church-goer too, look, how come you don't take me to church with you? I said, okay, he kept on saying, he kept on saying. So finally, it's New Years, and he said, why don't you--let's start going out together in the New Years, so we started going out together and then we started. And then after he kept telling me why don't I let him make--why don't I get a--why, I'll go to church with you. We've been married 49 years and I haven't gotten him to church yet (laughter). First I would--you know, he's a member of the church. He wasn't--I didn't get him to church back in those days. And I have a wonderful husband. Oh, he's wonderful. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's a little handicapped but he's wonderful. Story_ID: 80891 Speaker 1: Now you were telling me, I think, before we started rolling, that you were--you volunteered for the Bud Billiken Parade? Speaker 2: Yeah, well I walked--I walked in the first one. Speaker 1: Now, when was the first one? Speaker 2: It was around '27 [1927] or '28 [1928]. Speaker 1: So you were a kid when you were--and you-- Speaker 2: I was young. I just walked 'cause it wasn't big then. It wasn't anything big. So I walked in the first one and then in 1953 and '54 [1954], I worked with Marvin Murphy, he was in charge of the youth group at the 48th Street and Wabash police station. And they were trying to get something together for the young in that area. And Murphy got me and I taught 36 girls to dance. I was the first--I had the first dancing group of girls in the Bud Billiken--the history of the Bud Billiken Parade. Now they've got a thousand of them. But that was in '53 and '54 [1954] and we had a sound truck, you know how the truck go in front of you and the sound truck would stop and play the record and they would do the dancing and go on a little further. And then, that was '53 and '54, so then they asked me to pick the queen for the Bud Billiken Parade. Now you got yourself papers and everything else to get in. They asked me to pick the girls for the--to be the queen of the Bud Billiken Parade for the first--for '53, I had Mary Elizabeth Barnett (ph.), that was the girlfriend that lived with us and then for '54 I had Honey's [Lenese Brown] niece, her husband's niece, Delores Hicks (ph.), for that year for the queen of the Bud Billiken Parade. But I made a first in Bud Billiken Parade when I trained 36 girls. And it was really funny because back in that area, the neighborhoods was so bad and torn down, that's where they finally put the projects, that's where they tore all of that down and built the projects but before they put the projects, it was--it was awful rough. It was tough over there. People was living poorly, poorly, poorly, you know, kind of partway, curtains hanging all out the window--the wind and everything. It was--I don't know whether the projects solved it but--it solved it back in those days 'cause the kids didn't have nothing to do, nowhere to go and so I was part of the Bud Billiken Parade then when I worked at the Club DeLisa. Every year, I showed you quite a few--every year the chorus girls had to do a number by the pool, out at Washington Park. For years, we had to--I showed you two or three of the pictures in there where we did the Bud Billiken Parade, the chorus girls, Mike did that. Mike DeLisa did it. Story_ID: 80892 Speaker 1: Now, the Club DeLisa was at 55th and State, right? Speaker 2: Fifty-fifth [55th] and State. It was on the 5512 originally and it burned down and they built it across the street, 5513 or something like--back directly in front of it. Speaker 1: What's there now? Speaker 2: It's a vacant lot now. It changed hands to many a different one but it didn't last any time. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But it was fun, boy it was fun while we--we gambling, we'd be playing Tonk, in the basement, oh, we'd be gambling, it's hard just to gambling, just the chorus girls, you know. Come time for the show, we'd be missing--the show--would head up, we'd be still downstairs gambling. Mike [DeLisa], "I'm going to fire you all" and we'd be running up the stairs, trying to get on stage in time. But it was a lot of fun. We had a lot of fun. At one time, we had 16 chorus girls on that floor. That's a lot of girls, then. Speaker 1: Yes, so how long did you dance at the Club DeLisa? Speaker 2: Well I danced from--off and on from--like I said, I traveled a lot but I was with the original chorus girls. And I think the last time I worked there was with the Kit Kats, that was in the '50s [1950s], around '51 [1951], '52 [1952] or '53 [1953]. But I did a lot of traveling, you see. I didn't stay there forever. But I am the only living chorus girl from the original Club DeLisa. We buried Freddye Cole last year. So, that's me right now. We got maybe--might be one, two at the most, from--on the other side of the street 'cause when you think about it, that's been what, 1940, a long time, 63 years, that's a long time. And it was really funny because the other one, her name was Lillian Reese, she came by here, not too long ago but I was getting ready to go to the doctor because I had that heart attack and this girl was about 80, she had a--she walked with a cane and she come to get up the steps and she fell out--she fell down. The man next door had to come and pick her up and get her back to her car. So, I--look how good I'm doing? Speaker 1: Yes, you are. Speaker 2: I'm a member of St. Helena's Parish for 20 years. I won two awards. I won the biggest award that the--the black Catholic church, you know, the organization gave out--won that award. And I've done a lot of work in church and I've gotten an award. I'm not doing much now, just a little bit but I put in a lot of work in the 20 years I've been there. Speaker 1: Now, had you retired from dancing when you met your husband [Leon Hughes], basically? Speaker 2: Yup. Speaker 1: In '54 [1954], you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I had retired. Speaker 1: Now, why did you retire from dancing? Speaker 2: I just got tired. I was just making changes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then, you see, like we weren't--and one thing about it, like when I quit dancing, I was working at the Club DeLisa, we weren't making but about--I think we were making about $13 a week and we've done five--four shows and five shows a night. And so when I left Club DeLisa, I started bar maiding and a lot of places I was making 30, $45 a night tips. There was no way for me to go back to that especially when I worked at The Congo because, you know, all the big people came there. But then I was bar maid for many a year too. Speaker 1: Yeah, that is a big difference in money. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know with the tips, you didn't make a big salary because it was illegal for men--women to be bar maids then. But, you see, I made more on a night tip in the first little job I had than I was making all week at the Club DeLisa. So the money looked good, so that's where I went. Speaker 1: That makes sense. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: It makes sense to me. Story_ID: 80893 Speaker 1: So, tell me--now you won a contest in Florence, Alabama, right? Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Well that's called the "W.C. Handy Festival". I think this year will be the 20th year and it's one of the biggest events in the state of Alabama because that was where W.C. Handy was born. And I went down, I have a cousin that moved down there, Evelyn Cane (ph.) and I went down to visit Evelyn in 1998 and I was down there at the time of the festival. So we went to the festival and I was just--I was just tickled me to death and then they had--at the end of the festival they had the strut, where they'd strut around the fountain and the park and everything. So I liked that. I told Evelyn, I said boy, that's something else. I ought to come--she says, why don't you come next year and strut. So-- Speaker 1: It was a contest or what? Speaker 2: Well, yes--they'd pick you as the "Strutter" of the festival. So you saw me in my blue--you saw, that was what I strutted in. I had on my blue African garb and it's hanging all down and everything and I strutted. I--and it was a funny thing 'cause the parade is about nine blocks and it's hot down there. And I think it was 105 degrees and I strutted all them--all--all those blocks. Then when you come back to where they have the band, and everything, then you strut around it. So I come back the next year, I won the "Strut." So, I say, well, what am I doing next year? (Unclear) Evelyn say, what are we going to do next year? I say, well, I don't have no idea what we're going to do next year. But I went down there. I went there the next year. And I was the first woman Grand Marshal in the history of the W.C. Handy Festival. They called it "Ooh-Pee-Doo". I was the "Grand Ooh-Pee-Doo," the first time in history. I--my car that I rode in was a 1927 Model T Ford, that was the car I rode in in the parade. I was on TV all day long--I'm going to give you that tape. I'll give you a tape--I got one. Maybe have time to look at some of it. All that has my life history in it. I was interviewed at the Northern University--University of Northern Alabama [Florence, Alabama]. I was on the news all day long. I was in the newspapers. Boy, it was just a marvelous thing. You talk about a culmination to my years in show business, that was it. Then I went to his original home site, the museum--here's I sitting on the front porch and them old chairs they had--they had the whole authentic chairs like they had years ago. I sit on the porch the day I took pictures--I stand up on this--I gave you those pictures too. Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a cabin that W. C. Handy was born in (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: W. C. Handy--it was a replica of his-- Speaker 1: --the (simultaneous) (unclear) of this cabin, I'll remember-- Speaker 2: --his original--it's a replica, naturally, of his home, the one he was born in. I took a thousand pictures. I took pictures all around it. Speaker 1: How old were you then? Speaker 2: Let's see, I'll be--I'll be 87 first of February. Let's see, how old was Honey [Lenese Brown] then, that was the second--that was in '99 [1999]--that was in '99 'cause I'd only been there three times, '98 [1998], '99, and I won the 2000, I was the Grand Marshal. Speaker 1: You're 82 or 83? Speaker 2: Eighty-three. I was 83. Speaker 1: Okay, so you went those nine blocks in heat? Speaker 2: Listen, and I mean I was strutting through and I was kicking up and strutting and turning around. I was so damned tired. I finally said, boy, I sure hope this ends and I kind of looked up and I saw the end of the road (laughter) 'cause everybody say, you're not going to march. I said, yes I am too. I'm putting on all of my African outfit and everybody going to see it, I'm going to march. Story_ID: 80894 Speaker 1: Tell me the story you just told me. Speaker 2: Okay, just start it? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Okay. On August the 29th--first I'll start by saying that my cousin, in Alabama, he had made me two tapes of Dinah [Washington], old songs that I had never heard of. And I had--just playing in my car all the time but I missed one of 'em and I couldn't find it. And I mean it stayed on my mind but this night, it stayed on my mind. I said, I'm going get up early and I'm going outside and I'm going to find my Dinah tape. So, me and my husband [Leon Hughes], we just lived the good ole life. We'd sleep till 11 o'clock and get up at 12 o'clock. We'd play games on the computer and at night I'd look at my soaps all night long, that we'd tape in the daytime. Just a good living for old folk. And I go out there and I couldn't--I looked for that tape. I couldn't find that tape. I started back in and that's when the heart attack had me. When I woke up I was in intensive care in the hospital and this is a peculiar story. Have you ever heard of people saying that they saw the light when they died? Well let me tell you what happened to me. I--I don't remember when I got to the hospital or anything but we had an aunt that had died in July and I told them this, I said, look like when I was in the hospital, the wallpaper had great big flowers on it and all of a sudden I started to moving, I wasn't walking, but just like kind of gliding along. And I'd glide a little long and I'd look over to the left and there's my auntie's casket, with the lid open, and I see her. Then I walk--I glide on a little further, and I saw Father Kaminski (ph.), my pastor. I remember him putting something on my head and stuff like that and then I remember turning around and gliding back. When I got to where my auntie's casket was, it was gone. The next thing I remember, I woke up in intensive care. So I say I saw the light. Speaker 1: So you were sliding in one way and decide to slide back? Speaker 2: No, I went one way and after he did--the Father give it back, then I started going back to where I came from. And when I passed where my auntie's casket was, it was gone. And the flowers was back on the wallpaper. I tell you--and I heard about I saw the light, but I saw the light. They say I didn't, but I saw it. Speaker 1: Did you actually see a light? Speaker 2: No, it just got bright. See when all the--the walls became white from the wallpapers, not white bright. So here I am. Speaker 1: That was just in August. Speaker 2: August the 29th. Speaker 1: You seem to be awful lively today, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, it's kind of hard watching everything you eat after you eat all that soul food. Speaker 1: Oh, so you've got to restrict? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no--you know little salt, little everything. Speaker 1: Is this the first time in life you've had to do that? Speaker 2: Uh-huh. I've never really been sick, really sick. When you don't want to leave and I don't want to leave Honey [Lenese Brown] (laughter). Look at that grin. I don't want to leave Leon [Hughes]. I don't want to leave my family. So I tried to--I'm not the best of it, you know, I go--I've got an appointment with the heart nurse tomorrow and then every five weeks we have a session for all the heart patients that had congestive heart failure over the HMO and we get together, and they take your vitals and discuss new things, and what not to do and what to do but I'm still here, driving. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm doing everything I used to do, in moderation. Story_ID: 80895 Speaker 1: Ma'am, tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community now? Speaker 2: Well, I'll start in my community, we're pretty together, in my community, and I'm going by wards, you know, like I'm in the 21st Ward, and we have an alderman that listens to you, do whatever you can for you. Speaker 1: Who's that? Speaker 2: Armand DeVille (ph.). His name is DeVille, Reverend DeVille. Now, we had problems--we've had problems in our neighborhood. We still have problems but we had problems with the alley because when traffic is bad, they come down our alley. So, we got petitions--I got a petition on this side of the street and then somebody on the other side of the alley, they got a petition. So I took it to DeVille and asked him what he could do about it. So he said he would do what he could. And then I went back over, he called me, I went back over and he told me he said, well, I'll tell you what Eloise, said, we'll be able to get some bumpers for you. You know those bumpers they have in the alley. I told him, I said, that won't work here. They put it first--they put a sign, one way, don't enter, coming this way. But when traffic gets so heavy, they come that way so I told Reverend DeVille, I said, that won't help, bumpers won't help. So finally, we got the one--we got the one way alley. And we had problems with drug dealers and they stay on top of it--march and everything. So we did have a beautiful block club and then, you know, everybody died but we got another one. Armand DeVille, he listens to our problems. And there's a neighborhood--we get along very well, it's almost like living in a family here. If somebody gets sick, you know, everybody's there. Somebody died, and here I've been--I was general manager of the old block club and we used to have the biggest block club party out this way and I used to take care of all of it. I got the fireman--fire truck, I got the jumping jacks, I got all the food from McDonald's and places that gave food. I took care of all of that but--and they've opted for the last 30 years, every time somebody dies, I took up collection and we'd take collection for the family, do what they want. If they want flowers or whatever. I read at everybody's funeral that died. I got a thing of obituary--there's pick out some--pick somebody. And I'd read, but I don't do too much of that now. I don't collect or nothing. But everybody's been so kind in our neighborhood and we just look out for one another and I can't speak for others but we are an old neighborhood because we've been here 36 years. And when I moved here 36 years ago, when I got up and went to the garage the next morning, I had a sign, "Go back to Africa". So, but like I says, and I'd like to see all the neighborhoods do the same thing but everybody fights everybody. You know this one wants this and if you're together, you don't need a whole lot of everything, just a few things to get together with one another and be with one another and that's what we have around here. I can't say what I'd wish for the other ones but it's like I said, it's pretty--pretty down here. I want to spend all my days here, right here in this room, if I can (laughter). Story_ID: 80896 Speaker 1: Tell me, what advice would you offer young people who want to get involved in show business these days? You had a career in show business that was pretty--it was rewarding, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah well, now, it's so different from then. You see, because in those days when I wanted to be a dancer, you could go to dancing school, but if you could do a "B.S. Chorus", that was four steps--they called it the "B.S. Chorus," if you could do a "B.S. Chorus," you get a job anywhere. There was a hundred little clubs and bars that had three chorus girls. You could get a job anywhere but now--now in--long time ago, everything was so specialized. You got to take ballet, you got to take jazz dancing, you got to take tap dancing. We didn't do all that, that's why I--we were so successful. We'd beaten Apollo Rockets because we were doing tap dancing like the men were doing. But everything is so--everything--everything you do now, you--they teach you. One thing, like my little grandniece, she's going to dancing school. I went to dancing school, we got it all. You got to take tap, that's a whole session. You got to take jazz, you got to take, and all of that is one from the other that keeps going on. But when I was going to dancing school, we all learned it all basically, everything, if you wanted to learn. I didn't--never wanted to be a ballet dancer 'cause I didn't want to stand up on my toes. To me, I couldn't see dancing on my toes so I just took general--just general dancing lessons. But it all costs the same thing. Now everything costs a different price. For jazz, you got to pay for that. For ballet, you've got to pay for that. For tap, you've got to pay for that but when you got it all at one time, and I think it didn't--in those days, I think it only cost three dollars a month. That's all mother was paying for dancing lessons for me. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So it's hard now and then there's no place to work. There's no place to work now. Now that I think about it, I don't know a place around here that's got a chorus or band. There aren't any places like that anymore. Story_ID: 80897 Speaker 1: When you look back at all your work and all your associates and, you know, and there's so many great people and talents that you've known, what do you see as your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy is that I have lived my life the way I wanted to from the very beginning. I wanted to be a dancer and I've lived that legacy from the bottom to the top. I could have done a little more had I not been so foolish. I've conquered and could have gone a little further. I could have gone to the top, all over Europe and everything had I not been so foolish but I lived my legacy in fulfillment of what I wanted in my life. Story_ID: 80898 Speaker 1: And ma'am, this is a slightly different question. Well, before I ask you that, I just want to ask you, what did your parents think about your career as a dancer? Were they surprised that you were able to be successful then? And how did they feel about it? Speaker 2: I think my mother [Ethel Battiste Williams] was very successful and very proud of me. And I'll tell you one thing about my mother. I like sharp cheese and crackers and I don't care where I was, where I was on the road, at Christmastime, I got the cheese and those crackers. And you get cheese and crackers anywhere. So, mother was very pleased. She was very proud of me. She didn't see a lot of it because she died in '40 [1940] but she saw me making a good head start at what I wanted--the way I wanted my life being what I wanted to do because she sent me to dancing school and that was my main thing. So she--that way she didn't--made the only step that she could make and the rest of it was up to me. So I made all the steps on my own with my mother's help and supporting me and making it possible for me to learn to be what I wanted to be. Speaker 1: Now what about your father [John Henry Williams]? Speaker 2: Daddy, when we say daddy's name, we just automatically start to smiling. He had a way of saying things. I can't think. Honey [Lenese Brown], can you think of some things that daddy say? There's just so many that he was funny. And, like I say, right today, when we are all together, my other sister [Annita Ethel Vance] lives in Kalamazoo, Michigan, my niece she lives--my nieces and Honey and them, there's never a day that we don't talk about something that we don't bring daddy's name don't come up. And it's spoken with love, not with sorrow, but it's spoken with love and a feeling--of the feelings that we had with daddy. I mean, every day we get together, we laugh about something daddy said. She can't remember but it's so many of them (laughter). Speaker 1: Did he have any remarks about your career as a dancer? Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if daddy was as proud of me as mother was 'cause he was so quiet. I don't think daddy ever really saw me dance. I don't think daddy ever came anywhere I did. He didn't never see me dance. Mother came to [Club] DeLisa to see me dance. No, I don't think daddy ever saw me dance. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: He's so busy being a father and trying to be a provider. Story_ID: 80899 Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me, this is slightly different from the legacy question. How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as being giving, caring, supportive and love, that's what I'd like to be remembered by. Speaker 1: Well, from what you said today, it seems like you've been a good friend to a lot of people. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, been a good friend to a lot of people. And I've had a lot of good friends, like my sisters. See my sister, she's my best friend. My other sister, she's my sister. Her daughter, Annita, she's my best friend. I've got a lot of best friends. My neighbors, I've got a neighbor across the street, she comes over and takes my blood pressure. Neighbors down the street, if I go out time to feed my husband [Leon Hughes], we've got neighbors like you've never heard of but that's because we do for each other. Speaker 1: Well, I think, I think that's a good place for us to stop so-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --thank you very much. Story_ID: 80900 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell me a little bit about this photo and when it was taken. Speaker 2: Well, I was three months old, that's all I can tell you (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Honey, come here. I was three months old. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That would have been-- Speaker 2: Three months old, this is in 1916. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Sixteen [1916] still. Speaker 2: Yeah, 1916. Speaker 1: Three months old, born in February, that's-- Speaker 2: February the 1st. Speaker 1: That's April. Speaker 2: April, okay. Speaker 1: Nineteen sixteen [1916]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Ready for the next one? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): That was in '82' [1982]. Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh, that's my daddy [John Henry Williams], that's Honey [Lenese Brown]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, let's try. Okay, I'm ready now. So, that's all four sisters? Speaker 1: Yeah, three sisters. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Three sisters. Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and daddy. And that was taken in-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Eighty [1980]. Speaker 1: In 1980. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready for the next one. Speaker 1: That's my daddy. That was taken in 1980. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What was the occasion? Speaker 1: My sister decided that we should have a picture made together before one of us passed--the family--a family photo. This one--that was made the same time 'cause he got that same shirt on on that picture up there. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Larry, can you bring the side of that-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): There you go, when that was taken. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Now that was taken about in 1938-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE): Thirty-eight [1938], right. Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938], that's my mother [Ethel Battiste Williams]. Speaker 2: What's your mother's name? Speaker 1: Ethel Williams. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Daddy's name was John Williams. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, next one. This is you winning the strutting contest? Speaker 1: At the W.C. Handy Festival, in Florence, Alabama in 1998. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) the older pictures here are missing. Speaker 1: This must be inside--there's some loose-- Speaker 2: Ready? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Uh-huh. Speaker 2: That's a picture of me in front of W.C. Handy's Home and Museum in 1998. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, next one, and ready. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a picture of me standing beside W.C. Handy, on the statute in the park. Speaker 1: That's a picture of Mantan Moreland who was on Charlie Chan's movies. Speaker 2: He's a pretty handsome guy there, isn't he? Speaker 1: Uh-huh. Speaker 2: You were used to (unclear). Speaker 1: Mr. Chan, Mr. Chan. Speaker 2: (Unclear) this picture. Speaker 1: Now that little one with me and him at the--at the amusement park, now that looked like him, later on. Speaker 2: Everybody sees him. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, well that's the way he looked on that one because we were acting funny. That was in 19--that's way before--I would say not less I would say that would be in 1930. Speaker 2: Okay, ready? Oh, 1933. Speaker 1: Nineteen thirty-three [1933], that's a picture of Louis Armstrong, autographed, "Eloise and James Phillips," that's my first husband. Speaker 2: Now that's the picture that Dempsey Travis [HM] have in that book--in the book, that's one of the pictures he got for me to put in his book. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Fatha Hines [Earl Hines], 1933. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): I'm getting three different shots on these--the full shot-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): --close up on the face and then a close up on the autograph. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): That's why it's taking a little longer. Okay, Billy Eckstine. And what year was this? Speaker 2: This was in about 1935. Speaker 1: That's the four Kit Kats, the Apollo Theatre in 1951. Speaker 2: That's Herminia-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And-- Speaker 2: --Harry. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, who's in this one? Speaker 2: Neval (ph.), yes, one more. Was Milton in there? Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Who's that? Speaker 2: That's me. That's Eloise. Speaker 1: That's Milton and Harry. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, ready? Speaker 1: Those are the Ink Spots. I don't know what year--that was in New York that had to be in and around '30 [1930], when Leonard Reed, that had to have been '34 [1934]--'34. Speaker 2: What year was that--that was probably--that was probably in '45 [1945]. That's (unclear) [Dinah Washington]. "With the big black knees" (laughter). "Hope they'll hold you up." Speaker 1: That was the Bud Billiken Parade in 1944. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Gorgeous. Okay. Speaker 1: Hudson, who has this--who's the band leader in the Plantation in St. Louis [Missouri] in 1952. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, George Hudson was the band leader? Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the band leader. Speaker 2: That was a picture taken in--Eloise with a cigar, acting crazy in New Haven, Connecticut in 1933. Speaker 1: That's a friend, just a friend. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And this is some of the chorus girls from the Club DeLisa. That's Carolyn, Eloise and Tommye, in front of the Club DeLisa. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Now that's Nat [King] Cole with the original fellas in his band. That's Wesley and, I can't think of that other name, but those are the original King Cole Trio. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Let's see if we can read that. "Your Pal, Nat Cole." Speaker 1: We are the "Wee Bits of Rhythm" there in 1935, that was with Nat Nazzaro took us to New York and changed our name to "The Rhythm Triplets," but the "Wee Bits of Rhythm," we were at the Club DeLisa then. Speaker 2: At the Metropolitan Theatre and the show was "Bojangles Harlem on Parade". That's me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Who made that? Speaker 2: I don't know, just one of the artists made it. You heard them make it and sell 'em. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, I see, okay. "Bojangles 1936." Speaker 2: Yeah, we were rehearsing--we didn't--rehearse till about five o'clock that evening from the time the Friday show, the new show, we've been rehearsing for seven, eight hours. Speaker 1: That's funny (laughter). Speaker 2: Trying to take a nap. This is Eloise waiting for the new show to come and we rehearsed all day long and I was trying to catch a little bit of nap. Speaker 1: These are two of the chorus girls. That's Helen and that's Dolly. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a good shot. Yeah, that's me trying to catch a nap before show time after rehearsing all day long for a new show. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Most people like to stretch out when they take a nap. Speaker 1: And I thought I was really trying to keep from getting-- Speaker 2: --taken in 1951, at the Plantation Club in St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: And which one are you? You're on the left, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm on the left and that's DoDo--DoDo (ph.) and Nat. Story_ID: 80901 Speaker 1: That's an old friend of mine, Bull Whip and Eloise at the Rhumboogie [Cafe]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: What a name, Bull. Speaker 2: Louis [Armstrong] and Herminia at the Plantation Club in St. Louis, Missouri. That's downstairs, in the basement, of the club. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: I forgot to ask you what he was like? What did you think Louis Armstrong was like? Speaker 1: Oh, I loved him. Speaker 2: I didn't realize he was-- Speaker 1: I loved him, I loved him. Speaker 2: That's what everybody said-- Speaker 1: He was a--oh, he was, lovely. I worked with him before in 1933 in Washington--in Washington I didn't work with him because he was working at a white club--a white theatre in Mexican (unclear), that white theatre, that was in '33' [1933], so they had the harbor was where they had all the black shows and right across the street from there, the Chicken Charlie had a place where we would all come and eat and drink. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): So, that's you, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me. Yeah, that's me. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: Get that whole figure. Get that whole figure. Club DeLisa, 1941. That's me. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Give me a second. Okay. Speaker 1: I'm at the Club DeLisa in 1942, at the bar. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oops, I'm sorry, what's going on with this thing? There it goes. Okay. Tell us about it again. Speaker 1: That picture was taken in 1942, at the bar, at the Club DeLisa. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How coy, one leg up. Speaker 1: Almost every picture I got of Pat, he's holding up--Nat [King Cole], he's holding on to me, we're hugging. Speaker 2: Those are "The Rhythm Triplets." Speaker 1: People actually think you were triplets? Speaker 2: No, at first we were the "Wee Bits of Rhythm." Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's me doing my specialty number on my toes. That was in 1942, at the Club DeLisa. Speaker 1: Another shot of Mr. B, Billy Eckstine. Speaker 2: That's a picture of Dinah Washington and me and a group of other people at Robert's Show Lounge and that was in about, in the '50s [1950s]. That was in the '50s. I know it was in the '50s, about '56. Speaker 1: That's me posing with the show folks on the "Monarch of the Sea" in 1959. Speaker 2: That's '59 [1959]? Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], '69 [1969]. Let's see. Speaker 2: Maybe it's '69. Speaker 1: Yes, it's '69 . (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What was the occasion? Speaker 2: I think that was the one where we went on our 25th wedding anniversary but we made about seven, eight cruises. We cruised all the time. That was the only one my husband [Leon Hughes] ever wanted to go to. Speaker 1: That's the best picture of Bessie Smith. She gave that to me in 1930-- Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Four [1934]? Speaker 1: --thirty-four--1934, in Baltimore [Maryland]--at the Baltimore theatre in the Royal Theatre in Baltimore. That was outfit, wasn't it (laughter)? Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: That's me and Mantan at the park in Long Beach, California, at the amusement park, acting crazy. When you see his eyes, bucking (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: The fastest eyes in the world-- Speaker 1: --look like he's talking to Mr. Chan. Speaker 2: Yeah, the fastest eyes in the world, Mantan Moreland. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, Gene [Ammons] that's Gene-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): It's really crooked, lean it towards you. Speaker 2: That was taken during The Congo [Lounge] days. Speaker 1: Honey [Lenese Brown], (unclear) in Las Vegas [Nevada] in 1985. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Can't keep yourself off-stage, can you? Speaker 1: I tell you, I tell you. Speaker 2: That was made in 1937 back--back behind the theatre in Sacramento, California. We were on the way and that was when we were with "Shuffle Along." I say almost every picture I got of Nat [King Cole], we're hugging some kind of way (laughter). We don't need to use that one. Listen can we--oops, I can't move. Speaker 1: Now that's Sarah Vaughn at Herb's Lounge where I was a bar maid. Was having a little party after the close, in 1970. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right. Speaker 1: It was taken at the Playboy Club in, where did I say, Playboy-- Speaker 2: Lake Geneva [Wisconsin]-- Speaker 1: Lake Geneva, having fun with George Kirby. That was made in 19--I was working here in 19--1975, I think. Speaker 2: They're making a playmate out of him. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Top left. Speaker 2: Top left--we're laughing at something funny somebody said on the cruise ship, "The Song of Norway" in 1979. Speaker 1: And that's--isn't that a sweet picture of me and my little ole husband [Leon Hughes]. I tell you, wede been married 25 years, that was our 25th anniversary that I treated him to that cruise and he never went on another one. We all say--we always say, one time's enough for anything. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, this one next. Speaker 1: We're laughing, always something funny going on the cruise ship. Speaker 2: That's a picture of my sweetie pie, all by himself, in his white slacks, in his blue coat, looking good (laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): It looks like he's dressed for sailing. Speaker 2: And this one, we were on--we were going to the Sandy Eagle--not San--San Juan--we were going to the hotel in San Juan to see a show and for my husband to gamble. He liked to gamble and he won $700 that night and gave it to me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Very nice. Story_ID: 80902 Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): First of all, I want to say that this is--this is Scott Stearns, videographer and it's February 12th, 2003 and we are here at The HistoryMakers offices doing photographs with--go ahead and tell us your name. Speaker 2: Oh, my name is Eloise "D" Hughes and I'm 87 years old. I live in Chicago [Illinois] at 9542 South Green, with my husband [Leon Hughes]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that's great. Now what we're going to do is each time I put a photo up, just brief answers, tell me who it is in the photo-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): --when it was taken, to the best of your recollection, and where it was taken, to the best of your recollection. Let's start with this one, that's up in front now. Speaker 2: They're the--they're the Chocolateers and I got that picture when they worked at the Club DeLisa in the early '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Would you spell Chocolateers for us? Speaker 2: C-H-O-C-O-L-A-T-E-E-R-S. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and most people should know but when we make the--when we make the caption, if you could spell DeLisa for us. Speaker 2: Okay. At the Club DeLisa, D-E, capital L-I-S-A. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. Now I'm going to flip it over and ask you to give me a description of this photo. Speaker 2: Now that is Velma Middleton, the songstress with Louis Armstrong. She was a heavy woman and you wouldn't believe it. She could do the splits and that was taken in 1950 at the Plantation Club in St. Louis, Missouri. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Give me a description for this one. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead. Speaker 2: That is Dinah Washington and that picture was taken, excuse me, at the El Grotto Lounge, at 64th and Cottage Grove, at the Pershing Hotel, and that was in 1954. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): All right, okay. Speaker 2: That's Little Stanley (unclear). I worked with them--we worked with them at a state fair in Indiana. I can't remember exactly where it was but Roland (unclear), the middle one, he lived in Chicago and he just died about three years ago. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, all right, go ahead and give me the description for this. I know it has his name on there-- Speaker 2: Well, that's Vic Palmer. He was a comedian and he sang opera. I worked with him at a model supper club in Vancouver, British Columbia in 1953. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And this one. Speaker 2: Now, this is a Chicago group, "The Three Rockets." Two of the fellows, we went to Mary Bruce's dance school in 1930 and then they formed this team, "The Three Rockets." We were all quite young then. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. All right, go ahead, please. Speaker 2: Oh, now, this is where we would go to, after the breakfast dance, we'd dress up in our finery and that was at Speakers Lounge, at 55th and Michigan-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Spell the name of the place. Speaker 1: S-P-E-A-K-E-R-S, Speakers Inn, I-N-N. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Do you know the names of all the people in here? Speaker 1: Just about. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Can you--starting from this side, on your left, can you tell me who each person is? Speaker 1: That's Homer Leah (ph.), chorus girl, Eloise, a chorus girl, Freddye, chorus girl, Hazel, a chorus girl, Tommee, a chorus girl, Delores, a chorus girl and the other two are waitresses from the Club DeLisa. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and did you tell us the year for this? Do you remember about what year? Speaker 1: Oh, that was in--let's see, 1940 and '41 [1941] or '42 [1942]. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, very good. How about these fellas here? Speaker 1: Oh, that--that is Stumpy--Stump and Stumpy. They were from New York. We were managed by Nat Nazzaro when I was with "The Rhythm Triplets" and that picture was given to me in 1940. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay, what about this one? Speaker 1: Now that's Mary Lou Williams. She was our first known black jazz pianist and my ex--my first husband [James Phillips] gave me that picture and that was given to us in 1933. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay, go ahead with the description, please. Speaker 1: Now that was one of the very old blues singers, named Chippie Hill. Chippie was--in the late '20s' [1920s] and she was one of the first well-known blues singers. She disappeared for a long time and didn't anybody know where she was. So she came back to work again, they found her and she came back to work and she worked at the Club DeLisa. That was in about 1943 and they called her back to New York to do some work in New York and she was killed by an automobile. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How does she spell her first name? Speaker 1: C-H-A-P-P-I-E, [sic, C-H-I-P-P-I-E] Chippie, H-I-L-L, Chippie Hill. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Next photo here. Speaker 1: Now that's Kay Davis. She was a--she was a vocalist with Duke Ellington's band and we worked with her in Washington, D.C. in, I would say, 1935. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next one here. Speaker 1: And those are the Ames Brothers. We worked with them in Windsor, Canada in 1953. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, okay. Speaker 1: Now that was one of the chorus numbers at the Club DeLisa and that was taken in 1944. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: And we used to play in the alley all the time, right in back of the DeLisa. We'd go out there during rehearsals and, this is a rehearsal morning. That's Lorraine on the left, school girl in the middle, and me on the right. Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, did you tell us the year? You said the '30s [1930s] right? Speaker 1: No, that was in--at Club DeLisa about--in the '40s [1940s]-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): '40s-- Speaker 2: --it was early '40s-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: --all of these are in the '40s. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next one. Speaker 2: Oh, that was taken in '41' [1941] on my 28th birthday, downstairs in the basement, and we are celebrating my birthday. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and which one are you? Speaker 2: The one with the cake in the middle. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Here. Speaker 2: Yeah, right there. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, let's make sure we point that out, right there. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, very good. Go ahead with this. Speaker 2: Okay, that's fun out in the alley. We were waiting to go on stage at the Breakfast (unclear) and you see it's daylight and that's Maria (unclear) out on the left, Dorothy Pool above her, Lorraine above her, Tommye on the other side of Lorraine, Willa and me in the middle. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, all right. Tell us about this one. Speaker 2: Okay, now this is a--this is a--the Four Horsemen. We were the four buddies-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: --at the chorus, at the Club DeLisa. On the left at top is Tommye, next to her is Delores, me and Freddye Bates Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, so Freddye spells her name, F-R-E-D-D-- Speaker 2: F-R-E-D-D-Y-E, Freddye. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): --Y-E, okay. And then, I don't know if we can make it out, these two names? Speaker 2: Tommye, T-O-M-M-Y-E. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And that's Delores, "D", we call her "D". Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And we go to the top, we got an action photo here. Go ahead. Speaker 2: Now this is, you know I had a big picture made of the whole stage and left it at home. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Oh, dear. Speaker 2: This was the finale. That was the "Honey Dripper." I'll never forget it because the shows last one month but they kept this show in for two months because of that song. That's Freddye Bates on the left, I'm trying to think of--but that's Bunky in the middle, the comedian and-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How does he spell-- Speaker 2: Bunky, B-U-N-K-Y-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: --Bunky, and that's Eloise. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, great. Let's start with this one. Speaker 2: Okay, that's-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): You see the marks that--where Freddye and Eloise are and then Tommye and-- Speaker 2: I can call every name up there. That's the whole chorus. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, why don't we do, starting with the back row, left to right. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): And then the two in the center, and then the front three. So we'll start in the back row. Speaker 2: Okay. That's Willa, that's Lorraine and the back of Lorraine is Voluptuous "V", and then there's--he was with the Steeplechasers, that's Herman with the Steeplechasers, that's Lanky "V", that's Lanky "V"--that's Dorothy--Dorothy Pool, that's Mabel. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and then-- Speaker 2: That's Freddye Bates, that's me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and then we've got-- Speaker 2: That's my sister, Annita. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And that's Golden and that's Tommye. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and she spells this? Speaker 1: G-O-L-D-E-N, Golden. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, Golden, and your sister's name? Speaker 2: Annita, A-N-N-I-T-A. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, there's one Lanky? Speaker 2: Yeah, this is Lanky "V", on the other side--that's Lanky "V", and on the other side, that's Voluptuous "V". We had two "V"s and that was the way we called them. One was heavy and voluptuous and the other was tall and thin. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And we have one more on this card. We go down to this newspaper clipping here. Go ahead and talk about it-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a print. It was from out of the Pittsburgh Courier, they're out of business now. I can't remember what year that was. But that's Freddye, Eloise and Lola Drake. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. We'll do one more thing. (Unclear) caption. Speaker 2: I have--I had a picture of Little Miss Corn Shucks, too, I left home. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell me about this one. Speaker 2: Oh, now that's the "Honey Dripper" again, but it's a fuller picture of--I can't really recall everybody's name but I know the fella in the middle is Bunky, on the left is Freddye, on the right is me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And that's Willa Neal there, there's my sister, Annita there. There's-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): How about I do this? You tell me as we--as I go across and it'll be a lot--who's this? Speaker 2: Okay. That's Tommye. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And that's Goldie. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's Freddye. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: In the middle is School Girl. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's Bunky. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's me. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's Lanky "V". Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: That's Willa. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And that's my sister, Annita. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, that'll give us enough to-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead with the description for this one. Speaker 2: This is my great nephew, his name is Keith Clark. K-E-I-T-H, C-L-A-R-K, and he's with the Spartans. He plays with the Spartans at Marian Catholic [High School] in Chicago Heights [Illinois]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What year was this taken? Speaker 2: This was taken this year. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Yes, this year. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Two thousand two [2002]? Speaker 2: Two thousand two. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and-- Speaker 2: And now this is--this is my little niece. This is Lenese, L-E-N-E-S-E, Clark. She's attending American Dance Center in Homewood for the last four years. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, and this was also a current photo, taken in 2002? Speaker 2: Ah, yes, yes. And I was kind of hoping to get these together. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, go ahead. Speaker 2: Okay, now that's my--that's Keith, my-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): What year? This was earlier than the other one. Speaker 2: This was taken in--that was in middle school. So that had to have been taken--and this is about '98 [1998]. He was in middle school then. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: And Lenese, she's a cheerleader-- Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Uh-huh. Speaker 2: --at--she was in first grade and she was a cheerleader for the children's football team, which her brother coaches now. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay, what year would this have been? Speaker 2: This, let's see, it was first grade. She's nine now. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Nine is third grade so it's a couple of years ago, probably 2000-- Speaker 2: No, it was--you know what, it was '99 [1999]. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Nineteen ninety-nine. Speaker 2: It's on the back of there. Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh...