 Story_ID: 237303 Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer and Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer. Today's date is Monday, October 11th, 2004, and this interview is taking place at Union Baptist Church in Hopewell, Virginia. Now if you would please for the record Reverend Harris tell us your full name including your middle name and spell it. Speaker 2: Curtis W. West. Wait a minute, let's, let me try it all over again. Curtis West Harris, Sr. My name, C-U-R-T-I-S, W-E-S-T, H-A-R-R-I-S, Sr. Speaker 1: Reverend Harris, would you please tell us the date and location of your birth? Speaker 2: July the 1st, 1924, in Surry County [Virginia] in a town called Dendron [Virginia]. Speaker 1: Could you spell Dendron? Speaker 2: D-E-N-R-O-N [sic. D-E-N-D-R-O-N]. Speaker 1: And would you please tell us your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a minister. Story_ID: 237304 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris, let's begin talking a little bit about your mother, starting with her name and where she was born and where she grew up as a child. Speaker 2: My mother was named Thelma Harris. She was Washington first and--before she married my father, Sandy Harris. She was born in Nansemond County in Virginia, Nansemond County, and it's no longer in existence. They merged the county of Nansemond and Suffolk County, I mean Virginia, I mean Suffolk [Virginia], the state, the City of Suffolk, and they merged those two. So my mother lived in that area and she went to school in that area and she stopped in her elementary schools. Speaker 1: Why did she stop? Speaker 2: Because it was not easy for kids to go to school in the rural. They had to go to the farm. My grandfather was a sharecropper and so my mother married my father and then they moved to Surry [County, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Did your mother ever talk about what life was like for her as a little girl growing up in Nansemond County? Speaker 2: She, my mother used to talk about--and all of my family, a humorous family. We had fun, even though we didn't have much, they loved each other. We had family reunions often, and of course because you are on the farm you always had plenty to eat, so they'll go out in the backyard and kill a chicken in a minute, and everybody would have all the chicken they want. If you wait awhile, they'll cut, they'd kill a pig, and if you wait a little while longer than that, they'll kill a cow, and then go down and get you some milk, and then my grandmother would make some butter. So, we were getting along good because we had plenty to eat and clothes was not important as they are now. They, as long as you were clean and get you some overalls and a shirt and you're okay. And so that was the life in my mother's growing up, but she got married early. I don't know how old she was, but she was relatively young when she got married and she then produced six children. Speaker 1: Do you know how she met your father? Speaker 2: I don't know, probably at the church because that was the going place now where you had to go to meet people, you go to church. So, they probably met the first time at the church. Story_ID: 237305 Speaker 1: So, let's talk a little bit about your father, Sandy Harris. Can you tell us where he grew up as a boy and what life was like for him as a boy? Speaker 2: My father, I think he grew up in Nansemond County [Virginia] also, but they moved, my mother [Thelma Washington Harris] and my father moved to Surry [County, Virginia] later. My father was a farmer, and at one point he went to the mill to work, and in Surry County, and the mill caught on fire and it burned up the whole mill and they never rebuilt it. Surry then was a thriving county, plenty jobs and some people were, had businesses, but my father, when the mill burned down, my father tried to go back to the farming, but he had lost his skills and so he went to Richmond [Virginia] because he heard that there were some jobs in Richmond, people who were in the tobacco plants. So, he went to Richmond looking for work and he got a job and-- Speaker 1: At a tobacco plant? Speaker 2: Yes, and by this time my father was a young man and he was, he became very frustrated. He had, at this time he had five children and his family was removed from him, and of course he's a country boy, and he got to Richmond he was in the city and he saw a lot of things that he'd never seen before. So, he said he would come home on the weekends and catch the train and then he would go back to work. And, and my mother became pregnant with her sixth child, which was me, so my father with his frustration, he didn't know which way to go. I suspect that he saw some other things going on, some other women looking at him and everything, and my father was a very handsome young man like me. Story_ID: 237306 Speaker 1: So he [Harris' father, Sandy Harris] decided that he was not going home in July. He was supposed to come home on the Fourth of July, and he didn't come. They done got to him, yeah in the big city. And my mother [Thelma Washington Harris] realized that it was time for me to come out, so she--and I was born on July 1st, so my mother decided that she was not going to tell my father until he got home as he's coming on the Fourth of July, and my father didn't come. So, the train coming into Surry [County, Virginia] passed right by our house, and my sisters and brothers used to stand on the porch and wave at daddy when the train passed by, and he would be on the caboose and he would wave back at them, but they had to go down a little bit down the street so he could get off the train, and at the end of the train at the caboose, that's when they would wave, and they were out there on the Fourth of July waving, but my daddy was not on the train. So, they went back the next day and he was not on the train. The third day my mother said, "Don't wave, don't go to wave no more because he will come when he wants to," and that's the way my mother was. She ain't gonna worry too much, and she was able to stay on this earth for ninety-three years because she didn't worry too much about anything. So, my father didn't get back. When he got back, I was twelve years old. Speaker 2: Did the family have any contact with him during that time? Speaker 1: We didn't know where he was. We know he went to Richmond [Virginia], but we didn't know where--Richmond was like another country from Surry. So, but my oldest sister [Effie Harris Connelly] was determined that she was gonna find him. She went to visit with some of our in-laws on my father's side, and she found out where he was, got his address and everything, and they went up, my sister went up to Pennsylvania and then she got back off of the train in Richmond. She gonna find daddy, and she found him. She--he had a little shack and he hadn't seen my sister for twelve years. Speaker 2: Did he know her when he saw her? Speaker 1: Yeah, he recognized her. Story_ID: 237307 Speaker 1: So, my sister [Effie Harris Connelly] came home excited because we found daddy [Sandy Harris]. So, we got together after a while, I said, "We gonna go to Richmond [Virginia] and find him, go over there and see him. " So, we went to see him, we found him, and we talked to him and that was the first time I had ever seen him. Speaker 2: And you were twelve? Speaker 1: I was twelve. And so he, then he started talking to my mother [Thelma Washington Harris] and so he came home and, but there was too much time had passed. So, in a month he was gone back to Richmond. Speaker 2: After just a month? Speaker 1: I think he stayed about a month, maybe two months. Speaker 2: What was it like for you having your father back in the house for that month? Speaker 1: By this time, I was twelve years old and you don't have no father, I'm already a grown man, so I could handle myself pretty well, so we got along, got along well, but my, the rest of my siblings didn't get along with him. That's why he went back. They didn't they, my sisters' teen years, teenagers now, you know, and he's trying to put his foot down (laughter) too late. Story_ID: 237308 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris what can you tell us about your grandparents? Speaker 2: My grandparents lived in Surry [County, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Which set? Speaker 2: Both sides. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Both sides, and I don't know too much about them. I remember seeing them. My father's [Sandy Harris] father came to live with us in Hopewell [Virginia] when I was a big boy, and he got sick and he died. I guess it was at our house, but they took him back to Surry for the funeral. Story_ID: 237309 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris, can you tell us a little bit about when the family relocated to Hopewell, Virginia, and what precipitated the move? Speaker 2: My father [Sandy Harris]--I was about four years old and my mother [Thelma Washington Harris] was, it was harder and harder for her to get employment-- Speaker 1: In Surry [County, Virginia]. Speaker 2: --in Surry. The mill is gone, my father's gone, six children now. Some people who had moved to Hopewell from Surry and gotten jobs in a factory decided, was saying to my mother, "You ought to come on Hopewell and you could find work," because as a domestic and she came to Hopewell looking for work as a domestic. Speaker 1: And how, how did Hopewell compare to the home that she'd always known in Surry? Speaker 2: Well, 'cause I was four years old, so I don't know too much about Surry other than going back from time to time, but I never, I don't remember ever living in Surry. My mother, well I guess she was doing all right in Surry. My father was starting off as a sharecropper and later on started working in the factory, and my mother had six children, which means that and they were coming, they were, she was producing quickly and so she probably didn't get to do very much as a young woman in Surry and she got to Hopewell, then she had to work, course she got six children now and it was very difficult because we had, we called latchkey house. Speaker 1: Oh, latchkey kids. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. 'Cause I was young and I was staying around the house and so forth, so I was waiting for momma to come back, come from work. Speaker 1: So, would she leave very early in the morning and get back late at night? Speaker 2: Yes, and then my sisters started to do some domestic work also and so when they started to do the domestic work that was to help to take care of it at the house-- Story_ID: 237310 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up? Speaker 2: In Hopewell [Virginia] they had a creek called Bailey Creek, and the plant used to let a lot of their runoff go down the creek. See, environmental stuff was not proper at that time, so that creek, see it was a paper mill, and that runoff was very, very, the odor was very strong and you know if you are in a certain--when the wind is blowing in a certain way you can smell it now, some of it, not as foul as it used to be, but when you cross Bailey Creek coming into Hopewell from Prince George [County, Virginia], that's where it used to hit you and of course when I later on found out that--I don't pay much attention to it because your nostrils after a while you can, you don't pay attention to it. Anything else when you, like anything else when you, when you smell it for so long, you don't notice it so much. Speaker 1: So what-- Speaker 2: So, that was the smells that come in, and what else? Speaker 1: What sights and sounds? Speaker 2: The sights was that hey, I'm in the city. You go downtown and see stores, two and three stories high, you know I've never seen anything above a story, one story. So, that was a sight for me. And what I used to follow when a fire engine comes that red truck with a siren on it was fascinating to me and-- Speaker 1: So with the sound? Speaker 2: The sound-- Speaker 1: Was that the sound (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) yeah the sound, yes it was. I was fascinated by the sound of a fire truck. Story_ID: 237311 Speaker 1: What was growing up in your house like? What was a typical day like for you as a small boy? Speaker 2: In, coming up in my house first of all my oldest sisters [Effie Harris Connelly and Eva Harris] had to go to work, and my younger sister [Maria Harris] had to look after me. Speaker 1: Was that a handful for her? Speaker 2: No, they would, when they settled me up, settled me down in a place whatever it was I would keep on doing that. For instance, I used to think that I was a mechanic. So, if I could get some tools say I'll take you apart. Just give me some tools. So, and I would stay at it. I wouldn't go anywhere. Didn't have to argue at me about running out in the street and stuff, I'd be at it. Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite things that you like taking apart and putting back together again? Speaker 2: Automobiles and, and clocks. And I could, as I got older I was able to do that and after, during that I used to build my own toys. I made guns and I made wagons and I'd make enough guns for all the boys in the neighborhood 'cause gonna be like Indians [Native Americans] and cowboys. And I'd make a gun that looks like a gun and would put rubber on it and that's, when we put that rubber on it we could shoot a little distance with that rubber. If you had a strong rubber, you could, you could shoot it up to that building, to that door, and when we catch the crooks we'd shoot 'em, sometimes shoot 'em right in the face. Speaker 1: With the rubber band? Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). Oh, we had, yeah, we used to have a time, and one boy had an outhouse and we would use his mama's outhouse to put the crooks in jail. Story_ID: 237312 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris, tell me what is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: I remember the day, the first day I went to school [Carter G. Woodson School; Carter G. Woodson Middle School, Hopewell, Virginia]. The school was located straight down the street here behind the fire station, and my sister, my youngest sister [Maria Harris] took me to school, and the rules were that the boys go into one door and the girls in another door. And when you come to the end of the street you'll split off and 'cause I was scared, so my sister said, "Go in that door and I will meet you in the hall," and so I went into school, see I'm six years old and my, my sister came in and when she, when I got in the school you know I was excited. Where is all this going, you know all these people, and my sister was trying to get my attention, 'cause she was at the other end of the building. The building was long, and I have a picture of that building at the house, and my sister was trying to get my attention and I was looking all around and she said--and the principal's office was in the center of that, center of the building, and my, when my sister was trying to get my attention she said, "Curtis," and I didn't hear her, but the principal who was a minister, Reverend [Harry E.] James, he heard the noise, so he came out of his office and bruised, bused us out (laughter). I knew that I was in the wrong place (laughter). Story_ID: 237313 Speaker 1: Can you tell us, give us your siblings' names and their birth order including yourself. Speaker 2: My oldest sister was named Effie [Harris Connelly]. My second sibling was my brother named Fletcher [Harris]. My third sibling was my sister Eva [Harris]. The, my next sibling was a brother named Purnell [Harris]. My youngest sister named Maria [Harris] and I am the sixth one. Story_ID: 237314 Speaker 1: Can you tell us the name of the street that you grew up on and kind of describe your block and your community for us? Speaker 2: My, when I was coming up, I was coming up right in this community. Speaker 1: What was the name of the street? Speaker 2: Second Street-- Speaker 1: Can you-- Speaker 2: --in Davisville [Hopewell, Virginia], but you can't, it's nothing, nothing here no more like--they got new buildings. Not new buildings, but they tore down all of the houses where I lived when I was coming up, and I stayed in this neighborhood about nine or ten years. Speaker 1: And what was it like, and you know can you kind of describe it for us? Were the houses detached houses or were they-- Speaker 2: The houses were row houses, one story, and I guess it was eight or ten together and then you'll, that'd end up being a block, then you start another one. Those houses were built because the factory was moving into this area and people to have somewhere to live. You didn't have no, no water in the house. You had water, a spigot on the porch, and the way the house was made, two people would come out on the same porch, one side and then the other side, and then that spigot was in the center of the porch, so everybody would get the water from that same spigot. No water inside of the house, no bathroom in the house. They had outhouses in front of the house, and of course anybody could go into the restroom, even off the street. Didn't have no door, no light, no lock on it or anything, and of course there was no light in it, so at night you may make some mistakes, so and that was the, that's the way it looked in that area and they--so all of that lasted until I moved. I moved, my family moved to South B Village [Hopewell, Virginia]. South B Village is a community that used to be white, and there were a few white people still there when I moved into the community. Speaker 1: How was your mother [Thelma Washington Harris] able to afford to move the family, just with her and your sisters working they were able to do it? Speaker 2: Well, yes that's--'cause the rent was only two dollars a week and we got so far behind until the man said you never gonna catch this rent up we gonna start you all over again (laughter). Speaker 1: What was it like in South B Village? Speaker 2: Well, we got to South Village, it was South B Village, we was in a beautiful place because they got the bathroom in the house, and they used to have hot water in the house, but by the time we got there they done abandoned all of the water, hot water heaters, nobody couldn't, you, when you had to get to go to the bath, when you go to use the bathroom, use the bathtub, you would heat some water on the stove and fill the tub up and then you dump the pot of boiling hot water in there and you better hurry up and take your bath (laughter). Story_ID: 237315 Speaker 1: --We talked a little bit about your first day of school. Do you remember the name of that school where you went to elementary school? Speaker 2: Yeah, Carter G. Woodson [School; Carter G. Woodson Middle School, Hopewell, Virginia]. Speaker 1: So, do you remember some of your teachers at Carter G. Woodson, and-- Speaker 2: Mrs. [Sadie W.] McCoy, Mrs. Fields [ph.], Mrs. Johnson [ph.], Mrs. Powell-Johnson [ph.], Reverend [Harry E.] James, and Reverend James stayed in the school until the school was built over here. So down the road was a school and, but I had just graduated from high school. Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to elementary school, [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris. Tell me a little bit about what kind of student you were during the elementary school years? Speaker 2: I don't know. I didn't take no school, no books home. Speaker 1: So you were smart? Speaker 2: I think so, but I didn't go to school much. Speaker 1: How come? Speaker 2: Because when it was, when the weather was bad and I didn't have no school, no shoes, then I didn't go, and my mother [Thelma Washington Harris] had to go to work, so I stayed in the house and she used to walk to work all the way down to City Point [Hopewell, Virginia]. That's where the white folks lived. Speaker 1: And where she did domestic work? Speaker 2: Yeah. And she would come back and we'd have dinner, during the week we'll have a big dinner because the men, the white men used to hunt and they'll bring some game back, and my mother would cook it for us. And one of the things they used to bring was possum, and but they used to tell us that they got to let the possum get cleaned out before you can kill 'em. So, we'll play with him in the house 'till they get through cleaning it and to get him, clean him out, then my mother'd kill him and we'll have a big feast (laughter). Speaker 1: Didn't that leave a huge mess in the house? Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: When, when he'd clean himself out? Speaker 2: No, we would usually have a box or something and-- Speaker 1: He'd go in there. Speaker 2: --he'd go in there and he'll be, and we'd be playing with him most of the time. Speaker 1: Like a pet. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And when you were in elementary school did you have dreams and aspirations? What did you want to be when you grew up? Speaker 2: When I was a young boy, I wanted to be a fireman, but I never thought I would ever be a fireman. Speaker 1: Why not? Speaker 2: Well, the odds was against me. Never seen a black fireman, so I didn't that I would be a fireman. However, I was fascinated by fire trucks, and I would watch 'em, and I used to go downtown and watch the men who, you know them Brink's trucks, well they had to come to the bank in order to put the money in the bank and I was fascinated by that. I used to just watch them, and then they had a gun. I was always fascinated by guns. And so they would come in and do what they got to do with the--and then I'd go on back home because I lived right here and the bank was there downtown, so it was not far for me to get away from home to see that fascinating situations. Story_ID: 237316 Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church growing up [in Hopewell, Virginia]? Speaker 2: No, not when we were growing up. A little, you know. I was fourteen years old when I met the Lord, but at fourteen I'm very grown, because I had to grow up very fast, so I was--I went to the, to--they had a revival right down the street from where I lived. There was a field and the field was in front of the church [Union Baptist Church, Hopewell, Virginia], but the church was very small. You couldn't seat fifty people, so they had a revival in a tent because they got a radio artist who used to sing and play the piano every Sunday on the radio. Speaker 1: To come to the revival? Speaker 2: No, they, that, that was going on so the, our pastor got that artist to come and sing and pray and play for the revival. The pastor did the revival himself, and see he lived in Richmond [Virginia], and this artist lived in Richmond, and they were friends, so she'd come and one of his theme songs was, there's a bright side somewhere, and he would come to do the revival for a whole week. And one day I went to the revival, it was on a Sunday and I was struck by the spirit of God, and when they made the call to come forward, I came and a lot of other kids came forward too, and adults, grown folk were coming forward and they had the whole revival for a week, and when they had finished up all the revival they had twenty-one souls. Speaker 1: What did your mother [Thelma Washington Harris] think? Speaker 2: My mother was not in the church. Speaker 1: But, what did she think about you becoming (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She didn't think much about it. So, so, if it had been left to her I would have never been baptized. She was not a mean woman, but church was not one of her long shirts. So, she had been to church some, 'cause she used to go to Bishop C. M. Grace's [Marcelino Manuel da Graca; Charles Manuel "Sweet Daddy" Grace] church. You know about that? They got one in Washington [D.C.], the House of Prayer For All Nations [sic. United House of Prayer For All People; Church on the Rock of the Apostolic Faith]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: You heard of that. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: They got one in Hopewell [Virginia]. Speaker 1: And they had one like back in the '40s [1940s] as well? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Bishop C. M. Grace was a founder. That's been many years ago. He had a church in Hopewell. He had churches all around, 'cause he was a bishop, and my mother used to go to that church sometimes, but she was not very churchy. Story_ID: 237317 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris. As a young man, like a teenager, who was influencing you? Who were you most influenced by? Speaker 2: To tell the truth I think I was a leader. I was influencing other folk. So, that's the way I recall, I looked at the--I used to go to the movies and so forth, and you know I was influenced by Buck Jones and-- Speaker 1: Was that your favorite cowboy? Speaker 2: Yes, and Ken Maynard and all these and then I could go to the movie for ten cents, so I--and we had one down in Hopewell [Virginia]. We don't have one now. And I think that's a part of how I got fascinated by guns. So, that's kind of--we didn't have much to inspire. Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about high school now. You were still at Carter G. Woodson [School; Carter G. Woodson Middle School, Hopewell, Virginia]. What were your experiences like in high school? Speaker 2: I was a cake eater. Speaker 1: What does that mean? Speaker 2: Them girls be looking, and when I was in high school. But, the older girls were attracted to me. Speaker 1: Were you attracted to them? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Any girl huh? Speaker 2: Yeah well I would be talking to them and they'd be talking to me, but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were like a big man on campus? Speaker 2: Well, I didn't do very much in, in the school. When we come out of the school, we'd go to the Harlem Night Club [Hopewell, Virginia]. Speaker 1: What were some of the names of some of the clubs in Hopewell? Speaker 2: Well they didn't have but one. Speaker 1: What was it, what was the name of it? Speaker 2: Harlem Night Club. Speaker 1: Okay and teenagers could go there? Speaker 2: Yeah, they could slip in, but see I'm a man now you see, I'm you know 15, 16, 17 and everything like that, I was a grown man, and some of these girls they were attracted to me as a young man. As I think about it, I don't know whether I need to tell all of this as my history (laughter). Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers from high school? Speaker 2: Yeah, I just, Mrs. [Sadie W.] McCoy. Speaker 1: So the same ones from talked about (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Some of the yeah, see the school was the same school from the primer, see they don't have no primers no more. See I started off as a primer, in the primer, and then the first grade and the second grade and so forth and, and then you stayed there until you graduated or you're going home, one or the other. And, and you would graduate in eleventh grade. You didn't go to the twelfth grade. Story_ID: 237318 Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Carter G. Woodson School; Carter G. Woodson Middle School, Hopewell, Virginia], [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris, what were you thinking that you were gonna do with your life? Were you thinking you were gonna go to college, you were gonna get a job? What were you thinking? Speaker 2: I always thought about I was gonna have a job, but not go to college. My sister was instrumental in me going to college. She paid the money, and so I went. Speaker 1: Where were you thinking about going or where did you want to go? Speaker 2: Well I went to, I wanted to be a doctor. So I wanted a pre-med course and, but prior to that when I was back in high school, I was good in math. I could do, figure out the letters and the mathematical pieces very well and so I said, "I want to go and major in"-- Speaker 1: In math. Speaker 2: --in math, but after I got to college-- Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school? Nineteen fifty [1950]? Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-six [1956]. Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-four [1944]. Speaker 2: Forty-four [1944]. Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-four [1944]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so when you, so you decided you were gonna go to Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And did you pursue the pre-med track? What did you think--what was your impression when you first got there to Virginia Union? Speaker 2: Well I found out that I was not a good math student, so then I switched to pre-med. So, my days in college were not fruitful. I still thought that the world was going to, that the world owed me something, so I just struggled through and after a while I left. Story_ID: 237319 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris we ended with you talking a little bit about your time at Virginia Union [University, Richmond, Virginia]. Did you enjoy college life? What were some of the things you enjoyed doing in your spare time when you were in college? Speaker 2: When I was in college, I was kind of carefree, and my, I didn't do very well in college. I think I messed around with my time, so I can't say too much about my college days as the fact that I became very interested in things like civil rights, and so then I left and then I started to develop my own family. Speaker 1: Because you married your high school sweetheart [Ruth Harris] after you left-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And you all moved to Norfolk [Virginia]. Why did you move to Norfolk? Speaker 2: I went, I went to Norfolk looking for work, and then I came back and married my sweetheart, and then we moved, then we rented a house in Norfolk and stayed there for a little while, year or something, and then I moved back to Hopewell [Virginia]. So, I've been here ever since. Story_ID: 237320 Speaker 1: And what kind of work did you do when you came back to Hopewell [Virginia]? Speaker 2: The best job I could get was as a janitor because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Despite having two years of college [at Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Yeah, but would not recognize nothing for African Americans other than to be a janitor, so I thought I was a pretty good janitor. Speaker 1: And you were a janitor at the Allied Chemical [and Dye Corporation, Hopewell, Virginia] plant? Speaker 2: Yeah, fifteen years. Speaker 1: What did they, what kind of materials or chemicals did they product in the plant? Speaker 2: Chlorine, fertilizer. Speaker 1: Was it dangerous work? Speaker 2: Yes, it--a lot of folks died in the process that they didn't know what they were into, and then later they had materials called kepone. Speaker 1: What's kepone? Speaker 2: Kepone was, they were manufacturing kepone--I don't remember what it was used for, but they, it was so bad that they put it in a, when it got into the [James] River, when they found out and people were getting sick when they found out that it was, what was going on, they had to shut down the river. I mean you couldn't fish or anything in the James River because the kepone was all in there everywhere. A lot of people went to court, I mean the court, they went to court and a lot of people went, got opportunities to sue, and it was blowing all over the place, and they discovered that there was some in my yard, the kepone. So, they came over and dug it up and they made the analysis and so forth and they said that, they said that it was not a whole lot in, in my yard, but it was some. So, they sent some people in and washed all of the walls in the house and to mix, see if anything is on, in the walls. And they said well we don't see enough to worry about it, and but I sued anyway. Speaker 1: Were you successful? Speaker 2: Yeah, but we couldn't do anything very much with it. They had lawyers too, so they gave me a little bit of money for, as a settlement and I don't know, maybe it was my lawyer, so 'cause he was recommending that to give it up. Speaker 1: And this was in the mid-'50s [1950s]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 237321 Speaker 1: And let's also talk about in 1959 you became pastor of Union Baptist Church [Hopewell, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what was that like for you to have, attain that, to have become pastor of your own church? Speaker 2: I became involved in this church after being out of the church for about ten years, and by now I'm living right here in Davisville [Hopewell, Virginia] in the project. I've been to Norfolk [Virginia], now married [to Ruth Harris], I'm back into Hopewell [Virginia] again. And so now I've come through my whole spirit, a time when I was interested in baseball, and I played baseball for ten years. Speaker 1: Was it on a semi-pro team? Speaker 2: Semi-pro. Speaker 1: What was the name of the team? Speaker 2: Hopewell All-Stars. Speaker 1: And did you all play against some well-named players? Speaker 2: Yes, we played against Jackie Robinson. We played against [HistoryMaker] Minnie Minoso, Willie Mays, and some of the African American greats that played with the Kansas City Monarchs. I tried out with them one time while I was in college [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia]. Speaker 1: Do you remember what year that was? Speaker 2: While I was in college. Speaker 1: So 1945, 1946. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and I played against the Indianapolis Clowns. You heard of that? The Indianapolis Clowns was like the Harlem Globetrotters. Speaker 1: But a baseball team. Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact [Reece] "Goose" Tatum, who played with the Harlem Globetrotters played also with the Indianapolis Clowns. The funny thing there's a woman who played shortstop and the outfielder was a midget (laughter). Speaker 1: I'm sure that was a sight to behold-- Speaker 2: Yeah it was, used to come and they, and we'd have it right in Hopewell. They'd come and well, Jackie Robinson's All-Stars, he made a team up after the World Series, because baseball players were not making much money like they are, like they make now, and he had to have some money to feed his family in the wintertime, so Jackie he would go out, and Gil Hodges was a white player. He had him some all-stars, and [Roy] Campanella who was a catcher for the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers]. He had him some all-stars. They going all around the southern part of the country. Speaker 1: So they would travel around the southern states and play against like semi-pro teams and people would pay to see the game and that's how they make money (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yeah, big. Yeah, yeah, they would make big money (laughter). Story_ID: 237322 Speaker 1: Well, so let's go back a little bit [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris and talk about Union Baptist [Church, Hopewell, Virginia]. So, you became pastor of the church. What was happening with you in terms of civil rights in 1959? Speaker 2: I started in this church. I went to the revival-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in this church and the preacher came in from New Jersey and preached the revival, and I don't know where I was sitting in the church, but he said everybody who is, was a member of the church, sit down. Then everybody who does not have a church keep standing, and I didn't have no church, and I was trying to sit down, but I couldn't. So, he called me up to the front, said "You don't believe in, you don't belong to the church?" No. "When the last time you been to the church," and I answered all the questions. He said you, you ought to give your life to, to the Lord back, give it back to him again. And so I agreed with him, and so then he, and then I joined the church right here and I was, I've been a good member ever since. Speaker 1: Did you ever think at that time when you joined that you'd become pastor of the church? Speaker 2: No, no, but I used to study. I used to study the Bible, and I became a Sunday school teacher and I started to teach Bible class and I would study and it would come to me pretty easy. But, I didn't know I was gonna be no preacher, and when I found out that things were working good, I was still playing baseball and, but I decided that I can't do both, so I quit baseball. Speaker 1: To become more active in the church? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 237323 Speaker 1: But when did you first become involved in SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]? Speaker 2: In '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: Okay, right. Speaker 2: But I had known about the [Civil Rights] Movement, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure, so tell us a little bit about what you were doing when you first became involved in the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, prior to, you know 1964 [sic. 1965], the march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama]. What were you doing before that locally with the Southern Christian Leadership Conference? Speaker 2: They, the movement, they, the SCLC was not SCLC. [Hopewell] Improvement Association was our title in Hopewell [Virginia], and we did a lot of things including, I sued the city to use the cemetery. Speaker 1: To have blacks buried in the cemetery? Speaker 2: Yeah, and we sued the city to let black people go into the, to the pool. They had a pool down at City Point [Hopewell, Virginia], but blacks couldn't go, couldn't go in it. And the principal of the school, Carter [G.] Woodson [School; Carter G. Woodson Middle School, Hopewell, Virginia], lived right across in front of the pool, but his kids couldn't go in it. They could look through the fence, and so you know we always abided with the law. Speaker 1: Tell me about in 1963 the fight with the Ku Klux Klan [KKK] and the city to prevent them from building a landfill in the African American community. Tell me about that confrontation with the Ku Klux Klan. Speaker 2: The Ku Klux Klan, some things had happened to me that we thought it was a Ku Klux Klan that had something to do with it, because they hit against my, threw some, some call it Molotov cocktail. Speaker 1: Molotov cocktail, threw it through your window (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In my, yeah, and later on we found out that they were going to locate a landfill in the black community, and we took up against that, but they built it anyway, but we found, we were trying to prevent them from doing it and they--when we went to, when we found out that we going to-- we had a march from the landfill to city hall to protest. We didn't know that the Ku Klux Klan was going to make a protest against us, and when we got back from, when we got down to city hall the Ku Klux Klan was already down there. It was about 150 of them in robes and so they tried to prevent us from making our speeches, so then I started to pray. Let me see you beat that. They come to the conclusion that every man ought to have a right to pray and therefore they would be quiet so we can pray. After we got through praying, then they started praying, and after they got through praying they filed away one by one, didn't say no more words. So, then we had marched from the church, yeah, going to city hall. After we found out that we done won the battle, we gonna march some more, so we marched back over here with police escort. Story_ID: 237324 Speaker 1: Let's talk about the historic march in Alabama from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama] and your participation in that. Speaker 2: That, I think it was in 1965 that we embarked upon a program to get opportunities for voter registration of African Americans because it was difficult for African Americans to vote. We used to have to pay three years' back taxes, and the taxes was a hundred, I mean a dollar and fifty cents a year. Of course that was good, big money after that time, I mean during that time. So, we felt that we ought to do something about this, and there was a guy--and by this time now I'm on the board of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. This guy named Jim Bevel [HistoryMaker Reverend James Bevel] who was on the staff at SCLC, and Jim said, "We never gonna be able to solve this problem unless we march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama where [Governor] George Wallace's office is," and so I said, "well that's a good idea. How far is it?" Said fifty miles. I said, "Wait a minute, you must, you must be kidding," said fifty miles. It's gonna be fifty miles. So, we went on to the next order of business. We didn't think about it no more. [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] didn't think about it either. He was in the meeting with us, so next time we met, Jim Bevel brought it up again and it didn't pass. Story_ID: 237325 Speaker 1: So, evidently [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] sort of thought that maybe it is a good idea, let's try that. So, he came to the next meeting with the idea and, and the people bought it. See my involvement with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] has always been in a volunteer basis. See, I have never been on the staff, so I would follow them all around wherever they going with my own monies. And sometimes I didn't have the money, so I borrowed, I would go to the airport to the--there was a group in Petersburg [Virginia], they had an agency that they could, where they would make, give you tickets to fly, and Milton [A.] Reid and I made a good relationship with the boss of that agency, and he would let us fly wherever we got to go and pay him later. So, many of our trips was paid for later (laughter). But I went to Selma [Alabama], and that was, we started that march right after Bloody Sunday, and they, and so we left the church to go across the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama] and when we got to the bridge they, all of the traffic had stopped and there was no way to get across that bridge, automo- cars from, as far as we could see, and they had parked their cars adjacent to each other so that nobody could get by and that highway is eight across. Speaker 2: Eight cars across. Speaker 1: Yeah, and the police had the bullhorn and they said, "You go back to your church, you can't cross here," and we said, Dr. King said, "okay, can we pray before we go back?" So, they said, "Yeah, go ahead, have your prayer and then go back to the church." They got up Reverend [Ralph] Abernathy to pray, and we didn't, after we got through with the prayer then we turned around and went back. Story_ID: 237326 Speaker 1: We were talking about the march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama], and you all had gotten to the [Edmund Pettus] Bridge [Selma, Alabama], and the bridge was obstructed with all of the vehicles, so what happened next? Speaker 2: We went back and filed a suit, and the judge gave us permission to walk that road and, for cause that the state police and the local police and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and the federal, the federal police to protect us, and they had soldiers on every bridge all the way from Selma to Montgomery-- Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: --that's fifty miles. Speaker 1: And for you personally, did you think that you guys were gonna actually march from Selma to Montgomery or did you think that perhaps you know you'd change your mind, 'cause I know that you didn't have the proper clothes with you? Speaker 2: Yes, yeah I had, you see when I went to, went to Selma first we were not planning, we were not getting ready to go across the bridge, we were warming up, so we had, we went and had some demonstrations and the chief of police confronted us, because we wanted to go downtown and do some demonstrations that was before I was going to the bridge on the march, and he stopped us and made us go back in the church and so I went, came back home, because there was another march and we were destined to demonstrate in front of the courthouse, so that African Americans could register to vote and they, they said that the registrar was out of town. So, and then we gonna--the next time was gonna let one or two come at the time, take a long time, and, but they didn't want us to have lines. So, we went in front of a courthouse and sung songs, and it started raining. You know it was raining hard, and, and then I got wet and so we have not, we've haven't gone across the march yet. So, I went to, so I was so wet until I stopped in a clothing store and bought some blue jeans and some sneakers and a cap and some underwear 'cause I was soaking wet and we took all the clothes and put them in plastic bags and the lady, one of the ladies that we know was helping us said, "Okay we will put these clothes in the cleaners, they'll keep it for you when you come back." So, we went back. See I went several times down on that, on that trip and then when we, she picked us up at the airport when we were coming back and give us our clothes and they had cleaned them up and everything, and then I went back again. This time we had found out about Bloody Sunday and said, "Well we're going to war." Give me some special clothes 'cause this time I got my blue jeans and I'm gonna wear them. I wore them out of the airport, in the airport and got my toothbrush and put it around my shoulder and everything and said I'm going for the long haul, and I have a picture standing on the steps with some of the children when I was getting ready to go to Selma. And then we went on to the march and the first time we couldn't get across then we went back and the court ruled that we could march, so, everything changed. Story_ID: 237327 Speaker 1: And they asked volunteers to serve as human shields for [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. Speaker 2: That was along the march. We got to a special place, and they could not protect him because it was so--the way it was made up they couldn't, the police could not protect him, that's when we did the march, the shield, the human shield. Speaker 1: Why did you volunteer to be a human shield? Speaker 2: Well, I had already decided that was going all the way. I was committed to do what I was doing, and I had already decided I'm going to go, I'm gonna follow it down to the end, and then when they were saying we can't protect him right here, they stopped along the highway, so then we said, somebody said if we could make a shield, we need some volunteers, so okay here's my hand first. Here am I, send me. That's what I preached about last, yesterday. So, we got through that. Nobody got hurt. I was expecting every moment for a bullet to piece my flesh, and I was not afraid. Speaker 1: Did you think it was too big of a risk to take for one man? Speaker 2: Who is that me or Dr. King? Speaker 1: Dr. King. Did you think that you were risking too much for him? Speaker 2: All of us were caught up in it. We probably would have done that if Dr. King had not been there because people had been geared up for it, because when we were marching from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama] he was not there every day. He'd go away and people wanted him to speak in New York, then he would also--he took four days on that march, and he went away and came back and see I was leading the march sometimes. Did you see that? Speaker 1: We've got photographs, yes. Speaker 2: Yeah, so that was, it was a whole line of folks following me. People were already committed to do something about the conditions as it relates to voter registration all over this country and especially in the South. Story_ID: 237328 Speaker 1: Let's talk about, in 1960 you began your political career, when you ran for a seat on the Hopewell City Council [Hopewell, Virginia]. Speaker 2: Well actually that was--the beginning of my running for city council was in the area of when I ran for the city council, it was, I did it seven times (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why were you-- Speaker 2: --before I finally got it, got it right. Speaker 1: Why were you so persistent? Why, why didn't you give up? Speaker 2: Well, there were different things that was transpiring. At the beginning I had no dream of winning, but I used this to, to stimulate African Americans to register and vote and we get more people on the books, give them some reason, and of course at that time the votes, it was that poll tax and people were not going to spend money to register and vote, so we had to then conduct an effort to get people to get registered and we had to raise money to pay for the practice, for the, we had to pay to raise the money so that the people could have the money to register to vote. Speaker 1: To pay their poll taxes. Speaker 2: Yes, and we did that and in the midst of all that I began to run. So I ran seven times as a member of the city council. I ran two times for the [Virginia] House of Delegates. I ran two times for the congress, and then later I ran for city council and I think the first time was, the first time I won was '84 [sic. 1986] I believe-- Story_ID: 237329 Speaker 1: The year prior to that you were successful in getting the City [of Hopewell, Virginia] to switch from its current system, from its current ward system to an at-large system? Speaker 2: No, reverse that. Speaker 1: I'm sorry switch from ward, at-large system to a ward-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --system. How were you able to do that? Speaker 2: Well you see the Voting Rights Act of 1965 was coming into play, and we discovered that according to the Voting Rights Act, you can't pack folk into various communities, and keep them isolated, and so you would have at-large system so that can't nobody can get elected, and that was my case, and I keep running, but I couldn't get enough votes to get elected. So, and when I thought about that and saw the impact that that would have on African Americans, then I sued the city for a ward system, and when they saw that I was serious and they also saw that I was winning, they took a new attitude and let's have a compromise. Said what, let me, if you, you can, we will give you a ward, but in the final analysis that if we give you a ward, you will have to run in the ward. So then by this time they had an African American on the [Hopewell] City Council [Hopewell, Virginia]. Speaker 1: How was that person able to win under the at-large system? Speaker 2: Well because when they saw that I was serious and was going to give them some trouble, then they went, hurriedly and got this black guy [C. Ray Edmonds] to run thinking that the court would not make us have a ward system. Speaker 1: Because they'd see that an African American could get-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --elected. Speaker 2: Yeah-- Story_ID: 237330 Speaker 1: After we won the case, the compromise, he was screaming, said okay, don't put him in his, in my ward [in Hopewell, Virginia]. By this time, everybody knows what he's doing, said don't put him in my ward, so they cut the ward and gave me 75 percent African American in my ward. So, well you can't hardly lose with 75 percent (laughter), but it turns out that he got his friend, the black guy, he got his friend to run against me and then, and this was the same year when this African American fellow who he also was, he was up that year. Speaker 2: His term was. Speaker 1: Yes, now, but he's now in a ward system, so what they, what they did was gave, let us have a ward system with five ward system, five ward seats and two at-large seats. They still were struggling, so it turns out that I had 75 percent of African Americans in my ward and [Joseph] Joe Gilliam [Jr.] ran against me and [C.] Ray [Edmonds] was supporting him, that was the black guy. Speaker 2: He was supporting your opponent? Speaker 1: Yeah, and both of them lost. The black guy lost because when he asked that they wouldn't let him be in my ward he ended up with a 20 percent ward white. Speaker 2: And 80 percent black? Speaker 1: Yeah, no, no. Speaker 2: Oh, the other way-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --80 percent white and 20 percent black. Speaker 1: Yeah, and of course he thought that white folks loved him good, so he, that's what he was banking on, but the white people said, "We can't keep [HistoryMaker Reverend] Curtis Harris off, out because he's too strong. In the meantime, maybe we can let Joe win and maybe Curtis Harris will go back and sit down." Said, but at any rate we going to have, if we don't be careful we gonna have at least two blacks-- Speaker 2: At the same time. Speaker 1: --at the same time, so, and they were not ready for two blacks at the same time. So what they did was they went out and started spreading the word, that's what the white folks did. They're mean when they want to. They said we don't need two blacks, so I asked one of my white friends, asked, "What the white folks saying downtown?" Said, "They talking," I said, "but I don't know exactly what they're saying, tell me what they're saying," and he's a white guy, he said, "You really want to know what the white folks saying?" I said, "Yeah tell me what they saying." He said, "Well what they said is, one, one nigger is enough." Story_ID: 237331 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris, let me ask you a little bit about the Boatwright Commission [Committee on Offenses Against the Administration of Justice]. Can you tell us what that was and your involvement? Speaker 2: The Boatwright Committee, Commission was created by the [Virginia] General Assembly to harass African Americans who were involved in the movement, and they were trying hard through the general assembly to cut down on our involvements, and the reason, the way they tried to do it was they gonna find black folk who are troublemakers and bring them to court, so they caught up with three or four of us. When they got to me, I said, "I'm not gonna cooperate what you're doing." I said I'm not gonna cooperate, and so they brought me before the legislative committee and denied, and told me that you, you gotta tell all or tell what's going on, and I said I'm not, I am not telling. Speaker 1: What's going on within the movement? Speaker 2: Yes, I said, well, the first thing he said was, "What is your name?" I said, "I take the Fifth Amendment," and they were not ready for that. My lawyers, they all trained me up good. Speaker 1: Who were your lawyers? Speaker 2: I had three lawyers, black lawyers, [Joseph A.] Jordan [Jr.], [Edward] Dawley, and [Leonard] Holt. Jordan is dead now. He later became a member of the city council in Norfolk [Virginia]. He was an invalid, he couldn't move his legs, but he had moved it, fixed his car so he could drive anywhere he wanted to and he could run it, run it up into his house, into his garage, and get out of the car, go on in the house (laughter). Speaker 1: Now Reverend Harris, were there others who shared information with the Boatwright Commission? Speaker 2: They let some others go. I don't know what they found, what they, what they told them, but they let some go-- Speaker 1: What became of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but I wouldn't mess with, I wouldn't cooperate, so they put me, they tried to put me in jail and I would-- Speaker 1: They weren't successful though in-- Speaker 2: They couldn't do it because my lawyers and I were strong in our positions that we're not going to cooperate. You know, we'll go to jail if you want to. We're not gonna cooperate. Speaker 1: What happened to the Boatwright Commission? Speaker 2: After they was trying to call, find me in contempt of a legislative committee, that's what the Boatwright Committee was trying to do, and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] came and spoke and said things on my behalf and said he will come back. They didn't want him to come back, so they, the judge and the court was in Hopewell [Virginia], the circuit court in Hopewell, and he, when he realized that they gonna have to put me in jail, 'cause I'm not going to tell, therefore when they found out that I wasn't gonna tell, the judge said, "Well we gonna dismiss this case, but if they come back again and ask you questions you gonna answer all the questions that they ask you, you hear," and I said yes sir (laughter), and then they let me go. Speaker 1: Now did the commission eventually dissolve? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: It dissolved. Speaker 2: After that there was nothing. See that was a big thing and it petered out because nobody was willing to talk. Story_ID: 237332 Speaker 1: We also didn't talk about, in 1964 your sons helped to integrate Hopewell High School [Hopewell, Virginia]. How was that for your family? Speaker 2: We had filed a suit maybe two or three years earlier in the federal court, and it had to work through the system, and finally the judge ruled in our favor and so, and they were working hard to not make it, let it happen. So, the first thing we did was pull a trick on the school systems. They didn't say nothing, they was quiet for their summer school and they had, they tried to have one in the black school too, so the next year before they found out that they didn't have enough, have any students in the black school because they didn't have enough students, so I waited to the last minute when they had already given up of having summer school in the black communities. So, I made applications for Kenneth [Harris] and Curtis [Harris, Jr.] to go to the white schools. They were the only ones. Speaker 1: And they went that summer? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what about the following year did they go that following year? Speaker 2: In September. See, the judge had not ruled when I did that in September--and I went away to the Holy Land and when I was in the Holy Land my wife [Ruth Harris] sent me a letter and said that the judge they had ruled that everybody go to the same schools, so I couldn't hardly get back in time. So, by September schools were integrated, yet we still had Carter [G.] Woodson [School; Carter G. Woodson Middle School, Hopewell, Virginia] as an all-white [sic.], all-black school-- Story_ID: 237333 Speaker 1: A lot of the training that you got on the ground during the Civil Rights Movement you put into action in your hometown [Hopewell, Virginia], in your hometown community. Can we talk a little bit about some of the demonstrations and marches you've had on Fort Lee, Virginia, the [U.S.] Army base? Speaker 2: We've been working on Fort Lee twenty-five years because of discrimination in the workplace. Speaker 1: Against soldiers or against civilians? Speaker 2: It was civilians for the most part, but I've done some things with soldiers, but basically it's about civilians. We couldn't get anybody beyond anything, any, you know they would stop at [GS grade] fives and six and sevens and every once in a while you get somebody at an eleven or twelve, but not often and these people were professionals and they couldn't get through, so I embarked on a program of trying to change that, and Fort Lee, see they would, they would change the commander every two or three years, so then I gotta start all over again. So after a while I decided that I'm not gonna do that no more, I'm going to, I'm going to go right to the horse's mouth, and I set up a demonstration that was gonna march all the way down to the gate in attempt to go in the base and march in the base, and I released that to the news media so they could, and they were all out there, but I couldn't have no people, that people got scared. Some of the people who got off from work went out of the back gate, so when I said well I'm marching and I called the state police for protections the state police, the city police, the county police, and we're gonna need all of that protections, so they were there, closed down half of [Virginia State Route] 36. Speaker 1: Which is the main route into Fort Lee (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. We closed one side. Story_ID: 237334 Speaker 1: We marched [on Fort Lee, Virginia] and they, their strategy was, when they get here we're going to take them in a van to see the commander, to see what y'all want. That's a good strategy. So, but we didn't know it 'cause we was gung-ho. So, when we got to the gate, at the main gate they--a colonel came out and greeted us and said we want to have you to come to speak with the commander and here's your vans. We'll have somebody to drive you and bring you and I said okay. We did that, and we sitting around the table you know like we was in a big powwow and they gave us some jobs, I mean some big time jobs. One guy ended up at [GS grade] 16. That's big money in the [U.S.] military, so I said okay, but that was not enough and people were then bringing, bearing down on me to help us. So, and I had several complaints that we sent to the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and TRADOC [United States Army Training and Doctrine Command], had the complaints for them, and things were moving along slowly, so somebody said, "Well we gotta march again." So we went, we marched again and we found out that they were not as liberal as they were. Speaker 2: The first time around. Speaker 1: Yeah, they told me, made a mark and said don't cross that mark, that mark, said if you do you going to jail (laughter), and I thought about it and, but what happened was I didn't realize that they were going to have MPs [military police] with weapons. Speaker 2: The second time around. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: They brought out the guards and the guns, huh. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and that-- Speaker 2: Did that, did it remind you of marching in the '60s [1960s]? Speaker 1: No, because in no march were we ever confronted by the police, not with guns. You know they had dogs and fire horses, hoses and-- Speaker 2: And just the riot gear on. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. This time we heard them noise, that noise in the background with the colonel in the front. Speaker 2: What was the noise? Speaker 1: It said, click, click, click. Speaker 2: Oh the guns. Speaker 1: Yeah acting like they, I thought they was, they getting ready to shoot. I don't know what they was gonna do, but they scared me. Well, nobody ran, but I didn't cross that line. So, we had to turn back. Speaker 2: And what's the situation with Fort Lee today? Speaker 1: Well, about three weeks ago a lieutenant, female lieutenant at Fort Lee came to see me, said, "Somebody said that you're the only person that can help me. I have done my training and so forth and now I'm trying to get a promotion, and they said, no you ain't, you ain't gonna get no promotion, in fact they weighed her and said you weigh too much (laughter)." Speaker 2: So the discrimination continues today? Speaker 1: Yeah, we had to go back and win another case. They gave her the promotions and back pay. Story_ID: 237335 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris I wanted to talk to you a little bit about your effort to have a monument or memorial in Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] honor erected here in Hopewell [Virginia], you started in 1993. Can you tell us a little bit about why it was important to you to have that? Speaker 2: Well Dr. King was my hero, and my mentor, and he came at my request to come to Hopewell to support me and I never forgot that. I was at his funeral. I knew all the kids, and I thought it was, would be an excellent idea to put a statue of him in Hopewell, and so I sat down, set out to do that and the council turned it down, so ten years later I found out that a new--a committee of citizens wanted to change the name of the plaza [Ashford Civic Plaza, Hopewell, Virginia], and they wanted to put monuments in the plaza, and I said, "No I'm on the [Hopewell City] Council [Hopewell, Virginia] now I got a vote. Nothing can go into the plaza. Ten years ago you fixed that when you didn't let Martin Luther King's statue go into the plaza. You gotta be consistent." I throw that word around very, very loosely, and they paid attention to that. They don't want to be accused of being inconsistent, so I used my know how and caused them to turn it around and said that, they set up a committee, and I volunteered to serve on the committee and there's two of us on the council and we came to the conclusion that we, the report, we gonna report that yes, let them put a statue of Martin Luther King in the plaza, okay. It took them some time, several meetings and so forth, but I kept going and they agreed then to let us have a statue of Martin Luther King in the plaza. Speaker 1: Ten years after the original request. Speaker 2: Right, and in a year and a half I had raised over sixty thousand dollars for the statue and this year [2004] on the 2nd, the 4th day of April we unveiled the statue, and Martin couldn't come. Speaker 1: Martin the third [Martin Luther King, III]? Speaker 2: Martin the father, but the third showed up, so that's how it went (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 237336 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris, when you look back at your life what stands out the most to you and why? Speaker 2: Well, what I think when I look back at it, I think about the fact that the Lord brought me from a mighty long way, that it's no way that I could have survived without him, and I'm grateful that the Lord used me in that way. Speaker 1: And you know, the place where you grew up as a child [in Hopewell, Virginia], you live today right across the street from there. Why haven't you ever moved? Speaker 2: I need this place, and I think these people need me, so there was no reason for me to leave since I need it, they need us, need me, and so I continue to reside in this place, and it's been good to me. This place has been good to me and there are a whole use, a whole lot of needs for ministry in this place. I won't ever finish, so I'm enjoying the opportunities to serve. I'm still a servant. You don't retire from service to the Lord. You don't retire. Story_ID: 237337 Speaker 1: This year we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of Brown vs. Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], that decision, and in your case the fortieth anniversary of your children [Kenneth Harris and Curtis Harris, Jr.] integrating Hopewell High School [Hopewell, Virginia]. How do you think-- Speaker 2: Forty years, has that been forty years? Speaker 1: Forty years, forty years, yes sir. How do you think African American children, and in particularly African American children in Hopewell [Virginia] are faring under the educational system today? Speaker 2: I think it's better in one sense, and on another side if we are not careful we will be back in a bad situation. Speaker 1: But how so? Speaker 2: Not, in a different way. For instance ever since, you see integration was never intended to work, even after the court ruled, it was never intended to work and if it does work, it will be a handicap to African Americans, and I've watched that and I've seen the trends. Speaker 1: What are the trends? Are you talking about how we're still seeing a lot of school systems that are very segregated due to where people live and that kind of thing? Speaker 2: That's part of it. The other part is SOLs [Standards of Learning], you know about that? SOLs, eventually there will be a lot of black kids who will get diplomas with nothing on them. Speaker 1: Well tell us about SOLs? It's a vocational type of-- Speaker 2: It's a training--that's the system that they use to determine the development of a process and the process is to find out what's going on with students, what's going on with teachers, what's going on with the facilities, and [President George Walker] Bush says he's going to make sure that no child is left behind, and then he didn't put the money in, so it can't work. So there's so many systems, so many efforts to cut short African Americans. See for a long time we were in segregated schools, the teachers loved us because all of us was in the same boat, and when we got integration they divided us. We're in the same school, but not in the same classes. We're in the same schools, but when they put on the tests, how you gonna test a class, I mean how can you test people who have had different kinds of opportunities. You know if your parent know everything about eating, and the social graces, and you have a test, and with that test you will determine what you know about social graces, well you gonna flunk, 'cause you never been involved, you never been exposed, and so a lot of that is happening now even up to the present time now that we got SOLs. Now the SOLs is supposed to measure the growth, the process, and so much so until the efforts to make it happen caused some people they can't make it, they can't function under that pressure, so we'll give them a grade, give them a diploma, but you can't get no jobs. Speaker 1: 'Cause it's not equivalent to a high school diploma. Story_ID: 237338 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered, [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris? Speaker 2: What I--I don't want to feel, I don't want to be naive in spite of all that I have done, people are going to forget me soon. Speaker 1: Why do you say that? Speaker 2: It does for everybody else. People don't remember. It doesn't last very long. Speaker 1: Well what about in the case of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], you know, thirty years after he was killed you were still fighting to have a memorial erected in his honor. You didn't forget. Speaker 2: There are a lot of African Americans who know nothing about Dr. King now. They don't, I do, but they don't, so, and that statue means a whole lot of different things to different people and I got a letter the other day from somebody who did not sign and thought and said that was the worst thing that could have happened, was to put a statue of Martin Luther King in the [Ashford Civic] Plaza [Hopewell, Virginia]. So everybody is not where I am, and some time, when I'm gone that statue is gonna mean something else to the generation that's following me. Story_ID: 237339 Speaker 1: What do you think your legacy will be? Speaker 2: What I really--I'm really living for my family. I believe that they will remember me. I think my kids, and as they get older and another generation and they will not be intense about remembering granddaddy. See 'cause they didn't have the opportunities to really see me and feel me and touch me as you go from generation to generation, and folks will remember less and less about you. If somebody writes something, they, the people who, who teach may bring something up, but by and large and if you don't get into the right place and if you leave Hopewell [Virginia] altogether folks won't remember nothing about [HistoryMaker Reverend] Curtis Harris. See I'm not really banking on any more people remembering any legacy on my behalf. I believe that my kids are going to remember me until they die, if for no other reason than the whippings I used to put on them, they will remember. But, by and large, I don't anticipate no legacy that's going to follow, 'cause there's so many people who have come along this way and some of them have done much more on behalf of the people than I have, and we don't remember, we don't know about them. My history now is such that I can talk to young people about historical things. A lady came to our church [Union Baptist Church, Hopewell, Virginia] yesterday. She has a Ph.D. She's getting ready to write a book on Hopewell. We invited her to come. The city is gonna pay for it. She's a young woman, got a Ph.D., born in Chesterfield [County, Virginia], raised in Chesterfield. She don't know nothing about what I'm talking about. She was just as excited to hear (laughter). She wouldn't know nothing about it. So, I guess in that case when she put this in print, then other people will be able pick up on it if they--people don't read no more. You got the Internet and you got, you know, so I was surprised Henry [ph.] just told me that he was in Florida when he sent his daddy's picture to The Progress-Index and he in Florida pulled up on the Internet, and read The Progress-Index to determine, to see the picture and everything that's in the paper, that he left to the paper before he left, going to Florida. Story_ID: 237340 Speaker 1: This is Sandy Harris, [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Curtis] Harris' father. This photograph was probably taken in the 1920s or the 1930s. Speaker 2: This is Thelma [Washington] Harris, Reverend Harris' mother. This photograph was probably taken in the 1930s or the 1940s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is Reverend Harris, Curtis Harris, and Ruth Harris, and this photograph was taken in the 1940s. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is a photograph of the Hopewell All-Stars. This photograph was probably taken in the 1940s or 1950s. I'm not sure which one is him. Speaker 1: This is Reverend Harris in the pulpit at Union Baptist Church in Hopewell, Virginia. This photograph was probably taken in the 1990s. Speaker 2: This is the Union Baptist youth choir, and this photograph was taken in 1964. Speaker 1: This photograph was probably taken in the late 1990s. Speaker 2: This is Reverend Harris and [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and this photograph was probab- was taken in the late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], early '60s [1960s] more than likely. Speaker 1: This photograph is of Reverend Harris holding the clothes that he wore in 1964 [sic. 1965] in the march from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery, Alabama, and this photograph was probably taken in the 1990s. Speaker 2: This is a 1964 [sic. 1965] march from Selma to Montgomery. This is Reverend Harris right here. Speaker 1: Okay, this is a demonstration at Fort Lee, Virginia, taken in 1987. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That is Curtis Harris with his daughters Karen [Harris] and [Ruth] Michelle [Harris Pritchett] in 1974 campaigning. Speaker 2: This is the Hopewell City Council [Hopewell, Virginia]. Reverend Harris, Curtis Harris right here. This photograph is probably taken late '90s [1990s]. Speaker 1: This is Curtis Harris and former Virginia governor, [HistoryMaker L.] Douglas Wilder, and his wife Ruth Harris, and this photograph was probably taken in the '90s [1990s]. Speaker 2: This is Reverend Harris, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson, and Roberta Flack, and this photograph was probably taken in the '80s [1980s]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Curtis Harris and Governor Mark Warner and his wife Ruth Harris, and this photograph was taken probably in 2002. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: This is Curtis Harris at Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia] in 1945. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Curtis Harris, 1945 or 1946. Speaker 1: Okay, let's do this one right here. This is Curtis Harris in the mid to late '40s [1940s]...