 Story_ID: 269387 Speaker 1: We're gonna get started by slating that my name is Jodi Merriday and I'm the interviewer. Matthew Hickey is the videographer and there are no observers. Ma'am, could you please state and spell your name, including your middle name? Speaker 2: Barbara Taylor Heineback, B-A-R-B-A-R-A, Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R, Heineback, H-E-I-N-E-B-A-C-K. Speaker 1: Could you please state your date of birth and the location of your birth? Speaker 2: December 29, 1944, New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: And today's date. Speaker 2: August 2nd, 2005. Speaker 1: And the location of this interview is on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] at The HistoryMakers' office. Could you please tell us your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a consultant. I have my own firm [Bee Talkingpoint]. It is in Frederick, Maryland, and I provide public relations, illustrations, which my partner does all of the drawing and all of that, it's a business, business partner. And we do a lot of writing and other straight, full PR [public relations] and media, media relations firm. Story_ID: 269388 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask five People magazine-ish kinds of questions, just bear with me. Could you tell me what your favorite food is? Speaker 2: Maybe it's lemon chiffon pie on certain days and other days it might be just a wonderful, fresh salad. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Winter, when it's snowing. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Yellow. Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Nowadays, Australia. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying. Speaker 2: Some days it's gee golly whitakers. Story_ID: 269389 Speaker 1: Okay, next we're going to explore your family background. I'd like to start by asking you if you could please tell me about your mother. Speaker 2: My mother is a Floridian, although she lives in Georgia now. My father [John Taylor] was from Georgia, so that's after they retired, they moved to Georgia. And she was born in a little town called Waldo, Florida. Waldo today is known as the speed trap capital of the U.S.A. Tiny little one light town. And it's a country town, her parents [Cindy Wilson and Isaac Wilson] were farmers. She was one of twelve children, the last of twelve. Mother will be ninety-eight years old later this month. She is blind today and other than eye drops, it's the only medication that she is on. Speaker 1: Could you state her name? Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Billie-- her maiden name was Robella Wilson and her nickname, what everybody calls her is Billie. Speaker 1: Okay. And so did she grow up exclusively in Florida, or-- Speaker 2: She grew up pretty much exclusively in Florida in Waldo, Florida and then finished high school in Orlando, Florida, from I believe Jones High School which might still exist. Mother was--she's short, she's about five [feet] two and a half [inches] and she was very proficient at basketball. And apparently a couple of the local colleges before they had all these computers and records and keep tab on people, would hire mother out to play for a local college basketball team even though she was really still finishing high school. So she, she had a good game, apparently. Speaker 1: Is there anything else that you know about her background or her growing up that you'd like to share? Speaker 2: She loved to read. Believes and always has in an education and a good, solid education. Although she loves the water, she's afraid of it, you know. She's been on a cruise ship once in her later years, but never learned how to swim. And she was wonderful at knitting. Did a little bit of sewing, but she was excellent at knitting and she had me seeking patterns for her from other countries that I'd have to get translated because she wanted to learn a certain popcorn stitch or a certain weave. And that became quite a passion for her. She never had her fingers in soil for about thirty years I guess when she was raising a family. And then when dad retired, they returned. They had moved to New York [New York] where I was born, and returned to the South to Georgia, my father's home, and she ended up with quite a wonderful garden. My dad's sister helped her with that, and between her rose garden and her vegetables and she would intersperse flowers throughout the vegetable garden and asparagus and grew just about every vegetable at one time I could think of, other than those--it was too hot in Georgia to grow cabbage; she had no success with that. But really enjoyed gardening. Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother? Speaker 2: Soft spoken, but steeliest in her manner. Very stubborn. She likes to have her way. Good family provider, was a total homebody. Mother loves to have company, always has, but she's not big on going other places. In the younger years she did enjoy traveling. But she truly likes spending the night, no matter how far she roams now, her thing is all about coming back to her own bed by nightfall. Story_ID: 269390 Speaker 1: Did she [Heineback's mother, Robella Wilson Taylor] share any stories with you about her growing up? Speaker 2: Yes she did. I was saddened when she would tell me how she would go out and, and either be a nanny or take care of children for other people, you know, in order to make money. And that part of it was fine, but they did not want her to learn how to read and she loved reading, and how she would have to have a little flashlight and sometimes candles, whatever, trying to read either under the covers or under a bed or hiding somewhere at night after her work was done, just to be able to, you know, try to pull down a book or a magazine, read an article and to learn, and how tough it was and, and how the society was against that. Speaker 1: So she was born in the early 1900s. Speaker 2: Nineteen o' seven [1907]. Speaker 1: Were there any other stories that she shared with you about any of the historical eras in which she was, she lived her life? Speaker 2: Not a lot is coming to mind right now. My dad's [John Taylor] family was a bit more outspoken than mother's side of the family. And then with mother being the last of twelve children, I didn't--some of her siblings older than her had already passed on and were deceased before I was born. So I didn't learn a lot and by the time I became really curious to want to know the history and all, it was a bit too late. She shared with me a little about her dad, who had come from the South Pacific Islands. And it was sort of hush-hush around what grandpa had done, my maternal grandfather. So he apparently had gotten into some trouble and somehow managed to take on the name Wilson [ph.], but we're not real sure of how--I'm not sure as to how all of that came about. And he managed to get out of trouble, apparently, and I didn't get details about it and I'm pretty sure mother does not know. I don't think it was something she didn't wanna tell all. I'm pretty sure by the time she came along, she absolutely did not know the full story. Perhaps some of her older siblings did. Speaker 1: Do you recall your grand- your great-grandmother and great-grandfather's names on your maternal side? Speaker 2: They would have been my grandparents, Speaker 1: Oh your grandparents (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah my grandparents. Her father, yeah, and his name is--was Isaac Wilson. And my grandmother's name was Cindy Wilson. Isaac and Cindy, they were the two that had the twelve children. I say twelve, thirteen. There's another uncertainty because before mother was born, there had been a set of twins. And mother is not sure if she was the twelfth child, you know, and if, let's say if it was the fifth child, if those were the twins that one died at birth and the other died a few years after. Mom's not sure if they counted as let's say number five, or five and six. So she's not really certain if she was the twelfth child or the thirteenth child. Story_ID: 269391 Speaker 1: Talk to me about your father. What was his name and where was he born? Speaker 2: My dad passed away in 1993 in Albany, Georgia. And he was born in a farm just twelve miles from Albany in Leesburg, Georgia. The fam- the farm is now in the family, it's mother's farm and you know, it's possible my brother [Barry Taylor] and I will inherit that should we outlive mother [Robella Wilson Taylor]. No one ever knows. It's not certain. But that's the Taylor farm now in Leesburg, Georgia. And dad was born about--less than a mile as the crow flies from where the Taylor farm is now in Leesburg, Georgia. And he drove me around in Leesburg and there is a tree now that's growing in the middle of the field, and that's where the schoolhouse was. It was a one room schoolhouse that had all children apparently between the ages of one and--kindergarten and twelfth grades, and at no time did dad ever remember more than about ten or a dozen students being in that little one room wooden house because all the children then had to work so hard and be in the fields. That one or two once in a while would be able to come back and, you know, take a class here and there. One of the interesting stories about my father that I find most memorable is the only thing that I'm aware that my father was ever ashamed of, is the fact that he was pulled out of school and did not get to finish high school. My father only had a fourth grade education. He was very capable. I always said dad could have gone on to be an engineer, he could have been an architect, whatever he had wanted to do had doors been open at the time. Dad was excellent at math, mathematics and could figure out just about any problem that was presented to him. He had his own math. Nobody ever understood it, and I would go to him for help with my homework assignments and he would finally get to the point that he could get me to understand what to do and I became very good at math myself. But I never quite understood how he got--usually I didn't understand how he got from point A to point B. But he would keep working with me until he got me there. And he had such a love for math that I inherited a love for math in my younger years. And one of his favorite stories was when he was in the [U.S.] Navy he was on a ship, I've forgotten the name of the warship. I had always threatened to try to do a little research and go back and find out if that ship is anywhere and maybe get a little recognition for my father. But apparently they were setting up on a deck of this warship, it's sort of like a compass or it might have been a compass of some sort. A nautical compass. And the engineers and all could not set this compass and they worked on it for a couple of weeks. And all of the smart, bright guys with the great educations and all, no one could solve the problem with this. And dad went up to the top deck one night and worked it out. Well he'd gone up a few nights, he'd sneak up, you know, after hours and all and toy with this thing. And one night he corrected the problem, or he fixed, he solved the problem that no one in the Navy was able to solve. And so it was set up the next morning. And dad never received any recognition for that, but that was one of his favorite stories and as he got older, he would tell it more and more frequently to the point that my mom, Billie's saying, "Okay John, enough. We've heard that before." But he was very proud of that and he had accomplished it and something, you know, that well he should be proud. Speaker 1: And could you state your father's name? Speaker 2: I'm sorry, John Henry Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R. And dad was born, if I didn't mention it, in Leesburg, Georgia, just--I'd mentioned the farm but I may not have stated exactly where it was, or where it is. It's still there today and it's still being farmed. We keep about fourteen acres and just have a couple of houses on it and use it for hunting and you know, fun and all. And the rest of the farm we rent out to farmers. Story_ID: 269392 Speaker 1: Were there any stories that your father [John Taylor] shared with you about his growing up? Speaker 2: There were. There were lots that he shared. I knew his mother, my paternal grandmother probably a little better than I knew my maternal grandmother [Cindy Wilson] because when I would go home to my maternal--to Florida in the summers, to my maternal grandmother, she was elderly and quiet. Prayed a lot and I just remember her every morning sweeping the house from front to back. And my maternal grandmother lived to be 105, and she just died of old age, but not really diseased or anything. The body just wore down, basically I believe. And my maternal [sic. paternal] grandmother passed on, I would say--see Grandma Annie [Jerden (ph.)] was about ninety-two or ninety-three when she passed away. I wanna say ninety-three I believe, in Albany, Georgia in a nursing home. But Grandma Annie managed to farm for many years while farmers were farming cotton and other vegetables and all. And I remember as a little girl although I went to school in Long Island, New York. We'd go south two or three times a year, maybe at Christmas, Thanksgiving and then spend two months in the summer. Dad would work in New York and mother [Robella Wilson Taylor] would take my brother [Barry Taylor] and I south. We would just--I just had one sibling, where we would spend the summers at the grandparents'. And we spent a short time in Georgia, much longer at my mother's mother's home in Florida. But I didn't get to know Mom's mom because she was so much older, whereas my dad's mother, Grandma Annie, was more active and still running the farm and running the shop. And Grandma Annie was black American mostly, had a little Cherokee in her. And Grandma Annie was a--what's the term they use--a midwife. So she delivered babies and she was also a great herbal physician and the whole community, black and white, when people would get sick, they couldn't get over the whooping cough, they couldn't break a fever and all, Grandma Annie would be called to the rescue. And she would come--she would go out--she'd go and see the patient, see what she felt was wrong with them and she said okay I'll be back this evening or tomorrow morning. And she'd come with her herbs and boil things on the stove and what have you, or put these mustard and very stinky, strongly flav- not flavored, but fragranced musks and kind of mud packs and such on one's chest and throat and everything and most of them apparently they improved because she did this, you know, right up until, you know almost the end. Speaker 1: What was her full name? Speaker 2: Annie--what was dad--Annie Jerden. That was her maiden name. She married twice and Grandpa Jerden was not--I didn't know until I was a teenager that Grandma, Grandpa Jerden was not my grandfather, but that was grandma's second husband. That my granddad was Taylor. And I didn't know him. He passed away before I was born. Story_ID: 269393 Speaker 1: And the other thing Grandma Annie [Heineback's paternal grandmother, Annie Jergen (ph.)] did was she made cane syrup. And one of my fondest memories of the holiday season when we would go south because I grew up, I was born in New York [New York], grew up there, went to school there. But we would go south as I mentioned, several times a year. And when we would go for Thanksgiving, it was very festive. By then I had quite a few cousins and aunts and uncles, relatives. It was a large family. And on the farm everyone came to grandmother's house on the farm. And she would go out and slay chickens and turkeys. And then the men would go to the woods and they would roast a roast suckling pig, sometimes two. And they would do this in the ground and they would dig this big ditch. They'd put hot coals that they would bake outside in an oven until the coals were red hot. Then they would wrap the pig in all these, I think it was corn leaves and all and leave it in the ground overnight. They would prepare this pig like the wives would prepare the interior of the pig, give it to the men, they'd drive off to the woods and they'd put this thing in the ground about five, four or five, six p.m. in the evening. And one or two men would hold watch over the pig and it was like, okay you've got the first watch. Second watch, third watch like you do on a ship. And the pig would be finished cooking sometime nine, ten, eleven o'clock the next morning. And that would be part of the Thanksgiving dinner. And actually I guess it wasn't really ready until closer to eleven or noon. Because when the pig came out of the ground, everybody's starving and ready to go. And the aunts and all had arrived with all the pies and what have you. The other, you know, accouterment. But while, you know, so the children and wives and family, they go to bed of course. And then when we got up Thanksgiving morning on the farm they had a couple of mules, which you seldom see today. And Grandma Annie was known for her syrup. Grandma Annie's syrup. And if I can find one, there might be one jar left where I can take a picture in the barn that says Aunt Dolly's Syrup [ph.]. They didn't--in the beginning they called it Aunt Annie's Syrup. And then it got changed, everyone at some point, I'm not sure why, started calling grandma, Aunt Dolly. And her syrup was labeled Aunt Dolly. So it was a big white vertical label that says Aunt Dolly's Syrup in red letters. And so it was molasses made from sugar cane. And it was her own recipe and there were two big black cauldron pots. And this was cooked outdoors. So it was a big brouhaha. All the children were able to get on the back of a wagon. Dad [John Taylor] would hook the wagon up to the tractor and we'd go out and we'd pull all of the sugar cane from the sugar field. And all the children got to pick some--the men had already picked most of it the night before, but we got to do our little bit, you know I'd say four or five in. And then we'd bring the wagon back to the yard where the cauldron pots--well first it had to come through a press and there was this cane press where you--everybody gets to keep walking in circles and putting stalks of cane into this shoot. And it presses the syrup out of the sugar cane. And all of the syrup drips into these cauldron pots and the stalk gets tossed. It gets cooked for hours and hours and while it's cooking, the two mules are hooked up to go around this processor and--I mean this goes on for hours and hours and hours, cooking this syrup down until it's prepared. But that's the activity to keep the men and the children busy Thanksgiving morning. The women are in the house cooking and then it's very celebratory and people are eating all over the pies and the cakes and the veggies, most of which had been harvested on the farm, and the chickens and turkeys and this big roast suckling pig. And for sure a ham enters the picture, you know, that someone brings or grandma had made. But you know--and grandmother had a wonderful cake recipe that's a little bit like a spice cake, but it's not the traditional spice cake. And woe is me, I never got the recipe and I just have one living cousin now that should have gotten it and she doesn't have it either. So she doesn't have it and I don't have it. It's not likely that it's still around. So those are some of the sadder moments. How did we let that pass away? And at the end of every summer when we were headed back to New York and we'd drive back through Georgia and stop over for a night after we left Florida, grandma always had that cake in the car and a box of fried chicken and her biscuits and-- Speaker 2: What kind of cake was it, do you recall? Speaker 1: It was, that's what I was saying. Speaker 2: Like a pound cake or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was very similar to a spice cake, it was round and it was two layer, possibly three. And she made a spice drip sugar dressing, kind of like a molasses dressing. I'm sure it was made from her molasses syrup that kind of just dripped over a spice cake that had cinnamon, nutmeg, probably a little clove, you know. Very similar to a spice cake, but yet it was different, especially her icing and there might have been butter in the icing. I don't know. I can almost taste it as I'm sitting here telling you. Story_ID: 269394 Speaker 1: If you knew your great-grandparents, could you tell me their names or if you could share with me how far back you can trace your ancestors? Speaker 2: Yes, interesting question. I guess I must have been about eleven years old and I became curious about family tree. It might have been something we were doing in school or I don't know what. But I asked my dad [John Taylor] about the history and the background and that's when dad told me as much as he knew and I've covered some of that with you. But he said "Babs [HistoryMaker Barbara Heineback], the person you need to speak to" is his great-aunt Sara [ph.]. And so we decided okay fine, when we go back to Georgia this coming Thanksgiving, or that next Thanksgiving, I would sit down with Aunt Sara and take copious notes. Aunt Sara was the only person that really had the memory of slavery. And Aunt Sara's parents or grand- her forefathers had gone through slavery and she had recalled that, or she was probably a child or maybe one of the first freed blacks at that point, I'm not sure. And unfortunately before that next Thanksgiving came, Aunt Sara passed on. So I was never able to really get the documentation of that. And dad said that, "Yeah, Babs these are some things that she had mentioned to me years ago and I don't know the details," but Aunt Sara really had vivid memory of certain things and had passed on certain stories that had become blurred to my father. He hadn't really tried to record it or appreciate the significance, you know, of that history. And I think by then when I was asking dad, my father was probably of a gender [sic. generation] where people were not necessarily trying to remember anything correlated to slavery and those painful years. But it was that, I guess what would have been my great-great, or great-great-great paternal aunt who had some actual history of slavery and certainly a memory of it and the difficult times and a little bit as to who was whom. So what I did do while I was in Leesburg, Georgia that year, I went to the downtown city hall and I don't know if it was that year. But by the time I became a teenager and I picked it up again, realized I could go to city hall and get documentation and history of the family tree. I tried that in Leesburg, but it turns out that in Leesburg, Georgia, the city hall had burnt down years ago and therefore I would have to go to Atlanta [Georgia] if I ever really wanted to do any family tree study or history. And I have not done that--I've been negligent. Story_ID: 269395 Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up? Speaker 2: Who knows? Tell you what I don't remember. Apparently I was--I fell out of a car when I was in the back seat when Dad [John Taylor] was driving once, and so I use that as an excuse. That's my--forgive me, it's not my fault. I don't remember that. An early remembrance that I have is lots of fun to be in the car with my father when there was a very tall hill not far from where I grew up in Port Washington, Long Island [New York]. And we'd get in the car, just the two of us, and he'd drive out to this hill. And he would do figure eights in the car in the snow. I mean snow had to be just right. You had to have at least four inches of snow. So we were playing games in the snow in the car. That was a lot of fun. I recall being in the jeep with my dad and he was a daredevil. And, and he would be in the jeep driving and he would back the jeep up right to the edge of this cliff that fell down into, you know, the beech and an embankment. And I guess this cliff was maybe some four, five hundred feet, you know, high. And he would just speed and stop the wheel right then and we'd jump out of the jeep and look to see how many inches had he come to the edge. So I was the only who would go with dad, you know, when he was out for a little excitement and all. So we had fun and we had a father/daughter relationship that I envy no one of. Story_ID: 269396 Speaker 1: Now, you were talking about driving to the [cliff] edge with your father [John Taylor]. Speaker 2: Yes, driving to the edge with dad. Too much fun. And maybe that's why I guess if there is one part of my spirit that supersedes all, it's my love for adventure. You know, I wonder where she got that? I did get it, not religiously, but, but straight from my father. One of the things Dad and I did his last years, Dad passed away I think at the age of eighty-three [sic. eighty-six] in 1993, April. And for those last few years before he passed away when I would go to--because by then I was either living in [Washington] D.C. or in California. But I came home every Christmas. And when I was there I'd get home a day or two before Christmas. And somewhere between maybe Christmas night and the 24th to the 26th, one of those nights, Dad and I would be in the den where his bed was. He'd kind of moved out of his bedroom into the den. He commandeered the den 'cause that's the room that had the fireplace in Mom [Robella Wilson Taylor] and Dad's home. And she had the main bedroom, master bedroom. And he kept the fireplace going all, you know all night or pretty much all night in the winter depending on the weather. But Dad and I after everybody had gone to bed, would take one of those nights and we would end up just having a chat and catching up on what had happened to him, to me, my friends and loved ones, him and the family and all. And we would stay up all night. And it became a thing that we both looked forward to when we knew we were gonna have our chat night, as it were. And now the first couple of times it happened, Mother would wake up and hear us, you know, chatting away, you know 12:30, 1:30, 2:30. "Babs [HistoryMaker Barbara Heineback], John, go to bed, go to bed!" And we'd just ignore her nicely and keep talking and all. But it was those first couple of years that Dad and I would end up having that all-nighter, very similar to what you and I are doing now. And that was the one time of the year that I knew I could ask Daddy almost anything and he would answer. And my father's favorite drink, he only drank on the weekends, was--he drank beer usually. But at Christmas I would bring him, I found out Dad liked bourbon. And I'd buy him a bottle of eighty proof Wild Turkey, and home I would come with this bottle. And that's the only time in my life I've ever drank Wild Turkey. And sometimes now, you know a bottle will last me for years and then I'd serve it if I had guests who are interested. But at Christmas, sometime during Christmas week, I always make it a point of raising a glass and having a little shot of Wild Turkey just, you know, raising the glass to Dad because I drink wine and that's really about all I drink otherwise. But we would have our evening and he would tell me stories of his work and how he and Mom migrated from Florida to New England and ended up in New York, Long Island, where my brother [Barry Taylor] and I grew up. And it was--I think I did know a little before that, that my--but not much before. And it might have been Dad at one of those fireside chats that I found out when Dad met my mother in Orlando, Florida, she had been engaged to someone else, another man. But Dad saw Mother and said she's the one. So Mother eloped with my father although she was engaged to another man back in the day, as quiet as it's kept. Story_ID: 269397 Speaker 1: So you were mentioning earlier about the land diversity on the [paternal family] farm. Would you like to talk a little bit more about that? Speaker 2: Sure. One of the things that we realized on the farm is that it has a small area of wetlands. And what we have found there has been a little bit of--what is the purple stone? Not amber, that's the orange-gold, but the natural purple. Speaker 1: Amethyst? Speaker 2: Amethyst. We had found amethyst running through rocks along the creek. We have found a family, I think they're extinct now. We haven't seen one in over five years, but we found a family of--there's something called a three ringed squirrel. It is one of the most beautiful creatures God has created. Little larger than your average squirrel and a tail about one and a half times as long. It's a black tail, you almost think skunk! But the rings are near the tip of the tail and there are three white lifesavers at the top of that squirrel, maybe 'bout an inch think each, each ring of white hair going around it. And it's in the squirrel family, very rare. There are mushrooms that are rare that have grown only in these wetlands and the conditions are just right. So recently there was--we had the pine trees cut. You know when you have to cut timber back ever so often, every so often. And it was improperly done a few years ago. So I'm very concerned that that sort of thing can easily disrupt the nature of the wetlands, and so we're hoping that that didn't disturb Mother Nature's plan. And there is a lime sink there. So all of these conditions just kind of make for an interesting habitat. Story_ID: 269398 Speaker 1: Could you share what your family life was like early, you know, on. You shared early memories. Are there any things in particular about either your brother or-- Speaker 2: My brother and I grew up--we were both born in New York [New York], although Mother [Robella Wilson Taylor] was from Florida, Dad [John Taylor] from Georgia. Dad's work took him north. So they had lived in New York by the time we were born. My parents were married for well over twenty years before they had any children. So although Mom and Dad are Mom and Dad, they are really kind of Mom and Dad but very grandparent-like at the same time. Certainly my brother and I benefitted hugely from that because they doted everything on us. We were like their children and grandchildren. And we were fortunate to get the best of their wisdom, inspiration, support, love, all of the above. So Barry and I, that's my brother Barry Taylor, B-A-R-R-Y, we went to a parochial Catholic school the first years, Port Washington Catholic School [sic. St. Peter of Alcantara, Port Washington, New York]. And I was there from kindergarten through third grade before my parents switched us to a public school. The rest of the family, aunts and uncles and all, didn't like the idea that we were growing up in this parochial environment. And having come from a Baptist and Methodist background, both families, they did not understand what's up with this Catholic thing Mom and Dad were doing. So although we never officially became Catholics as children, we went to Catholic school, learned the rosaries, learned all of that. I must say I think it was an incredibly thorough education, K [kindergarten] through the third grade. And I remember distinctly my classes, my nun teachers, and they all wore habits still at that time. Small classes. Talk about the three Rs, it was very strict. I had my hands slapped with that yard ruler stick and standing in a corner and sitting on the stool in the corner. If you're not too bad, you face the students. If you were really bad, you faced the corner. I was a product of all of that. And my time in public school is much--in elementary school, sort of started to fast forward and started to become a blur. It wasn't as distinct. The nuns make an impression on you, at least they used to. Whereas I guess by the time I got to public school, I probably started to kick back and said this is a walk in the park, I can do this. So it was very different. That certainly is a strong memory early on. I was allowed to take different classes as a youngster. Story_ID: 269399 Speaker 1: We lived twenty, twenty-five miles from Manhattan [New York, New York] in Port Washington [New York] where my father [John Taylor] was a caretaker on an estate of a very wealthy Wall Street broker. He would make a million dollars a day and back in those days anybody making a million dollars was very unusual. He was one of the probably two wealthiest people in town. The person my dad worked for, he was extremely wealthy. The other person was the head of the mafia who lived down the road, down the lane. Can't think of his name now. So there was a lot of money around and money at that point was nothing special. It was my neighborhood, it was the environment. And there was a lot of comfort, great education and you--we studied. That's what everybody did. You go to school, you're supposed to get good grades or at last decent grades, and life goes on. And then the summers were spent in the South, which was a very different environment when you could kick back, relax, play with cousins and friends and all of that. And I recall probably by about the third or fourth grade I started having homework that took several hours at night. So school months, September through June, all evenings were you know you come down for dinner, you go back up to the room and you, you get the assignments done. And that was what my whole childhood was. It was just, you know, the three Rs basically. Speaker 2: And what were those three Rs? Speaker 1: Reading, writing and although it's arithmetic, you know, it should be RRA, but somehow, somewhere over time it was quoted as the three Rs: reading, writing, 'rithmetic instead of arithmetic. Story_ID: 269400 Speaker 1: What street did you live on? Your earliest, the earliest street that you can recall living on. Can you tell me the name of that street and can you maybe describe that neighborhood (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, 35 Cedar Lane [Port Washington, New York]. I lived there through high school [Forest Hills High School, Forest Hills, Queens, New York, New York], from when Mother [Robella Wilson Taylor] brought me home from the hospital in Manhattan [New York, New York]. She would have been in the hospital I guess just two or three days, but because of a snowstorm the doctor made her stay longer, another couple of days 'cause it was too much snow to bring the child home. Now remind me to relate to when my son [Erik Heineback] was born in Stockholm, Sweden when, when he was three days old the doctor told me to put him out on the balcony in the hospital where it was snowing lightly and they just put a little net over him and all he had over him was just a little thin blanket, his diaper and a little t-shirt. They said no, no, we have to acclimate them. Fifteen minutes the first day, a half hour, then forty-five minutes. And there was no heat, no heating light, nothing. And it was the middle of the afternoon. They said as long as it's not raining, but if it's a light snow or a sunny day, to the balcony they go. They have to get used to it. And this was March 21st, 1973. And I'm standing there at the window in my gown, oh my God, they're gonna kill my son. Is he still breathing? Big difference. I couldn't come home from the hospital, and my son born, you know, years later is out on a balcony where it's subzero weather. Story_ID: 269401 Speaker 1: What was the neighborhood like? What was your block like in your earliest remembrance? Speaker 2: Well there were not blocks. People had estates. And 35 Cedar Lane [Port Washington, New York] was a lot of acreage that went right down to the Atlantic Ocean. And I and my dog Frisky [ph.] who played a major role in my growing up. I'd go down to the beach and do my homework. Run around the rocks almost every day of my life. That was part of my afternoon unwind, I can play for forty-five minutes, an hour, change clothes before you have to come in, wash your hands, go upstairs and do homework until dinner. I ran around the rocks whether it was snowing, whether it was ice. You know, you put on your long, what they call 'em long'ns [ph.] I think back in the day. These pants kind of like we now have ski outfits, the ski pants. But they were just long'ns back and wool things that were kind of well padded, you'd put on. And your galoshes and boots and what have you. And you know I played outdoors for at least an hour every day. Didn't matter what the temperature was, what time of year it was. If it's 25 degrees, I'm outside. If it's, you know, and in New York summer days got up to the mid-eighties occasionally, upper seventies, low eighties is average summer day I guess. And then you know I remember when my brother [Barry Taylor] and I, Dad [John Taylor] helped us build a Tarzan rope and we had these three trees we had lined up and had the rope hanging from the middle tree. And my brother could always hold on and go from the end tree to the farthest tree and jump and make it to the branch. And I don't know how many times I tried to jump and make it to the branch and ended up with busted lips. Never lost any teeth, but had, you know, leg wounds to show for it for months to come. My parents would yell and say "Wear long pants, were your, wear your long'ns. I don't care if it is June, put something on your legs if you have to do this." And did a lot of biking, a lot of tree climbing and beach going and when I wanted to learn how to swim and my brother could swim and I couldn't. I was very envious. I envied him that and I said "Barry please teach me how to swim next summer." "Okay Babs [HistoryMaker Barbara Heineback], okay." So it's late May and down to the water we trot. And he jumps in with some of his buddies and I said, "What do I do?" He said, "Just jump in." My big brother told me to jump in, I just--bingo. The end of the dock, mind you, must have been some twenty-one feet, something like that. And you learned the doggy paddle. You just kind of come up like a turtle and I thought I was swimming. I guess I did the doggy paddle for some five or ten years and never knew the difference before I finally really learned how to swim. Story_ID: 269402 Speaker 1: Are there any neighbors from your community that you remember? Speaker 2: Yes, yes I'm glad you asked. There was Wayne and Jolynn Bellavia [ph.]. Their mother was Irish, great cook. Yeah, the mother was Irish, the father was Italian. And they lived at the end of the lane about a mile down. And we would be back and forth at each other's houses every afternoon or most afternoons. After school I'd stay over Jolynn's or she'd come down and you know, play with Frisky [ph.] and me after school. And she was closer to my age. She was a year younger than me, Wayne was a year younger than my brother [Barry Taylor]. And I've been married twice, and both times Wayne has kind of been around to give me away or to be there. And I just lost my buddy Wayne last year, November. And no matter where in the world I was, I always got a letter from Wayne, sometimes once a week, at least once a month. And even though we both had emails, he decided a long time ago nope, he likes to just write a little hand note. And it might be on just lined paper or whatever, or card paper. But wherever I was in the world, we always kind of kept in touch. So friends forever, you know friends for life. And kind of fun having Perry Como, the old crooner. He and his family lived around the corner and didn't see much of him, he traveled and all a lot. But I recall that was the house to be at on Halloween night. And you'd go there and people would get fifty cents or a quarter when everybody else is giving, you know, couple of pennies or a nickel or candy. But we never wanted money, we want the candy. And there was one woman in the neighborhood who made jellied apples, homemade jellied apples, a little German lady. But that was downtown, that wasn't in my neighborhood. We'd comb our neighborhood first in the evening then we'd--Mom [Robella Wilson Taylor] would drive us downtown and head out with another crew and we'd circle the downtown. It was one night of the year I could be out until about midnight or eleven. I mean you'd knock on the doors at Halloween until, you know, people really started to fuss. Maybe not midnight. It was probably more like 10:30 or so, but it seemed like midnight, you know, to us as children. Halloween was the best holiday of the year as far as I was concerned. Speaker 1: You know it sounds like your community was pretty diverse. Can you talk a little bit about the ethnic composition? Was it predominantly white neighborhood, ethnic neighborhood, African American neighborhood? Speaker 2: Sands Point [Long Island, New York], Port Washington [New York] where we grew up, we were the only blacks in the neighborhood. For a long time they didn't even have any Jews, Jewish families living in Sands Point. There are now. But not at that time. It was really a pretty Christian, you know, kind of white neighborhood. It was very vanilla. Downtown, or parts, other parts of Port Washington you could move down to an area called Manorhaven [Long Island, New York]. And that was the melting pot of integration and you had your Euro community, you had a lot of Germans and a lot of Italians in this little community called Manorhaven. And it was a blue collar community there. And then you had downtown Port Washington that was sort of the blue collar, sort mixed, middle class rest of the community. Port Washington was probably during my childhood, probably went from a township of maybe ten or eleven thousand to about twenty, twenty-two thousand when I moved away. And we lived seven miles from downtown. You had to drive; it wasn't a walk. Story_ID: 269403 Speaker 1: You know you definitely had to drive to Sands Point [Long Island, New York]. And there was a black community where we went to church when we went to church. My dad [John Taylor] went to church more than anybody else, it's interesting. Mother [Robella Wilson Taylor] would read the Bible every morning, and that's what she woke up and did. And she had her Bible right next to the throne in the bathroom. She read a chapter a morning, but she didn't go to church often. Whereas Dad would go to church twice a month, maybe something like that. He was a deacon at the church [Port Washington Baptist Church, Port Washington, New York], supported the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and made a contribution of five hundred dollars when we were very young as a lifetime member which was a big donation for him. And he showed us at that time the significance and importance of supporting community efforts. My mother as I mentioned earlier, was the homebody, whereas Dad was a big community worker and people would always say Mr. Johnny and Mr. Taylor would you join us in this? We're trying to start a clinic. Even after they had retired and he moved back to the farm in Leesburg, Georgia. One of my girlfriends who had become an RN [registered nurse] nurse in Albany, Georgia, was trying to start a community health clinic out in Leesburg. Had a hard time getting community members to join her. But she did support the effort--Dad did support the effort and became part of her team to raise money and make sure that the community got a local health care clinic, which is now, you know, a nice little brick building that's been there about fifteen years or longer, that he helped to co-founder. Speaker 2: How did your parents come to own a home in this community during that time particularly? Speaker 1: Yeah, my mother to this day can bite a copper nickel in half. She's a great saver. She believes in saving money and she sees the value of squirreling away little by little and getting something, achieving something, making something of herself. The family and they bought--no, they bought their first property in Orlando, Florida. And they bought a little stand that became a taxi stand. And they kept that a while and they sold it. And then they got another, you know, something a little more substantial, and also their first major purchase was the [paternal family] farm in Georgia that we still have today. Story_ID: 269404 Speaker 1: Now Dad [John Taylor] almost lost the [paternal family] farm at one point. When he wanted to buy it, he wasn't sure if he had enough money, talked to Mom [Robella Wilson Taylor] and said "Billie I want this farm, I don't know if we can quite get it" and everything. And Billie had her own little next that she hadn't told Daddy about. So together they were able to purchase the farm. And at that time, yeah I guess we were born, but we were living in New York. And Dad had his mother [Annie Jerden (ph.)] on the farm and she was kind of managing and you know he was going down several times a year and had hired hands doing things, tending the farm. Well my grandmother --now you get the scuttlebutt. Here's the dish. Grandmother-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: Here's the dish. Grandmother sold the farm. It 'bout killed my dad. She sold it to a white man. Dad came back that next year or in months, you know I don't know if this took a year and a half, six months or however the trans--long the transition was. But Dad was so befuddled and outdone that this is really what he wanted, always said he wanted to retire on the farm and develop this. This was his nest egg and his dream. And he talked to the man that Grandma had sold the farm to and as I say it was a good white man. And this man sold--was willing to sell the farm back to Dad almost at cost. I don't know if there was a hundred dollars difference or if it was the exact same amount of money. But the man realized that, you know, Dad was the one that had really put the money up, that his mom you know, getting older and all, didn't really know what she was doing or certainly went against Dad's wishes and it was his to sell or not, not necessarily hers. Although Dad might have been, you know, a good son at the time, had Grandma's name on it. I don't know how--what the particulars of all that was. But at any rate, Dad did buy back the farm at cost, same price basically. And lived to be a happy man thereafter. Story_ID: 269405 Speaker 1: So you mentioned the elementary school that you attended. Did you go there directly to high school, or did you go to middle school-- Speaker 2: I went from Sands Point Elementary [John J. Daly Elementary School, Port Washington, New York] to John Philip Sousa Junior High [School, Port Washington, New York]. From John Philip Sousa Junior High in Port Washington [New York] to Forest Hills High School [Forest Hills, Queens, New York, New York] where I graduated. And that was going from a small school where I was able to be elected to, you know, sort of head different groups and classes and all, to suddenly overwhelmed. I guess the junior high school probably had, I'd don't remember, maybe 350 students. Certainly not more than five hundred. I doubt we had five hundred students in school, in the entire school. And I went from that to a--I'm sure we did not. Probably talking 350 students total. And junior high school as ninth, was seventh, eighth and ninth grades. And then in high school ninth grade, tenth grade suddenly I came into a high school that had a thousand students and I was a bit overwhelmed. And that was in Forest Hills in Queens [New York, New York]. And also suddenly I was introduced I think in my junior year of going--from having gone to school all day, basically 9:00 to 3:00, to a school where you have split sessions and the tenth graders go from 2:30 to five, and the eleventh graders go somewhere in the middle of that, and the seniors get to go from eight to noon or so. And I graduated Forest Hills High School. Speaker 1: So let's come back to elementary school and then we'll go to junior high and high. In elementary school, do you remember any teachers that influenced you? If so, what were their names? Speaker 2: I remember my brother's [Barry Taylor] teacher more than any others, Mr. Abromowitz [ph.] who was just a great teacher in the whole. He was the teacher that everybody loved, everybody wanted. "When I get to sixth grade, I want Mr. Abromowitz," and he retired before I got to the sixth grade. I had a teacher who was pretty nasty in the third grade, Mrs. Brumma [ph.], who really held my feet to the fire. I had an English teacher that I recall, I'm embarrassed and ashamed, I don't remember his name. And that was probably--I doubt in the second grade, we're probably talking fourth grade. And I was--I learned that I was a decent storyteller. What I knew, we had to do a book report once a month. And I'd come up with a good report and I could write it, the theme, it followed, it flowed. I was the only person in class that would get grades like B plus over forty-eight or sixty-one or something. I was such a poor speller, I'm dyslexic, I didn't know that until just recent years. And there was no term dyslexia back in the day. It hadn't been discovered by then. You're just a lousy speller and you're--could use a little work. But finally after a few months of this in the class, my teacher realized that I and perhaps others, but certainly helped me a lot, had a good story and could write the story. But so many points were taken off for the spelling that it dropped my grade down real low. So he decided you can do a written report or an oral report. And once I got into the oral reports, that's all it was from that point on. And my next story was a story that I had read about Althea Gibson. And I got an A plus 'cause I did her autobiography or her biography, whichever it was. But it was all oral. So I was pleased with that. It helped me a lot and it also gave me the break to really begin to take an interest in English as I had in math earlier because I didn't have to worry about all that spelling for every little thing. And I managed to play to my pluses rather than my minuses, and could enjoy and managed to do well in the grammar part of English. Story_ID: 266865 Speaker 1: Can you share with me any teachers perhaps that influenced you when you were in junior high school? Speaker 2: John Philip Sousa [Junior High School, Port Washington, New York]. No one really comes to mind. Was trying out for sports then. I wanted to be, I wanted to excel at running, and I never managed. I got a couple of--I've forgotten the order of red, white and blue. But anyway I got a couple of second and third place, but can never do that sixty yard dash and get the number one prize. No, those were just, you know, nice years but nothing stands out in particular that I can think of now. Speaker 1: What type of child were you? How would you describe yourself? Speaker 2: I will say this to that. In '92 [1992], 1992 because my parents [Robella Wilson Taylor and John Taylor] moved--I flew in from California to the [paternal family] farm in [Leesburg] Georgia and packed up my parents because Dad had--was an Alzheimer's patient and Mother was trying to take care of him on the farm and it was becoming too much for her. And so we bought a little house right next to my brother's [Barry Taylor] in Albany, Georgia, twelve miles away. And so I came back to pack them up and all to move them to, to the house next to my brother and sister-in-law [Jane Austin-Taylor] so they'd have some help. And then soon after that we'd gotten a nurse for Dad. But during that packing and I was up in the attic, I--in the cedar chest I ran across some Catholic school report cards. And I saw some for my brother and some for me. And the ones for my brother, he had a nice sprinkling of A's and Bs, good grades and was a good student. And I looked at my own and I had some Bs and Cs and the only A I got was in congeniality. So I said okay I guess I wasn't that academic back in the day. But I managed to get along with people somehow, so my people skills outshined my academic skills, apparently. And I was a bit of a mischievous child I think. Not mischievous getting in trouble, but just always wanted to have a little more fun than the rest of the environment expected or would allow. And yeah I did what I had to do and I basically did what I was told. But I was, you know, I was always up for, you know a bit of fun or a bit of easing out of things. And I was not an indoors child. Didn't wash dishes, never learned how to cook until I became interested, you know, later in life. And now love cooking. But spent as much time outdoors rather than indoors, that was the main thing I guess. Story_ID: 266866 Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations that you can recall early on in these formative years? Speaker 2: I think probably did, but I also think I didn't realize that at the time. What I've come to realize I guess in the last fifteen years or so, is one of the people who influenced me the most, or certainly a lot, was a piano teacher we had, Mrs. Pelza [ph.], a German piano teacher in Port Washington [New York] who taught a lot of students. And she spoke English well, her grand- her mother who came to visit with her, spoke English not as well. And I always got to class early because Mother [Robella Wilson Taylor] was cleaning house for Mrs. Pelza. They--my parents couldn't afford to give us piano lessons, so they did a trade and Mrs.--my mom would clean the house every other week in exchange for my brother [Barry Taylor] and I have weekly piano lessons. And I would get there early and I would have to sit in the kitchen and have a cup of tea and this dark bread with Mrs. Pelza's mother who, whose English was very limited, but she tried to always show me pictures of the old country. Tried her best to talk to me and Mrs. Pelza the piano teacher who traveled to Europe every summer, would send me postcards from all around Europe and because she was so cerebral, she would tell me about the cathedrals and about the historic places she was visiting and all. And I would keep these postcards and I guess almost worship them or just vicariously wonder where she was and imagine myself in these foreign, distant lands and ah, one day. And one of my favorite things in life now is travel. And I know that Mrs. Pelza had everything to do with dropping those seeds of curiosity about world and people and points beyond. Story_ID: 266867 Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier that there was a church where your father [John Taylor] was a deacon when you were growing up. What was the name of that church? Speaker 2: I believe it was Port Washington Baptist Church [Port Washington, New York]. And that was the church where I was baptized. Speaker 1: Do you have any memories from that church? Any favorite phrases, sayings or sermons? Speaker 2: No, I really remember being kicked out because I was giggling one day and Mom [Robella Wilson Taylor] had to take me, absolutely walk me out of church. I got the giggles and couldn't stop. And of course my friends put me up to it. You know when someone's about to laugh and you're trying not to, and then they just really laid it on and it didn't take a lot for me. And I got in trouble. Suddenly there was this outburst right in the middle of the sermon and all. Yeah. Story_ID: 266868 Speaker 1: Who would you say most influenced you as you were growing up? Speaker 2: My dad [John Taylor] certainly. He gave me the courage that I knew I could be whatever I wanted to be. He told me that. When I would talk about growing up and getting married and all of these fanciful ideas, he'd just calm me right down quickly and say "It doesn't matter who you marry Babs [HistoryMaker Barbara Heineback], it doesn't matter what he is doing or what he has or his education, his money, his abilities. I don't wanna leave this earth without knowing that--until I know that you have some capabilities, education, abilities and wellbeing to take care of yourself. Then you can go on and do what you want and travel to all these places you talk about, and have fun" he said. "But first gain an education and have something solid so that I can rest in peace and know that you can always take care of yourself and never have to depend on anybody else." Story_ID: 266869 Speaker 1: Were there any other extracurricular activities that you recall participating in? Speaker 2: Yeah, I took trapeze lessons at CBS Studios on Broadway and fifty, about 51st Street from a Joe Price for years and years and years every Saturday. It was a one hour train ride, Long Island Rail Road [LIRR], into Manhattan [New York, New York] and back. And I got to travel alone doing that and figured out how to take the train. I didn't figure out, Mother [Robella Wilson Taylor] showed me of course and then she didn't have to take me back and forth every week. And I guess I was around twelve years old or maybe ten when I started traveling on my own on Saturdays to CBS and then take my dance classes and then come back home. And I so when I was taking dance class and acrobatics I was thinking maybe I'll go into show business. And then when I started trapeze, I thought maybe I'll be in the circus. And then Dad [John Taylor] got a horse on the [paternal family] farm and then I said maybe I'll be in the rodeo. But I went to college and led a normal life instead. Story_ID: 266870 Speaker 1: Speaking of college, you went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: I certainly did. I'm a Howard, I'm a Howard alum and graduated from Howard in January of '72 [1972] because Erik [Heineback] was born in '73 [1973], yes. Graduated January '72 [1972]. An interesting story then. I have a degree, a B.A. in English and television communications and Tony Brown was the dean of the School of Communications at the time. And I realized about three--I realized in January before I was supposed to graduate, that I had enough credits to graduate. By the way, I should back up and say when I applied to Howard from high school [Forest Hills High School, Forest Hills, Queens, New York, New York] I wasn't accepted, my grades weren't good enough. I was accepted at American University [Washington, D.C.] where I went for semester, and then I was able to transfer to Howard by the next year or the second semester of the freshman year. And so I was--I realized I was able to graduate in three, in January which would have been three and a half years. And I went to the, the dean of records or whatever, whomever I had to see and said I just need these two other credits and I've signed up for them, those, and I'm looking forward to graduating in January. He kind of looked over my papers and then he looked back up at me. "I don't think so Barbara [HistoryMaker Barbara Heineback]. You're missing two things." There were two prerequisites that I had to take before I could take two classes I had registered to take. And so he signed a release form saying I should drop you know, 102, 102, this and that, and take 101, 101. And I was very despondent and I'm standing on line to drop the class and I thought to myself drats, I'm not gonna drop them yet. The one 102s that I had already registered and been accepted in. What I did was I said I'll give it a while and I registered in the two 101s. So my credits--I think I was carrying a load of about eighteen credits is normal and I was carrying about twenty-two or twenty-four credits. I said if I mess up, he's gonna throw me out of school, my tail is grass. But I figured let me try this for a few weeks, a month or so. If I can't do it, I can always drop them later. He'll be none the wiser. But if I can carry the whole enchilada, all is well. So I managed to carry all the credits, I did okay. Meanwhile, I was also working at that point at CBS News because in my junior year, or the beginning of my senior year, I decided I wanted to get a jump start. And so I went around and dropped a resume off at all three networks in Washington D.C., CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc.; CBS, Inc.], ABC, NBC News, thinking nothing will come of this. And I had a little part-time job at the Washington Hilton [Washington, D.C.] behind the desk in reservations two evenings a week and half a day on Saturdays. All of a sudden I get a call saying come in for an interview at CBS. And I trot down that next week. I was hired to be--to work with 'Face the Nation.' They needed an assistant and they also needed work and help in--as a researcher pulling together materials for the 'Face the Nation' program, and to be their kind of gal Friday for that. So I was very excited, it was a full-time position. Work thought--CBS thought I was taking a few courses at Howard. They didn't know I was a full time student. Howard University knew that I had a part-time job, but they did not know I was working full-time at CBS News at 2020 M Street. Story_ID: 266871 Speaker 1: I pulled it off because my job [researcher, CBS News] required me to come in Sunday mornings for about two and a half hours. My job was to call the guests, which were someone like all of your congressmen, senators and you know your twelve or so secretaries, secretary of state, [secretary of] defense, all of that. Now naturally, it's the producer that calls them, invites them onto the program ['Face the Nation'] and will you be our guest this Sunday to discuss X, Y, Z? But once they agree to do that, my job was to pull together all of the clippings, and this is before computers. So I had to have every major newspaper from around the country every morning clip out all interesting articles and keep them in files, the old fashioned way. And then once we know who we want to be our, our guest person that week and what the subject matter is, I had to collect all the news clips that came out of the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times], The New York Times, The Washington Post, the Chicago Daily [News], New York Post magazine [New York Magazine], your, your three news magazines, the Time magazine, Newsweek, Businessweek, Fortune, and anything else that was major, and compile a folder, four folders. One for our guest, the congressman or the secretary of state, or defense or you know whichever department head, interior, health, HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services] back then. And then one for the producer and one for each of the three reporters that would cover the guest. And the three reporters were always made up of the anchor for 'Face the Nation,' and then we would have--so you had one CBS reporter. We would always have one major newspaper reporter, one radio, one television. And it was compiled like that. Or maybe not--the radio could be a radio, it could be one of the magazines, somebody from Newsweek or Time. That fourth position would be a newsperson that was the best expert on that subject matter that we could find on any given Sunday. And I would relay the program format to the guest while they were being made up by Louise Brown [ph.], who's the makeup artist at CBS News. And I'd have about fifteen minutes with them to go over the format and all. And then the program would go on air and I would just kind of be there to troubleshoot help back and forth between the studio and the actual taping room. And then we were the only bar or cocktail lounge in Washington [D.C.] open these--this was the day when there was no alcohol in Washington on Sundays. And we always had an open bar. The bartender would come in from 9:30 to 11:30 Sunday mornings and it's amazing how most guests were not rushing home, but they always had time to stop for a gin and tonic or something, rum and coke on the way out. But it was a wonderful opportunity to get to know who our political leadership was in the country. No matter what assignment I was working on at school, I always sort of had a little in, could get a quote, could get a tidbit, an opportunity to ask those questions. And it opened the whole world of politics up to me in a way that I never would have otherwise been exposed. And because I had this little two hours on Sunday and I worked--and so I had all day Monday off. So see my work hours were (unclear) Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and then these little two hours on Sunday. So it was really, really a plum job. It was a nice salary. And because I had all day Mondays off, I was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] all day Monday. I took every course under the sun that would fill in toward my diploma, or my, you know graduation certificate from seven in the morning until ten at night or however long Howard was open. And I was in school all day on Mondays taking just whatever because it was a Monday class to fill in the gaps. And then I had classes maybe two or three evenings beyond that. So that's how I happened to go to school full time and work full time, and no one was any the wiser. And I did that for more than a year a half, a little under two years. So when I went back at the end of the semester to, you know, the head of records at Howard, and showed him my report card. You know I sort of said, you know this was not Tony Brown. He was in the School of Communications, but the one over the whole graduating department. And I showed him my records and all and he looked, and he looked at my records and I knew he wanted to have my head on a platter, but he couldn't say anything because I had straight A's. It's the only time in my life I ever got straight A's. I was so afraid of failure and I knew I had done something wrong. I said if I mess up, I am so out of here. But managed to pull it off and had all A's. And in fact then I went back and I fussed with one of my teachers because I had him drop an A in one course to a B because I knew it wasn't deserving, and that he was--that I just really did not--I didn't feel like I had earned it. The other classes we really had, but there were just too many things that had gone wrong in that class that semester that I wasn't happy with and it was just kind of a--I didn't want the A that I hadn't earned. I had earned the others, so I had straight A's one semester and all A's and a B another. Story_ID: 266872 Speaker 1: What are some of the extracurricular activities that you were involved in during your college years? Speaker 2: During my college years there really weren't any. I was working, I was studying and I was engaged and I wouldn't get married until after I had completed school because I was afraid I'd get pregnant, drop out, get lazy, whatever. So I was engaged about long as I was married. I was engaged for several years, actually it was three and a half. Speaker 1: So upon completing your degree at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], what was next for you? Speaker 2: I graduated one day in January and two or three days later I got married in January. And married a diplomat, a [Swedish] Foreign Service officer, and we were in the [United] States--that was in January, until Sept- until June of that year. And then we moved overseas, traveled for a couple of months and officially moved in September. And then my son [Erik Heineback] was born overseas in March of that next year, so almost a year and two months after college graduation. And then I was busy figuring out how do you become a mommy and how do you learn this foreign language and survive in a, you know, a new country that--so I was, you know, then I was back in school all over again full time studying Swedish. Speaker 1: So at this time you moved with your husband [Bo Heineback] to Sweden. This was the first destination after college. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And what was that like for you? Speaker 2: Wonderful, wonderful experience. Enjoyed the city [Stockholm, Sweden], enjoyed the country. I had doubts about my ability to learn this language, so I decided I would not speak English for one solid year. And every time--Swedes love to practice their English on Americans. And every time someone would say something to me in English, I'd look at them like I didn't have a clue as to what they were talking about. And finally, you know, they would say "Parlez-vous francais?" and I would still look blank. And then they would say to me in Swedish "Kan du tala svenska?" "Can you speak Swedish" or ask me, you know, something in Swedish. And I would respond as best I could or at least make an effort to say something. And after about three months I started--I could understand phrases and understand a little bit. And I went to school I think from around 8:30 in the morning until 4:30 in the afternoon with a half hour break. So it was intense, and it was Swedish taught in Swedish. There was no English being spoken because it was five students from five different countries. So Swedish was the only language spoken that first year. I did speak English two or three times that year when I called my mom [Robella Wilson Taylor], and like when I wrote to her of course, wrote to Mom and Dad [John Taylor]. But I refused to speak English with anybody, including my next door neighbor who finally said to me, "[HistoryMaker] Barbara [Heineback] I know you're American. Will you not speak English with me and I'd love for my daughter to learn." I said "Give me one year," and I told her in Swedish, "Give me one year of Swedish and I'll be happy to spend time with your daughter and speak English with her," but not until after whatever date I had established. Story_ID: 266873 Speaker 1: You were discussing earlier what it was like to have given birth to your first child in Sweden. Would you like to share that story with us again? Speaker 2: Yes. It was--my son was born in a hospital in Stockholm [Sweden] called Danderyds Sjukhus, Danderyds Hospital, right in town. And although I knew I'd probably go to the hospital in a taxi or my husband [Bo Heineback] would drive me to the hospital, whatever, I was so worried about what if he's born early. What if my husband's away on a business trip, I can't reach him that day for whatever reason and he's somewhere and I'm here and I go into labor. So after I was in Stockholm a couple of months, because Erik [Heineback] was born I think five months after we moved to Sweden. I hopped onto the (unclear) get to the underground, and took myself, found my way to the hospital on the Metro or the Marta [sic.] system. I figured just in case, let me do a little dry run here, do my own advance work. Went to the hospital, walked in cold, very little Swedish and asked, told them I said, you know, obviously I'm pregnant, gonna have a baby. It's gonna be here. And could you show me around and all? Well no one had ever done anything like this. So here's this little foreign child and off the hook and the Swedes are very formal and you have appointments and things are done procedurally, procedurally there. So I kind of show up on the carpet out of the blue and I think they were flabbergasted as they were, you know, entertained by this whole thing. But the doctor came out and the nurses came out and, "Oh the birth will be in here and then we do this--," ta, ta, ta, ta. So they took me through the dry run, spent about an hour in all. And that really did relieve what otherwise probably would have, or could have started to build up into some stress. And I kind of knew the drill and what was to be expected. And I came back home that afternoon feeling pretty good about things and said okay, I got it, I can do this. And-- Speaker 1: You mentioned earlier as well that in Sweden they put the children outside after they're born. Speaker 2: Yeah. Because it gets so cold, you know a typical winter in Sweden and Stockholm can be from twenty or thirty degrees celc- well not Celsius, that would be broiling, that'd be very hot. Twenty to thirty degrees Fahrenheit, you know on a nice day, down to minus thirty, you know, Fahrenheit. And it can stay that way for a couple of weeks, ten days, whatever. But low thirties is about as warm as it's going to get during the winter months, and lots of snow and all. One has to raise a child to become accustomed to the weather right away so that babies acclimate themselves. And you know I have a six foot three inch, or two inch anyway son now, healthy, who runs. So he survived it. Story_ID: 266874 Speaker 1: So from there, what was next for you? Did you all move again, or were you working when you were in Sweden? Speaker 2: We didn't move right away. I started to--after about a year I started to become pretty antsy to wanna go back to work. I felt that my husband was not antsy for me to work. In fact, he would have preferred me be a nice little homebody and you know, have babies and pretty much remain barefoot and pregnant. And that was not what I saw for my future. So we ended it. We ended it as friends. Bo [Heineback] felt that I had--Bo is my ex-husband. He felt that I'd been a good mother. It was no quarrel as to what would happen with the child and Erik [Heineback] would come with me and I decided to go back to the [United] States and did. And in Sweden you can get a divorce pretty quickly, I think in ninety days or three months, something like that. And when it was time to sign the papers, Bo wrote to me and asked if I would extend it another three months and think about it some more and I did (unclear) to do that. But signed the papers afterwards. We split as very good friends. It was really without argument. It was, it was sadder to split because we split as friends and it was amicable and we always really loved each other as best friends, and both loved our son. Did not tell Erik that we had divorced. Bo ended up getting a job at the United Nations [UN], so he was able to come back to the States. About a year after that he left Stockholm [Sweden] and came to the States. Erik and I were living in Washington, D.C. I came back to the States and that's when I started to go to work for the Carters [Rosalynn Carter and James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.]. And soon after I got back, I came back in July I think just before the Fourth [of July]. And my son was a couple of years old. And a friend of mine who was a state representative, John White, was traveling from Albany, Georgia to drive up to Atlanta [Georgia] one day and he said Barb [HistoryMaker Barbara Heineback], why don't come with me, I'm driving to Atlanta. About a three and a half hour drive and I had nothing to do. I didn't have anything going. I was looking around Albany for a job, thinking it would be nice to live in the South. I never had, I'd always lived in New York and just spent my summers in the south. So I went up to Atlanta, serendipity played its role and just after he had finished his business at congress [Georgia General Assembly] and all, he wanted to stop by the Carter/Mondale [Senator Walter Mondale] campaign headquarters on Peachtree [Street]. And my life was never the since thereafter. He went inside for a few minutes and I was about to--just before we left to go back to Albany. Story_ID: 266875 Speaker 1: So you were mentioning that things were never the same after a very particular stop that you made. Speaker 2: Okay where were we? Speaker 1: Talking about your return from Sweden and you were-- Speaker 2: And so we stopped off, [Representative] John [White] said to me "Barb [HistoryMaker Barbara Heineback], wait just a minute, do you mind? I wanna run into the Carter/Mondale [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr. and Senator Walter Mondale] campaign headquarters." I said, "No, fine," and I waited in the car about ten minutes. And then he came out. He said "Barb, come here a minute. I want you to meet somebody. I want you to go down the hall here and talk to John [ph.]." I go into this room and he introduces me, "John, Barbara, Barbara, John." We start chatting and John says, "I understand you have a little bit of experience with news and, and television and all." And I told him about my degree [from Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and yes I had worked at CBS News. And of course John knew that I was job hunting, but I was job hunting in Albany, Georgia. I hadn't thought about Atlanta [Georgia] just yet. And so John continues to tell me that they're hiring and they need someone now and that he's hiring people for the Carter/Mondale campaign. And I sit up straight and you know, wow you got my attention, you know. And so as we chatted, he hired me ten minutes later because of my background with CBS News and 'Face the Nation,' and had done a little bit of freelance writing while I was in Stockholm [Sweden]. Not much, but had contributed a few stories to the local paper and all, and a couple of interviews on the television station there. And just as he was about to seal the deal, he said, "So how long have you done advance?" I looked at him with a peculiar expression. "Advance? What's advance?" Well when I said that, he almost threw me out of the office. It was like, "No, no, this is not the job." I said, "Wait, wait, wait, what are you talking--," I said, "well tell me what's advance?" I re- he really tried to just literally throw me out. He had no time. He was cut to the chase, he was rude about it, crude. Just forget this, this is ridiculous. And I refused to let him throw me out. I said, "Just tell me what advance is" and he quickly said, "You gotta go ahead of the candidate and lead things and set up this, this, this, that and the other. And everything from writing press releases to making sure there are bulbs, you know, connected in the light bulbs in the hotel rooms and everything where the candidate stays." And I said, "Well don't diss me like that," I said, "I'm a fast study." I said, "Give me two weeks and I'll prove to you I can do advance." And he said, "We're on the general campaign now, Barbara. Had this been the primaries, I could cut you some slack basically, but this is the general starting next week. Now we don't have time for trainers, you know, to train people and all." I said, "Come on, give me two weeks." He said, "You got two--" he couldn't get rid of me. He's still saying no and I'm saying I refuse to leave, I can do this. What does it take? You know, just up the ante. He said, "You got two days." He said, "You be--" and he said, "I will call you and go down the hall, set something up. By the time you get back to Albany, the campaign headquarters will call and give you someplace that you have to take off in the next two days and, you know, you'll have your little two days in the sun." So by the time we drive back to Atlanta, I'm in the car bouncing up and down with John. "John, what does this mean," and dah, dah, dah, dah. By the time we get back to my parents' [Robella Wilson Taylor and John Taylor], Mother says "Babs, Babs, call Atlanta, the Carter/Mondale campaign headquarters have called three times. They said it doesn't matter what time you get in, they'll be there all night, give 'em a call." So I walk in the house and I call them. And they say, "Hi, are you Barbara Taylor Heineback?" "Yes, yes." And they said, "We have a question. We'd like to know would you consider working for Rosalynn [Carter] instead of Jimmy?" I said "Rosalynn who? Who is Rosalynn?" I had been living in Sweden, mind you, so I was--didn't know all about the Jimmy who period that had gone through, let alone Rosalynn. And it was like, "Barbara that's his wife." I was like--I said, "I see." And they forgave me that and realized that I had just returned to the country and they needed an answer right away. I said, "Could I please think about it?" They said you know, "We know we offered you this, we're not taking it back completely, but we really need people for the candidate's wife. Would you consider that?" And I said, "May I sleep on it?" They said, "Call us by nine a.m. tomorrow morning with your answer." And I hung up and thought about it, and it took less than an hour for me to decide that if I went to work for him with my lack of experience as it were, I would be the one that they're just sending ahead to make sure the light bulbs are in the rooms and that all the ropes are put out to cordon off the press and to do this, that and the other. But if I do this for the first lady or the president's candidate--wife, the candidate's wife as it were, I get to do everything. I get to do all the grunt work, but more to the point, I get to write the press releases and I get to help make some of the decisions and be a part of the whole process. She was only going to have two or three staff members. So I quickly called back and said, "Yes, I'd be happy to accept the advance position for the candidate's wife, Rosalynn Carter." And with that, I was sent that very next day. They said, "We'll send you your tickets and documentation. Go down to--," at the time I don't know if it was a travel agency in Albany or Western Union [Telegraph Company; Western Union Holdings, Inc.] or where I had to go to pick up my documentation. "You're flying out in the morning to Cadillac Square in Detroit [Michigan]." Story_ID: 266876 Speaker 1: Typically, the Democratic candidate since time immemorial, always begins the general campaign in Cadillac Square in Detroit [Michigan]. But [James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.] decided to begin the campaign in Warm Springs in Georgia, which was President [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt's, Franklin Roosevelt's place. Remember he had polio and you know and the warm springs helped him a lot. So he developed his own little escape, getaway white house in Warm Springs where he would go quite often. And so Jimmy decided to send Roosevelt, I mean Roosevelt, Rosalynn [Carter], Rosalynn to represent him in Cadillac Square the first day of the general [election], Labor Day. And I flew up to--just ahead, a day ahead of Rosalynn, Cadillac Square and the Democratic campaign headquarters. People met me, you know, local group and all. And she came along some hours later or the next day and everything went well. And I had a little overnight bag, not too much larger than my purse here because I'm thinking I'll be gone for a day and go home tomorrow. They said "Fine Barbara [HistoryMaker Barbara Heineback], great job. See you in Tri City [Tri-Cities, Michigan] in two days, day after tomorrow." And they were going back to Georgia. She and her press secretary and Madeline MacBean, her personal assistant who'd been with her all through Jimmy Carter's governorship. So Rosalynn had had Madeline with her for some twelve or fifteen years, very long time as her personal assistant. And so Tri City, where is that? And they had me a bunch of tickets. Well Tri City is way up north Michigan, and it was three townships that were very close together. And I was put on a plane and flown up there. So I ran out someplace in Detroit and I bought--I had the three piece suit that I had with me which was a jacket, a dress and a jacket to go with it. So I had to get a little more undergarments and some more stockings and nice little white shirt. Additional I think this was sort of like a jumper thing I had, or if it would go with the slacks. I said that'll tide me over another couple of days before I go back home. So I head up to Tri City and Rosalynn comes up there. Another couple of days, everything went well. And then they said, "Fine Barbara, we'll see you in San Francisco [California] day after tomorrow." I said, "Really?" I said, "That's kind of wonderful." I said, "I have a favor Mary [Hoyt]," I said to the press secretary. I said, "Would it be okay if I stop over in Chicago [Illinois] for a few hours and take a later flight to San Francisco?" Fine, you know, as long as everything's set up by a day and a half later. Story_ID: 266877 Speaker 1: Now mind you, I should back up a little bit to Tri City [Tri Cities, Michigan]. I had a career choice. I had gotten everything set up at the airport for the first lady's [sic. future first lady] arrival. And my job, which I don't think I had explained, was basically to get the word out, to get press, to make sure that we have support people at the airport and rally building and all for Mrs. [Rosalynn] Carter to come in, for some press to be out there to interview her, to answer questions. Let them know what the president, what the candidate [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] is promoting and thinking and doing all of that presidential campaign building. And at this point, you're talking 1979, 1980 [sic.], there was no yardstick to go by. No one had written the 101 rules and all. So it's all sort of on the job training and learning and figuring it out and what should we be doing and going by your mother wit and what you know about politics and what makes sense. Because as you can see, I was sort of wound up, pointed in the right direction, and just told go for it. And that's what I did. Well as I was on my way to the airport a few hours before Mrs. Carter was to arrive, to get my people there and build the press pen and do all of those things, I realized that I had made a wrong turn. The hotel was about fifteen miles from the airport. Because this was pretty much rural, rural country and it was the closest airport, which was fifteen mi- I mean the closest hotel was about fifteen miles from the airport. So when I realized I was headed in the wrong direction, I make a U-turn on this road that has a straight edge and not the normal ditches that I was accustomed to from the East Coast. And my whole wheel went over the side and the whole bottom of the car just came down flat right on the road. And I thought well this ends my little sweet career. I can hear John [ph.] now, "I told you she couldn't handle it." And so I didn't know what to do other than pray. So I just kind of put my head down for a minute and said please Lord, don't let this be the end of my little two-day short career right here. Prayer works. I promise you when I looked up, I saw Farmer Jones over in a field on his tractor. And I said that man's gonna save my life. I jumped out the car and I'm doing this. And naturally he saw this car that had--I mean he saw what happened. He knew what it was. And so within two or three minutes he'd gotten himself to the road, he's pulling me out, turned around and all, car was fine. And that took maybe ten minutes or so, fifteen to get all of that done. And by the time he got there, his wife had been in the house baking cookies. She gave me a whole sheet of cookies. She comes out in a box. She found out who I was. She brought me two or three cookies. When she found out who I was and where I was going and I was headed to the airport to meet Mrs. Carter, she said, "Oh, let me bring you the whole batch." So she puts everything very beautifully in this box and I go tootling off to the airport. And when I arrived, it was like, "Well where have you been?" 'Cause I'm a little late. And I said, "Back at the hotel baking cookies." And I just left it right there, said you don't wanna know. So that was the skinny on that. Story_ID: 266878 Speaker 1: And then when, when Rosalynn [Carter] said, "See you in San Francisco [California]", fast forwarding after she came. It was a good tour in the Tri Cities [Michigan] and we went ahead. I called a friend in Chicago [Illinois] that I'd gone to college [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with, good buddy. And asked her if she could meet me at the airport. We had some shopping to do. And now I realized by now I'm about four days into the drill, that I'm not gonna see Georgia for days, weeks, maybe months to come. And it ended up being months, not days or weeks. And so I ended up buying another suitcase and had warm clothes, cool clothes, and bought all that I needed and I ended up being jackknifed across the country from San Francisco to River City, San Antonio [Texas], up to New England, to Massachusetts, to Maine, to Tennessee, to upper state New York, North Carolina, Washington State and that's sort of the way it went. I would jackknife and flip across the country. I seldom--I don't think I ever went to the state next door or up the road or down the road after that. And this was life. I got to see my son [Erik Heineback] once during the general campaign they allowed me a day and a half off where I flew back to Georgia, spent a day and a half with my son Erik. And then after that, right back on the campaign trail until after the candidate [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] in the hotel right up the street on Peachtree [Street, Atlanta, Georgia] from where we are now, across from the High Museum [of Art, Atlanta, Georgia]. It had a skating rink in front. I remember I brought my ice skates back with me that winter because maybe I'll get some skating in. Story_ID: 266879 Speaker 1: It was when the President [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was elected. But actually the election and the whole drama and all took place at the Omni Hotel [Atlanta, Georgia]. But the Carter campaign headquarters was in the hotel across from the High Museum [of Art, Atlanta, Georgia], whichever one that is today, I'm not exactly sure, things change over time. And Carter did not win the election until it must have been about 3:30 or 4:00 in the morning, maybe it was 2:30 or 3:00 a.m. But I know we were up way beyond midnight and they kept asking him to come down and give his acceptance speech. And he and Rosalynn [Carter] were up in the room and he didn't wanna come until he was absolutely sure; it was a little too close for a while. She changed gowns a couple of times. "I'll wear this one. No, wear that one. No, just take everything off for a while" and be in a robe until we knew. So it was rather hairy, but victory in the end, which was wonderful for all and that day, the day of the Election Day, the last rally, the candidate and first lady met together in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. I don't think it was Hollywood [Boulevard] and Vine [Street], but it was a main crossroad downtown, cross section. And we needed a really big, big, big crowd. And advance people don't take long in figuring out where can we jam the streets and create a natural crowd pattern. We succeeded at that, had a great rally. The enthusiasm the impetus in the media and everybody was just rolling with us. It was great, great rally. And after that, the Carters flew back to Georgia, where I would have flown back with them, but I had just accepted going to Washington, D.C. to 'Voice of America' [VOA] to be interviewed for a station in Sweden that realized I was on the campaign and they knew that I could speak Swedish; I was fluent in Swedish by then. And had to do a couple of last-minute reports on how everything looked on the campaign and all of that. At VOA in Washington, D.C. first thing the next morning. And I had registered when I came back to vote, in Leesburg, Georgia, my parents' [Robella Wilson Taylor and John Taylor] home. And so I flew into Atlanta [Georgia], rented a car, drove down, or flew in. I don't remember if I drove or if I flew. But anyway I went back to--whether I flew into Albany, Georgia and then drove, or flew from--drove from Atlanta to Leesburg and back to Atlanta again that evening and did not get to Atlanta probably until 6:00 or 7:00 p.m. So I'd gone from L.A. to D.C. to Atlanta to Leesburg, back to Atlanta where I voted in Leesburg. I said I've gotta vote, gotta vote. My vote counts too. Every votes count in this thing. So it was a harried day, but wonderful ending. Story_ID: 266880 Speaker 1: And then Mrs. Carter [First Lady Rosalynn Carter] asked me--and then I didn't have any aspirations of coming to Washington [D.C.]. I wasn't even looking to come to Washington, actually, and was still looking for a job in Albany, Georgia after the campaign and all was over and I just wanted to chill; be with my son [Erik Heineback] a little while and you know, come back to life and catch up. And I didn't find anything in Albany. And one little incident that I should definitely mention. At this point I get offered a position--I'm passing my resume around in Albany. I get offered a position by the local television in Albany, Georgia, on a local station to be a reporter. And the station manager hired me, verbally made the offer, and when can I start, when should I start. And he said probably in about a week. He said let me call you tomorrow and we'll figure out a start date, you know, get you all the papers and everything to sign. But we'd love you to come to work for us and think you'll have a good experience and good, you know, and would be an asset to the station. And I go home very excited, "I have a job Mom [Robella Wilson Taylor], Dad [John Taylor], right here in Albany, twelve miles up the road from the [paternal family] farm." And a day or two goes by and no call. Three, four days, a week. I call the man at the beginning of the next week and I asked him what happened. He avoided my calls for about a week and a half. And finally I just called, I said, "Well I'm coming in tomorrow if you don't call me back. I'd like to know, you know, why we haven't been able to talk about a start date or the more, is there more information you need, if anything is wrong." Well he called and he told me, he said, "[HistoryMaker] Barbara [Heineback], I don't know how to tell you this, but I'm not allowed to hire you." It turns out the man that pretty much owned or controlled the television station [WALB-TV, Albany, Georgia] also pretty much controlled the newspaper [The Albany Herald], had been the mayor of Albany. And it was part of the good ole boys' party. And because I had grown up in Long Island, New York and was too much of a Yankee for them and they felt that I was, what is the term, he said? Mr. [James H.] Gray [Sr.] they called him used. He said, "She's one of those--," he didn't say arrogant, but anyway I was a person that he felt they couldn't control. And I drew outside the lines too much to be--to kowtow to the southern way of thinking or to his--the good ole way things were accustomed to be doing done in Albany, Georgia. And I wasn't going to be one of his yes persons by any stretch. So the, the offer was rescinded. And I was devastated. Didn't know what I was going to do. So finally I told my parents I'd better pack my bags and head to [Washington] D.C., you know, at least I know the turf up there, maybe get a job there and contact some people. Story_ID: 266881 Speaker 1: And by the time I got to [Washington] D.C., Mrs. Carter [First Lady Rosalynn Carter] had called me at my parents' [Robella Wilson Taylor and John Taylor] and mother had left messages with one or two friends where she thought I would be staying, saying call immediately; Mrs. Carter scheduled an appointment for you to come to the Blair House [President's Guest House, Washington, D.C.] for an interview. I didn't know what, where the Blair House was, which is the guest house for people of--state diplomats. It's where all heads of state visit and actually the interview didn't really take place in the Blair House 'cause that is for heads of state. But right around the corner, across from the White House [Washington, D.C.] there was some office space that was sort of an attachment to Blair House office space to support the Blair House. And she interviewed me and asked me if I would come to work for her and [President James Earl] Jimmy [Carter, Jr.]. And if I would be one of her--be her press officer and second person on the press staff. And, and I worked doing advance and all. And I really wasn't sure about it because I was worried about all that travel we had done. And it was so important for me to spend some time with my son. His English was limited. His Swedish was much better than his English and needed to get him stabilized and all. And when my mom found that out, she went to Nut City. Here is her daughter being offered the job of a lifetime and I'm thinking about it? Well you think of your child first. It was just an instinctive thing to do. And so Mother called everybody on the planet that she knew to talk some sense into me. And help me make the right decision, which I made. Speaker 2: At this time how old was your son? Speaker 1: Erik [Heineback] was two, yeah he was just two years old. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And so we, we moved to Washington [D.C.]. I had about four days to find a house, get Erik registered in daycare or whatever stage he was in. I was trying to find a nanny because I was gonna be working all day. Didn't know who was gonna help me with that. That ended up being a wonderful experience. One of our houses on the [paternal family] farm my parents used to rent to a family for many, many years. And a young girl who was about ten years my junior ended up wanting a job. And she's now about twenty years old and was looking for work. And I asked her if she would come to Washington and live with us. And she was delighted and tickled. And so I had someone helping and being with my son that I knew, could trust. Watched her grow up. I knew she came from a good, Christian family and all. And to this day, Denise [ph.] and I are wonderful friends and she lives very close to my mother. And I doubt I'd ever been to Leesburg [Georgia] or Albany [Georgia] without visiting Denise or Denise visiting me. And so that piece was taken care of. Found an apartment right near the zoo. As I started unpacking, I realized it was too small for me, my son and Denise. So after I got about 20 percent unpacked that night when coming home from the White House and making dinner, I stopped and I said we need a bigger place, this is not going to work. And found a wonderful three bedroom, or complete two bedroom. I think I had just a one and I really had to have at least two bedrooms. So I got a two and a half bedroom split in Silver Spring [Maryland]/D.C., right on the line there. Story_ID: 266882 Speaker 1: --I went to work for [First Lady] Rosalynn [Carter] and my work in the White House [Washington, D.C.] was a rewarding experience because I became the first black to have a position like this as part of the professional staff. And really being the one, the press secretary and Mrs. Carter sort of determined first line exactly what will take place and what they want. But they can't make that decision in a shoe, so we were a team of about five people. Every day we would huddle and have that evening meeting with how the week should go, how the month, whatever's coming in, looking ahead. Which activities we will accept; which ones we will not. And then it was up to Mary Hoyt and myself to determine what will the press coverage be, to what extent. And I was the first lady's eyes and to some extent, ears. But especially eyes. I was the one that had to take two trips for every one trip Mrs. Carter took. Whether it was across country or across the world, to sort of see the visuals and the photo opportunities for the cameras. Had to help with all of the--I had to write press briefings every day to the press. What they could cover, when the first lady, when her public opportunities would be. I had to determine the number of press that could cover. If it was full, open press or if it was something we call a pool coverage, and is it going to be a ten person pool, a five person pool, a three person pool. And if it's down to just three people, then you always have a wire person cover it and you have to do the writing and write the report. They do a pool report. And when I say pool report, that is a report that whatever the writer or journalist writes, the writer cannot use any additional subject material beyond what they put in the pool report. Because other reporters were not allowed into the venue because it was too small or whatever reason, that it was limited to three people. You have a flash camera, you have a video camera, and you have a pool reporter. And those are the only ones. And maybe a sound person. But usually one of the other three has to carry the sound, if it's that tight. And so whatever pool report is written and posted for everyone to have simultaneously in the press room at the same time, whether it was done by the UP reporter, United Press, or AP, Associated Press or United Press International [UPI]. They cannot cover anymore topics than what they put in the pool report. They can write the story their own way, but everyone gets the details or the facts out of the pool report. And once in a while for whatever reason, if one of the wires is not there to do the pool report, sometimes the pool report was deferred to me. I would have to write the pool report and post it if only one or two people were in the room. It might be the first lady acting as the President's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] emissary in the room with another head of state. And just the two of them, Secret Service and myself are in the room. I'm responsible to write the pool report to cover that particular story or segment. And then the other journalists can all develop their stories around that. One of my fondest memories in terms of growth of news was the opportunity to work with great minds like Helen Thomas. I mean she was not only the dean of the [White House] press corps from UPI, and I think Helen has tried to retire at least three times, but the world just won't really ever let her truly, officially retire, I don't think. Or she might have officially retired, but she has never actually completely retired. Helen Thomas has the most pregnant mind of any reporter I think I've ever seen. She would get stories and get things before they leaked. Find out what's going on in Poland, what's going on with an issue or subject matter that I think our very senior, senior, senior level officials in the executive branch felt this is under wraps, nobody knows about it yet. And all of a sudden, next morning in the press room, you know, either the president gets the question in a press conference, or whomever the president's press secretary is, whether it was Jody Powell or whom, gets dinged by Helen Thomas. I mean she, she had the news and had her fingers on so many people around the globe. She could always find out what's percolating before it was common news to the rest of the world. Story_ID: 269406 Speaker 1: Let's come back to your discussion of what was occurring as you were working for then President [James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.]. What were some of the most challenging moments that you had and what were some of the most rewarding? Speaker 2: One of the more challenging moments I had while working for Mrs. Carter [First Lady Rosalynn Carter], and this was on the campaign train just before Election Day, maybe--Election Day is always the first Tuesday in November, this is probably the third or fourth week of October when everything is building toward a crescendo and both sides are trying to find whatever they can find on the other candidate and dish. Well it so happens that the candidate Jimmy Carter had just been interviewed by--what's the magazine, the girlie--Playboy magazine. And in the magazine article Jimmy Carter, you know, Mr. Christian, Mr. man on the--at the fish pond, goody-goody-two-shoes, straight and narrow, had admitted to Playboy magazine yes I have lusted after other women. Story broke while Rosalynn was in her jet. By now she's been, you know, donated, not donated, but she's flying around in the candidate's wife's jet, her plane, to hopscotch from spot to spot on the campaign trail. She was--and this was before the day of cell phones and all of that. You've got to go back technologically, that you don't know the news that's taking place while you're in the air until you're on the ground. You did not have--you did not have televisions and all of this in the friendly skies with you at the time. Skies were still friendly, but they just were not technologically advanced. Suffice it to say when Rosalynn landed in--we were in Texas. I don't think it was San Antonio [Texas], but we were somewhere, maybe in Austin, Texas because she was going to meet Lady Bird Johnson. And it was her first meeting with Lady Bird. Rosalynn was so excited and all to meet the first lady of Texas. And an ex-first lady of the United States. And we thought that was gonna be the story and the coverage and all. Now mind you, I need to back up and share that up until then, Rosalynn's coverage was never more than a dozen people at any event in terms of the news, you know the news coverage. She might have the local newspaper, local television station, maybe a local radio and one or two others, a spattering of some other newsies that might have shown up at any given time. So to have five people at the airport, couple of cameras or certainly not, not--I don't even think we'd ever had a dozen people anywhere. You know, five or six. Just a handful of press people covering her activities at the time. Because this story about Jimmy having lusted after other women that had broken while Rosalynn was flying from Chicago [Illinois] to Texas where I was to meet her at the airport. When she got down on the ground, Atlanta [Georgia] is calling me, "[HistoryMaker] Barbara [Heineback] build a press pen." Now at that point I don't think I even knew what a press pen was. You know, I just asked the press to stand over here or stand over there and four, five or six people, they do as they're told and it's all very controllable. But suddenly I've got about forty press people here. So I had to actually get cordon rope and all and build a pen, build a place for them to stay, for them to be contained. And so when she had her wheels down, I had to go on board and share with her what had happened, what had broken. And in the meantime, I had written some suggested comments, what she might want to say and how she would handle that. So that clearly was one of my most challenging experiences. Speaker 1: What kinds of responses did you write? Speaker 2: I'm saving that one for my book. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We're still kind of getting that chapter just as it should be. But it was a telling period and a very challenging one, you know, for me, for the situation. And took some thoughtfulness and really trying to measure and balance and consider as much as I could as quickly as I could and make sure at the end of the day that everyone comes out smelling at least if not like a rose, as they should and, you know with longevity and all, how will this play? And, and just sort of allowing your mind to fast forward and cover as many what ifs as humanly possible, and then take that and make a couple of decisions very quickly. Speaker 1: Could you share what she ultimately did say to the press? Speaker 2: I wouldn't want to misquote her and I honestly do not remember just yet, you know right, right off the top. But it, it worked. Story_ID: 269407 Speaker 1: This was one of the more challenging times. Could you share one of the more rewarding experiences that you had? Speaker 2: Yes, I guess. It's so hard to think of just one. I can think of another one that was challenging. We'll come back to Jonestown in Guyana and how we had to deal with that incident. And I was in the throes of all of that, right in the middle. That's not something you wanna be in the middle and up close about, but with rewarding, there were so very many. It was the smaller stories that are less dramatic that I think were some of the more memorable. When we traveled to Jamaica, West Indies and [First Lady] Rosalynn [Carter] was with a lot of very young people and children, and reading to them and also just going into the communities I think in a way that first ladies had not reached out and done certainly since Eleanor Roosevelt. That was--it was--it brought humanity to all of the deep, steeped politics that we had to deal with day by day of which decision do we make, where do we go and what do we do. Based on the politics involved and the balance of that whole political machinery that's in play. Mrs. Carter also decided, or she didn't decide, but she was asked, and based on her profound interest in mental health, became the national chairperson of [the Commission on] Mental Health. And going around the country with various mental health groups, I was able to experience and learn how so many families and communities from all walks of life, the very wealthy, the very poor, black, white, very well educated, not so well educated, there is still quite a bit of stigma with the mental health situation when you have a family member and how it was being still swept under the carpet. And I'm talking mid-1980s at this point, the 1980s. You know, '85 [1985], '86 [1986] when I first became really aware of this at all. And how Mrs. Carter's work with trying to bring visibility and trying to allow cultures and not only our nation of people, our nation of people in particular, but the world in general, to appreciate that mental health is like having the flu, having influenza or having, you know, rheumatism or something. It's, it's a--someone is in ill health and what they need is some good health care, medical attention. This happens to be mental health, but should be treated as calmly and as openly as anything else. And she continues to this day to work hard and long to erase the stigma of mental health concerns and problems around the nation, around the world. And being in smaller communities, hearing the stories, seeing how a first lady's influence can make a difference and begin to push the envelope and bring things forward, is--that's the reward of all the rest of the craziness of playing the game of politics that has to be played to some degree no matter how honest, no matter how sincere one believes in one's bent on the political stream. When you can do something that makes a difference, that creates improvement in a person's life, that's rewarding. And of course now their work with Habitat for Humanity, and I've kept involved with the Carters and have gone on a couple of stints with them on that, is another way of seeing how one can make a difference and one person can make the difference for another human being or his or her or their entire family. And how you really can work through some of the ills within our nation and within smaller communities. Story_ID: 269408 Speaker 1: So in totality, how long were you with [First Lady] Rosalynn Carter? Speaker 2: I was--the President [James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was a one-term president. And I was with them for three years and I wanna say three or four months of that -- three months, of their administration. What happened was I came back. It was our fourth year and there they were just really gearing up for that final run again for the second term. And I came back with Rosalynn on a Monday afternoon. We had been up in New Jersey just for an overnight. And when I walked in the door Monday evening, my son met me at the door and Erik [Heineback] at the time was, what, four and a half, going on five maybe. He said to me, "Mommy, why are you always at the White House [Washington, D.C.] with Mrs. Carter or you're, or you're traveling with her, or you're, you know, doing something with her?" And I said, "Well darling, I have to in order to keep a roof over our heads and something to eat and, and food to eat and a place to stay." And I went on into, you know, kissed him and went on into the room and was going to change and get ready for dinner I suppose. And all of a sudden I hear this little feet coming into my room and he looked up at me and he said, "Mommy, we don't need so much to eat." I wrote my letter of resignation that evening. Still kind of remember those words and looking into his eyes. And I didn't expect that. I was blindsided, but it was a painless decision to make and I knew what I had to do. My child needed me. And it was a concern that I had had when Rosalynn had first asked me, "[HistoryMaker] Barbara [Heineback] will you come to the White House with us? You know now that Jimmy has won." And I was hesitant then and I told her I'd love to, how honored I was and all. I said, "But I really need to spend some time with my son now. I've been away from him for three months and he's new back in the country and--," dah, dah, dah, dah. And she said, "Barbara not to worry." She said, "It was the same for us and Amy [Carter]," who was their youngest child. And she said, "And Jimmy has promised not to travel for the first year in the White House." Well the president kept his promise. He did not travel the first year. But he sent his emissary, which none of us knew at the time or could have imagined his emissary, i.e., being Mrs. Carter. So when Erik told me that that night, now here we go, fast forward again three and a half years later, or three plus a few months, years later. And I've been with Rosalynn at the White House and traveling and all. When Erik told me that, that night I went into my room and I started flipping back through my calendar. And I counted back over five months and realized that there was not one month in those last five that I had been in Washington, D.C. more than a total of three days out of any month for five months. So you're moving so fast and all. I was caught up and swept up in the time and in the White House pressure cooker life and lifestyle. But I had never been in Washington, D.C. a total of three days, not three days in a clump and then gone and back for three. Over those last five months. That is why I wrote my letter of resignation that evening before going to bed. Rosalynn understood it and was sorry the next day when I presented it and all, but she accepted it. Story_ID: 269409 Speaker 1: And it, it worked out well because I'm gonna say that was March or so by then. And what she [First Lady Rosalynn Carter] allowed me to do, they hired me on as a local contract person. So I still had a job. I was still working you know, five, six days a week. But I was going home every night and I was only doing the local stuff for her. And she hired another advance person, somebody that had worked with us during the campaign who was delighted. Got to come to Washington [D.C.], the White House, all of that to finish off, you know, the run. And asked me to make a recommendation of whom I thought was the best person. And also we hired someone that I had called upon several times when we were going abroad or whatever and needed some extra bodies, and you know men on board, or women on board. And so I was able to select my replacement, somebody that I had worked with well. So what happened was I ended up taking a large responsibility for some of the mental health activities and other things that would keep me local because the mental health office was right in Arlington, Virginia, the national office. And so I did that. And then every summer, because my son's father [Bo Heineback] and I were now divorced, but still very good friends, my son [Erik Heineback] went back to Sweden for at least two or two and a half months, close to three, every summer. I wanted to make sure he did not lose his Swedish, and he did not--it was too hard to learn. And I said if he loses the language, he's going to miss out on half of his family, all of his dad and dad's people who do not speak English, at least not the elderly ones. Some of the children of course started to learn, but that came after the fact. So while my son was in Sweden in the summer, I traveled nonstop with Rosalynn again. I was right back in the pressure cooker, working as a consultant right up to the end. But come September, she honored it and I did not go through that general election the second time around. I did whatever I could locally. But very, very few trips did I take between September and November. Just a couple of times she asked me could I come out for one day, three days, two days. But not much at all. I did not travel more than a day and a half any week during the general because she was wonderful to honor my situation and I, I wanted to do as much as I could. I tried to throw myself into a Xerox machine, be there and be here, but it didn't work. But it worked that we had a happy medium. Story_ID: 269410 Speaker 1: There was a piece that I'm trying to link now. The ancestry of your husband was Swedish. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I got the piece about [Swedish] Foreign Service. Did he go back? Where did you meet your husband? Speaker 2: I met Bo [Heineback] when I was at CBS News. And one of my best buddies was Dan Rather. Dan took me under his wing and was mentoring me and knew that I wanted to get on camera and, and be a reporter. So both Dan Rather and--who was one of the '60 Minute[s]' people? Elderly man out of New York. Dan Rather and--very handsome. Speaker 1: Not [Walter] Cronkite. Speaker 2: Looked a lot younger than he was. Speaker 1: Peter-- Speaker 2: He was one of the main CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc.; CBS, Inc.] people. Well anyway I was, I was being mentored and really enjoying my time at CBS and all and it was actually Bob Pierpoint [Robert Pierpoint], White House correspondent, who said, "I have a story for you [HistoryMaker] Barbara [Heineback]." He said "You've got this Swedish connection." I could not because I was not a reporter, the station would not let me do a news piece that would be competing with the licensed Dan Rathers and Roger Mudds and Cronkites of the world. But if I wanted to do a little social commentary piece, that would be a way in the door. He said "Why not do something on Sweden? That's something that you can talk about that none of the rest of my guys could do." So legitimately you wouldn't be stepping on any reporter's tootsies or in their territory or turf. They'd get a little funny about that." I said, "Oh great." So I set up an interview with a woman I had spoken to on the phone, Ingrid Arvidsson who was the cultural attache at the Swedish Embassy [Royal Embassy of Sweden, Washington, D.C.]. And I go over and interview her for a story. And so before I left, she invited me to a cocktail reception she was having three weeks thereafter. And when I went to the cocktail reception, as I walked in she was greeting her guests and one of her junior guys from the embassy was also helping her with the greetings and all, one of whom happened to be this Bo Heineback who started chatting with me and we struck up a conversation that I didn't think much about until Ingrid Arvidsson in her own inimitable fashion with this low, belting voice said, "Bo, would you let some others talk to Barbara? You're gonna monopolize all of her time?" Well I saw this poor man's face go red from chin to the top of his scalp. So I went to one corner of the room, he went to the other corner of the room, never a twain shall meet until about an hour and a half later when I got ready to leave the reception. I was going toward the door and he said, "Well I would like to continue this conversation. Can I get your card or can we talk some more?" And I didn't have a card, but I guess I gave him my number and all and he called and invited me to lunch. And that started the beginning of the friendship, which started the beginning of a relationship. Speaker 1: What is his actual name? Speaker 2: Bo Heineback. And actually his official, real name is Bo, B-O, and his nickname is Bosse, B-O-S-S-E. But it's a real name in Swedish, in Norwegian and in Danish it's Beau, B-E-A-U, but the Swedes say Bo. Story_ID: 269411 Speaker 1: So given your visibility, how was it received that you were in this interracial marriage? This was clearly unique and these were tumultuous times in America. Speaker 2: They were, I wouldn't say tumultuous, but we did stand out for sure. It was not a common thing by then at all to be involved in an interracial marriage. Bo [Heineback] was given a career choice when he told the ambassador. Diplomats have to have approval to marry the women they wanna marry. And he said she has the culture, the education, et cetera, but there is this little issue in case you have overlooked it. Have you checked out the color of her skin? You know not only is she not Swedish, but everybody's going to know. It's not a question of is she or isn't she? So he had a career decision to make when he married me. They weren't sure how it would go. They didn't take anything away from him; he went on to become an ambassador and all. So he had a very thriving career. But his ambassador let him know that you, you're taking a gamble and this could go either way. Your career might go up and then it again it might just halt and you may never make the upper rungs of, you know, careers, to become an ambassador, which he did. And became ambassador in several countries. In fact, Bo ended up being the youngest diplomat in modern history from the Swedes, you know, the Swedish Foreign Service to become ambassador as young as he did. He sort of skipped a couple of rungs. But he was very, very bright, or he is very, very bright I should say. And I learned after of course that he went back to Ingrid Arvidsson after I was in the [Royal] Embassy [of Sweden, Washington, D.C.]. And he went in and he asked her, "Who were the legs that was just in your office?" He tells me this much later of course. And at that point the embassy was on R Street and Mass [Massachusetts] Avenue. So I had to go up this long, long upstairs and one of those grand old mansion embassies. And they moved from there to the Watergate [Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.], and then to 15th Street where they are now, and now they're building an embassy right down in Foggy Bottom [Washington, D.C.]. Right across the street from the Watergate, right on the water by Harbour, whatever, Harbour Square [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: So fast forwarding I guess a couple of years, maybe many years, you marry again. Speaker 2: So I marry again. How did you know that? You've got the dish. I had a very short marriage after I returned to the [United] States; and been here a while. And it was a bit premature, last about six days. And a big mistake. And that started and stopped. I married someone who was rather disingenuous and I had no idea and just made a big, silly mistake. And you make a mistake, you don't wallow in it. You, you know I'm, I, I don't mind, you know I, I--when you make a mistake that big, there's only one way to fix it, and that's cut it clean and just, you know, this is not what it was said it was and it was just too much that had not been revealed that I didn't realize. We're not gonna go--my dad [John Taylor] taught me something years ago that I remembered. He said "Babs [HistoryMaker Barbara Heineback], you cannot build a solid house on a weak foundation." This is no way to start anything, so clean cut, goodbye. Story_ID: 269412 Speaker 1: So in moving forward, let's come back to what you were doing professionally. Still sustained your ties with Mrs. Carter [First Lady Rosalynn Carter]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Professionally. And somehow between there and here you've launched an extremely successful firm. Can you talk to me about how that transition was made and other things you were exploring? Speaker 2: After--it was that second marriage that took me to California and we separated just before I left, but everything was set up to go to California, so my son [Erik Heineback] and I did. And had--I guess I had about fifteen or sixteen wonderful years on the West Coast. Had worked with Scripps Memorial Hospital [California] where I was their chief of protocol. No, that was America's Cup. At Scripps Memorial I was a fundraiser for them and I had not done fundraising. And by the--just before '85 [1985], right after the White House [Washington, D.C.]. I guess what--well right after the White House I went to work for COMSAT, Communications Satellite Corporation, L'Enfant Plaza [Washington, D.C.]. And I did their public relations corporate, which was a wonderful experience. Continued to improve my skills in PR [public relations] and in media management. Then California where I went to work for Scripps Memorial Hospital, one of the prestigious hospitals on the West Coast. And at that point when they were hiring and trying to find fundraisers, they were pulling us from two disciplines because there was no school of fundraising at the time and people did not have professional experience in it. It's just something that one did. And they were pulling heavily from people from a PR background and sales background and then, you know, started creating the training and on-the-job training, which I had then become here we go again, accustomed to. And we had--it was the first hospital to ever have a hundred million dollar campaign. A few Ivy League colleges like your Harvards [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and MITs [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had gone after that kind of money, but never before a hospital. And we did. And it was a five year campaign that we successfully brought in, in four years and a few months. And so that was a very successful experience. And I started something called--it was a cross-cultural doctors clinic activity working with someone who's now become one of my best friends, Celia Diaz, who started the Binational Emergency [Medical Care Coordination] group in San Diego [California], and then through the hospital I started the clinic and now she and I work together on certain projects and I'm part of her advisory committee and plus I fly out to do some media training and media management, and help her with other events that she's doing from time to time. And some of the doctor development pieces I will work as a consultant with her on in Mexico or in California. Speaker 1: So what were some of the challenges that you faced in launching your own firm [Bee Talkingpoint]? Speaker 2: Staying alive. (Laughter) I guess the first is to dare to do it. And I've stayed small and kept very lean. I've had up to two other people in the office with me. But because my clients are in California and here, and I move about, I tend to operate solo and then work with associates. And that keeps your overhead down. You can go through the lean and mean years as well as going through those years that are more plentiful. And that can change on the overall economy. It can change on the political environment, and also I think basically those two, those two things play in heavily. So you have to kind of figure out where is your comfort level, what is it you really wanna do. Do you wanna do the work? Is it the writing you enjoy, or is it the office management that you enjoy, and, and office people development. And I really like the writing and I really like working on the projects and going project by project, and also trying to have, you know, enough time to, to take care of me. Story_ID: 269413 Speaker 1: So we were talking about your launching your own business, your own firm [Bee Talkingpoint]. And you were talking about how you've been able to sustain it. Can you share with me perhaps some of the most intriguing perhaps clients or events that you've covered? Speaker 2: Sure. One decision I made, I think I'm, I know that I'm my toughest taskmaster. I was offered two positions the same week. You know you go for several months and you're looking for something else or something new, nothing comes along and then--bingo, you get two within a few days of each other. And I was offered one--and this was when I was living in San Francisco [California] and both positions were in San Francisco or the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California] at least. And first I was offered a position with a firm that was going to pay me about 30 percent more money to be their public relations person for the national firm, and they were headquartered in San Francisco and I was delighted at that, and I would be given a car to drive and eat in the executive dining room every day and also have gas put in the car and it had all--it was a plum job, excellent salary and all. But theoretically the position did not offer me anything new; it was doing straight public relations that I had been doing over the years. It would not have been a boring job. But I did not necessarily see it as a challenging job, or at least I didn't a couple of days later because I asked, you know, for a little while to think about it. And I'm glad I didn't say yes to that right there on the spot. And people usually almost always, other than the White House thing, grant you, you know, a little flexibility. The [presidential] campaign trail was a bit different. And within a couple of days I was offered another position working in Silicon Valley [California] with a biotech company. It paid a good salary, but not nearly as bells whistling and all, as this other national corporate America position was willing to pay. And I needed a few days to think about that. And I had to make the decision what do I want? Do I want the money, or do I want to grow professionally and accept the challenge of biotech, have a niche market that would be new to me, another stretch. And learn what I could from that experience because I knew that would open new doors and there was also an investment relations component that was a part of the biotech position. And so my decision was to take the biotech position. And I was still young enough to learn and to grow. And also what was going on in my life at the same time was the man in my life where I could have just simply not worked at all for maybe six months or a year, and do one of my hobbies, which was sailing. And sail through the Panama Canal and leave Sausalito [California] in September and end up in Maine that next June. Well that was dangling a carrot that was very hard to walk away from. And a few years before that, it would have been a no-brainer. Go sail. Everything else be damned. But I figured well you're not getting any younger and you're getting a little long in the tooth here and maybe we'd better solidify this career of ours. And so I decided to do something that I had never done before, and that was to try to think smart and I went with the biotech firm in Silicon Valley for about 60 percent or seven-- 65 percent the salary of this other job, but it was still a very nice salary. So the money was not to sneeze at, but it wasn't what it could have been. But the learning curve was steep and great and at the end of the day incredibly rewarding. Story_ID: 269414 Speaker 1: And what do you still want to do professionally and maybe even personally that you haven't done yet? Speaker 2: Improve my skills as a travel writer so I can retire into what I still, ever since the Mrs. Pelza [ph.] that I spoke of early on in the interview, and I see myself spending a fair amount of my retirement years roaming the globe. Speaker 1: When do you see yourself retiring? Speaker 2: I don't know if I will ever totally retire. But I will always wander the globe in search of people, in search of adventure, you know. That started with that jeep backing up right at the cliff. What next? Story_ID: 269415 Speaker 1: You were mentioning earlier we were talking about the decision that you made even to scale back what it was you were doing professionally and as it related to your career, to assure that you were tending to the needs of your son. Could you discuss that a little bit and perhaps I guess answer the question of if you have any reflections or any regrets related to that? Speaker 2: Yeah. I'll answer the last part first. That's easy. Never a regret about selecting to be with my son and I gave myself about an hour to come up with a decision, but before the words tripled off my son's lips, I knew career choice. I knew hey, Erik [Heineback] needs me. You know when your child walks in, looks up in your eyes and says, "Mommy, we don't need so much to eat." I hear those words now some twenty years later. And I said he's calling out and he needs me now. And I haven't been around a lot lately to put the Band-Aid on his knee when he falls and to be there. I never missed a soccer game on Saturdays when I was here. And no matter where we were in the world, not just the country, we almost always got back home some point, Friday night. So if I got in at 2:30 or 4:30 at Andrews Air Force Base [Joint Base Andrews, Maryland] off Air Force One, I was at the soccer game Saturday. Whether it was an 8:00 a.m. or an 11:00 a.m. game, I was there. And so I did do that, but that's one little thing, soccer game. But there is this mommy presence and mother and son that I will never forget or never regret having made the decision that I have to be at home now and do whatever it takes to be with my son on a regular, daily basis. As far as regrets for having made the decision, there were also no second guesses or regrets about that. I was very blessed that [First Lady] Rosalynn [Carter] was so understanding. So at least I still had a job and I didn't know that. She did not have to offer that--a consultancy to me so that I had regular money coming in and it didn't suddenly slap me in the face and change my lifestyle, which was a blessing. And then with the opportunity to go to work for COMSAT [Communications Satellite Corporation] and taking the experience of what I had learned and garnered and going on to other things. No, not sorry about that. Story_ID: 269416 Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to add to the interview? Perhaps something I didn't ask. Speaker 2: No. Thank you for the opportunity to share part of my life and experiences. You know there are bits and pieces of your life and I'm sure I'll wake up three days from now or something, should have told them about this or that. But I'll throw those bits and pieces in the book as they come to me. But nothing specific at this time. Speaker 1: For those going into the area of media or public relations, what suggestions would you have for them? Speaker 2: To really do your research on the topics and subjects. Not to rely on the so-called pool reports of the world, but to always try to remember the human element and who are the people involved in this story. And take that extra moment to stand back, ask yourself not only am I writing or covering this, whether it's you know, through a video camera or as a reporter, a writer, but regardless as to what it is your editor asks of you, always let that little burning itch of seeking additional knowledge, information. What more can I get out of this? Where is that extra human element that is in this story that if I were not to look at it from my eyes, but possibly from theirs, is there more or something else that should be told or that can be captured? Story_ID: 269417 Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for, say the African American community and perhaps even the world? Speaker 2: Yeah. Thank you for asking that. For the African American community, I am very concerned about the lack of respect that we seem to have for one another now. Among young people toward their parents, among young men toward young women and vice versa. As regards the, the loudness and the just lack of respect for one's self. I think we have to sort of step back and feel less inclined to believe that someone owes us something and all I have to do is drift through. And instead begin to look back on education and look back at I have to earn my way like my parents did and my grandparents did and those that came before us. And reconnect with a sense of self. That, I have great concern about. And trying to figure out what I can do or how I can make a contribution there to try to let that pendulum start swinging back a little bit more toward center. I think we've kind of gotten out there on the edge with that. Story_ID: 269418 Speaker 1: World improvement, you look at the wars, you look at the selfishness, you look at where corporate America has gone with their--the dichotomy between the haves and the have-nots is broadening and that's very incorrect. It's threatening and it's sort of like the lilies in the lily pond that not too many people seem to be paying a lot of attention to it today. And as it stifles and suffocates the water and the breathing that are so many that are underneath. Every day that that multiplies, you think there's a lot of water left, a lot of oxygen. You'll look up one day and it'll all be gone because once you're at 50 percent, it only takes one day more to multiply to one hundred. And then you're down, you're locked in, lockjaw. And whether it's with healthcare, healthcare benefits for this country and people that do not have proper healthcare in a country like the United States of America that is not tolerable. There's no reason for it. Sorry I did not talk about the healthcare system in Sweden that is light years superior to what we have in terms of senior care, children care, healthcare all the way around. This is a country if you have funds and the means, yeah you can have almost anything you want. But what about all citizens? What about humanity? What about our fellow brothers and sisters? And I would--you know what it takes for the world and I mean when you look at the terrorists and people who've gotten kind of fed up around the world and why is this happening, it's not all an accident. It's very, very sad. And when a society reaches the point that they have martyrs who are doing some of the kinds of things that they're doing, it's time for so many of us to stand up and say wait a minute. Maybe I don't really need so much myself. And we as a nation really need to re-prioritize I think a lot of things. And I would like--as for where the world goes, that, that's really too big a question for me to try to summarize. Story_ID: 269419 Speaker 1: What values do you consider most important and why? Speaker 2: Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. I think a smile is God's sunshine. And what I have read--it takes fewer muscles to smile than to go the other way, so it's basically I guess I'm lazy; it's easier. And I truly believe I can wake up and feel happy in the morning just as well as I could wake up into any other attitude. And I often have people ask me are you always like this? And the answer is pretty much yeah. You know if I get in a downer, and sure I have my down days, down moments. I will take myself off and deal with it, get over it within a couple of hours as a rule. And if it's something that's gonna require a couple of days, then I just go into lockdown and deal with it because I refuse to drag it around. Story_ID: 269420 Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? What do you want people to say about you? Speaker 2: A person who reached out to help others. Story_ID: 269421 Speaker 1: What messages or lessons do you have for your children, grandchildren and perhaps even the world? Speaker 2: Well this is one that's not my own, but I read it many years ago and I have--the older I get, the more I come to realize the value and the truth in it. And that is that people may not remember what it is you say to them or what it is you do with or for them, but they will always remember how you make them feel. Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important? Speaker 2: If we don't understand and appreciate something of not just our own immediate history, but something a bit more global than just what's under our noses, history will tend to repeat itself. And then you don't advance. And yes, there's some good in history that you would love to see play out one more time. But if you don't have some cognizant appreciation of the big picture and more than just one's immediate circumstances, i.e., it's not all about me, then one can carelessly make unnecessary mistakes and flounder chasing our own tails for far too long when a little bit of knowledge, a little bit of patience, or a little bit of perseverance will get us so much further with ourselves, our own growth and development, and also I think with our, you know with fellow mankind and humanity. Story_ID: 269422 Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I'm still working on that one, Jodi [Merriday]. Still cleaning up my act. We're polishing, we're still sculpting. We have a way to go...