 Story_ID: 237394 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Paul Carter Harrison, P-A-U-L, Carter is C-A-R-T-E-R, Harrison, H-A-R-R-I-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: 3/1/36, that's March 1, '36 [1936], and New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: All right, okay. And, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a dramatist, director, essayist, educator (laughter). I suppose I do all of that. Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is the 14th of September, 2004. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: You're now in my apartment in New York City in Manhattan [New York, New York]. Story_ID: 237395 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that I'm compelled to ask you by management, and (laughter) they're, they only require a brief answer, a kind of a warm-up. And the first one is, sir, what is your favorite color? Speaker 2: My favorite color, blue-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --blue in the way of--what do you call it--not navy blue but, and not sky blue, but somewhere in between-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --more like, you'd say, oxford blue shirt, that kind of blue (laughter). Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Fall is my favorite time. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Well, my favorite food, it varies, but I think it's, probably, so it varies--fish. I don't do beef, eat almost no pork at all. I say almost none, 'cause every now or then, I have a piece of bacon or a slice of ham, but I mean, basically, no pork. So, fish is my favorite meal basically. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Well, I've--the last forty years, I go to Spain every summer, so it's an island of Ibiza [Spain], I-B-I-Z-A. And so, I've been doing that for every summer for about forty years with my daughter [Fonteyn Harrison]. So, I guess you would say that's my favorite vacation spot, even though there are several other places I like to--I find also very, very compelling, you know, places like Brazil, South Africa. I think South Africa is wonderful, but Ibiza is like going home. I mean, I kind of--my beginnings are there, so I go back there every summer for about a month and, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. So, off the coast of Spain? Speaker 2: Yeah, off the coast of Spain, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "Like that," something "like that"--not something like that, but rather--I suppose the exclamatory, "Like that (laughter)!" Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, I-- Speaker 2: That's how I tell the actors--like that (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay--a directive? Speaker 2: Right, right. Story_ID: 237396 Speaker 1: Well, I want to ask you about your family history. And I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [Paul Randolph Harrison] side of the family, but we'll start with your mother's side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yeah. Thelma, T-H-E-L-M-A, Inez, I-N-E-Z, Harrison, H-A-R-R-I-S-O-N. Speaker 1: And her maiden name was Carter, right? Speaker 2: Her maiden name was Carter, Inez Carter Harrison. Speaker 1: All right. And what's her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She was born in 1914 in Wilmington, North Carolina, but she was raised as a child in New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, what can you tell us about her side of the family? How far back, first of all, can you trace this side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was interesting but, you know, this phenomenon of, of tracing the family is a relatively new one, paying closer attention to it. My family pretty much was--I always saw my family pretty much tied to New York City. And I never really paid much attention to what was going on in the South, but I can tell you about my mother. Part of my mother's beginnings have to do with her being and growing up as a child in Wilmington, North Carolina. Her father who--she was a--her mother--her father, Ezra Carter, was, he's--was a--who used to own a store. He used to own a grocery store there. And he was a lay minister in the local church down there. And she had a--he took care of his family with, you know, through--that was his livelihood, including his wife, and his what--altogether there were four children--my mother, her two sisters, Gladys, her sister, Gladys Sayed [ph.] DeJesus, who was, who became a very wonderful contemporary composer of popular music, here in New York. And her other daughter, his other daughter, was Beatrice [ph.], who was a schoolteacher, who used to work in Cincinnati [Ohio] and, before, came back to New York to study, studied at Columbia University [New York, New York], you know, and for her teacher's certificate. And her, and the son, Ezra Carter also. And he raised them down in the South, in Wilmington, North Carolina as children. Then, what happened was that--I might also add, he was also, he was--it's very interesting. This part is very interesting to me. You--there was a very interesting kind of mixtures, you know, those genetic mixtures that were happening then, like my mother's side, 'cause it was half. Her mother was half-Indian [Native American] and half-black. Her father was half-English and half-black, so the interesting kind of mixtures were going on in that family line, you know. And it's turned out, he turned out to be the [Marcus] Garvey, the head of the Garvey chapter, the Marcus Garvey chapter down there. Speaker 1: The UNIA [United Negro Improvement Association]? Speaker 2: Yeah, with the UNIA. And the--so he, here he is the, a shopkeeper, lay minister, head of the Garvey chapter, the Marcus Garvey chapter. The Back to Africa Movement and all that was going on. At a certain moment, one of the major chain--what do you call it--came, a major store chain, a supermarket came into the area. I think it was Safeway [Inc.]--came into the area. And all the people who had been going to my grandfather's store and, and getting credit, you know, paying at the end of the month when they get paid, suddenly left his store, and started going to the Safeway, and it broke his heart because he had supported these families for so many years. He was very--not just was he disgusted with it, not only was he a leader in the community--the fact that they all felt they had to go to the Safeway broke the man's heart. I mean, really, kind of hurt him deeply. He left and decided to go to Washington, D.C. with his family when my mother was very young. When they got to Washington, D.C., he spent about two years there. And they couldn't, he couldn't, he could never reorganize his livelihood the way he wanted to. He never could get it organized the way he wanted to, and he became ill, and he died. And so, the mother, my mother's mother, took the family to New York from there. And from that point on, we were there. Story_ID: 237397 Speaker 1: On my father's side, it was a little bit different. My father-- Speaker 2: Now, let's get your father's full name. Speaker 1: Paul Harrison, Paul Randolph Harrison, R-A-N-D-O-L-P-H. Speaker 2: Okay. And what's his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 1: Let's see, I don't remember, let's see. It must have been pretty close around the same time, around 1915, I would say, I would say. But my father died, unfortunately, very young. He died when he was twenty-eight years old. And I would imagine he was about a year older than my mother [Thelma Carter Harrison], something like that, I would imagine. Speaker 2: So, around 1913 then, I guess, huh? Speaker 1: He was probably born in 1913, I'm sorry, yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, I assumed he was about a year older. They met in New York [New York]. He--my father was an interesting man. He had a regular day gig, a city job, but he was really a singer. And he used to sing with big bands, you know, one of the society bands, big, black-tie type of orchestras. And he used to sing, but he had his regular day gig as it were. And he met my mother in New York when they were kids, like teenagers--I suppose you would say. And, but his mother [Isabel Harrison]--my--he came up with six or seven siblings (laughter), from South Carolina, from the Charleston [South Carolina] area. He was born in Charleston. My grandmother was, was born and raised on those islands off the coast, one of the islands off the coast of Charleston. Speaker 2: Okay, what we call the Sea Islands. Speaker 1: The Sea Islands-- Speaker 2: The Gullah country. Speaker 1: --the Sea Islands, Gullah, Gullah. And so, that her, her whole language and whole cultural style was very much in the Gullah mode. Her sensibilities are very, very--in terms of being an enterprising woman, you know--make your own way. That came over from the Sea Islands with her. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: And, and the kind of connectedness, in other words, keeping networks within the group, you know, was part of her way, were functioning also-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --from the Sea Islands. But they were, but the kids were initially raised in Charleston, South Carolina. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, I was going to comment that people say that, that's the most African part of-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 2: America. Speaker 1: --no, she definitely was into that, plus she was a, a leader in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church. I mean, one of the leaders, I mean, she, and, you always think of the women not being involved with it, strongly as the leadership of the church. But she was one of the leaders of the A.M.E. church, which was very, very mystical, as far as I could tell, can see--I mean, highly mystifying experience when I came in touch with it when I was about ten years old in New York-- Story_ID: 237398 Speaker 1: I mean, to me, it [the African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.) church] was an incredibly mystifying experience which I can never forget, you know. In fact, it was not only mystifying, it was somewhat terrorizing. I mean, I said, "What is going on here?" Speaker 2: In that-- Speaker 1: It was this otherworldly, it was totally otherworldly kind of a thing. Speaker 2: The A.M.E. church? Speaker 1: Yeah, they-- Speaker 2: Now, this is, this is the reason why I point--bring this up for anybody watching this. Most people--for A.M.E. is more toned down and usually than the Baptist, you know-- Speaker 1: Oh, no, no, this is the traditional A.M.E. This is like the, one of the earliest A.M.E., almost Pentecostal-type of flavor, Pentecostal flavor. Speaker 2: Well, it kind of raises a question of whether the A.M.E. church that most of us see now is the original version, or you're saying that this-- Speaker 1: The earliest version, yeah, this is the-- Speaker 2: --the earliest version was more-- Speaker 1: --much, much more visceral-- Speaker 2: --African and-- Speaker 1: --very African, ritualistic costumes, extraordinary costumes. It was quite impressive, a very--I mean-- Speaker 2: Tell us about this now before--we gotta dwell on this and then-- Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, I can--when I first, my first encounter with it was, my first true encounter with it was that when I--which is part of the story. There was--I have it--my grandfather on that side, I never knew because he was in a sanitarium when they--when my [paternal] grandmother [Isabel Harrison] left to go to New York [New York]. She left her husband there in the sanitarium for tuberculosis. And I had never met the man, and we had hardly ever spoken about him, in fact. All I know, about the time I hit, maybe, came to ten years of age, the man had passed down there. And they shipped his body to New York for this, for this funeral. It was my first contact with my grandmother's church affiliation, and this was a high ritual mode. It was A.M.E., African Methodist, what, Episcopal, high ritualistic style with extravagantly colorful costumes. This man was--his body was open and made, you know, visible to everyone. I, of course, I didn't know him, but it was incredibly--they did a whole major ceremony around the body. And extended prayer, highly extended prayer and song, of course, was all part of that. It's part of every funeral. But this was--it seemed to be quite--I had been to other funerals before as a child, but this one seemed to be very much--the impulse behind this one seemed to be very, very spiritualizing. In other words, they--as if they're going to raise this particular person out of the casket almost. I mean, it was amazing. Now, I had been to an earlier funeral, my father's [Paul Randolph Carter] funeral when I was seven, when I was seven years old, and it was not quite like that. It was much more subdued and, in fact, because it might have been because of my grandmother, had the funeral in her, in the parlor of her house. It was--my grandmother had an apartment in New York that had about twelve rooms, maybe about five or six bedrooms, purposefully for her enterprising thing. She had this huge apartment in Harlem [New York, New York], huge parlor, and so, she had the funeral service right there. How they got the body up onto the elevator and up, up to the eighth or tenth floor that where she was, I don't know. I don't remember how that happened. But nonetheless, it was very subdued, and but when it came to her husband who apparently was part of the same association, sacred association, she felt compelled to take it to that ritual style that belonged with that. It comes from those islands. It's basically an extension of the Gullah [Sea] Islands [South Carolina] experience. Speaker 2: So it may not necessarily be the A.M.E. church that was-- Speaker 1: Well, I'm not sure it was A.M.E., but I, I mean it's like-- Speaker 2: No, I mean, the source of the ritual might not be that church so much as the, the Gullah influence. Speaker 1: The Gullah influence was, was definitely there. And then I saw it again in 1960 when my grandmother passed--that same ritual happened again for that. It's amazing, an amazing kind of event where, you know, coming from--as a kind of urbane and urbanized sort of youngster, young man, cut off from that. I mean it was hard to get, become part of it where one can look at it and find something very, very compelling about it. But, you know, we--I wasn't part of it by 1960, you know. But when I was ten years old, it was really very, very kind of earthshaking, you know--clearly, it separated--I mean, one felt something separating. And somehow, there's a fusion of life and death coming together at the same place in the same spot, the same location. I don't know if that makes any sense. You realize something else is going on, you know, and it was just an incredible event. But anyhow, that was how that, that's how my grandfather was buried, or at least the sacred ceremony that went on around him. Story_ID: 237399 Speaker 1: But my grandmother went--she came up, she left her husband there, and came up to New York [New York]. And she immediately, because being an enterprising woman with a great network of other people from those [Sea] Islands [South Carolina], and those people living in Charleston [South Carolina], she came up to New York, she immediately bought several buildings up in Harlem [New York, New York] where she would rent out to people who were not "fleeing the South." but people who were just coming north, and had to have a place to stay, people coming from Charleston area, and need a place to say for like two months, three months, cheap rent. She would rent them, rent these rooms to these various people in these, these brownstones that she had uptown, up in Harlem. And so, it was just kind of a continuous trail of people coming in, staying at her various houses, (unclear) at such a moment. And she did that for many years. That was her main income, her main source of income. And she had her, of course, her children doing various things, but they were not, they were, you know, professional, various professional things they were involved in. All--let's say, I would call that, they would say that they, that was her particular work. They had their own work--the children. You know, they would vary, depending on what they were doing. The, like my--well, finally, when my grandmother left those--sold her brownstone, she bought, she got into this big apartment I was telling you about earlier--huge apartment. And all of her sons, they all had--everyone, all of them had, all of her sons had these very nice apartments and homes in New York--some out in Queens [New York, New York], and other were in Manhattan [New York, New York], big apartments. And that was just, be the lifestyle, very, very urban lifestyle that they had developed. The--we grew up in a very nice five-room, three-bedroom apartment in Harlem, right on the edge of, beginning of Harlem, at 111th Street, you know. I had another uncle on 116th Street in the--what they call the Graham Court [New York, New York] which is 116th, that magnificent courtyard building. That was another one who had a house in Queens. Another--yeah, there was just, they were all spread out, you know. We had a--it was quite an interesting family--the Harrisons on that side. But she, when she had this big apartment--what was the reason for the big apartment? So, again, the network of people would come. So when I'd go to her house, there was always people there I didn't know. They would come in, stay for a month or two, and they would leave. And she always kept this flow of people coming through her apartment, you know, they're called roomers. That was the term at the time, roomers or boarders, if you like. She, and she had them, and she did attend to these people. And they stayed there for a period of time, and they would move on. That--and until finally, she moved out into--out in Long Island [New York] and bought a house just for herself and her family. And she stayed, you know, she stayed out there with her, with one of her daughters, and they lived out there. But it was, it was an interesting time. Such a very enterprising woman. Speaker 2: What was her name? Speaker 1: Isabel-- Speaker 2: Isabel. Speaker 1: Isabel Harrison, Isabel Harrison. Story_ID: 237400 Speaker 1: I didn't, I never really--my mother's [Thelma Carter Harrison] mother, I never got to know. I knew my grandmother [Isabel Harrison] on the Harrison side. I didn't--my mother's mother passed before I got to know her. I mean, she was--when I was born, she was still living, but, you know, she passed soon after. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: The--so we, so my family sort of became entrenched in the whole kind of social lifestyle of New York City [New York, New York] coming up as young kids. Young kids from the South became very, very much part of the social style here of the--and so, you would say in the '30s [1930s]. And they are really--if, if you ever meet my, my people or you--they are definitely people of the Duke Ellington period. I mean, you know, they're kind of 1930s kind of personalities, you know. They share the same kind of sensibilities, or they did share that. My mother just recently passed a couple of years ago. But if you saw her, you would say, ah, this is a women of the '30s [1930s] and of the '20s [1920s] and the '30s [1930s]. And so, New York, New York City kind of event, you know, you would see that in her. Speaker 2: Now, what did your mother do for a living when she-- Speaker 1: My mother was a, she was--what do you call it--an executive assistant for the housing--first, for the government, U.S. government, for many years. And then, she moved for, her final job that was--retired from, was with the New York City Housing Authority where she was the managerial assistant for the, for one of the housing projects. And so, she was what--she did administrative work for all of her life. And she, it was a very interesting thing about that. When she went to work, first went to work, back in 1943--I guess it was, when my father [Paul Randolph Harrison] died. When she first went to work, the first thing that happened was the school, the primary school that I had attended, the principal called her in, and said, "Well, Mrs. Harrison, what are you going to do now that these children, you know, are here, and your husband has passed on?" And she's--"Well, I'm going to go to work. I have some places I can go to work, et cetera. I have skills. I mean, I have, you know, I want to use them now." And they said, "Well, we will recommend that you take, to go on family relief," is what they called it. They would call it welfare today, but back in that period in the '40s [1940s], they called it family relief. The first thing the principal recommended was, you know, you shouldn't do that. You should go on family relief. She said, "Why would I do that--for what?" So she said, "Well, you know, you have these two children [HistoryMaker Paul Carter Harrison and Kenneth Harrison], these two boys, and these two boys need supervision. And we would prefer that you would be at home to take, to watch your children, to take charge of your boys than to be away from the house working." She says, "No problem, I, you know, it's not an issue." You know, she, her support system was solid enough in the family that that never had to be a concern of hers. And she had the skills to use, so there was no point in her doing this. In fact, she was offended by this suggestion that she go on the dole. She was very offended by that. And, obviously, she didn't do that. She went and did her--started working. But that was the attitude, by the way, at the time, you know, black mother without a husband in the house and two boys--c'mon, take the dole and sit around, you know. Speaker 2: Now-- Speaker 1: So, she didn't do that obviously. And, but she did have a wonderful support system that included my father's side of the--my grandmother, as well as her sisters, like the one aunt who was a musical composer. I be- connected with, we were all connected with her children. We kind of grew up with her children as well. We were all part--we lived in the same building, in fact, you know. So we, she had--it was very, quite, quite a good, a good support system for her. Story_ID: 237401 Speaker 1: Now, is there a story as to--I mean, about how your parents [Paul Randolph Harrison and Thelma Carter Harrison] met that's passed down? Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting, you know, you just assume people get together. We never asked those kind of questions. Those seem to be very private moments, particularly since the man--that my father hasn't really been in our life at all, had never been in our life--was not in our life for like what, since the '40s [1940s], you know. And our whole thing was the life around the mother. And we did not, in fact, allow other--we did not, in fact, we interfered with any potential other kinds of unions that might happen. I'm sure we did. I know we blocked every possibility. She was a very attractive, lovely woman, a very, very, you know, a very kind of, you know, Lena Horne-ish, and very kind of--so men were interested in her. They were very--but these boys, my brother [Kenneth Harrison] and I, we just got in the way of that. We just wouldn't deal with it. Until finally, when she was seventy-seven years old, she told us one day there was a man interested in her to marry. We said, we laughed, we, you know, so it was very funny--said c'mon. We have, of course. And she said, "No, I'm quite serious. This man is interested in marrying me." We said, "Who is this man?" Well, it happens to be a man that she had worked with at the [New York City] Housing Authority. She had known him for about twenty years. He was married. He retired around the same time she did. He went south to South Carolina with his wife. And, shortly after, the wife passed, he came up to New York [New York] that same year, ran into my mother, and, again, taking her out. And he said, you know, professed having years of great affection for her, you know, years--and he never--could not do anything about it, you know (laughter). And, it--he proposed to her. And so, my mother asked my brother and I for about maybe two or three months--"Boys, should I marry this gentleman, Mr. Weathers [ph.]?" And, finally, we said, "Yeah, you definitely should go ahead. I mean, why should you be alone, you know, your siblings are all dead. All your siblings are not here. You're living alone in New York." She had a very nice place, though, in Brooklyn [New York, New York], a very nice what, a condominium there, lived very nicely, but she was there alone. And we didn't go to Brooklyn very often when we came to New York. When I was in New York, and I rarely would go to Brooklyn but, you know, I'd have to go see her every time. So, we said, yes, absolutely. And so, we gave her away in a major wedding, you know, at the age of seventy-seven years old after all those years of blocking her (laughter) those early years. Story_ID: 434933 Speaker 1: I know your father [Paul Randolph Harrison] died when you were young, but what was his personality like? And you say he was a singer and he-- Speaker 2: Well, I tell you, he was a singer. He was a very interesting man. I, when I'd say interesting, I was only seven years old. But I only remember him as his comings and his goings, you know, as a child. If you have a man, who you wake up with in the morning, who was on his--you're in school and he's on his way out the door to go to work, and then on the weekends, he's out singing, singing and with big orchestras. So, it's very difficult to know him as a child other than the occasions when we would go on to take walks in the park occasionally, or take boat rides, 'cause there's Central Park [New York, New York], you know. We have, we have people with the row boats who we can go out with. And we lived right around the corner from the park. And so, it was, so we didn't have an enormous amount of contact with him. We were always aware of him, but we didn't have great contact with him. Of course, he was always the person who would come and would rule the household when it came to some things that were not going on properly between my brother [Kenneth Harrison] and I. So, my mother [Thelma Carter Harrison] would say, "Your father will be home, and he'll talk to you when he come home." We had those occasions. We remember those things very well, and we never repeated those offenses--those things that offended my mother. We never repeated those things again once my father had had our attention. Now, those things we can remember, but for the most part, we hardly saw the man. He goes to work in the morning. He comes home in the evening, goes to sleep, gets up, you know. He has, you know, family hours, but not a whole lot of, you know, by the time, between the time of, let's say one and seven years old--I mean it's very difficult to know that personality. Story_ID: 434934 Speaker 1: Now, my mother, on the other hand, we obviously knew very well. We had a whole life around her. And we were very attached to her and we always referred to her--they would talk about Thelma [Carter Harrison] and her boys [HistoryMaker Paul Carter Harrison and Kenneth Harrison]. We travelled a lot together. We did a lot of travelling around. So, it was very--we were very, very close. And we, as a result, became very close to that whole Carter side of the family--the, my aunt and her children. And we're all sort of tied in together. And we were all pretty much involved with the New York [New York] scene, and not very much concerned about the South--never even made, had any whispers about the South in our lives. We never talked about the South. Speaker 2: So, you didn't travel there much as a child? Speaker 1: No, we went once. My brother and I went once when we were--oh, I guess, we must have been closing in on 12, 13 years old. I think the furthest south--and then went to North Carolina, it's Wilmington [North Carolina], maybe when we were twelve years old, something of that sort. And my--and we found it very, very strange, very, you know. We, you know, we didn't know what to think about it, but it was very strange for us to be there, sitting on people's back porches and, you know, it was just a different kind of--their photographs. When I see these photographs, these early photographs, and we see us sort of moving around in that milieu, and you can see we look like, you know, fish out of water in there, and 'cause we're looking at everything, it's always very new and very curious. But we had no sense of affinity with it whatsoever. Speaker 2: Was there--I know the segregation was big in North Carolina. Speaker 1: Big time, yeah, it was big time there. But, the only--the first encounter with segregation for us was the trip on the train. When we had to get off the train, I think it was in Virginia. So, I think it was some place in Rocky Mount, Rocky--was it North, Rocky Mount, North Carolina or Rocky Mount, Virginia, whichever that is. You get off the train, and you walk to the back, through the back coaches. I mean, they segregated the coaches. And we were, once in New York, we got, we get in the coach, wherever we wanted to get in and, of course, we had that, that situation. We got to a certain point. We had to get off the train, the same train, walk to the back, and get into the train for the black folks. And, of course, we found that to be very interesting because it was a wonderfully kind of--the energy in there was quite wonderful because it was very, very much like a family, was that, was--the extended family whereas nobody--they passed food around. People opened up their boxes and passed it around to each other on the train. It wasn't like, that's your seat, and that's your chair, that, that's your, that's your box of food. Just sit--whatever you had, you shared with other people. That thought was, you know--I mean, this to me, I'd never, you know, experienced with the exception of the church outings that my grandmother [Isabel Harrison]--it's gone with my grandmother on the father's side with those people who were from the Gullah Islands [Sea Islands, South Carolina], those Charlestonians [Charleston, South Carolina] also. And they would have these, quite frequently, these outings in major state parks in New York and expected from members. They all know each other. But to be on a train and nobody, and the only place I've, the only one of the places (laughter), that I had experienced anything like that was on a train, riding the trains up and down from Amsterdam, Holland [Netherlands], then down to--let's say, between Paris [France] and the south of France. You very often--students do this. They share a bottle of wine, pass it around. You don't want to confuse it with the same spirit. That's about, you know, some indulgences, you know. But in that train, the black folks would, were, corralled together in one, or just two or three coaches. And they all acted as if it was one big family. And, to me, that was the most important observation to be made out of that. And it was quite, you know, interesting. I had never quite experienced anything like that. We got down to, when we got down to North Carolina, we just found it very curious. We were very, we were looking at it in, with a certain kind of a distant eye, you know, so this is what the South is about. Oh, this is what that is. Oh, I see. We didn't feel any problems--well, no problems were there 'cause we were still children. Of course, you know, children don't--we met other children. And they thought we talked funny, and we thought they talked funny, and, you know, we just sort of dealt with it. We didn't, they're--we just assumed that it's just not cultured, just the, the distance of the South. It was like the--look, in Brooklyn [New York, New York], they talked different than the people in Manhattan [New York, New York], okay. The Bronx [New York, New York] has a whole different thing. We got down to the South. They sounded different to us, and we sounded different to them, you know. So that was the only thing we could, you know, ascribe to the sense of distance. Story_ID: 434935 Speaker 1: My brother [Kenneth Harrison] experienced the, I mean, more hardcore discrimination in the South when he was a basketball player with the--my brother was the first black basketball player for Villanova University [Villanova, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 2: Now, what's your brother's name? Speaker 1: Kenneth Harrison. Kenneth Harrison, he was the first black player, basketball player for Villanova. And in the '50s [1950s], Kenny literally had to travel with the team to the South--play those southern games. They'd put him in a different hotel and the black--separate him out, and put him in another hotel from the rest of the team. Now, that's, that's what--when you're 17 years old, 17, 18 years old, then you really feel the impact of discrimination at that point. You're being separated out. Or when I was nineteen years old, my first contact with true discrimination came. And I don't, and by the way, I don't want to confuse discrimination with ethnic, sense of ethnic affiliation growing up in New York [New York], with all the different ethnic groups. We continuously insulted each other. We--the Italians, we, you know, we had names for the Italians. The Italians had names for us, obviously. We had names for the Jewish guys, and they had names for us. I mean, it was, you know, we did this as friends 'cause they were going to school with each other. We'd--Irish guys, we had ethnic slurs about them, directly to their faces--call the guys out. And you call the Jewish guy out. You call the Italian guy out. They'd call you out. The Spanish guy, you call him out. He'd call you out. I mean, but these are friends. Nobody else could do that. If you're not part of that group, you couldn't do that. Even if you were black, you couldn't let a black guy call one of your Jewish friends. You couldn't let him call him out. You defended the Jewish guy, but he, because you were friends, you could do this. If you follow what I'm saying, very interesting kind of--we never felt it as discriminatory. We're just something we knew were different. And I grew up with that understanding difference. I like the idea there's so much difference. I'm not trying to be like everybody else. You know, I like Chinese food. I like Italian food, and I suppose it's different, you know (laughter). I like to eat uptown, the Soul Kitchen [ph.]. It is different. It is my kind of eating. But in any case, my first encounter, I was nineteen years old, I was a transfer student from NYU [New York University, New York, New York]. And it's--again, look at this urban, this urban sort of situation might be worth looking at. I was an undergraduate student at sixteen years old, soon to turn seventeen, at NYU, New York University. Living in Greenwich Village [New York, New York], I got burned out by the time I hit my senior year. I say, burned out--I'm talking about I was just tired. I was exhausted--too much of everything too soon, just, you know, I mean school was fine. I had no problems with schoolwork. It was just simply, I just wanted to do something different. I wanted to be out of Greenwich Village. I wanted to be in a place, like what is America? I wanted to be in America, but where is that? It's just, it's not New Jersey. It's some place out there. So, I applied, I applied to ten--to five of the Big Ten [Conference] schools, the so-called Big Ten. I--why did I do that? I had no idea what the Big Ten was. All I knew was that they were away from New York, a thousand miles or something like that. And then somebody told me something about Big Ten. I said, what's a Big Ten? And they said, there's university of this, this, this, and I applied to five of them. The first one--two or three months after I applied, the first one to respond to me was the University of Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]. As soon as I got that, I said, "Hey, I'm going," (laughter), you know--Indiana, where is that? What is in Indiana? I had no idea what it was--let alone what is an Illinois, or what is a Michigan or, or what that could be. So I said, I'm going to do this. My mother [Thelma Carter Harrison] says, if you want to do that, okay. My mother was paying for me to go to school anyway so it didn't matter. It was whichever school I wanted to go to. As long as I went to school, it was fine, but I had to go to school. I said, I'm going to leave NYU. I'm going to go down there to do my last year, my final year. I said okay. Of course, when I got there, I found out I had to stay for two years. But anyhow, that's just another story, but the two years, but the point is, I had to go down there. How did I arrive in Bloomington [Indiana], or how did I arrive in Indianapolis [Indiana]? I arrived in Indianapolis wearing my oxford blue shirt (laughter), my, and a nice blazer, blue blazer, my striped tie, you know; my wonderful English shoes, and my nice gray flannel trousers, and my argyle socks, you know. I had the total look of the Ivy League kind of a preppy kid. I had a Burberry raincoat, wonderful two leather bags. And I get off the train, and I get to the bus stop to go to Bloomington. And I'm standing there to get some chewing gun and some newspapers. And there's a white kid who's pushing guys, pushing a broom. And I'm standing there with my chewing gum and my newspaper, my Burberry, and my English shoes, and the whole trip. And I'm--and this guy pushes this rubbish all across my feet, and kept on going. So, I turned to him, and I shouted, "Hey, you, you see me standing here?" He said to me, "You are in the way." I said, oh (laughter), this is what time it is (laughter). I said, this is where we are (laughter). I mean, I had no idea what the--I mean, I got it though. I felt suddenly defenseless at that moment, that he could say that-- Story_ID: 434936 Speaker 1: I mean, with no uncertain times, I say, oh, this is where this is. When I got to Bloomington [Indiana] and took--it was an hour ride from there to Bloomington--nothing but corn from Indianapolis [Indiana] to Bloomington. I thought I was going into the outreaches, the real outback. I say, "Where is this university [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]?" I'm wondering, you know. I get there and I'm middle of the corn fields is this place called Bloomington. And you got all of this university sprawled out there. The first week that I was there--the second week I was there, I went to a [Andres] Segovia concert, very nicely dressed, went to see Segovia play at the hall there on the campus, across the street, by the, just right on the campus and the main campus, and just across the street from a little restaurant. At the end of the Segovia concert, this friend of mine--he and I, we go across the street to have a beer. We go inside there, and he could, he could order the beer because he was--what, he was an ex--he was a veteran, so he was about 24, 25 years old, and I was only 19 years old, but I looked pretty mature. I go in there and we sit down, and he ordered two beers. And we sat there for an hour and didn't get served. And we finally asked "What's, where's the beer?" And the girl said she was not going to serve us--the waitress. So, we go to the manager, not the manager--the owner, and said, "Listen, what's the problem here? We, waiting there for an hour, and didn't get served." She said--and literally said it--"We do not serve colored boys here." I mean, straight in your face--it's like that. Now, we go outside. We leave in a huff. And my friend was in the theatre department, and I was in psychology at the time, you know. And now, we're trying to figure out what to do next. A young white girl comes outside. She says, "Fellows, what happened, what happened here?" And we explained. So the young woman said, "Well, we've been trying to get a case against her for a long time for this kind of discriminatory behavior. We'd like to get your help." And my friend said, "Don't bother," 'cause he was from Indiana, and he was and he said, "don't bother," in a very theatrical way. He said, "My lawyer will take care of this in the morning (laughter)." You don't have to bother with this, you know, and that's the attitude. It was not about the collective group being discriminated against. It was that he and I were the ones. We felt in, in a very--independently of the collective situation. We were the ones who were offended. We didn't think about it in terms of it being, this is 1955. We didn't think about it in terms of it being a part of a collective offense. Our initial response was we were offended. And we were going to see his lawyer the next day, and we were going to set a case against her. Well, it wasn't our lawyer that finally got this woman to lose her license less than a year later. It was the students on the campus, who every day for the next six months, had demonstrations in front of her place. They would go in and sit inside--send a black person inside--would not be served, and then, they all get up and leave. They did that to her for six months. That, as a collective outrage for that behavior, mostly white students involved in it and, of course, the black students who were on campus. And that's what got her to lose her license--not my, not my private personal, my personal sense of being offended, which was an eye opener for me. I mean, so I said, oh, it's not about me. It's about all of us, isn't it? Finally, it's about all of us. It took me--I mean, coming from where I was coming from out of New York [New York] to this. Suddenly, I had to understand the collective response to discriminatory kind of issues. Did I answer your question? Speaker 2: So this was, yeah, so it was beyond just an individual-- Speaker 1: It was beyond the individual (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and it's-- Speaker 1: --it was beyond the individual. I mean, I was, I mean, and my personal hurt meant nothing compared to the ramifications in the larger sense, you know, what it means in terms of trying to negotiate the issues around racial discrimination in America. And, of course, I had to learn that because I wasn't, I wasn't, I did not have that when I was living in New York. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Sure, there were discriminatory practices, but nothing that, that I would know about. I mean, nothing that would have, that would directly impact my life personally, individually, personally. It was, as I said, my negotiation with other people and other different groups and ethnic groups was simply an independent one-on-one negotiation. You call that person, you call them a foul name based upon his ethnicity, didn't matter because that's what you do. We--they are different, you know, we had--and that's how we functioned in New York as kids. But then suddenly, suddenly I had to realize that there was this kind of collective responsibility that, you know--and it wasn't just my own personal ability to be able to hire a lawyer to take, to deal with this situation. That had nothing to do with it. Story_ID: 434937 Speaker 1: We didn't talk about grade school. We didn't talk about what your aspirations were as a youth. Speaker 2: Yeah, as a youngster coming up, my, you know, I'm interested--well, let's put this way. Coming up as a kid in New York City's [New York, New York] school system, there are certain kinds of standards and objectives laid out for you. And you had to--certain achievements at different levels, and so that you--I came up as a--my brother [Kenneth Harrison] and I both, I suppose, came up with just simply, whatever objectives were put in front of us academically, those were the ones we're supposed to achieve. And it always guided, guiding us toward going to a university. We always knew we were going to go to the university and there wasn't any question about it. That's how the family was and that's how we were--our lives, our lifestyles were dealing with people who were interested being in universities and being in colleges, and things of this sort. And our cultural intersection with the rest of the city gave us a worldview which was much larger than, let's say, if I were living in Bloomington, Indiana all my life, or if I were living in Wilmington, North Carolina. So in, as a youngster, we were connected with popular music, classical music, theatre, dance, things that awakened certain kind of curiosity. We, in school, we would have these visits to different people's houses, to eat their food. So, we'd go to a Jewish house one day, then go to Italian house another day, so and this is all in our primary school development [at P.S. 113, Ruth Whitehead Whaley School, New York, New York]. So that by the time you get to high school, then the newest, the real serious standard is to pass the Regents exams [Regents Examinations], so you get into college. And so all of our energy was directed that way. So by the time I get to college, and I tell you, the reason I tell you this is 'cause it's a funny little story. There was a--by the time I get to college, I don't know what, really what I want to do. I have no idea. And I'm sixteen years old and I get there and so, you take liberal arts and, you know, liberal arts basically. Pre-medicine, liberal arts, you take the science courses 'cause you might want to be a doctor, you know. You take all the science courses (laughter), because you might want to be a doctor. You don't know whether it's, what do you do, what's a life? A life means a professional life. What kind of profession? I don't know. How about being a doctor or a lawyer or, you know, something? I mean it, you just don't know at that time. I didn't know I was interested in the arts at 16, 17 years old. I was very much interested in the arts, but I wasn't sure how to come to it, how to deal with it, how to get involved with it. But, nonetheless, I got, I passed all my exams very well. I mean, you know, for the, called the state Regents exams. I get into college. I don't know what I'm going to do. I'm studying psychology and medical pre-, the, the early courses for medical studies, and things of this sort. And I'm having a lot of fun and my fun, mostly was dealing with people in the arts--poets. Story_ID: 434938 Speaker 1: That's when, that's during the time, I met [Amiri] Baraka-- Speaker 2: He was-- Speaker 1: --when he was LeRoi Jones, and Ted Joans, and many of the poets or the Beat poets around that period, the '50s [1950s]. I went to school in 1952, so between '52 [1952] and '55 [1955], I was really sort of hanging out with the various poets, musicians I encountered, Thelonious Monk. And I mean, I became familiar with a whole new intense, intellectual body of stimulation. You might say of--I mean, Thelonious Monk, to this day, was probably one of my most, one of the greatest influences on my life to this day. I first encountered him in 1952 when I was a freshman in college [New York University, New York, New York]. And I used to refer to him as this crazy guy playing around the corner until I understood what he was, until like suddenly, I understood what he was doing. I said, wow, this is something else. This broke through. It broke through the chromatic sensibility or the order of melody for me, you know. I said, ohh, this is what that is. I see it's not just crazy stuff he's doing. It's doing--this angularity is setting up some other things, and it has impacted how I thought about writing ever since. So people say, oh, did you, you got your writing thing from, you know, from looking at [Jean] Genet or looking at [Samuel] Beckett or somebody, some European writers or something. And I said, "No, are you kidding, no. My stuff comes right up out of Monk." Charlie Parker co-trained as a writer, you know, by becoming, you know, conversant with this kind of way of work. I suddenly began to change my whole view of what is a narrative? What is the narrative? A narrative is not in this organized, orderly fashion. Another way of getting to it, which comes closer, which I found out much later, much later on, the closer to African way in which you produce images. Anyway, and not to say this is disorderly, but it's just a, it's a whole other way that you construct the image, construct the narrative, and then, as understood in the European American model of an idea, how you construct the--whether it's orderly--what is order construction? Orderly construction of the narrative. Anyway, by the, by the time I was 16, 17 years old, I was pretty well set on--oh, not set--I was pretty well ingrained with the possibilities of being involved with the arts. But I didn't know how to come to it and after all, I might come from a family, you know, say my mother's [Thelma Carter Harrison] side, where, you know, c'mon, I did not send you to school to be a writer, an actor, or a musician or something. You'll, you know, you've got to have some specific credentials to get things done. Story_ID: 434939 Speaker 1: I remember, when I was nineteen years old and I was going out with a woman who had been married. And she was twenty-one, and she was now no longer married. She was back home--West Indian woman from Jamaica. And I was going out with this woman briefly 'cause I mean I met her, and after seeing her the second time, she said, you must come to my house and pick me up, up in Harlem [New York, New York]. And I get there. Her father sat me down. As soon as I get there, he says, "You sit down, sir, have a seat." And I sat down while waiting for her. And he came and said, "What's up? What are you studying in school [New York University, New York, New York]?" I said, "Liberal arts." He said, "Now what is that?" I said, "What, you know, it's liberal arts." He said, "Yeah, but what do you want to do?" I said, "I don't know." I mean, this man took me around the horn about how am I preparing a life, and I understood it after the fact. What he wants to know is, you're going to date my daughter, what are you doing with your life? So, second time, I went up to pick her up the following week, and he took me through the same drill. He wanted to know how was I preparing my life. And I could not tell him. He said, well, I mean, I mean after, and at the end of that, well, he didn't have to tell me anything else. I even told myself something. I knew I could not go out with this woman. I could not go out with her any longer 'cause I was not going to go through this drill. She was looking for--he was looking for a husband for her. She had just finished one relationship. She's twenty-one years old. He wanted her to have a husband. That was not going to be me, particularly, I was only nineteen years old. I mean, I'm just, you know, a kid. But the--but I understood it after, way after the fact what he was doing. First, it was a nuisance factor--this kind of interrogation. But you understood in terms of the, in the terms of the family values, particularly of these people from the Caribbean, and what they know. Their kind of--guarded sense of, you know, in this very protective sense, how to get their children involved in the United States and, you know, you just don't let them have any kind of random kind of contact with the world. You want to make sure you guide them a certain kind of way. I understood that way, way, much, much later on. It was much--it was just a nuisance factor for me at that time. And a very lovely girl. But I had to let it go. I could not respond to those questions. I had no idea what I was going to be doing. Story_ID: 434940 Speaker 1: Did you have any mentors in grade school or high school [High School of Commerce, New York, New York] that you remember? Speaker 2: The--there's only one, in primary school. In primary school there was only, there was one black school teacher, one black teacher. She was a music teacher, Ms. [Alice] Fairclough--I can remember her name today. And Ms. Fairclough was the one who taught us African songs, and taught us, of course, how to sing the Black National Anthem ['Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing']. I mean, we, I mean that we--it was, it was basically, we were entrenched in European cultural concerns even at the primary school level. But she was the only person who would bring to us all of the history of--and she was the music teacher. But she would take part of her music time to bring us to, and to contact with important figures of African American history, slavery, as well as songs, say, slave songs, so, if you did a slave song, you have to talk about the history of the song, where it came from, how, you know, what were the circumstances around the song? She would do that for us. When we would talk about Africa, she would teach us, literally teach us, how to sing a song in African language. You know, I'm saying African language, meaning that probably at that time, I don't remember. I think it was probably Nigerian or, you know, text. I don't quite remember. It was nothing--I don't remember exactly what the text was. But the point is, she would literally teach us those, the language of it, and how to sing it, and the rhythms of Africa in the context of--in a school that was contextually very European in its style and, you know, it's very, very American style. So, this Fairclough who was, was--she was a large women. And she had a great stature and very--so that, you know, you--she was, she was a very nurturing person, too, so that if anything went wrong in your classroom, she would come to that class, no matter who, and she would sit down, and she would talk to the teacher and talk to you, you know. You didn't have to call your mother if--and say you did something, some violation and, you know, she would--Ms. Fairclough would show up and take, and do this. So, yes, Ms. Fairclough, I thought was a great--and any, any person who, from that time, and went to school with me at that time, that I might not have seen for years. If they happened to see this program, they had her name, Fairclough, they'll know. They'll recognize that, they'll remember. Ms. Fairclough, she's the one person-- Speaker 1: What was the name of your school? Speaker 2: P.S. 113 [Ruth Whitehead Whaley School], Public School 113, 113th Street in Harlem [New York, New York]-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --right around the corner from my house, just one block away. Story_ID: 237410 Speaker 1: What is important for most--we don't have today, for most black kids is indeed this kind of an intimacy between the schoolteacher, who's an extended parent and kind of a surrogate parent. The schoolteachers that, you know, that would take charge of the direction of the kids once they're in that building, you know, they become the new parent. We don't have that any longer in the school systems. I don't remember the--in my--on the street I lived on, 111th Street, was a very, very nice street. You know, we lived--we had a very lovely, very, coming up in Harlem [New York, New York]. And the nighttime was quite different than it is what it would be right now, or for a long time had been going down after the 1950s. But the--it was quite an interesting life, very nice. You, I know, you can't--couldn't have possibly appreciated what it was until you went away. It became a whole village. Your block, your street became like a whole entire village. If a child was getting into having problems, they would send that child away to the South, usually to the grandmother, grandparents, and keep that child--not actually. I could speak to this in at least a half dozen cases of the people in my village, 111th Street, where people had to be sent to the South, probably to North Carolina or Georgia. And they would spend a year. They'd come back changed, completely changed. What happened? When they were down in the South, they were going to schools where the schoolteachers were part of the total social fabric in segregated schools, where the schoolteacher was part of the total social fabric of the community. Those schoolteachers went to the same beauty parlors that their mothers went to, went to the same churches, went to the same social events. So there was the extended family. It was very clear, and the support for, you might say, teaching those kids was strengthened. It was a clear bonding there in a total community, so that the teacher didn't feel like I've done my job, I go home, and I don't have to see that kid again until next week or whatever. In New York [New York], you had--it was just, you were very fortunate to be able to find somebody who would take on that--assume that responsibility, that particular role. I mean, when I was teaching at a junior high school, when I was in graduate school in New York, and I was teaching, substitute teaching, I remember one school down on the Lower East Side [Manhattan, New York, New York] where the black woman who was teaching, and who was teaching music, her only concern was that the black children knew how to sing European songs. And she was very aloof and she was very, very distant from the black children who were at the school. Her concern was only--could they sing perfect pitch, and sing exactly the way it was written, and was--did it sound like Cole Porter--not Cole Porter even--did it sound more like, you know, it was written for, let's say, a classical orchestra or something like that, or classical music? So she was distant. She was useless beyond the fact she had the skills. She had perfectly wonderful skills, and a very nice person basically, but she had no sense of, you know, connectedness to the children, other than the fact that she could teach them how to sing, or how to play a piano, or something like this. The--so it became a big--for me, it was very, very--I was very lucky, very fortunate to have a woman around me that--who could do that. Story_ID: 237411 Speaker 1: Before we leave childhood altogether, there's a series, there's a question I always ask, and we're supposed to ask this, and I neglected to ask it. And that is what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, for me, I mean it's--look, first, that I find easily--coming up in New York [New York] meant for me the--for my block on the top of the hill, on the top of the hill, up, up on the hill, across the park up the hill, maybe three blocks away, four blocks away, was the dome of St. John the Divine Cathedral [The Cathedral Church of Saint John the Divine, New York, New York], which always had for me, a kind of mystical feeling 'cause there was on the top of the little figure of the horn and it's always there. In the middle of my stickball game, in the middle of playing stickball in the street, and I look up, there it is. So there's something about that, you know. I, of course, I had visited the place on many occasions. You know, I passed through it. I might have known it, but it was there. It was something very comforting about that, not in the Christian sense, I mean, don't misunderstand me. It was just that it was something wonderfully noble about that, that open space through the park, across the park [Morningside Park], three or four blocks away, this huge dome--something cosmic about it--not, not religious. It had nothing to do with religion, like I wanted to become part of the church. But the cosmic element of it, how it seemed situated at, from that distance, it covered that block. You understand what I'm saying--from that distance, it looked like the dome came right into that--covered that block from one side of the street to the other side, you know, that gave that impression. The other thing is that the--as, as a kid, what I used to love was the part of the sight, one of the great sights we missed, after the '50s [1950s], is the idea of promenade on weekends, on Sunday, getting dressed, go to church. And for me, it didn't mean a specific church. I'd go to anybody's church. I'll go to a Catholic church. It didn't matter, a Baptist-- Speaker 1: So the family didn't really--what was the community-- Speaker 2: No, my family, my family was not, my particular family, my immediate family was not involved with a specific church. We were not concerned with but we--my mother [Thelma Carter Harrison] was very much concerned with sacred ideas and values. My grandmother [Isabel Harrison] definitely was involved with her church, so occasionally, I would go to her church, or go with my uncle to his Catholic church. My uncle went--Puerto Rican uncle, who was married to my mother's sister [Gladys DeJesus], the composer. Jose [ph.] was Catholic, so we'd go to his church. It didn't matter, but the most important thing is that we got dressed up on Sunday. And then, after we'd do the church thing, we'd do promenades up and down 7th Avenue with girlfriends, you know, young 12, 13, 14-year-old--take the girlfriends to the park, go rowing. We did these little kind of, very nice little kind of, you know, pieces of a social, social behavior. It was, it was just very, very interesting. You, you kind of counted on seeing people on the avenue, dressed up, promenading up and down, you know, see-- Speaker 1: We've heard that, you know. A lot of people who were raised in Harlem [New York, New York] talk about this--how on 7th Avenue, is, you would, your date didn't cost anything really, 'cause you just would walk your girl down that 7th Avenue. Speaker 2: You just walk up and down, walk up and down. Then, finally, you'd go to an ice cream parlor, you'd go to a very nice ice cream parlor. You always had a couple of dollars. You had enough to be able to buy your date an ice cream, a dish of ice cream. That was an important thing--to have at least a buck in your pocket, so you could buy her a dish of ice cream. You have a dish of ice cream, the two of you eat ice cream. And, you know, you'd take her home on time--see, the parents would be here, bop, four o'clock for dinner, five o'clock for dinner, whatever it is, you know, between two and five. And you'd take her home and that was it, you know. There was that. There was also the, the wonderful, the, the incredibly, you might say, galvanizing energy of a drum and bugle corps. And it's a lot of drum and bugle corps, and I used to belong to one also--my brother [Kenneth Harrison] and I. We used to belong to one where we, we learned how to play the horns, and we learned to play the drums, and we marched, and we did that up and down Harlem streets. And we used to, but we used to like other bands that did it also. Story_ID: 237412 Speaker 1: Now what did you play then, the trumpet or the-- Speaker 2: I played, I played the valve trumpet, the valve horn. And my brother [Kenneth Harrison] and I both played valve horns. But we had another cousin who used to play the snare drums, and so he was part of the family, the musical family in the building. He was part of my, he was one, he was the son of my aunt [Gladys DeJesus], and everybody in that family played something. They all played piano, they played, you know. But he, but we used to go up and have jam sessions up there at his house, you know (laughter). We were kids and, and he would play drums, and we'd play our horns, trying to make some sounds, make something happen, you know. It was very nice. But that, the drumming, in other words, if we were in the middle of a stickball game and like, or any kind of a game in the street on a Saturday afternoon, and when he had this, where he had this marching band sound, we would stop what we were doing and go look at it and watch it, 'cause we liked to orga-, how it was--the organization of it, I suppose. The structure of it was very nice--just the--when I got involved, I became involved at a level of competition. So we'd compete against other bands, big bands, big, big, marching bands. And so, it was a combination of-- Speaker 1: (INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Say now, one other thing-- Speaker 1: We're talking about the bands-- Speaker 2: --the bands, those bands, the competitions. We, we were very proud young people, 12, 13, 14 years old, and to have the right kind of uniforms, we were sponsored by--one of the VF-, VF-, Veterans of Foreign [Wars of the United States], VFW organizations sponsored us, and we'd go in these competitions in New Jersey. And I can remember, to this day, that we were always entered in our challenges against these bands in New Jersey, particularly some of the Italian bands who were very swift, and very interesting, and very, very sharp, and greatly talented. And we wanted always to be in competition with those guys because they presented the best, you know, you can go up against. And if we would win on a particular year or a particular event within the year, then, of course, it was, you know, it's a wonderfully--I mean, it just gave us a great sense of satisfaction. So I used to, we used to play--my brother and I both--we used to play in this band, this VFW band, and it was very, very helpful to us. So, it's probably the sounds, probably the sights and sounds or the, the--we didn't get involved very much with the--oh, I guess, the best, the food that I remember the most was my grandmother's [Isabel Harrison] kitchen, on my father's [Paul Randolph Harrison] side, was the--what I would call, the Gullah type eating, you know, that red rice and okra, the red rice and okra, and the beans and stuff that would--the way, the way she would cook. That's the food that I remember the very, very most. And that's the food that, to this day--I mean, my palate responds to, you know. I'm just, I'm in the Caribbean mode when I go, when I'm looking for something to do, something to do, I'm very concerned about eating Caribbean style. The--so that was part of the, the overarching kind of tactile, you know, and visceral kind of experiences that one would encounter. Speaker 1: I was wondering, in terms of the band competition-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and, you know, the kind of theatre and stuff that you, you write about now. Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely. It comes out of that. Speaker 1: Yeah, was there a--had--was there a difference between a black drum and bugle corps and a white one in those days (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, absolutely. No, but we understood that, but we understood that very well. I mean, there's, there's, we--oh, I didn't understand it till much, much later--what exactly it was. The--it was not just simply doing the paradiddle on the drum. It was doing the 6/8 hit, you know. You had--it wasn't about doing it 4/4 time. It was to get the appropriate syncopation in the drum. And it was about the certain kind of march step that had a certain syncopation to it, a certain kind of a riff in it, that put us in the--whereas the kids in Jersey, for example, where we'd go up against these major bands, would have a very straightforward approach to it, very swift cut moves. Our moves always had a little kind of, a little extra little something on it to make it look transformative. In other words, you wanted--is for me, the way I come to the theatre, the way I come to theatre is the same way that those bands were, were being produced, you might say. The bands, the black bands, that I worked in, that I'd worked in, that I'd played in as a kid--it was always about to take you to the next possible experience beyond what you were looking at. In other words, it might repeat some gesture. And suddenly, it shifts just like this. It might be a shift, and it just turns after you see another piece of a coloring in the cloth of a costume, if the costume looks different, something to alter, not deflect, but to alter and heighten your sense of what that activity is. And that's when they, our bands, not that we could play the music better, but we had a marching style and an attitude about how we did these things which was quite different. And we--and not always will remember that it was, and, and I recall as an adult, that what we were doing was no different than what the kids were doing in double dutch, the girls were doing in double dutch. It was a whole kind of a 6/8 pattern, a multi-rhythmic pattern that made the, that created the energy, as well as the excitement, and, and not only that, that fixed the ideation of what it is that we're doing. So you look at that. You'll feel the--and the bottom line is the power. The power is not how hard you play it--it's how you execute it, and what, you know, how--what is the, what is the style of, what does it look like in the execution? That is the power. You want to get to that--the power of the idea. And it's not so much I can play it harder, you see. Story_ID: 237413 Speaker 1: --And I must say that the other thing, of course, that cannot go away from it as a child, youngster, between the ages of 12 and 16 years old, 17 years old, those--the basketball courts up in Harlem [New York, New York] on the playground, playing basketball on the playground, had the same kind of magic for me. I mean, truly, magic. I mean, those--the stuff we see going on in the NBA [National Basketball Association] today is all the stuff I used to see as a kid, and--you did not dunk on a person because you could do it. You did to, to completely demolish the person. You dunked the ball on him, so that makes him come apart. I mean, the energy takes--it eviscerates your energy when the ball is dunked on you. So, if I, so if I'm guarding a guy and he gets up over me, and he dunks on me, it just takes your energy away. You have to understand that power--that's the power of it. The fast break is magic. It's--the fast break is transformative. When a team is running down the court and they end up making the shot, it does a whole thing to the other team. It diminishes them in a certain kind of way. It's incredibly powerful--an incredibly transformative moment, you know. And so, the, so what we see, and the way we played that game as kids was always--not because I could shoot better, it was as a team, if we could find a method to, to--a way of, you might say, diminishing the essence of the other team. That means a perfectly well-executed play. I mean, you do two, three, four passes, and somebody shoots from way outside and makes the shot, it's so splendidly done in the execution. It's splendid. It's so powerful that you actually, it actually worked, you know, and that's how I think all team sports should be finally. It's, this is what we used to aspire towards so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a book by Nelson George called 'Elevating the Game: [Black Men and Basketball]'-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --where he talks about how black basketball players, so. Speaker 1: Oh, yes, absolutely-- Story_ID: 237414 Speaker 1: Did your brother [Kenneth Harrison] ever talk about his basketball style in relationship to the other players at Villanova [University, Villanova, Pennsylvania]? Speaker 2: Well, that's what happened, one of the things that was clear--I'll give you two examples of basketball style coming up that were very discriminatory, in fact, that were very painful to certain people. In Chicago [Illinois], you had two wonderful basketball players--one called Charlie Brown [HistoryMaker Charles Brown], and the other one's called Paxton Lumpkin. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Paxton Lumpkin or Lumpkin Paxton--Paxton Lumpkin? Speaker 1: Paxton Lumpkin. Speaker 2: Paxton Lumpkin, those two, they were freshmen when I went to Indiana [University, Bloomington, Indiana]. And they were freshmen, and I was a, I was a senior, I suppose. And they were wonderful basketball players. The coach [Branch McCracken] never wanted them to play the way they would play--they could play their game because they come out of Chicago schoolyard type of style. And he was trying to make them play a certain way. And when those guys did not do well on their exams, the coach did not support them, and they had to leave after their second year. On the other hand, the guy, the tall guy, the white ball player that was there, who also wasn't playing very well, the coach supported him, and he was able to stay. And these guys played a different kind of a game. My brother, coming into Villanova, had to change his game all the way around. First of all, he was 6'2", center--tried to make him play with his back to the, to the basket (laughter) when he's always played outside, you know (laughter). So, but, nonetheless, he was an All-American in his first year of varsity ball, the first year in those days, you, you couldn't come as a freshman or sophomore. You have the--he was the, he had All-American status. He was one of the highest scorers for the second year. And in the third year, he--the first eight or nine games, he was like one of the third, maybe the third highest scorer in the country. Then he went into a slump for three games where he only got less than ten points. And the coach [Al Severance] came to him, and called him in the office and asked him, was he shaving points? Broke my brother's heart, broke his heart. In other words, just because he had two or three off games, the coach didn't even second guess it. He just simply said, "Are you throwing the game, are you shaving the points?" And from that point, my brother couldn't play for them--well, he played, but he didn't play with the same enthusiasm. He just played to fulfill his scholarship. He just, you know, he had a scholarship for four years, and he just played just to fulfill his scholarship. He never got to the level of play that--I mean, he played well, you know. He, you know, George Raveling was there with him--the second basketball player was George Raveling. And George Raveling was always like, in the beginning, was like (unclear) the guy, so he got a lot of time to play, and you know (laughter), he was there, a supporting character, you know. He was--George Raveling was a different kind of a guy than my brother (laughter). George had come up in New York, and he came out of a different situation. George was happy to be there. My brother said, like I'm doing you a favor, being here, but now that you think that I'm cheating and I'm not doing--I don't think that, you know, you, you haven't shown me any kind of respect. So, he's played just to play--got to finish up his work, but it was a different kind of a game altogether. He had a different kind of a ballgame. But I know that even when I played basketball in an organized way, which is not higher than, never higher than a sort of a club level, and certainly, high school club level ball, away from high school. In fact, was that we--you always had, it was quite different in having the white coach and a black coach. The white coaches always tried to make us play a very, very sort of, a very conservative kind of a style, where the black coaches almost insisted that we have some other kind of things, you know, that we'd have to do. It was much more demanding on us, you know-- Story_ID: 237415 Speaker 1: --My skills never got up to that level that, of playing the way the black kids were playing, you know, that, that I was growing up with. I could--I mean, I could play with them, but not on that level. I had--my stuff was fairly conservative by comparison--good, but conservative, you know. And so, but on the other hand, I never will forget in high school [High School of Commerce, New York, New York], 'cause we had one of the championships with top teams in the city. I thought I'd make the high school team--I didn't make it. The guy who beat me out was a guy who was head of the unions here in New York [New York], one of the chiefs of the unions here in New York today. Hill, what's Hill's first name, Puerto Rican kid, last name--Stanley Hill. Stanley Hill played the most conservative point guard position you ever wanted to see. And I said, "Why, how could they take him over me?" And my game was a lot more interesting than that. I got all the slick moves here. I got--what is this? Stanley Hill is what they needed for all the other slick guys around (laughter) to keep that together. And they won the city championship as a result. So, I mean, you know, I mean you have--how can you, you can never tell, I mean, how that works. But those are the kind of things for growing up in New York as the sights and the sounds, the kind of decorum, a kind of, you know. We, coming up in New York, we understood things like territorial and turf kind of situations, gangs. We understood where the gangs were. We understood how a particular way of negotiating that, so you can come through various kind of territories, particularly in visiting some young lady, you know, you have to know how to come through. You have to--you can't come through a kind of challenging posture. You got to know the right kind of rhythm and the language. You have to have the language together, so you don't show--it's like dealing with, it's like dealing with African males all over. That's what I found out much later on. Is it dealing with African males all over Africa? They must, you must--if you are stopped by a policeman or a soldier in Africa, in West Africa, they challenge you on a male level. And you have to know just how much of a response you, you have to give to be able to come out of the situation. You cannot be obsequious, you cannot be fearful. On the other hand, you cannot be over, over the top in terms of your sense of persuasion. You cannot be disrespectful. You have to recognize their maleness. You got to go--it's like when--every time you're stopped by a policeman or a soldier in West Africa, you begin to feel the territorial thing that happens when you're dealing with, negotiating with the gangs in New York or, or Chicago [Illinois], particularly New York 'cause I know that. Well, you have to literally figure out in the male-to-male sense where this thing is going to go. But you got to have a posture, which could not look like you are weak, but you could not also be overly, overbearingly strong, somewhere in between, and you define the right rhythm to be able to make that happen. Body language and all that stuff plays into it, you see. Story_ID: 237416 Speaker 1: Let's, I guess, fast forward up to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] now. You're there in your-- Speaker 2: I was at Indiana, and that's where I finally finished my work in psychology. But I was, I found that to be a very--those two years I spent there were the most humbling two years. I mean, I never, I mean, I suddenly began to realize I was a black person outside of the, outside of--I wasn't a black person. I was a colored guy in a white place is what I've realized. Speaker 1: Now, Indiana University--well, several of the Big Ten [Conference] schools are surprisingly leaders in African studies and African students are-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah-- Speaker 1: --you know, present on these-- Speaker 2: Indiana is one of them, and also in music. Dave Baker [David Baker], one of the--have you interviewed him yet? Speaker 1: No, but we need to, right. Speaker 2: Well, Dave Baker, you see, you got to talk to. It was Dave Baker--was one of the people who was there. And I--he was a graduate student when I was there, and I used to run around with Dave Baker. He was absolutely an amazing guy and he let up. He was the one person who kept the music going on all the time. I don't know when Dave did any studying, he was always playing. And Larry Ridley was there. The bassist, wonderful. And Larry, and we would, we would all go down and hang out with, on the weekends, hang out with Freddie Hubbard when he was just a kid of eighteen years old playing in the same place where Wes Montgomery was playing in all the time. So, we'd go down there on the weekends and hang out with him, with Freddie Hubbard. And I just, I don't know if Freddie Hubbard would, would remember when I was getting ready to leave Indiana. And I went in the bar and I saw Freddie--I said, look, he was nineteen then, I think. I said, "Freddie," I was about twenty-one then--I said, "you know, you need to go to New York." And he says, "You think so? You think naturally--." I said, "Oh, man, you've got to go to New York, you know." And he said, "Well, I don't know if I'm ready to do that." And two years later, he was out there playing in New York, you know. I was like, there he was--an immediate hit. Speaker 1: So, he was a student at Indiana U? Was he from (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, he wasn't a student 'cause the other--Ridley was, and Ridley played with him, and so did Dave Baker. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: They would go down to Indianapolis [Indiana] and play with him. He wasn't, he wasn't a student. He was down there in Indianapolis. Speaker 1: Oh, Indianapolis. Speaker 2: We're in Bloomington [Indiana], sixty miles away. And they'd go down, we'd go down on weekends, hang out in the club there. And he would--those guys would play with him. And he was just a kid, a very, you know, just a sweet, sweet kid trying, you know, trying to find his way, but everybody recognized him easily. This was the next voice, you know, after Miles [Davis] and Clifford [Brown]. So, this is the next voice, you know. We were kind of hoping it was going to be, you know, it got lost somewhere along the way, but it was, but it's good. Now, he was, he was a terrific, he was a terrific singer then. But, anyhow, the Indiana thing was, was, despite the fact they produced some great music--for me, the social realities of being in southern Indiana, or Indiana in general--I mean, just the--I mean, if you go just fifty miles away to, 50, 60 miles away to Terre Haute, Indiana, or go up to Martinsville [Indiana], eighteen miles away, you might as well be deep in the heart of Mississippi in both of those towns. You are definitely inside of--you are entrenched in old time religion-- Story_ID: 237417 Speaker 1: That's an amazing kind of difference that being in this pristine university [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], you know, which is producing all of this black scholarship, you know, not only that, I think of this time, did I tell you this little incident I had when I was in, I was studying physiology. I was doing, I had to do a lot of this for my studies in psychology. I was doing experimental psychology, not strength-type stuff, but experimental stuff that's physiology. One German professor, Dr. Wittenberger [ph.], Dr. Wittenberger, a woman, a great, big stout woman, stout German woman, who probably had just come to the United States 'cause she still had a great accent and Dr. Wittenberger, she terrorized everybody in the class. The first thing she did when I came to class--well, and not the--not--there are two sections. One section was a lecture section. And she was the old style German lecturer--hard nose, no questions, nothing, just straight out, write it down, give it back to me on the exam. I went to her lab, the first day of lab. Dr. Wittenberger tells all the students to line up against the wall, and then she's going to seat the people in the lab. She sat all the white students in the front. She sat me and the other black student, who was a football player. And why he was in that class, I don't know 'cause, you know, it was just a random science course he had to take with me. It was part of my curriculum. Sat him next to me in the lab, and sat the four Chinese kids together behind us (laughter). So, all the white students were there, the two black guys ahead, the four Chinese guys are in the back, behind, right (laughter). And that's how she was dealing with it. Now, every time I used to come to class into the lab, I had to come across the campus. So it'd take me a little time to get there, and I was always late. So, the first two or three sessions, I would show up late. On the--by the third session of the lab, fourth session, she was explaining this--she, the woman, Dr. Wittenberger was explaining this experiment. And she was talking about this experiment and how it worked, and there was one little thing that triggered it. And it's a catalyst, and this catalyst would trigger this particular thing to happen. And she said, "And this little thing is just like the nigger in the woodpile." So, I--my first reaction is, she didn't say that, I didn't hear it and, and I don't think she said that. I don't believe she said that. Then I heard this rumbling noise next to me--this growl next to me. The guy, who she sat me next to--the football player, and he was--I mean he was just completely, he was so tensed up. And I looked down from me, and all the white students in the class had turned--almost all of them, not all at one time, but started turning, when I looked back like this, and then (laughter). Story_ID: 237418 Speaker 1: What happens is that at a certain moment, after I looked at this guy, his name was Harry [ph.], I looked at Harry, you know, and it's about to boil over. I looked down from me and almost all the white students in the class had turned around to take a glance back at the two of us. And I realized that she had actually said it, 'cause then, my first response was, no, it was impossible for this teacher to have said that in this class. I mean, I couldn't imagine it. So, at the end of the class, a typical thing happened. I mean, when I went over to her, I said, "Listen, Dr. Wittenberger [ph.], as long as I'm in your class, you will never use that refrain again, you'll never use that word in my presence again," right up in her face. I said, "You just will never do that in my presence again." And she said, "Well, what is the problem with it?" And now, she said, Mr. Talen [ph.], this guy, she said she wanted to know Harry--well, how did he feel about it? He, 'cause he bopped, put his head down. And he said, well, you know, it's a little bit--I don't know--it's sort of--he never said he was offended--did this little tap dance, and never said he was offended. So it turns out, I'm the only one that was offended. I said, well, I don't, irrespective of how Mr.--I don't want to call his last name--but how Harry felt about it, you will never do that in my presence again, ever in my presence. Now, again, that's that tactic I use always. I'm the one defendant, one-on-one. I didn't call out the rest of the university [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]. I didn't tell my, you know, I was the one who was offended. From that point on, she and I became great--she was my--I mean, I was her, one of her principal people in the class. And, actually, I was--and no one can understand how that happened, how it happened, that my challenge to her made her feel like I was somebody she's supposed to deal with. And as a result, I mean, I got all of the, you know, had--needed a surgeon to do something, to cut up a rat or something, call me up. And I was the principal this, and I would go in, and I would stand (unclear). I mean, she's suddenly be-, I became one of her prized, you know, pupils in the class. Speaker 2: That's interesting because the other guy, Harry, is almost (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Almost failed the course. Speaker 2: He's almost a clinical case for 'Black Rage' [William H. Grier and Price M. Cobbs]-- Speaker 1: Clinical-- Speaker 2: --by [HistoryMaker Dr. Price] Cobbs and [William H.] Grier. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: He's somebody that internalizes the rage-- Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: --and can't articulate it. Speaker 1: He could not articulate exactly what the--what he was feeling. I'm telling you, I would, I--my--and also the interesting thing here is that my first reaction was, she did not say that. I heard it, but I didn't believe I heard that until I saw him about to--I mean, he was heaving here. I mean, this--and growling. And I looked at the white students' response to me and I realized it's there. And when I challenged her on it, he could not, he felt he could not tell her directly. Speaker 2: That is interesting 'cause he believed that she said it. He expected it. Speaker 1: He felt it-- Speaker 2: Oh, really? He didn't even-- Speaker 1: --deeply, profoundly. I felt it intellectually. I said, "Hey, you hit me in my head here. I don't like that--don't you do that again." And I didn't, I didn't beg her not to do it. I didn't--I said in no uncertain terms--you will not do that in my presence again. And she backed up off of that. Not only did she back up off of that, I became her person. He, of course--that's typical situation. I mean, that's (unclear). I guess it is--coming from where I was coming from, from out of New York [New York], you know, I wasn't, I wasn't expecting--I mean, I would definitely challenge that kind of behavior coming out of New York. You know, I wasn't out of--this, I think, this Harry came out of a small rural community in Pennsylvania. He was a football player out of a small rural community in Pennsylvania. And they always, they would grow up in those rural communities--black, young, black people in rural Pennsylvania grow up with a great amount of regard for the authority of whites. I don't care--well, rural, no matter where it is, whether it's Pennsylvania, rural New York for that matter, rural communities where the blacks are in a very, very, you know, a great minority, a great, strong minority--I mean, really minority without much social support systems around them, just simply, they happen to be in isolation. And that's what I've discovered at least. It's the same thing as, as being in the Deep South, you know. Story_ID: 237419 Speaker 1: So that particular incident, it was again typical of the kind of things that bothered me so much when I was at Indiana [University, Bloomington, Indiana]. I mean, I was bothered by, by trying to get hitchhiked, getting hitched--try, a couple of times I tried to get hitchhike from--to Indianapolis [Indiana], so I could listen to some music or something. And we all had these kind of funny questions. One time, a guy asked me about my sex life. A guy, one of them farmers, one of those--one of those Hoosiers picked me up and asked me about my--"You getting any," and "you having a," you know, he sort of asked. It was clearly--was a kind of a strange--I mean, I wasn't sure if I was supposed to get out of the car, or what I'm supposed to do, you know. Well, here's a guy just--whatcha doing? What kind of gals you got up there? You know, he's sort of figured, what am I doing? He's a black, young black man--I guess, I mean, I mean, I got a sense that he was more concerned about whether I was doing something with the white girls up there than anything else is what I was kind of gleaning from the way he was asking the questions. I had to stop hitch-, I couldn't hitchhike any more. That was the end of that--no more hitchhiking. If I didn't get a ride (laughter), if I didn't get a ride to Bloomington [Indiana] with somebody, I wasn't going (laughter), you know. I also had to have, I had to have my social, my social interaction with blacks was across the track in Bloomington in the farm, the veteran, the legion hall across the track. So, the blacks, as blacks, we had--if we're not doing something on campus, we had to go across the track to come together. These are the kind of things I had--this is the South. This is living in the South. This is in Bloomington, Indiana at the university, a major university. I had to go across the track. Story_ID: 237420 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We were gonna, like, bounce back to high school for a minute. We have the Commerce (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In high school, we had--I went to Commerce High School [High School of Commerce, New York, New York] which it was, it was a good academic institution. It was a very good academic high school. The only reason why I went there, though, it was--I had taken the examination to--in New York [New York], we have this, these specialized schools that you can go into to get examinations, to get into them, like music and art--school of, [The] High School of Performing Arts [New York, New York], Music and Art High School [The High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], The [Bronx] High School of Science [New York, New York]. We have these three or four institutions, high schools that you take an examination and if you pass, you get in. I passed the--to go into Music and Art, The High School of Music and Art. And I was going to go there with Billy Dee Williams who was, and he was at that point, he was in painting. He was in painting and I was also in--I was in music. Actually, I was in music. He was in painting. We both passed the examination to go. And we lived around the corner from each other. He lived just down the street from me and we, so we grew up together as kids. We both passed to go into, and but I had two or three other friends who were basketball players (laughter), who were going to go to Commerce (laughter). So, so I mean, it shows you--I mean the, you know, the choices, and some of these life choices you make have nothing to do with anything other than the fact you want to be with certain, be associated with a certain kind of ideals. And these particular guys, who were basketball players, all wanted to go to Commerce and so, the public school. And so, I said, I will go down there, too, 'cause I wanted to be with them. As it turned out, I didn't make the basketball team, so I just did studies. I was in the honors program and so, I just studied. The--but Billy, of course, went through Music and Art, you know, and, and as well as a lot of great people, and like Coleridge-Taylor Perkinson, who recently passed about six months ago in Chicago [Illinois]--Coleridge-Taylor Perkinson, one of the great people who came out of Music and Art. But, yeah, I mean, that's, that was the high school. And anyone--most would associate Commerce High School with its basketball teams as it were. And that was-- Speaker 1: Okay, well that explains that, too. Speaker 2: Yeah, that--and we had--I was fixed on that. My brother [Kenneth Harrison], on the other hand, he went to St. Ann's Academy [Archbishop Molloy High School, Queens, New York, New York] before it became Bishop Molloy. And his coach at St. Ann's Academy was Lou Carnesecca who became the famous coach at St. John's [University, New York, New York]. That was his high school coach at St. Ann's. And it was through Lou Carnesecca that my brother began to develop into this more than just simply a schoolyard ball player, yeah. Story_ID: 237421 Speaker 1: Were there any significant mentors in high school [High School of Commerce, New York, New York] for you? Speaker 2: No, not, not really. In high school because of the way we--again, in high school was like an honors program. You're preparing all the time for the, for the, you're preparing all the time for the, the Regents Examinations. And so, and you come and go to your classes, you go home. So, you know, and the only significant part of being in the high school thing was, was that I met--the basketball players had a very wonderful kind of elan in the school. Everyone, all the women, all the girls, they liked these ball players. And they always dressed very well, and they had very nice bags. And so, they had a special thing with the girls in school. But also, the people who had a great thing with the girls in school were the musicians. There were musicians in--I was in the band, I played in the band. I played baritone sax, and clarinet in the band, and in the high school orchestra, not the marching band, but the high school orchestra. And I played in a very kind of mediocre way. I could play and read the music. I played, and that was it, but there were in the band, there were at least three or four black kids who had weekend gigs, who played on the weekends. And these kids would come to school sharp--they were dressed up. And they all had leather bags on their instruments. You know, they'd take out their leather bags and then put, open up another bag, and these wonderfully polished instruments, and they would play them, you know. And I used to always admire these guys--I mean, those guys had something about them. They were like very stately and, and they were very, very cool. I mean, very, very--it was the way--the attitudes and I loved the attitude. Now, you say, did I have a mentor? No, not precisely, but I did fine. I kind of need to contact with that particular sense of how they, how they dealt with the world. They seemed to be quite at ease with everything. They were making money on the weekends. They had their instruments, very nicely done, and they had a way of chilling on people. The people had to come to them and these--and they were not necessarily doing that as a club. Then, when I guess three or four guys are all hanging out together, they had their own independent kind of a thing. So in other words--what was that--things that were catching my eyes. Oh, wow, I like what this is about, and, oh, I wish I could do that--I can't do that, you know. I didn't have the skills for it, you know (laughter). So that was that. But I recognized something in the behavior. For example, that coldness, I learned much later on, is about being hot. It's in the Africans, so kind of a contradictory thing inside the African sensibilities that it is cool to the point of it being an empowering of oneself, and if it's in the self, produces heat so that, you know, you see this attitude. We see it in Miles Davis, for example--in Miles Davis is that coolness is what generates extraordinary kind of heat. And that's what empowers--empowering in itself, so that anything that's less than that is too loose. It falls apart. I mean, you see people, you know, who are trying to be who have the behavior. Some of the behavior, we see about in the youth, which is all over the place, and kind of random is not contained. They don't get contained enough to become empowered, to have an empowering image of themselves, you know, and that is what we call cool, which is really about being hot. It's not about that I'm just icy, you know, not being fragile, not, I'm sorry, not being frigid--just simply to get the sense of containment. And that's what I saw in these young people. I saw it in all the great musicians had it, all the great musicians had that, you know. And through, and all the great athletes have it, too, by the way. The great athletes who come to the--to run, let's say, a hundred-yard dash, must have that, that containment, that coolness to generate the power, you know, to exact the power, the heat. You know, that's something quite different than just simply pounding on your chests and say, I'm a powerful person, you see. The--so, to me, that there, there are lessons to learn. I didn't have like a mentor, like an adult mentor at that point, but I was discovering the world at that point. Coming to school, only on maybe two or three days a week, just for those specific classes and preparation for those classes, could do my orchestra studies. And there are things of this sort. I still had opportunities then at age 15, 16 years old to be involved with the cultural life of New York City [New York, New York], and so that I was coming in touch with people at 14 or 15 years old like Charlie Parker. And, and I was being taken--I have a cousin who's a promoter, a jazz promoter on the father's side. He's about, he was about four years older--that's four, four or five years older. And, Jimmy Harrison, Jimmy Harrison would take me to places like Box City [ph.] and Birdland [New York, New York] to hear these people and see Bud Powell. And he had and I--he introduced me to this music which fascinated me. I mean, it was totally, total fascination. And this older cousin who became, who still is a promoter to this day, he's in his seventies. And he's still promoting jazz music in New York [New York]. But he was the guy who would just take me out with him, you know. And I spent a lot of time and I'd just go to ballet. I'd check out the ballet, and so I was getting involved with the arts and stuff. I was still not sure what I was going to do with it. I had no idea what precisely I'd, you know, my involvement would be. Story_ID: 237422 Speaker 1: And you already talked about life in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] and some of the people you met there (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The life in the Village was, was--a lot of that was hit and miss, a lot of poets, dealing with the poets, and play--people who were doing plays. I never did any acting, but I certainly was around a lot of performance stuff, you know. Speaker 1: So, you really didn't do any acting in the theatre in high school [High School of Commerce, New York, New York] or anything? Speaker 2: Never, no, never did any acting, never did any acting. But I was around the theatre and when, in that period when I was in the Village dealing with as, as a writer, more than anything else. I would write something, and people would do these scenes. And I would, you know, and I'd come to hear the people's work, and I'd get involved with their stuff. And I was, still wasn't sure what I was going to be, whether I was going to do that. I just was interested in it, and I just, and I remember at eighteen years old, I remember when I was eighteen years old, you know, coming into contact with certain kinds of plays, like, like [Jean-Paul] Sartre's 'No Exit.' And, again, because it had some mysteriousness about it--to me, that was interesting. That was more interesting to me than looking at a play like Tennessee Williams--well, not Tennessee Williams so much--but let's say, a play, some of the plays that were being done around Broadway were just some straight fuss. As far as I was concerned they were like soap operas, and in those days, I thought that was what we were supposed to look at. I didn't know what a play was supposed to do for me. All I know is that I could have read that better in a book than have seen it on stage. It didn't do anything to me, but when I saw some, it didn't have any mystery for me. So, when I saw plays, and I saw some of these European plays that had a lot of mysteriousness in it, then I began to understand. I like classical plays more than I like contemporary plays where they had mystery in it. So, I can look at 'Macbeth' and it was also, it's kind of strange, shadowy kind of things that were happening. I began to become more interested in that kind of work. And it was in 1959, like everyone else, in 1959 with [Lorraine] Hansberry's play, '[A] Raisin in the Sun'--why it opened up the possibilities. I began to see the possibility, possibility that, you know what, I think I could do this. Story_ID: 237423 Speaker 1: In '59 [1959], then you-- Speaker 2: I'd been out of school about two years by then. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you came out of Indiana U [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] in-- Speaker 2: In '57 [1957]. Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], okay. Speaker 2: I came out of school and by that time, I'm back in graduate school in '58 [1958]. In '58 [1958] I go to graduate school, and that was the first, by the way, I can tell anyone this--the first time I really thought I learned anything as far as undergraduate, so far as the university was concerned, is when I went to graduate school here in New York [New York] at The New School for Social Research [The New School, New York, New York]. And I studied psychology, again, phenomenology, and phenomenology, my areas were phenomenology and gestalt psychology. And then I went there because a friend of mine was in school and I went to a lecture. And I became so completely moved by the lecture in phenomenology. It seemed, and it, in the, and it just was, it just made so much sense to me. And I was no longer involved with just a question of experimental behavior, running rats and stuff like--this was a whole kind of philosophical system. And I say, "Wow, look at that. That sounds interesting." Years later, I find out that it really was no different than African cosmology. It took me years to find--figure that out, not so many years, but at least half a dozen years. Less than a half a dozen years later, I find--hey, what is this all about, is African cosmology--no wonder I'm so attracted to it. Speaker 1: In what sense? Maybe you get, you could-- Speaker 2: The holistic sense of it. You don't see the parts, you know, without the whole--the parts, you know, not some of the whole. There's, you know, the parts are not more interesting than the whole. It's like, and so that in African sense, you don't--this African worldview, you don't, you see everything in clusters, in holistic kind of way, and not just sort of saying, "A" is reacting to this, "B," and "B" is bouncing off of that. In other words, it's not this kind of direct linear association between one thing and the other thing. It's a total thing. And I began to realize that only much later when I discovered how--where did I discover that--when I was living in Europe (laughter). I was living in Europe, but I started reading African religion and philosophy. And I said, wait a minute, this is what I've been studying (laughter). This is all the stuff I've been studying (laughter), in European phenomenology, and gestalt back in graduate school. But in any case, just to go back, I was in graduate school. And one of the things that helped me move toward writing, was that I had to do a lot of writing for my papers. I had to do a lot of papers, and I had to do a lot of papers dealing with how to understand, conceptually, figure, and ground. What is the figure? What is the ground relationship, you know, what are you looking at? What is that you're looking at? Is the figure that's making the ground, or is the ground that's making the figure? I mean, these are gestalt issues. What is the gestalt of the total image? I was doing a lot of writing on these kind of things. And I was writing these papers. And I was going, maybe every, and I was still trying to write plays (laughter). And I was doing these papers, but these papers were totally consuming, so I had to stop writing plays until the summers. After three summers, '58 [1958] and '59 [1959], and '60 [1960] and '61 [1961], it was after three summers. I finally was finishing one play, but the thing I realize is that I had literally come to the point where I understood something about writing through the writings I had been doing in graduate school. I began to understand what the voice was doing--what the, how to look at things, how to see the world, you know. I wasn't trying to write a play anymore, this character has a dialogue against, you know, I started beginning to find a voice, like Charlie Parker (laughter), if I could. I mean I was trying to go over there, you know. I was trying to find in the writing a voice like Thelonious Monk. I was trying to find Bud Powell in the writing, the style, you know, the angularity, the, what the figure is doing, what is setting up the, you know? And so, I decided to go and live in Europe for a while and just work on that. And then, it was the best choice I could have possibly made. Story_ID: 237424 Speaker 1: Why Europe? I mean-- Speaker 2: Because it was cheaper to live there on limited money, limited--I mean, the only reason why it--I would have gone to China if it, and if I thought I could make it happen, and people would speak English there or something. But I had to go someplace where they, where I could--I went to Spain to Ibiza [Spain], primarily because I knew people there. Then I went to Amsterdam [the Netherlands] because I knew people there--ended up staying in Amsterdam because everyone spoke English, and then I'd gotten--I got lucky and my first book was done there, you know, and, you know, so things started happening for me in Amsterdam, and so I stayed there. But the idea of being abroad was, the first year was simply see if I could literally finish a work. Speaker 1: Now, what year is this in? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I decided to leave graduate school just before I was about to finish my degree, my doctorate. I'd already picked up, in that three years, the M.A., but the--I was just about to finish my doctorate degree. And I had this one play of three summers, working on the one play for three summers (laughter). And I said to my advisors at the, at the school, at [The] New School [for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York]--I said, listen, I need to go away for one year just to see if I can do this thing. Do I really want to be a professor of psychology, or do I really want to write? And they said, "Fine, when you come back, you finish up your, dissertation and we'll give you a doctorate. You can walk out of here." And I said, "Great, but before I do a doctorate, before I do a doctorate dissertation, I want to see if I could really write this, really complete this play." So, I went to Europe, and I came back a year later and most of the time, I was in Amsterdam, or half the time in Spain, and half the time in Amsterdam. And I came back a year later, and I told my advisors, I said, "I'm not going to finish the dissertation. I'm going back to Europe next month and I'm going to stay there. I'm going to--I'm, I did finish my work. This is the work I'm going to do, you know, I made, that was that--a life decision. This is the work I'm going to do." And so, I'm back to living in Europe, and then while in Europe, I discover African philosophy (laughter). That's wild. Speaker 1: Now, how did you--where did you first encounter African philosophy or had you-- Speaker 2: Well, it is--I met a lot of-- Speaker 1: And were you even looking for it? Were you looking for it? Speaker 2: No, I wasn't looking for it. I met these guys from Surinam [Republic of Suriname], the Dutch colonies, blacks from Surinam for the Dutch colonies, painters and writers. And they were reading, they were reading Sertima--what's his name, [Ivan] van Sertima. And they were reading these various works, you know, about the, about African retentions and [Melville J.] Herskovits, and things of this sort, African retentions in Surinam, and places like this. And I began reading it, and that led me to other, other citations that led to philosophy, African cosmology. And then, at that particular moment, I began to realize--hey, this is all the stuff I'd been studying, you know. So, my plays then took on the--were configured in such ways not to look African, but to try to use the philosophical underpinnings of what is tension, what is, what is power? Power relationships between characters--not to write a play that simply says, here's a conflict between this person and that person, and how do we resolve it, that is definitely inside the Western tradition. I had to find a ritual way, a ritualistic way in which to unravel certain issues and certain problems, and that led me to that. Then I wrote a play. Story_ID: 237425 Speaker 1: Two things happened to get me back to the United States. I wrote a play--well, first of all, I had a book out, a new book out, called 'The Experiment'--it was called 'Dialogue from the Opposition' in Dutch, 'Dialoog van het verzet,' and it was based on one of my plays called 'The Experimental Leader' with a major prologue and a major epilogue on the political issues in America and the Civil Rights Movement. And I went to a bookstore, I went to a bookstore one day to get my newspaper. And this was a great big--what do you call it--a display of this new book on the cover, black folks marching during the March on Washington in 1963 on the cover. And it had 'Dialogue from the Opposition,' you know, [HistoryMaker] Paul Carter Harrison. I looked at this book in the window. I said, "What is this book doing in this window? I said, who's reading this book? Why am I writing a book about 'Dialogue from the Opposition' that's showing up in a bookstore in Amsterdam [the Netherlands]? Who else is reading this book, you know?" Then I began to think--I think it might be time for me to go home. I'd already been in Europe now about seven years. I think it's time for me to go home. Then I, then the thing that really turned it for me was when I wrote this play that had twenty--they needed twenty black actors. I said, "Well, where I going to find twenty black actors in Amsterdam? Where am I going to find twenty black actors in Amsterdam?" Between those two moments, and the third thing that became the kind of the great intercession in this decision was the very moment that I was going through this query about the play, my play, and why is my book in the window, I got a call from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] asking me to come and teach. Would I come and teach there? I didn't even know they knew anything about me, but yeah, somehow they did, and they asked me to come and teach. I said good. They wanted to fly in and have a discussion about it. I flew in, got a flight to New York [New York]. I arrived in New York. The next day, I'm going to go down to the meeting. The day I arrived in New York, [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated. I go down to Washington, D.C. the next day. There, all these--the smoke, you know, and the--it was still, still filtering through the air from the night before. I have my meeting up at Howard, and there was no way in the world I was going to leave out, out of there without a commitment to these people, to the university of coming back and teach. After that impact of the--I mean all that seemed to happen for a reason. All those things happened together--my, my having seen the book, the bookstore event, seeing that thing in the bookstore, having, having a play with that--I mean for twenty black actors, going to the--getting a call from Howard to come teach, get--arrive in New York. King is assassinated. Next day, I'm looking at all of the troops in the street, have my meeting, I said, "Hey, I'm coming. You don't have to--we don't have to do anything else." Story_ID: 235422 Speaker 1: Now what do we say about all this? How did it come back, you know, those forces that, those forces and the rhythm of life being what they are? As an African person, I believe that. As an African personality, I believe that there are certain rhythms that put you in a certain place and a certain location--that is, at a certain time, and that you have nothing to do with. You're just moving in those places, and that's exactly what happened, you know. All the decisions I made were, seemingly, my own voluntary choices, but I have a feeling those were choices that were almost made for me. When I left the United States, had to go abroad, and when I get abroad, what I do, I discover Africa. You know (laughter), I go into a space, which is not clustered with all of the things that should be reminders of Africa, black people all around me, but in a space where there are very black folks. And out of that, have a kind of opportunity to become more reflective about my past, about my present. What does it mean being an alien person and as it were? I mean, I--basically, I did a film in Holland [the Netherlands] called 'Stranger on the Square.' I did a documentary film called 'Stranger on the Square' with me and some other black artists who were living in Holland at the time. And I mean, where you feel a sense of estrangement from this community and that, you know, if you're that--I mean, I was doing that kind of a film in 1962. All right, so the point I'm getting at, you, you rediscover something about yourself as a black person in this alien space. Speaker 2: Now you did the film, 'Stranger on the Square' before-- Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Stranger on the Square' is the first film I did, was this documentary film for television. Speaker 2: 'Stranger,' is it 'Stranger'-- Speaker 1: 'Stranger'-- Speaker 2: --'on the Square.' Speaker 1: --'Stranger on the Square.' Speaker 2: All right. Now this is--was this done before you went to Europe or-- Speaker 1: Excuse me. I did that in Europe. Speaker 2: In Europe, okay. Speaker 1: In Amsterdam [the Netherlands]. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: You know, I was, I did this film, and I wrote this film. Somebody else produced and directed it, but I wrote this--I mean, conceptually, it was about being in a foreign place as a stranger, as an alien basically. And how does one respond to it? And, okay, but the point is, I was well aware for the first time that I mean, in America, I mean, I had enough immediate support system to be able to not necessarily feel estranged from America. I felt estranged from Indiana, estranged from the rest of the country, but certainly not New York [New York]. So I go into Europe, I go into Amsterdam, and suddenly, I become the outsider, I'm the outsider living there. And if you get a chance to look at yourself much more clearly, you begin to understand your relationships to yourself. You understand your values. You understand, for example, you enter a certain, you have certain encounters, and you go right up to the point, the point where you should not go any further. You know that only because you've had a certain past and a certain kind of value system that only allow you to, to tread upon certain kind of territory. You enter certain kind of encounters--hey, I know this, I can only go this far on this. If I'd not, had not had, if I had not had the kind of experience as a young black person with a certain African, inspired African American initially, but African-inspired value system, I might have fallen off the deep end, being a stranger, being, and having license to expose myself in any particular way I wanted to, having the license to just go over the top. I could have become totally whatever anybody wanted me to become, but I couldn't let anybody make me anything they wanted me to become. I had to be my person, the kind of person I am, which made me quite different from the Europeans in many ways. I might have appropriated some of their manner, and some of their behavior, some of their interests, some things, you know, a certain kind of style maybe, a social style. But the very bottom line, the value system was in place already. That's what I began to recognize and realize. Speaker 2: Now, Amsterdam is supposed to be the most wide open (unclear) countries (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wide open--I could have become, I could have become--hey, I could have been taken out if I went as a young man, 25, 26 years old, transforming time. That's a period, very, very--a period where I could have become anything. Story_ID: 235423 Speaker 1: Those forces lined themselves up in such a way that I get back into the United States, and I--then [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] is killed. I'm very, very moved by it and moved by the next day--the presence of the troops in the streets of Washington, D.C., the soldiers, and the fires that are still settling. And I, this is 1967, right, or '68 [1968] rather? Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], yeah. Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968]. And then I realize this is happening. I meet--I go to, it's very strange. I go up to the, I get in a cab, I go up to the gate of Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. It's closed, locked down because of the riots. And I--the door, the man is meeting me outside, going to meet me outside, come to the gate, open up the gate. The man who comes and to meet me is a white man. He opens up the gate. He says, "You're [HistoryMaker] Paul Carter Harrison?" Yes. He lets me in and closes the gate. He--I follow him and he go inside, and we sit down in his office. It turns out he is not a white man, but he is a black man who is the chairman of the department, "Beanie" Butcher [James W. Butcher, Jr.] (laughter). Now, my first reaction is, I'm on this plantation, the gate opens up (laughter). I'm directed by a white guy who leads me into the office, and the irony is he's not a black guy--a white guy after all--but he's really a black guy who's the head of the--chair, he's the chairman of the theatre. And this guy induces me to come to Howard. And I said, "Absolutely, I'll come here," you know. And that was the beginning of my new transformation. I came to Howard. I encountered this incredible, vital, group of young people who were in the midst of the Black Arts Movement, a new consciousness. My students included, you know, Phylicia Rashad; her sister, Debbie [Allen]; Clinton Turner Davis, the director, who's now a major director. It included [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage who's a major writer. These are my students--they inspired me. I--they tell me I gave them some inspiration, but they were the ones who compelled me to stay and to look deeper. They, for example, Petronia Paley, an actress in New York [New York], she and her, her friend who's Linda Goss, who is now, who's the wife of Clay Goss, the playwright, who was one of my students--they're both my students. Speaker 2: Yeah, she's a storyteller, yeah, storyteller, yeah. Speaker 1: She's a storyteller. So Linda Goss and Petronia Paley used to come to my office once a week with new albums from John Coltrane (laughter). And they would just simply say, have you heard this, have you heard this, have you heard this? It was a kind of this thing they would to pull my head around a certain kind of way, you know (laughter). And that meant, it was, it was done like, "Oh, hello, how are you today, Mr. Harrison? Have you heard this?" Then I began to invite the local poets into the classroom with them, with them, and then began to and, at a certain moment, then I began to--of course, I was reading, introducing into my lectures, some of the African philosophy. So I said, the way to do this, to get this down properly, I need to just write a book. And that's when I began to draft and begin to the book, 'The Drama of Nomno,' which has become 'The Drama of Nommo,' [Paul Carter Harrison] N-O-M-N-O, M-M-O, which began to set the whole aesthetic approach to the new approaches to the aesthetics of African American theatre. Story_ID: 235424 Speaker 1: To that point now, what role did continental Africans play--I mean, relationships with continental Africans play in the development of your ideas to this point? Speaker 2: No, no, no specific people--not, it wasn't people because I mean, I think of my--see, the thing is this. My book 'The Drama of Nommo' [Paul Carter Harrison] was about recognizing the retention of Africa, the African values as well as African iconography, African worldview, inside of what we do here. So it was not important to go and do, to sit down with Wole Soyinka. I need to be able to recognize Wole Soyinka's work and recognize the work of others to show how they, what they're doing, and what we are doing here. In other words, in other words, I didn't have to go to the continent at that point. For verification of what was happening in African America, all I had to do is recognize it and, and show the relationship to it and African culture. Basically, what, that was what the book is doing. The book is showing certain responses to the world and even if, even though we are in, what we call the African--we're in the American world, we'll find that Africans throughout the diaspora behaved the same way. It is just different based upon what part of it--where they're located. So if you're in the, if you're in, as what do you call it--if you're an African living in South America, and you speak Spanish and a certain--whatever the landscape allows you to deal with, you still have the African root, is still feeding through how you negotiate that. If you're in Haiti or a French situation, you, you speak French, and you're then negotiated that way through French language-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --as well as territorially, what it would offer. And I would imagine if we had a lot of African people living in Alaska, you would find similarly in their relationship to the Eskimo, a way of never being completely what has been the tradition of the Eskimos. You'd find some way that the African presence would alter that whole relationship, that whole understanding. It--that--it means it's still, these people are--they would then still be considered Alaskans or Haitians, or South Americans, et cetera. You know, the language being one of the theatres to the sensibility, but they are fundamentally African people. So, I don't have to ask or authenticate or authenticity or, you know, verification of my Africanness from Africa. I just have to understand how it is connected to, to the experience I have here, as well as other people in the African diaspora, how does that all relate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: How do we relate to--what are the things that we share in common and how we would negotiate the world, you see. Speaker 1: Okay. I think--well, I asked that because I just wanted to know if there were any continental Africans, not necessarily involved in the theatre-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --as the, as we know it here, you know. Speaker 2: No, no, but there are, there are many, there are African people who--I mean, if you read, if you read the text of [John] Mbiti, if you--I've never met Mbiti, but if I'm sure--I mean, it certainly impacted on me, a text from John Mbiti. Or you read a text from the--what's the--[J.B.] Danquah who talks about the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, from Ghana and-- Speaker 2: --Ghana after-- Speaker 1: --Mbiti is from African religions and philosophy, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. So, if you read those things, if you're reading those things, and I haven't met them personally, but I'm feeling, I can see where there's--those things relate to our experience here in the United States, you know. Story_ID: 235425 Speaker 1: It's interesting that you mention the men from [Republic of] Suriname, because that being--they're African Americans, too, in a sense-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: --but have been (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) in the African-- Speaker 1: --identified as the most African of African Americans having-- Speaker 2: Yeah, the Maroons that would leave, who left the--well, you got two groups of them. You got the Maroons [Koromantis], who left and went right into the center of the center of the country, and they continued practicing what would be, I think, if I'm not mistaken, practices that were from, not Sierra Leone, but I think from Ghana actually. Speaker 1: Yeah, from Akan really-- Speaker 2: Yeah, from the Akan. There, there were-- Speaker 1: --yeah, they were Akan. Speaker 2: --yeah, their work is very much more of the Akan. And then, you have those who left the bush and went to the, and became part of the colonized communities of Indians and Chinese, and then, of the Surinamers of the Dutch. And so, they all speak Dutch, you know. And then, those in the interior had to discover Dutch language because they didn't speak Dutch language for a long time. But the others, they all speak Dutch. And those are the ones, of course, who had the first--they were the first group of Surinamers to come to Holland [the Netherlands] when I was there, when I was there with the black expatriates, you know. John Williams, John A. Williams was there, you know. And so, we--I was part of that group of people, and there was a group of Surinamer students and university--what do you call it--their professors, a couple of people I met were black Surinamers. But it was only after 1975 when the Surinamers supposed to become independent, an independent nation. The Surinamers leave two years prior to the independence. They left, even left the bush, five thousand a week for two years. So now, when you go to Holland, you think, where did all these black people come from? They're, I mean, this is like, as if they're black folks all over. They had to build projects for them. Where'd they build them--out near the airport 'cause you can't change the interior in the inner city of Amsterdam [the Netherlands]. You got to build something for these people to come and live. They put most of those black folks about--outside of Amsterdam. And, you know, and they had to come into town to work or, you know. Speaker 1: Kind of like a Soweto [South Africa] situation. Speaker 2: It's like a Soweto thing, you know, but the high-rise, high-rise, you know, high-rise apartment buildings, you know. But they're not bad projects, like the projects we know here in the United States, but, basically, that's what it is. So, I mean, the great amount, the great number of black folks are living there now. They're not the ones who had immediate impact on me, but the student intellectual community had a great impact, you know, we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it wasn't that real African group of students that-- Speaker 2: No, no, there was just this Suriname. Speaker 1: But you said that these students had been--the ones that you met had been reading [Ivan] Van Sertima from-- Speaker 2: They had come, they had already come. Speaker 1: And he was from Guyana, I think, or something. Speaker 2: They had been there for, before I got there. They came in, oh, they came in from Suriname. They came, they had already been there but they, but see, well, they lived, you see, yeah, the people who were the Maroons--well, they moved into the bush. They only practiced Ghanaian kind of practices. But in their surrounding--in the major--in the cities around it, around the, Paramaribo [Suriname] I think it's-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The city around, and the city life outside to the bush, you have, some of these blacks have, of course, have moved into the cities, and they became acculturated in the side of the colonialized community. The colonialized community included Native Americans of that place, of South America, the, also the Chinese and Indonesians were living there who were brought to do work for the Dutch and then, these blacks. They became one big melting pot of--for many, many years, I mean, for many, many years. And they became the first group of blacks to come to live in Holland, but they came usually as to, you know, study or to paint or to, you know, do things like that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And the, the main group of the black folks didn't come until after 1975. Story_ID: 235426 Speaker 1: I was just trying to figure out, or trying to trace, I guess, the source of African influence on what you're doing because I know at that period of time in the Black Arts Movement, we were like desperately trying to--a lot of people were desperately trying to find, what out--what being African was all about and trying to take away the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and that's what this book was trying to do, this book was trying to do, was not trying to say you'd have to wear a dashiki to be African. That's not it. It's about rediscovering or relocalizing the African culture inside of your own experience here. In other words, examining it from this side--what is it about what you do is African? I mean, the zoot suit, as far as I'm concerned, is a very Africanized way of using ideogram. How do you, you know, this kind of a triangular look of the zoot suit, the ideogram of that and, and the hat that goes out, that whole idea of what, costumically, what that is. How do you then create, how do you empower yourself, your sense of self through that? I mean, that's very--it's, it's not because they were styled in Africa. The zoot suit is not a phenomenon of Africa, but it's the idea of how do you take shapes and forms, how do you do shapes and forms, how these things seem to resonate an African sensibility, you might say. Colors, well, we could see the colors all over the place. We wear color all over the world the same way, whether we're in [Republic of] Suriname, whether in Cuba, whether in, we could be in Mississippi, Canada. It doesn't matter. We wear color. Our color orchestration, the choreography of the color, you might say, how the color, how those colors play. Well, that's--we have that. I mean, so these, these are the kind of things I was trying to deal with in 'The Drama of Nommo' [Paul Carter Harrison] and, of course, began to use it in how I tried to work onstage with people, you know, tried to, you know, tried to say, this is the African play because it has an African language or, you know, it has an African backstory. It has nothing to do with that. It has to do with the ritualized way in which you present the ideas on stage--the orchestration of bodies, the orchestration of the language. The closest thing to non-specific theatre, but that we see this in, is in hip hop. And the hip hop thing is clearly an Africanized way of producing communicating ideas, it's not always the healthiest in terms of this jaundiced society that we live in here, and we don't get the most wonderfully productive elements out of the hip hop that we should get out of it. It's all very somewhat self-serving, and it, it doesn't really do what it should do. But the form in itself as a communicative device is very, very African in many ways. It's not one of the, it's not my favorite entertainment, but certainly is a form. It's very, very impactful and very, very much an extension of Africa. And all those dances and all those movements and all that way to produce the language, the whole way the language is produced, and plays, like listening to Charlie Parker, same thing, Charlie Parker's voice or [Thelonious] Monk's angularity. You'll see it all tie in there together. And this is the kind of thing that I keep trying to get people to get back to, go try and look at that. Play those, play your play as a tune, like a Charlie Parker tune. Make your play sound like a Charlie Parker tune. August Wilson does it through the blues primarily. He uses the blues riff to be able to get the characters to move, you know. Now, it can get bogged down sometimes. But at the same point, the point is in fact, there is inside his work, a certain kind of the mysteriousness about it, which is also very much a part of ritual, very ritualized kind of way in which he produced the certain images. And the way the language is used there is not the descriptive language. It's not straight-up dialogue, you know, there. In fact, I told the actors when they were looking at doing one play, 'King Hedley [II],' [August Wilson] the long monologues. That's the problem you actors are having with it. You think you're doing a monologue. This is not a monologue. These are testimonies. You got to testify, like you go in your church and you testify. You don't, you should not ever feel the punctuation. You should go in and let the Spirit carry you. The Spirit carries the text. If the Spirit carries the text, then you're testifying, then you are doing the African thing. If you, otherwise, you're doing [William] Shakespeare, you think you're doing Shakespeare. You think that long text is for you to be able to take on a certain posture and deliver, and it's boring. It's tedious. It's strained, that text has it. It's a blues text. It has to riff. It has to testify, you see. That's what I'm talking about. You got to know that. Most people wouldn't know that--they wouldn't know that looking at an August Wilson play, a monologue. Story_ID: 235427 Speaker 1: When you speak of ritual, what do you mean specifically about? Speaker 2: We're talking about ritual as opposed to--we're, talking about, we're talking about an event that is orchestrated to transform, to transform a certain moment in time and place. In other words, the ritual is an orchestration of sound and light, you know, text, the kind of an orchestration of these things in such a way that the story, the narrative is no longer a straight beginning, middle, and end narrative, but an orchestration of all of these other elements to create a revelation and for the audience. In other words, it is no revelation if you go hang in, and you set up a structure, and you say this--"B" happens because of "A." "C" happens because "A" and "B" is happening. Well, that is the storytelling method, methodology of the European storytelling, you know, this cause and its effect. For the African, the thing that is most revelatory is when the total narrative breaks down and becomes resynthesized through some process. Something breaks down, it becomes resynthesized through a process that produces a transformation of the event, and then there's a revelation--ahh. Now, how do I know this? When black people go to church, I don't care if it's a church in America, church in South America, or a church in wherever, in Ghana. When they go to the church, the first thing there, the preacher will do is say, this is the text. Everybody says yes. You know the text. Yes, we know the text. You heard the text before? Yes, we heard the text. You know what it is? Okay. Now, how am I going to make this text relevant to you today? The same text is familiar text. How am I going to take the familiar and make it relevant for you today--the familiar? I'm not trying to trick you, but how am I going to do this? That's the task of the preacher. And everybody is sitting and waiting for him to do it. He finds a mechanism, a device, not by telling you over and over and over again the same text. He has a way of orchestrating that text, and bringing in the elements of light and sound and music, and the whole thing begins to happen. And it begins to then, break it down, and rebuilds it, and then there's this transformation of an idea that we're very familiar with. It becomes newly transformed for you to use it now, this day when you need it, 'cause the circumstances of your life have changed this day. This week, something happened. And your lives as a community that we addressed, so we take this text to deal with it. And when you know the text could be dealt with before, but for a different context. And I got to find the mechanism to make that. That's what I mean by ritual. You follow me? We don't see it enough of it. We know that, we know that a great musician takes a familiar tune. The tune might be 'Over the Rainbow.' We've heard the tune. We know how it goes. We know where it ends. Then he takes it, and he reveals it to us in ways that we did not know before. And we have a whole new acquaintance with what 'Over the Rainbow' signifies to us. That's what I want to do in the theatre. That's what I want to see theatre do. That's what I mean about ritual, you see. So, if he plays 'Over the Rainbow' over and over and over again, without bringing some new revelation to the piece, then, hey, it was a boring set, wasn't it? Speaker 1: So is that repetition that's in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --to reinforce, but another but using-- Speaker 2: It's not to play it because it's a pretty tune. It's to play it because that is the tune I need to play to reveal something that you need at this particular time. So I'll play this tune this way, the earliest, right. And then we just--I'm not playing it 'cause I know I can play it. I know how to play it. I can--I'm not going to play every note as perfectly as it's written on the page. I'm going to bend the note a certain way to re-inform what the signification of that note is as it relates to this next note. I'm going to angle--the sounds become angular suddenly to give you some new movement in it, new tate [ph.] to carry you in some other spaces with the song. We're going to do all of that. We're not just going to simply play the tune for you. In Africa, and I've been to West Africa, and I've since seen some ceremonies. There are certain rituals they do over and over again, but it's done differently every time. It looks like the same things, the familiar ritual, you know, but they, but certain other things happen--enter into how it is conducted on that particular day--weather conditions, whatever. Things change and though you have to, you have to then reveal what's important about that ritual through manipulating what's available to you, you see. Story_ID: 235428 Speaker 1: What does Nommo--I mean the word, Nommo? Speaker 2: Well, Nommo, the word Nommo means the word. And it means actually word force, so that what, when we say word force, we're talking about word as both spoken and gesticulated, or insinuated, so that all things have the power of word. All things have the possibility of being forces, so that it will speak to you. So the question is and the, what one would say is that man has capacity to manipulate word. That means all things--manipulative television, manipulative painting, manipulative light. You are the one, and when your orchestration of all of these things which have power, it is you, then, begin to give fullest expression of the art, and you give articulation to yourself--say I am making word. I am only making word. Word is power. What are you bringing in to bear with the appropriate orchestration of all these other things, these object things which have their own force? Whether you're looking through a camera, all you're doing is bringing to bear the word of what? The Word of God. You're not just talking about your word, you're talking about the Word of God. I mean, it's God, not in the sense of your preacher goes in and does his thing, but I'm talking about God as the supreme force. So when you say that, when you say that John Coltrane is spiritually powerful and potent, you're talking about his godliness. You say, you know, you're saying that what, God comes through there--I mean God has, has a way of, of showing--it becomes, it becomes revealed through how He is able to play this, play this tune. That revelation, then, opens up ideas for us to deal with. God speaks to us. You follow me? It is like, if you say, I make a stroke on a painting. It might only require one stroke. If I have a canvas, it's a white canvas. I might inquire only one stroke to get God's Word out there but, to me, it's the color of the whole thing and make a house and a tree and so forth, and do the whole thing. It might have squashed God's Word. It might just be a pretty picture. You know, for me to draw a slave, picking cotton, might not be anything more than a replication of a slave picking cotton. What have I done in the orchestration of that painting to give us the weight, the sensation of picking the cotton, so that it, that God's Word is revealed to me in ways that I understand more about picking cotton. But just for you to design picking cotton doesn't do it for me. It simply means you've got a guy, a slave figure, picking cotton like a photograph, and that's it. But it might require just the cotton ball. It might just require just the hand--who knows? Story_ID: 237426 Speaker 1: It took my going to Europe and coming back home to understand my connection with my past, both in the South, as well as in Africa itself. In other words, my immediate past would be the South. I met people from the South for the first time when I went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]. I met students from the South. I began to have exchanges about certain cultural forms with my students. I, you know, I must remember that I was only about ten years older than my students. And we were like, we were basically peers. We would hang out--we'd talk. I began to have a sense of recognizing certain things that I considered to be part of my urban experience, was really a continuum of things that had been played out in the South. I began to see it in my own family, et cetera, and things I always presumed were just simply wonderful kind of pieces of urban behavior, urbanized, urbane behavior, which finally was a continuum of things. That certain kind of gentility, for example, which I thought was very urbane, was really that same gentility was played out inside of the African slave quarters for that matter. I mean, there's--they weren't taught, would be, not for this certain kind of, certain things that were split with, and made it from the rural, so-called rural Negro experience that I, that I, you know, things that I cherished in the North basically came up out of that. So, I had to come back home to the United States to find that out. So, Howard was a good place for me to have that reentry into the United States. I had never been in a community, with the exception of Harlem [New York, New York], but many years anyhow, I say, since my childhood in Harlem. And I left seventeen years old, the same. My childhood in Harlem, for the first time, I'm back in an all-black--pretty much, a black community. The university, the town is largely black. I'm having these new encounters with my own people and the way my people are functioning-- Story_ID: 237427 Speaker 1: --The first play I did at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was the play that I couldn't find cash for in what do you call it-- Speaker 2: Amsterdam [the Netherlands]. Speaker 1: --in Amsterdam. So, the play is 'Tabernacle.' It's my first full length play. Every, every play I've done up till that time were what--the six, seven years I'd been writing plays were always one-act plays. And these one-act plays I used to get, were done at [The] Actors Studio [New York, New York], and places like that in New York [New York]. But, you know, I'd come home and do an Actors Studio moment and go back to, and then go back to Europe after like a month. You know, I'd do a thing and go back to Europe, okay. 'Tabernacle' was my first play--it was all males. It was very ritualized, had it centered around our music, had five--it was all male, five men who played mothers. The men had to be six feet tall. They stood on two feet on--they walked around on, on--what do they call it? They were elevated. Speaker 2: Stilts? Speaker 1: Not stilts. They walked, they were elevated two feet. They'd walk on these platform shoes. They're elevated two feet. That made them eight, that made them--no, it's, yeah, that made eight feet. Then they had two feet up to, of mask, so they were between eight and ten feet. The mothers were eight and ten feet. They were all big--big voiced men, talk like that. They played the mothers, the five black mothers. So, right away, you cut away all the sentimental notions. You're getting into the ritual--very Africanized ritual, or Africanized--I shouldn't call it that. But I'm using some of the impulse of Africa at least to do this. So, you cut away the sentimental sense of what the mother is. The mother is then dealt with, with five men over six feet, eight feet, ten feet, okay. Band in the middle that moves the rest of the boys or the, they change environment. It's constantly changing. In other words, the piece was very, very successful. The whole--people, people, to this day, come talking. They talk about that--the people in Washington, D.C., they saw that play. But it was the first play that got me really to understand about how to ritualize what, and it's interesting. My, my--the opera that I'm working with right now is all women. And they play male roles, they play white women, they play black women, they play white males, they play black males. It is, it's all (laughter), you know. So, I mean that's--this is like some thirty years later, you know. And so, somebody commented that well, "[HistoryMaker] Paul [Carter Harrison], when I first met Paul, he was doing all men, now he's doing all women," you know. But that's an indicator, that's another thing, but the thing is at Howard, that atmosphere of those two years that I spent there were--grounded me and set me off into writing the book of 'The Drama of Nommo' [Paul Carter Harrison]. I got--the 'Tabernacle' was done. I invested time in working with Archie Shepp on one of his plays, 'Junebug' (Simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Graduates Tonight'-- Speaker 1: --celebrate, graduates-- Speaker 2: Tonight. Speaker 1: --'Junebug Graduates Tonight' [Archie Shepp]. I did 'Junebug' there. I invited Larry Neal, the poet, Larry Neal, and to do a session around the same time I was doing 'Junebug Graduates Tonight.' So, it was a wonderful atmosphere. And that's the session, Larry Neal wired up the place with his extended poem, very epic poem. Archie Shepp playing with him, it was quite a magnetic evening. Anyone who was there still remembers that day. And then, I left there. I went to the University of California in Sacramento [sic. Sacramento State College; California State University, Sacramento, Sacramento, California]. I was invited to teach there. Story_ID: 237428 Speaker 1: Was it hard to leave Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at that point? I mean 'cause-- Speaker 2: No, I'm glad--well I'm sorry you asked, but since you asked, I have to tell you. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had to leave Howard, I had to leave Howard. Why did I leave Howard? The students were magnificent, challenging, and inspiring. The stuff I was doing was, I thought, making great, new inroads into the possible development of another kind of theatre, new theatre. You have to remember when I first went to Howard, they had--the mission with Howard is like a plantation. It's a land grant university, you know, supported by government subsidy more or less. And I get there. They, I think had, were not accustomed to doing black plays. The first year that I'm there, I do two black plays, 'Tabernacle' and I did a student's play. The second year that I'm there, I do three black plays out of five, three out of five. Then I go into a meeting in April to plan, to give them my season for the third year that I was going to be there in April. School is not out until May. I go in April to give them the season for next year, and I said I was going to have--they had a new chairman there, black, also black. And I give them the season. I now was going to have an all-black season. My idea was to bring into Howard plays of black authors so they could develop their work, develop new works there which I thought was an ideal place. I got 'Tabernacle' done there and it was an ideal for me to get that to be able to see that work in that, you know, in that circumstance, and then go on from there with it. So, my idea was to bring in black playwrights, so they would begin to develop their works at that campus, and then have that work go back out in the world. So, I said, okay, I gave them this--I went to the meeting. I said, it's an all-black season. The chairman slapped his hand on the desk, on the table, at the meeting. And he said as long as he was chairman of the Howard University, they would never be an all-black season at Howard. And when he said that, I looked at him and I said, "Well, then, gentlemen, ladies, you don't need me here." And I picked up my bag, went down to my office, cleaned out my office, and I left the campus. Speaker 1: Now, what year is this? Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972], no, 1970-- Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970]. Speaker 2: --the spring of 1970. That was right after the kids were killed down at Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio] and all of that--that same spring that the kids were killed at Kent State. And I'm trying to do this all-black season at Howard. And the chairman says, as long as he was chairman, there would never be an all-black season. And I left a month early. Speaker 1: Now, this is scary in 19-, I think, it was in '73 [1973] or '74 [1974] in [Washington] D.C. for African Liberation Day. I went to the theatre department because I was sure since Howard was so progressive in so many other areas, that would be progressive, too. And there was a big display case outside the theatre department with dedicated to, almost a shrine to Barbara Eden, the star of 'I Dream of Jeannie.' Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And she had visited the campus-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and she's a blonde, white woman-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --television star. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it was like, there was nothing-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --to indicate that any black work was being done there at all. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: That was a, that was a-- Speaker 2: For a long time, there wasn't. After I left for a long time, there really wasn't. They brought in Al Freeman, Jr. later on to chair, but nothing was really going on then. I mean, no, so in fact, they had somebody else that--what's his name--Walker was there before Al--Walker who wrote-- Speaker 1: Joseph [A.] Walker? Speaker 2: --'The River Niger.' Joseph Walker was there. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, who wrote--'Ododo' now was one of his works so. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, exactly. Speaker 1: That seems to be--I mean, is that, that's, would you consider that a ritual, some kind-- Speaker 2: It's an attempt at a ritual. It's--what, but, again, it's an attempt at a ritual. It's too self-consciously African in its style and how they're trying to do it. So, in other words, you don't, you got to use, you got to find the African sensibility inside of your own cultural context. You don't have to go--I'm--you don't have to, you don't have to, like drape Africa over it. You've got to find it inside. I mean, going to a barbershop, and getting a haircut is a thoroughly African experience. Just in the riff and the rhythms inside of that, it looks just like Chicago [Illinois] barbershop, but it is, if you step over it--Africa. But you gotta--then you go to Africa, you'll find something quite similar in the same way. But you don't have to dress it up, see. That's what I'm talking about. But, anyhow, I had to--no, you're right. I had to get up out of there. I left. I said, no, I'm gone-- Story_ID: 237429 Speaker 1: The students again, invited me to come, this time, to Sacramento State University [Sacramento State College; California State University, Sacramento] in [Sacramento] California (laughter). And, and I had this, you know, these great students and I worked on two things right away. I conceived and directed 'Ain't Supposed To Die A Natural Death,' these, these short pieces by, the short vignettes by-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker Melvin] Van Peebles. Speaker 1: Van Peebles, so I was asked to do it. Van Peebles said, would you do it? They asked--I said fine. I went out there and I directed--I conceived the production and directed it. And as you know, it went on to Broadway. I did also a tour, a state tour of 'Tabernacle,' bus and truck (laughter), a bus and truck tour with 'Tabernacle' with all these young black guys all over California (laughter)--heavy. I could tell you a little funny story about that. It's very interesting about how--about Africa and power. Power imperatives, you might say. How do you empower yourself? We went to a place in the bus and truck--we went up to Eureka, California. Do you know where that is? Eureka is up in the north, near the border of what do you call it--border of Oregon. It's a little small, a little town. Eureka is like, it's like a time warp. It's like a, it's a logging town from the 1930s, less than a town, it looks like. But the university is there and we're going to perform over there. And we, as you're driving through, these are urban, young, black urban kids from the university who come out of places like Sacramento [California]. And they come out of San Francisco [California] and Sacramento, and places like that. These are urban kids. We're going deeper and deeper into these woods with these, with these, sequoia trees and what-not. They've never seen this--these guys have never seen this. These--the spiritual aspect of it--I mean, just these enormous trees that you can drive a truck through. They're going through this area, you know, they're talking and whatnot. And they become quiet, and quiet, and quiet 'cause they, and they really seen a whole new--the impact of the natural life was starting to, to get to them. I did get a feeling in the bus as they were going up. We get up to Eureka, and it is a town that looked like it belonged in some other kind of, you know, like out of a movie set back lot. And we pull up to the hotel and these kids thought--by the way, before we even got to the hotel, they started beating on the drums, you know, on the congas and whatnot--congo-bow, bong-bong-bong, bong-bong. They were beating before we even pull up to the hotel. But by this time, this is--I don't know, I didn't, I wouldn't say they were unnerved, but certainly there was something compelling about it. And they decided to play a little bit and I guess something to do. Got to the little motel and I said, "Okay, we're here, you can get off the bus." They didn't get off the bus. What did they do instead? They, they became preoccupied with braiding their hair. They all started braiding each other's hair. It was the most amazing--they didn't get off the bus almost two hours later. They finally got off the bus. They just played drums and braided their hair out in front of the motel in Eureka in this remote corner of the world they had never seen. First, they were impressed by the spiritual life, and then they suddenly came into this space that it was so totally unfamiliar to them. They sat in the bus and braided their hair before they got off. They kept their hair braided until they left, until we spent three days there. But it, and to me, that was quite--I mean, it was interesting to see that happen. I mean, it was this--no one, it was never like, let's braid our hair, or let's play the drums. It was nothing like that. It just involved a very spontaneous need to reinforce or to find a way to empower oneself in this alien space and in this, after encountering this incredibly spiritual landscape, you know, which was unfamiliar to them as well, coming up out of the urban situations they had been living in before. And, of course, they performed extremely well up there. They--for those two nights they had to perform up there, it was like, the people, the people were absolutely astonished by what they did. And so, I did that show, 'Natural Death' and that-- Story_ID: 237430 Speaker 1: I developed '[The] Great MacDaddy' [Paul Carter Harrison] there, I did 'The Great MacDaddy' there first. Speaker 2: Now, 'The Great MacDaddy' then, the title would suggest a pimp or something like-- Speaker 1: Yeah, but it--well, but see I--that's what I'm say, you gotta go past it being a pimp. You don't do that. It's--you don't make him a pimp. You make him a provider of the community. So 'Great MacDaddy' is a ritual piece, which dealt with a young man who was irresponsible, who has to go back in time, back in time to the ancestral location, and then come back to, to do his function. And he starts in Los Angeles [California], goes all the way to South Carolina. That's interesting, right (laughter)? This says start, it starts in, in Los Angeles in 1920s. Young man has--it's based on 'The Palm-Wine-Drinkard,' the African novel by Tutuola-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: Amos Tutuola's novel, 'The Palm-Wine Drinkard.' So, but to, in this case, you have the young man who has inherited his father's estate. It's a wine estate in California. The palm, the man who taps the wine for him dies, which is the brew that allows it--was eventually the one--make--that encourages anyone to hang out with him because he's got the best wine in the territory in 1920s during the period of-- Speaker 2: Prohibition. Speaker 1: --Prohibition. And when they say, they realize he doesn't have the wine taps any more, they leave. Now, he has to go out and find this wine tap for what reason--bring him back to get the wine because they went to, they went looking for him and his body. He died--and went to open up the casket, he was gone. So he's--well, he played a trick on me, so I gotta go find him. So, he goes in the world to find him. And as he goes into the world to find him, he comes back, goes all the way to South Carolina where he meets--he finds the wine-tapster in the land of the dead. And in the land of dead, the wine-tapster gives him a clue, a special clue about something, and he takes that back to his people and have that. That, I had for that, I won an Obie Award for The Negro Ensemble Company [New York, New York]. They did that play a couple of years later. Well, that's a good example of what I'm talking about. You have an opportunity to work in the university. You're supposed to develop the work of the university and get the highest quality performance you can possibly get with the students, give the students an opportunity to work on the new work, give the students an opportunity to participate in this development. You work with the students, get the play for the playwright where it needs to get it, and get it back into the commercial world. There was no place in the world I could do that, that 'Great MacDaddy' big cast like that. And just automatically and, you know, by giving it to a commercial producer and that's the, unseen. I mean, I'm having the same problem with my opera right now, getting it done because I don't have--not working it through a university. Columbia College [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], at least it has done the concert version of the opera. It's called the 'Doxology Opera: The Doxy Canticles' [Paul Carter Harrison] and it was done at, at the Museum of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Contemporary Art-- Speaker 1: --Art, Contemporary Art [Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: --yeah, Contemporary Art. Speaker 1: And, but that was as much of a production we can get. It's very costly, but still was great. I mean, 'cause I have enough stuff, you know, to move it into a more commercial situation but now-- Story_ID: 237431 Speaker 1: Then I came back to University of Massachusetts [Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] after two years there, an opportunity to go to the University of Massachusetts to work with Archie Shepp, Max Roach, and Nelson Stevens, the painter. And I was supposed to become the--set up the cultural wing of the African American studies department there. That didn't work out--it didn't work out. We, and after the first year, it became clear that it was not going to work, you know. So, they stayed, and I left after four years. I left and went to Columbia College [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. They invited me to come as the chairman of the theater department, so I went there. Speaker 2: Now what year is this? Speaker 1: I came to Columbia in 1976 to chair the department, to chair the theatre department. I suppose I should preface it by saying I already had contact with Columbia in 1975 when they asked me to come as a consultant to develop a curriculum. And after I developed the curriculum, the president of the college, [Mirren] "Mike" Alexandroff, the former president, the original president, he said, "Now that you've done this, would you take the job (laughter)?" I said, "Well, I'm moving to California." He--it doesn't matter, will you take the job? And so, I said, "Okay, I'll try it on." So, for four years, I--four years, I was doing it, but I was going back to California every two weeks. It was kind of rough. And so, I said, "No, I can't do this," so I stopped, I got off, I left the chair. And then, I worked at a deal where I would come in only one semester a year for the next five or six years. Then I made a new deal where I started to work there full-time until I, until I retired two years ago which was 2001. Speaker 2: Two-- Speaker 1: Two, 2002, yeah-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --until I retired two years ago. But I was--it's been, it was, it's been a very interesting time watching Columbia grow. I mean, I've been in the middle of that whole growth cycle, yeah. I mean, it's--I hardly know anyone there now. I mean, it's like all my people are gone. Story_ID: 237432 Speaker 1: I guess also during this period, I certainly have been doing other work, like directing for The Negro Ensemble Company [New York, New York] and directing around the country in various places. My whole thrust has always been toward developing a new work. Currently, for example, I'm working on a project ['Sweet Thunder: The Billy Strayhorn Story,' Paul Carter Harrison] on Billy Strayhorn. I'm still trying to find--I mean, I did it in Arizona last summer, but I'm trying to find a way to really make it more ritualistically impacting. I mean, it's easy to play, it's very interesting entertainment to hear a bunch of Billy Strayhorn songs. But then, what is it about Billy Strayhorn and his relationship to Duke Ellington that makes it impacting for, or against the same question? I was, okay, this is the familiar. Now, how do you make that reveal this in ways that it really make it more important and impacting for you, more than just simply a slice of entertainment, you know, about Billy Strayhorn? So, I'm working on that problem. Right now, I say, I'm going to be doing it again in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] next year. So, I'm working on things like that. I'm writing, my most recent book, 'Black Theatre: Ritual Performance in the African Diaspora,' [(ed.) Harrison, Walker II, and Edwards] is a collection--I'm one of the editors. I'm the primary editor, and it's really about a collection of essays, thirty essays from across the diaspora from African to the Caribbean and the United States. It tries to bring some kind of crystallization of the idea of what is black theatre? 'Cause it's my idea that black theatre is not black theatre because of color. It's black theatre is about practice. It's about the style of the work. You don't have to--a jazz, so-called jazz--we never named it jazz, but folks have called it jazz. We call it jazz, too, but it's not because, when we were inventing this music, we didn't call it jazz. The French were the ones who called it jazz. And so everyone else bought into it. But you take so-called jazz music, you know, it is black music, only by virtue of the way it is played, not the color, 'cause anybody can play it, if they play it the way it's supposed to be played. Dave Brubeck can play it. Japanese pianists can play jazz, just like a black person can play [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart (laughter), you know. But there's a certain, you know, as a black person is going to play Mozart, you don't play Mozart the same way you play Gospel. You got to play it in that way. A person from Italy or from France or Japan who wants to play black music has to play the side of the black music mood, the so-called modality, the same with plays. Anybody should be able to do a black play. If they do it the way black practice is about, the ritual style. Otherwise, what you do, what you got is a slice of life. You have black people on the stage like 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] telling a story which is fraudulently told, a fraudulent story, written by a European. A fraudulent story about a black life, and you have people walking across this stage, black people on the stage. The--a black person on the stage does not make black theatre is what I'm saying. Story_ID: 237433 Speaker 1: This has been a debate for a long time. Speaker 2: People have not-- Speaker 1: People have struggled over the definition (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They've struggled over it, but they won't, they--some say well, it's about the black politics, or it's about like, you know. It's--even if it's about the politic, it's the social issues. It was about the social issues that still has to have a practice. Otherwise, you call it American theatre with black people about American issues, about black American issues. There's no reason to call it black theatre. You can just call it African American experience inside of the American tradition--fine, no complaint. It's not an argument. But he said, what is this black thing? Oh, what is the black theatre then? What makes it black theatre? What are the underpinnings of the practice that make it black theatre? Can I do it as a Chinaman--can I do it? You have to say, oh, I can't do that because I'm Chinese. Well, that's not true. You can do it as long as you do this way. As a Chinese person, you can't go in and play Gospel in the Chinese way. You better go and play that Gospel tune so Aretha [Franklin] can sing it. You gotta hit those right changes. You can't just go, you know, you gotta play a certain kind of changes. In other words, what we've been after in this new book ['Black Theatre: Ritual Performance in the African Diaspora,' (ed.) Harrison, Walker II, and Edwards] is to get, to try to conceptualize or this black theatre is based upon what social and what sacred references to our humanity is African people. That would constitute a barometer in which we set a practice upon--that barometer of what the practice is about. And when you see that work, it resonates a certain kind of a social and sacred system, or a value system if you like. And that should be implied in the work. This is the way a Charlie Parker tune is clearly African. It emerges out of the harmonic start in Europe. The harmonic system starts in Europe and it suddenly goes into something else, you know. It shifts and changes. You know, you set the harmonic tone. It's here and then we move it over in here. And the license that he takes with breaking up the tune is the African component of that, you see. Otherwise, you would play it like a polka unless they couldn't play a polka. You know, somebody say, I want to play 'How High the Moon' and you'll do a polka, 'How High the Moon.' Okay, the point is that's polka. That, that's a wonderful Polish way of doing the 'How High the Moon' (laughter), you know. That's doing Polish music. Let's not, let's not quit anybody, you know, that's not jazz, you see. That's what I want to say about the theatre, and the black theatre has to have that same kind of presence in the minds of an audience, black or white, or whatever. Speaker 1: What--does it make tougher when you're dealing with theatre than with other art forms because of the--there's--a theatre doesn't have the distribution of, say, black music or some other art forms. So does it make tougher to try to get across what, to define what it is, 'cause you-- Speaker 2: Yeah, sure it does. No, makes it difficult because people are afraid if they do something that is not part of the, the current--what is au courant, or rather, what is part of the commercial, what is accepted commercially. They want to have opportunities to have a living. That means then, black people must take responsibility then for it. Black people must take over the responsibility of the dissemination of these ideas and, and its kind of style of work. Black theatres, for example, I've spoken, this is, this is 2004, and I've talked to the--there are only five or six professional black theatre companies in the country. Of course, the country I've talked to almost all of them recently. And they are reluctant to do new work--to develop new work. They are reluctant to do it. They want to do--all they want to do are August Wilson plays because they've been done someplace else. Or they'll do a black play that was developed by a white theatre before they'll do a play that was developed in a local black community. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: This is what I'm getting from them. I said, "What are you guys talking about? This is your job to develop new work, develop new black"--well, no, no, we--our audience is--we need to have it--boop. So, when it's done by the Mark Taper theatre [Mark Taper Forum, Los Angeles, California] or the Lincoln Center [Theater, New York, New York], a major, or Arena Stage [Washington, D.C.], then we'll do it, they take that work has been done, the black work. And now, that black--those black works, when they're done by those other places are--no pun intended--colored by what they want to see in the black experience. Speaker 1: No pun intended. Speaker 2: (Laughter) You know, but, you know, it was sort of like that. They have like--they, they want to see the black experience in a certain way. And this is what, this is how it is, how it's presented to them, and fed back. The black theatre companies do this, they take the work and they do it. Story_ID: 237434 Speaker 1: Yoruba rituals are much more accessible to us--I think, because of--I think, we, we see it showing up in the Americas in the form of Santeria or Vodoun, somewhat slightly in the Vodoun, Candomble in the south of, in Brazil so, and we see it in the Holiness church. So the Yoruba, it shows up again, you know, it's easier for me to do that than to deal with, let's say, the Dogon rituals, for Adimali [ph.] because, though they are the most wonderfully esoteric rituals, you know, they don't show up as frequently in our sensibilities, our current world that we live in. They don't as, as a sacred value system, as a sacred system. Speaker 2: So, you're not necessarily a Yoruba yourself? Speaker 1: No-- Speaker 2: --but that you, okay, but it's accessible-- Speaker 1: --I'm saying how it shows up but it's accessible to--I can recognize it. I can see it, I can see how it functions. For example, I'm going to be doing 'King Hedley [II],' August Wilson's play, in Arizona this winter. And in that play, I think one of the reasons why the play is not been done well is because August implies a Yoruba kind of a ritual in the work. And, but it's not carried out fully by the people who direct it. I think there's been one production where it was done. I'm not sure how August feels about it though it's in Minneapolis [Minnesota], but I know production, for example, I think, in that play, the way you work with that play, you have to see it. If you look at the play and straight, the straight relationships of, of naturalism or realism, the play doesn't seem to work. It doesn't work because the play has to--it's like a Greek play. It is contingent upon some information about something that happened in the past--that magically happened enforces these new relationships to happen in the new play. It's like looking at a Greek ritual. You know, you're told what had happened in the past in order for this moment to come to bear. Speaker 2: The chorus, yeah. Speaker 1: The chorus, the chorus figures tell you that. In this new play, I mean, in this new play, Hedley comes out of the other play which is the, 'Seven Guitars,' [August Wilson]. You know, this, this figure, Hedley, who kills this guy, and it's thirty years later, thirty-five years later, the seed of Hedley is born. I mean, he's born later, but thirty-five years later, we see the kid from that seed he had--the young woman, he planted a seed, the older man planted a seed in the younger woman. These are large ideas, these are the large, contin-, what do you call it--ideas about continuity of life, you know, in 'Seven Guitars,' the seed is planted into the young woman. She leaves, and she gives birth. We see thirty-five years later this--what do you call it--this, the young, this woman is no longer a young women. She's this young woman. She's the one with this young son who has a memory of his father, a very kind of funny memory, a fuzzy memory, but he knows he has to carry out certain kind of deeds based upon the father. And these are, these are kind of, in a sense, almost Greek ritual ideas, but you see, the same kind of storytelling, the same kind of storytelling is told in African storytelling, certainly among the Yoruba. Story_ID: 237435 Speaker 1: One of the things he [August Wilson] does with what is missing is that approaching the play ['King Hedley II'] what's missing is understanding the characters in the archetypes that are implied in the Yoruba religion. The Ogun figure with the father figure, who is like the new father figure, the older man that he's, who is like--you got to understand the Shango figure, which is the young man, that hot-blooded young man. You got to understand the Yemoja figure, which is the woman who's the most nourishing, the Oshun, the wife figure, that what does she do? What is--if you understand those archetypes, you understand what those women are doing and what these men are doing. You understand the very opening of the play--who is the Eshu, the trickster figure who leads, who leads the whole event down a certain crossroad. He comes out and he tells you--something bad is going to happen, from the very beginning, the outset. He comes out and tells you this. He's the Eshu, or the trickster figure. He becomes the chorus figure. He begins to tell you, this is what's going to happen. I'm going to take you there. You come with me. The next thing the young man comes out. He plants seed in the ground. That's the veve, the crossroads. That's the--all of those elements are there. And if you don't, if you even touch it as simply, the guy, the old drunk guy has something to say and then, then this guy comes out. He throws some seed in the ground. He says, "I got some, I just found some seeds, I put them in the ground," and it's not done with the deliberation of ritual. The deliberation and the less, without excess of behavior, just very specific gestures, and so that you see the way the movement of the piece is going. This guy does his--he enunciates the event. He gives the enunciation of what the event is going to be. The young man comes out, he does this very wonderful ceremonial planting of the seed, opens up the doors, opens up the whole thing for something else to happen--bang. Out comes the woman, hey, things like that happen. You got to follow it in that kind of way. I'm going to try it that way. There's, yeah, there's--to work through this Yoruba, the Yoruba kind of presentation without ever talking about Yoruba--never called it Yoruba. We never called it (unclear), but the work, does the work help? Does the style help us understand what, what goes on in the play? The very last moment in the play when the young man is killed--he has to give up his blood in order for there to be rebirth. Bloodletting for re-, practices of re-, for in order to have rebirth. This is what the play is about in the end. So, I mean I got to work through this. I mean, you know, we know that the Ogun figure is going to kill this young man. You know, he has to. It's going to happen. You know that--gotta figure how it happens, why it happens. It happens for rebirth. I mean, these are--if you look at it just in terms of--naturalism looks accidental, and various sort of strange things happen kind of thing, you know, we're very, very precise and making, orchestrating those particular moments on the stage. That's the kind of thing I'm trying to discover, and I don't know if I have all the answers yet, but at least, I want to make, I want to make that inquiry into the work. Then I'll call August [Wilson] up and say, "Come and take a look at this (laughter), you know. Is this what you want, you're trying to do here?" Story_ID: 237436 Speaker 1: I don't know if it's the right time to ask this or not, but what's your assessment of some of the black theatre figures we've had over the--since the Black Arts Movement started? I'm talking about [HistoryMaker] Ed Bullins or [HistoryMaker] Woodie King [Jr.], Ben Caldwell--I don't know, August Wilson, even, and-- Speaker 2: The most--we and, these are, we--well, there are more, there are some people who go beyond. There are people who have been involved with the theatre, and we confer to them as theatre figures. But there are people who have been very, very instrumental in making, creating new ways of--not new--but sustaining the theatre, okay. Woodie King is a person who sustains the theatre. We cannot say we always like everything he does, but he is a producer and he sustains the theatre. He's very, he's very, very serious about keeping the black presence out there. His rationale is not always the same rationale that I would choose for having the play out there. He'll do a play that I would never do because I don't think it's black theatre. I think it's--belongs to American theatre. He'll do a play that's based upon the color of the play, as opposed to it being the practice. When he did, when he, when he initiated six, some, when he initiated Ntozake Shange's play-- Speaker 1: 'for colored girls [who have considered suicide / when the rainbow is enuf].' Speaker 2: --'for colored girls,' he's doing black theatre unquestionably. In the whole orchestration of that and how, the new revelations that come out, I mean that is black theatre. But he, there are some other plays that have to do more with the celebration of some kind of a way of life. And so, and that's to me, in this realism, belongs inside American theatre tradition. That's me talking, right. Woodie would probably argue differently about that. [Amiri] Baraka [LeRoi Jones] is the most insightful. He's very insightful about, you know, his--all of his theatre work is not great, but his early plays, his early plays are really quite essential understandings the poetics of theatre writing, but inside the poetics--not writing poetry, the poetics in the structure, the contradictions and the rituals that are going on in the work. Those early works are quite extraordinary from, from Baraka. Speaker 1: Which ones are you, did you-- Speaker 2: Clearly, clearly, one of them being, of course, the 'Slave Ship[: A Historical Pageant,' Amiri Baraka]. But aside from that, the--what do you call it--the Experimental--what is it called--not Experimental. 'Experimental Death [Unit #1,' Amiri Baraka], one, two and three, I think it is. There's three progello [ph.]--it's one of those plays. Speaker 1: (Unclear), yeah. Speaker 2: There are three of these plays. They all add together. I think it's called 'Experimental Death'--I can't remember them offhand. But they're some incredible pieces. They're really remarkable. There's also a full-length play of his that was quite good. I can't remember the name of it offhand. That happens--it'll come back to me in a certain moment. But Baraka is very important. Gilbert Moses, before he passed, was becoming the most important, insightful director. He did the 'Slave Ship' of Baraka. That work showed where Gilbert was possibly going to go before he passed. Gilbert was quite an extraordinary person. He is, he has the, he had the statue of the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] that currently is being held by--from the, from Lincoln Center [Theater, New York, New York], from the Public Theater [New York, New York]--George [C.] Wolfe in terms of his--when I say statue, not because somebody just planted something on his shoulder saying you're the best guy. It's because of the vision, the insightfulness of their theatrical vision, that directorial vision, how they manipulate the stage. They do that extremely well. George Wolfe does it extremely well because he makes stuff, he makes work that should not work--work. Quite a few things I've seen him do which should fall apart, but he gives it--his hand on it gives it a sense of legitimacy and character that you would not expect those pieces to have. Story_ID: 237437 Speaker 1: Case in point, the piece that won the--top dog from Lori Carlos, Lori, Lori--what's her name--oh dear, young woman who won the Pulitzer Prize. Lori--well, I'll come back to her name, too. But anyhow, Lori who wrote Topdog, Topdog, Topdog-- Speaker 2: Underdog, is it 'Topdog/Underdog' [HistoryMaker Suzan-Lori Parks]? Speaker 1: 'Topdog/Underdog'--what was it called? It won the Pulitzer two years ago. Very fragile, very--a play, and Parks, Lori Parks, Lori Parks, very fragile little play, Suzan-Lori Parks, Suzan-Lori Parks, a very fragile little play. It is not to depth sounding, has no depth sounding in the way of an Adrienne Kennedy play. And Adrienne Kennedy is one of the greatest of our writers. And yet, in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], black folks said, well, she's not black enough. Well, that's absolutely absurd. Her practice, her style, her gift is inside, her gift is in the ritual style of the work. And earlier in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], in the '70s [1970s], particularly, blacks were not--young, black writers, "revolutionaries," were not willing to see anything other than the replication of our confrontation with the establishment, with the system. And it had to be done in very realistic terms, very muscular realistic terms. And she was writing in this poetics, in these poetics, and these ritual styles and the language. And yet, it was significantly more black, "black" or Africanized than any of that work that was being done like a [Ben] Caldwell play, for example, just because it was, it had the right polemic, the right rhetorical stance. The right rhetorical stance what, what--is it simply a great American rhetorical play about a black situation, a great work, you know? The militant preacher, stuff like that, it's a terrific work. It's not black--not by practice. Adrienne Kennedy is black by practice, or African by practice. You see, that's the kind of distinction one has to make. It doesn't mean that Caldwell's play is not significant. [HistoryMaker Ed] Bullins, on the other hand, is doing both--making the rhetorical statement, but also revealing it through some very ritualized way in which the characters move about. The archetypes and the piece move about inside the play, but he never knows how to end them. They'll always be called the Bullins ending. You get a shoot-out in the end. Everybody--that ends the play, you know, but the parties, he note, but he's got the thing working. He definitely is a major, major, or had been, and still is, I suppose, a major, major figure. Speaker 2: That's a fault on--oh, I don't know. I shouldn't even say this, but there seems to be a fault of Spike Lee's-- Speaker 1: Spike has the same problem, you know. He's got a great voice and a voice-- Speaker 2: He doesn't know how to end-- Speaker 1: No, the voice kind of like that, that last, and not--I mean, it was very disappointing--that play. Story_ID: 237438 Speaker 1: He [Spike Lee] had a [HistoryMaker Ed] Bullins ending, he had this Bullins ending on what should have been a great, great film, that film called-- Speaker 2: The one about the blackface and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: I know what you're talking about. Yeah, the--that's the one that disappointed me the most because of the--I mean, the ending did. It was a rich film otherwise. Speaker 1: Rich film-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: 'Bamboozled'-- Speaker 2: 'Bamboozled,' right. Speaker 1: --richly, textured film, great statement, and did not know how to end it, did not know how to end it. Speaker 2: It's just (laughter). Speaker 1: Went to a Bullins ending-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: What about Ron Milner? Now, he just passed-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Ron Milner, I think Ron had the, the--Ron, Ron, of course, the older he, what--Ron always was a good writer, first of all. His early one-act plays--the first play that, you know, 'Who's Got His Own,' [HistoryMaker] Woodie [King, Jr.] directed--I mean, and produced, and he--you could not tell anyone that was not great black theatre. It's not black theatre--it's great American theatre. That's great American writing. It's a social realism, it's a social realist drama. He captured--he wrote the characters right on the money, and it's powerfully done. It doesn't for me, make it, doesn't make it black theatre. It makes it a great American theatre piece about a black subject. He begins to look--become in what I--his play called the lender, 'The Warning: [A Theme for Linda,' Ron Milner], something of this sort. You begin to see him because he's now cutting across more expressionistic, cutting across time and place, and moving the characters about. You now see him moving toward black theatre practice--to me, that's called--I call that black theatre practice. He's not cutting across the beginning, middle, and end linear development at, you know, and now, that's really quite compelling. When he gets to that play, the full length play that was on Broadway for a while-- Speaker 2: 'Checkmates,' [Ron Milner] I guess. Speaker 1: 'Checkmates,' you--now you're getting into black theatre that is really quite, quite wonderful. I mean, black theatre production, in terms of crossing time and place--not fixity. Characters move their archetypes, the way they move on the way that the piece unfolds, cutting across in time and place, moving back and forth in time. That is, that was, that's a great work actually. It's a terrific work. So, so, Ron Milner is very, very important to this movement, to this black theatre movement. The--and I mentioned Adrienne Kennedy, though she's never been part of it, and no one's embraced her, but she's really been quite central to it in terms of style. The--[HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward, you have to give it to Douglas Turner Ward for bringing--and here's how we--what we have to give to, what's very important about Douglas Turner Ward. The reason we have had a limited development of new work in the last ten years or more is because The Negro Ensemble Company [(NEC), New York, New York] no longer exists. When The NEC was, The Negro Ensemble Company, it did exist. What we counted on was three to four new works every year over a period of twenty-odd years. In other words, Douglas Turner Ward, in addition to being an extremely gifted writer, his--he's written one of the classic plays, I think, which is 'Day of Absence,' one of the true classics in the black theatre literature. Speaker 2: And it's still being done around the country. Speaker 1: Absolutely, and it should be over and over. It's still, it's still resonant. It still makes sense and the style of it makes sense. His, he was able to do work over that period of twenty-odd years, creating literature, black theatre literature. Story_ID: 237439 Speaker 1: We no longer have a professional institution that does that, whose primary effort or, or mission had been to develop new work, and put it out, put it out there in a professional way. Speaker 2: By that, you mean equity theatre? Speaker 1: Yeah, equity theatre, professional equity, commercial in an equity sense, an equity theatre. Speaker 2: In the way of--there are community theatres (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There are community theatres. I mean, eta [Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] is a theatre-- Speaker 2: (Unclear), right. Speaker 1: --is a community theater. eta does, what it's, it does new work all the time. eta does that. It has, it's limited by it's not reaching commercial potential for many of its writers. I, of course, have been able to do a couple of works there that did find its way into commercial theatre, you know, like the trial, for example, you know, 'The Trial of One Short-Sighted Black Woman [vs. Mammy Louise and Safreeta Mae,' Karani Marcia Leslie]. Speaker 2: Right, now that was a wonderful play. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I got from--I mean, a really, it's powerful. Speaker 1: We worked on that and got that woman to work on that--I mean, I was--my, my idea of how that should happen 'cause she had written in a different kind of way earlier, and we pulled it around the ritual style, moved it to the ritual mode, and the piece works-- Speaker 2: It does. Speaker 1: --and absolutely, it stunned everyone and it had a life and all beyond eta, see. And, now, fortunately, eta is there, but many of the works would not always get a, get--have the extended life. The Negro Ensemble Company [New York, New York] was a professional company in New York City [New York, New York] that, when it did its work, it had the potential for having a continued life in the commercial theatre. It was like a black, like the, like, was that like the--their place, you could possibly have the highest professional quality of work done. The--we haven't had that since they closed down in 19-, they closed down, I think, in 1987 or '88 [1988], something like that, so it's been more than ten years. Story_ID: 237440 Speaker 1: Now you have disciples. There are disciples of yours that are professed disciples of yours, there's Songodina Ifatunji in Chicago [Illinois]. He's at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois], I think, now. He's written, he wrote--'John Henry,' [sic. 'Quiet as It's Kept'] which was very similar. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, yeah, yeah. 'John Henry' [sic.] some years ago, yeah. And, again, that's using--part of that comes from the idea of taking to make a reincarnate, to reincarnate those particular myth stories, mythological references to the black experience which is one of the things we should do as writers and/or professionals in the theatre, is to retrieve stories that have some resilience in our particular time, retrieve those mythic tales that have some resilience in our time now. That's one of the things we should be doing as writers, yeah, as theatre people. Going back, for example, the stories of Anansi, the Anansi tales, and how do you those Anansi tales, whether you do it for adults or children, it doesn't matter. You take those tales and bring up new, and support, and use it to support certain kind of values. And we certainly can use something right about now. I mean, we're getting--all we've got is, you know, we're losing the children right now. We don't, we don't have their attention. We--it's hard to get their attention, so what, what do we have to do to get their attention or values? Must we bring forward for this? We, I mean, we know, for example, it's easy for a Bill Cosby to make commentary about the condition of the young people, and their inability to, to pursue proper education, their inability, their lack of courtesy, their way of dress and their sort of being sort of antisocial. It's easy to criticize their behavior. It's much easier to criticize it than to do something about it. And the reason why these things--it's easy to say that black people need to be parents, more like parents. Well, what, from what standpoint is he talking about--from his particular middle-class sensibilities, or from the sensibilities of the young fifteen-year-old mother who's still a child herself? And one of the conditions that create, to make it necessary for a fifteen-year-old to have a child, and try to make a life, and try to get a, try to have support of the child. And I mean there are the conditions around in the world that, that I'm not, it's not about blame the white guy for it. It's not about that. There is a system, and there is a system that has not made it possible yet for these young people to have sustained productive lives. Their parents, a fifteen-year-old girl probably has a, has a mother that's only 25 or 30 maybe, you know. Mother might be only thirty years old-- Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right. Speaker 2: --and not able to, to have a productive life, and here she is, fifteen years old. She's been around fifteen years, and she's been trying to get something going. She's got four or five boyfriends, and the conditions are set to undermine the possibilities of their being some productive way of dealing with this problem. You cannot just simply criticize and say, walk tall, and talk properly, and you can get a job, it's not true. Don't--you cannot just fault them for it. We don't necessarily have to like it and we wish it could be better, but at the same time, you can't just fault them for it. We got to fault the total system that will not, that does not support the possibility for them to make change. The system does not do it for them the way it is. They can't come out of high school, let alone get into college. What other pressures of a young woman, you know, out in her community where, where there's no male or young man, for example, where there's no male figure in the house. What are the pressures on that young man? What are the values that say that, well, that what are the rituals that would say he is a man in the community at fourteen years old? Why should he have to behave like a man twenty years old? What is asked of him at fourteen years old in terms of being manly when there's no man in the house? You know, so, so, in other words, these are real, real issues. These are things that gains, like good poetry, good theatre could very well address these things. I mean, in, in a more enlightening and a more enlightened way than simply to, to lay it out as a kind of journalistic way, or this is a fifteen-year-old child who's, has a child of her own, and her mother is--rather lay out the sociology of it--how do you reconstruct the sociology to give, to illuminate the issues in a ritualistic way so that it impacts us? How do we transform that on stage, and so that we begin to appreciate it in other kinds of ways? Story_ID: 237441 Speaker 1: So do you see the stage as a way to-- Speaker 2: It is a mechanism for doing it, and it's, for me, the stage is a secular way of doing what the church does. And you should not come out of this theatre unchanged, just as you can never come out of the black church unchanged. You go in. I don't care if you're not a believer. You don't have to be a regular or a believer. You just simply know when you come out, you have been changed. Speaker 1: That was--I think it's particularly true in the eta [Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois] production I saw of 'The Trial of One Short-Sighted Black Woman [vs. Mammy Louise and Safreeta Mae,' Karani Marcia Leslie]. The people who left there seemed to be transformed. Speaker 2: Totally changed. I got them, I got them on that one. I mean, I knew, I knew when I left, when I put that vote on them, when I put that vote on them, they weren't expecting that vote. And it only, and it called up those names. They called up those slave ships. I knew these are some, these are some calcified, urbanized African American people, sitting there. Their hearts are already calcified, and hardened against any surprises that they ought to change--to call up those votes, and call them by name, and to show them, come and bleeding through there, broke right through their hearts. Their spirit was awakened. They understood. Now, they came out of there, they came out of there changed. That's a secular event. The church does the same things. This is in the theatre. This--wasn't there with no, there was no Christ called up in there. There was no--they really do it on biblical readings up in there, but then, the listening was there. The call and the response was there. The testimony was there. Those elements were all there in the piece, you see, that awakened us. I mean, now I tell you something. This all goes back to where we started. I saw all of this when I was ten years old in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church. My grandmother [Isabel Harrison], you know, during the funeral for my grandfather, I saw that stuff go down slowly, unfold in there, and it just terrified me 'cause I wasn't used to nothing like that. But I was not the same way that I was when I went in there as a young, supposedly, reasonably, you know, hip, sophisticated ten-year-old, for a ten-year-old, you know. You know, I'm going to go ahead at grandmother's thing over there, and see what it's all about. And anyway, okay, yeah, they're doing this thing with us. I say, oh, wait a minute now. And I learned something, see. All right, so that's where that, in the theatre, those are the kind of the theater people. Of course, we, we--I learned something about contemporaries. My contemporaries are not necessarily the obvious, like Lorraine Hansberry and, you know. I mean Lorraine Hansberry is important to me as a writer, a playwright, more so than Langston Hughes. People might say, oh, well, Langston Hughes, they would just block, just drop everybody together. Langston Hughes was a terrific poet, so great dramatist, not because he wrote simple, you know, I mean, not talking celebrity here. I'm talking about inside of that work called writing for the stage. Story_ID: 237442 Speaker 1: Yeah, with [Karani] Marcia Leslie-- Speaker 2: She's the author of 'The Trial.' Speaker 1: --the author of 'The Trial of One Short-Sighted Black Woman [vs. Mammy Louise and Safreeta Mae].' That piece went through a lot of changes before I actually had done it. Whenever I first saw it, I didn't want to do it. Then I went and talked to her about it in California. And I said, "Look, if you make these changes, I'll do it." She said "Fine, I'll do it." I didn't think she would do it 'cause I had some, I had some radical changes for her. Speaker 2: What were the nature of your changes? Speaker 1: Well, basically, it, her piece read too much like a TV drama. And I wanted to make sure I got into a ritual thing. The important thing I wanted to do--she had these characters coming on stage. I said, first of all, I wanted her to--all the male characters to be played by one character, and he would wear a mask. In other words, I didn't want to have all these people coming on stage. So, all of the people who had to make witness, to be witnessing, to become witnesses on the stand, were played by one person, including the woman. So, to me, that's one of my significant changes I wanted to have happen, so that any witness who had come on was the person, and who was the bailiff, then becomes in a magical way--he wears all these different masks, and he plays all these witnesses that it sets up the ritual. The bailiff opens up, opens it up as a ritual, comes out front, and announces what we're doing here. So, I mean, these are the African elements I'm trying to add to the piece because, so I knew she would do it, but she said, yeah, I'll do it. I said okay. She started doing it. We went back and forth for about a year. And it was shouting and screaming, kicking on the telephone. I said, look, I'm going to hang up if you keep talking to me that way. I'm going to--she, and she's, then would call me back and apologize and kept on working. And she wanted to save her baby, and I don't blame her. I mean, you know, this is an author who was trying to save her baby. I said, "Look, you said you would make these changes. If you want me to do this, this is what's gotta happen." And she went back in, and she did the changes, came out, we did the work. And she was still a little bit worried about whether this is going to work. And I said, "Now we're going to open up the screen. We're going to have this thing happen. And boats are going to show through here in the end of the piece." And she said, "What's that going to do?" I said, well, we'll see what's--we're going to make this happen here. We're going to make, you know, change the order of some things. Well, of course, she was absolutely delighted about everything that turned out, but that was a collaboration. I mean, it was her writing. I didn't want to do the writing for her. I just wanted to be able to edit the writing for her. Story_ID: 237443 Speaker 1: This is a--anybody who has ever worked with you--I mean, a certain amount of energy and joy you get from this collaboration, even in, I guess American type theater stuff. But in African theatre where all the music and the other things and the rhythms and they, are, they come into play. I mean, it's really a full artistic experience. I mean, I think, you know, I'm talking to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, no, it is full. It is, what you have, I always thought--give you an example with the idea that the theatre process is a collaborative one. I start with the idea that it is--theatre for me is collaborative. It is an opportunity to invite the amalgam of different art forms, as it would be in an African ritual, or an African celebration where there is music, where there is text, where there's magic, where there's always magic, where there is a kind of collapsing of the living and the dead, where the dead figure comes out, and becomes live for you. And as where you're able then to call upon spirit forces to illuminate the, you know, the living moment. And I see this in this African, in the African ritual. And, and I say, well, yeah, we obviously can do the same thing. In 'The Trial of One Short-Sighted Black Woman [vs. Mammy Louise and Safreeta Mae,' Karani Marcia Leslie], the moment I start calling it the boats and show this, and show the boat's sails, you're calling forward all the dead. I mean, the dead comes forward and helps you to re-experience something for them. And, okay, so, again, it's not doing who-do, or voodoo, or anything like that, but, at the same time, it is magical. So, yes, the amalgam of all of the sound, the lighting, the orchestration of it, finding the right riff, the right rhythm. I think that's what film, good film is able to do it. Good films are about, particularly the Japanese films, I mean, or Chinese films, Japanese or Chinese films--I mean absolute orchestration of color and orchestration of light and sound, and all of that is--I mean, it's not just the narrative, obligatory placement of a sound cue inside of the film. It's more than that. For this case, you have them opening the whole landscape, the whole visual landscape is tied to sound and music and it's--everything is, you know, becomes orchestrated. And that's how I feel about the stage. So, for me, I prefer to work then on open stages, less furniture, the better. Less for me is more. I am interested in seeing the actors that reinvent the space, so if you have too much furniture, it locks the space down. You can't transform it. I have recently seen some Japanese performances also that do the same thing where the space then becomes totally re-articulated or becomes animated because of what the actors are doing. You know where you are. That's the kind of work I'm particularly interested in, in terms of the African, in terms of the performing spaces of the, that are used by the Japanese and the, and but I mean--well, you'll see the same kind of idea in a performing space in West Africa, but it's not a formal stage. It might be in a field. But the field changes by virtue of who's in it and the present on--who's in that space in the field. But in a formal stage setting, the Japanese have a way of doing that very well. The Greeks have done it in the old Greek stage, the old Greek stages, you know, they change and they're very simple, you know. It's not every--there are no doors and no whatever, even though where you are, they come in, they show up at time, place, change it, change the environment by the physical placement of the bodies on--in a certain space and certain relationship. You know time has changed. Something else has happened, you know. So, to me, that's very, very interesting and very, very compelling stuff--magical, in fact. That's the thing I used to like about the theatre that got me into the theatre was the magic of it. I used to like the idea of the magical. I saw 'The Blacks[: A Clown Show,' Jean Genet] back in the 1960s--the first production. And then, and I was really grabbed by that, you know. I said, wow, this is something you can do. So, I went from Lorraine Hansberry to that. I said okay. And then I saw, then on, before that already, I had seen [Samuel] Beckett's 'Waiting for Godot,' and that was spiritually compelling, too. I said, "Well, this is interesting stuff here. I like what's going on in this, you know." I not only just like it because, intellectually, you know, but it's just how the spaces were handled without a lot of furniture on stage, et cetera, you know, that was for me important. So, that, how to do theatre and to, and have re-, as an invention of your own cultural ideas. It's a thing for me. And I, fortunately, have been able to have some success with that--not as, as much as I would like to have, or let's suppose I haven't had as many opportunities to do it. But I, but the opportunities that I did have seem to have certainly been very satisfying and revealed the intention of, you know, what my work was about. Story_ID: 237444 Speaker 1: We always ask people this, and you've addressed somewhat in your comments about Bill Cosby's remarks. But what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: I think the--well, we want a more socially stable community, not just simply a community of instant gratification. We have a, for a few, and what now, what I'm--we're looking at right now is that the values of consumerism seemed to have overtaken African Americans, as opposed to their former preoccupation with spiritual values. This--we've got to find a way to reconnect with certain spiritual values so that we're not so completely absorbed in consumerism. And this means we should not have good things, you know, a real nice way of life, a big house, a small house, a car, or whatever--fine. But there's a kind of doing whatever is necessary to have more goods, you know, marketed goods that you can purchase, and find the money to purchase them with, than strengthening one's spiritual life--how to live in a place called America. You have to ask yourself how does anyone live in this country? Everybody wants to have their Mickey Mouse ears on. They all want to go to Disneyland [Park, Anaheim, California] and have a set of Mickey Mouse ears. The--how do you live here? What is the point of being here? It is a land of--this quite wealthy land. It's got vast, vast landscape here which changes as you go across the country. Most of it is empty. No one's living in it--they're all living in--we'll all living in the, black folks are all living in (laughter) one place. We're not paying attention to the natural life around the rest of the country because we want to be in the centers where we can make the most money and buy the biggest TV. We want to get, you know, the biggest TV and the biggest car, and we want instant gratification of that. We still are carrying, unfortunately, the vestige of--part of that is still the vestige of our enslavement. Part of it--now I only say part of it because, because to live in America is to buy in America (laughter). And I think that's everybody. Everybody wants to buy. They all want--I mean, you just look at the--we need to get as far away from the credit system as we possibly can. But then, we need to have, to be able to replace it with some stronger values. And we don't really have--we're not getting--our churches don't do it as well as they used to, or at least they don't get the attention of the young people enough. And our artwork--I mean, I've seen some recent novels by the way which are just, you know, shamelessly commercial, written by young black women particularly--just garbage. I mean, just sort of like, you know, little slice of life--how to, how to get in and out of a relationship. I mean, it's not about anything of--you have a global nature. And these are the works of the people who are given, you might say, the attention. And, and they're the ones who are qualified as by the system as, ha, these are your great writers. So, America is a strange place to live in. It's a very, very strange--it is not a great place to live in because of this kind of consumerism, this kind of, you know, preoccupation with consumerism. But it is a beautiful place if you can live in it (laughter)--if you can live in it. And different places around this country are very, very beautiful. It'd be nice to, to have a nice, to live in, comfortably in the wilderness of Miami [Florida], or Wyoming or Montana, if you could live in it without having to be up against these, all of the reckless kind of vigilant--vigilante groups. And everybody's got a gun and a stock, a stock of soup, and all that very--now, you can't live on a place which is constantly under siege. How can you live in a place like that? Story_ID: 237445 Speaker 1: So you don't live in it, you live in the city, and the city is about how do I get over in the city, how do I get through this, you know. Yes, you have--it's, I don't believe that--I think that what we're dealing with here is everybody wants--all the black folks want to get a university degree, so they can have instant gratification of a Mercedes Benz and a house away from other black people. That is troublesome. Then they want to become Republican for the wrong reasons, you know. I mean, they want to go into the Republican Party because the Republican Party is about commerce and industry on them--those kind of things. Forget about the human values. They don't want to challenge the system that so you don't have a two-party system. They don't want to change the system, where you have just one vote, one man, and no parties. You know, they don't want to change anything just as long as they can get a job, a job that pays well, and it can allow them to buy more, you know. They don't think about--oh, my God, I wonder, I am a skilled craftsman in carpentry. I have these great skills. There's a new nation called South Africa. I wonder if I can go to South Africa and make these skills work for me. They don't think about that. Everybody thinks there's only one plantation they can work on is this one. They don't say, I know how to do--and I say, go to a place like South Africa. I'm not saying just to go there, just for a romantic reason, but because they are a nation that is building, and they're moving in a certain direction. And you know, can't just go in there and sit down and say, hey, it's nice to be in the, you know, hang out. You got to bring something to the table, you know, bring something there, so that if I am a person who has, if I know how to bend steel, and make that steel create certain kind of instruments, I have the skills to do it. I'd go to South Africa and do it there because, you know, they need skilled workers who can do this kind of thing. Then I'm doing something. I mean, I might not make a million dollars, but I might make enough to live comfortably over there and live well, you see. So, it's about the, it's about the corruption of the values, you know, that the early values that we had as a people here. And I look forward in the future, hoping in the future that can become turned around. I think one of the ways to turn around is to show it through the kind of work that we do in the arts. Unfortunately, arts, too, are corrupted. I mean, I see it in the theatre and I see it in film. I see it in the television certainly. I see it in the artwork, artwork where they're talking about non-specificity of culture, you know. I mean, at The Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York, New York], the woman who runs it up there at the Studio Museum, [Thelma] Golden, directly wants to do shows where color or, rather, ethnicity has nothing to do with your artwork. Well, I'm not--ethnicity in artwork does not mean, look, the drafting of a black child. It has to do with what is the intent of the work? What is the movement of the work, you know? There are many Europeans who drafted on canvas--black images. Does it make them a black writer, a black painter? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: They're European painters. They drafted it in the European way. If I do a white paint image on my canvas, and I do it in a relationship to the point of view I want to make on canvas. And I found it and it's locked inside of the way of seeing the world as an African person, then I'm doing it. I don't have to do a black face to show them I'm a black painter. But I have to acknowledge the fact that a black painter has a specific perspective on the world that is equally as useful to the world as trying to undermine that perspective and make it become "universal" to the world. It is universal in its own way. That's, that's the point. Story_ID: 237446 Speaker 1: When you look back on what you've done so far, and I know you're still busy, what would you--is there any major thing that you would change? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I've been, I made a lot of changes in my life, period, as I moved around. As I said, I would jump from one thing to the other. Things seemed to fall at a certain moment in place, and I would follow the rhythms that guided me. When the forces have guided me to make certain decisions, I would do it. And I've been very, very lucky somehow that most of them have been very, very, reasonably good decisions, or and places, so I'm not so sure that so much. I'm just, I--everything that I have encountered so far, I'm glad I have encountered it. I'm not even sure to look forward to. I would have no idea what would be different if I, you know, I know that if I didn't make certain choices as I went along, I would have missed certain opportunities to encounter certain things. I know that much. I wouldn't be the person I am today had it not been for making the--moving with the flow of those things that took me to a certain place, as I said one more time. And I'm constantly still moving toward making things happen. What I don't think I want to change. I wouldn't want anything different with the one exception that my next--it seems to me where, where I'm headed right now is the next--I almost feel that like right now that my--the way I'm headed is in a new phase in which I am trying to get work done, black work done or developed, black work developed in a specific kind of way, so that I'm trying to get universities and or, to create residencies for black writers and paint--black writers and directors. I'm also having meetings with people about creating laboratories, black labs, in the summer, in the summer for professionals, so they can be in a part of a country on a lesson for four or five weeks, get paid while they're working, and develop some works like the Eugene O'Neill Foundation [Tao House, Danville, California] had and does, but more specifically for black writers and, so they don't have to be worried about whether this looks like an [Eugene] O'Neill play or not, you know. That's simply to be able to be a good work, be juried by its, by peers. I'm looking at the labs, special labs in directing and I'm trying to create an international festival of African diasporic plays in Harlem [New York, New York] as the main soap point of, you know, set it up here. I've been having meetings in Canada and meetings in England with people. And my reason for doing that is to show black authors and black artists that there is a commonality in what we do. We do it from a different particular perspective. It might be England. It might be West Africa. It might be the Caribbean, Brazil, but we look at the elements. You see it there. And there's also the change, the gaze on the part of the critical establishment, so the critical establishment begins to understand it needs to change its critical vocabulary. They don't have a vocabulary to judge the work right now. They can only say, how much departure is it from an O'Neill play, or is it like--they don't have a critical vocabulary. They don't know how to make an evaluation of what this work is. They don't know what to look at. What do they say about Adrienne Kennedy? They don't even measure and gauge it toward in terms of some avant-garde idea or ideation. They don't see it as part of a larger African-inspired sensibility. They can't see that because the vocabulary has not been developed. So, my point in the future is to develop that vocabulary and to expose work, to expose this new work so that folks can see black, white, whoever, looking at it--can see that there is a different kind of work that's being done by African, that's African-inspired, coming out of the diasporic experience. So it's not logged down to the oppression of the Negro in America. Is black theatre, show me the oppressed Negro. I'll show you black theatre. That's not the case. That's not what I'm doing. That's what I hope will not be the future-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --of black theatre. Story_ID: 237447 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done up to this point, what would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: I think that my legacy has been precisely what was implied in the '[The] Drama of Nommo,' [Paul Carter Harrison] having initiated that. I mean, I stuck to my guns as far as trying to do works like 'The Great MacDaddy' [Paul Carter Harrison]. 'Ain't Supposed to Die a Natural Death' [Paul Carter Harrison]. 'The Trial of One Short-Sighted Black Woman [vs. Mammy Louise and Safreeta Mae,' Karani Marcia Leslie], maintaining a, being on point, standing on point, as far as the value of ritualized narratives, ritualized theatre events. I think my legacy is--has been one of not drifting away from that. It's, in other words, that there's still something there for people to hold onto. I see the work, I see it in some people's work. It shows up. I don't say, "Oh, that's my work (laughter)." I've never, never done that. I see it in some people's work. I say, oh, there they are. They're doing it, you know, I say, oh, they're doing it. I'm not saying, that's my work. It's their work. But I see it as, okay, I like that. Now, and I even like it. I know why I like it because it's something I've been thinking about all these years, and I see that happening in some of these younger writers and younger dramatic--what do you call it--dramatists and directors. And having seen that is gratifying for me. And in saying that, it--I mean this work is not, this effort has not been in vain. I don't need to claim it as mine. It belongs to whoever is doing it. But, at the same time, I recognize that the work is not in vain for myself, so that makes, you know, it keeps me focused on continuing to expose that kind of work and to do things to make people aware of its intention. The intentionality of it, you know, which is finally to make a clear decoration that this is African-inspired work as a cultural, cultural epicenter. In other words what is the construction of it? It emerges from this Africanness inside of whatever, whatever location African people might be, whether they're in South America, Africa, wherever they might be--North America. Story_ID: 237448 Speaker 1: Your family--now you have a daughter [Fonteyn Harrison] and a-- Speaker 2: I have a daughter, I have a daughter. And my--I have a wife, my--I have a, well, I have a relatively new wife, and she's--I mean, she's not new anymore. She's my most sustained wife, you might say, sixteen years, we were married. I usually am only married for a couple of years at a time and my earlier four marriages were all like two years at a time. From my second marriage, I have a daughter. She was born in Holland [the Netherlands], she was born in Amsterdam [the Netherlands]. And she and I are very, very close. We spend, we spend every summer together. We usually--and that started since when I left her mother's house in Amsterdam, when from the time my daughter was three until she was eighteen, my daughter and I spent at least at least ten weeks a year together in Spain, a minimum of 10, 10, 12 weeks a year--Spain, some, and then after she became, on her eighteen years old, she left me and went off with her young man. I mean, that's, that's how that goes, you know. So, you (laughter). And when she went off with a young man, ultimately, ultimately married, and she had her own life. And she, you know, had subsequently, got a kid and all this. But the--my daughter and I--well, we spend the summers together though. We do still do that. And much to disagreement of her ex-husband, whom she had to fire at a certain moment. But she, but she and I, no matter what, we would spend the summer together in Spain, and we still do that. And we're going off next month to see her, in fact, and to spend a little time with her. My current wife is a wonderful woman, younger, young woman. She's younger than my, some of my former students (laughter). And who is quite in a different business and yet, you know, certainly we are able to share, to negotiate our interests. She's not single-minded about what she does. She's in the finance world, corporate America, and she's a senior vice president at GE Capital. She's a very ambitious woman, but she's fully acquainted with all the arts. And she's very much, she's from, not from New York [New York], she's originally from Tennessee, but she pretty has lived most of her life in New York. And so, like she likes to say, you know, you're finding his, you like, I like to think of her as being New York, but she really is a country girl from Tennessee, right and finally, finally, you know. And we're a very interesting family. Her brother, her twin brother is a wonderful minister. Her twin is a wonderful minister down at Canaan Baptist Church in, in Louisville [Kentucky]. Magnificent development. Now that's a great case. A young man got involved with his church, maybe twenty years ago when there was only one hundred people. He took it over, the church, when he was involved to go with the church with one hundred people. I think it was about 20 years ago, 25 years ago. About 15, about, there by the time, let's see, about 10, 15 years ago, 12 years ago, he had about 500 people, 600 people. They decided to get a bigger church. They built a wonderful state-of-the-art church to house one thousand people. Before the doors even opened, they were already, the church was obsolete. He then went out and bought another church, not, and this new church with ten acres and, you know, all kind of housing and stuff on it, you know, out in some deep suburbs. And then, this place, he's got a congregation of, immediate congregation of about three thousand, and he has two or three different sessions. I mean, he must have, he must have at least seven or eight thousand people in his church. I mean, it's like, and he's a young, smart, you know, very personable young minister who's Afrocentric in his world view, got his doctorate under one of the famous theologians, Porter [ph.], from, Abyssinia [ph.] originally. He was up, Abyssinia, and went up. Anyhow, he's got, he's got, he's very good. I mean, so he's, he's concerned with a whole concept of community, and community values, family values, how to then service the community as a community. Even though the church is way out in the suburbs, it's community. He's got these wonderful young men who are the deacons, who are all professional young men who serve in the community. Story_ID: 237449 Speaker 1: We have one last question and we're almost at this end of this roll, but how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered? I think I would like to be remembered as simply a--you know, I must speak too quickly on it, but just as a forward, very progressive forward-thinking, forward-moving dramatist/director who has always been committed to the illumination of the African American experience, African American experience in ways that can be useful, and not simply grounded in either sociology or journalism. In other words, to open up, to read, to open up the gaze on the experience as one that is more, more vital, more, much richer, that has finding a mechanism to, to reveal what this experience has been, and what it meant to us being Americans, being Africans in this American space. Being Africans in the American space is my concern. I'm not waving any flags here and if I do, but I am an African man in an American space, and what does it mean to be an African man in American space? And that's what my work is about--how to find that. And so, if I can reveal that, it'll be useful, I hope, then to other people of color certainly, and certainly if not, certainly revelatory for those who are not part of the African American experience. Story_ID: 235453 Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us about this. Speaker 2: This is, this photograph is in the early '70s [1970s]--Bert Andrews' photograph actually. I don't know the photographer, he died recently. But that's a Bert Andrews photograph of me in 1973 or '4 [1974], about 1974 or something like that, soon after I came back from Europe. Speaker 1: Great. Okay. Speaker 2: This is a more recent, this is a more recent photograph, the one that I've been using lately. I'd--this was taken in 1998 when I was at the conference, a black theatre conference with August Wilson. And we were trying to put together an organization to support black theatre and this is up at Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire], we did that. That's, that's what that photograph is, 1998. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: This is the signing of a book, the book called the 'Classical Plays of The Negro Ensemble Company' [sic. 'Classic Plays From The Negro Ensemble Company,' (ed.) Paul Carter Harrison and Gus Edwards]. This was at the bookstore here in New York [New York]. And it's 19-, I think this was probably 1992 or something like that, 1992 or '93 [1993]. Speaker 1: Probably you and your mother [Thelma Carter Harrison]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, this is, yeah, this is photograph, my mother and I, in 19-, 2000--this is about 2000. This photograph was taken in 2000. This is just before she passed. She passed recently about two, about two years--no, let me see, and, and, yeah, 2002, she passed. This is 2000. And this was for a book called 'Sacred Bond[: Black Men and Their Mothers,' Keith Michael Brown], it's a book about black men and their mothers...